ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                   XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                  XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                  KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

                                                  XVIII ATCM/WP 16
                                                  Original:English

THE ORGANISATIONAL ASPECTS OF
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

(Submitted by Italy)

Agenda 8(a)
The Organisational Aspects of the Antarctic Treaty System
The Secretariat

(Item 7 a of the Agenda)

INTRODUCTION

The XVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Venice from 11 to 20 November 1992, discussed at considerable length the establishment of a secretariat, and analysed various related issues such as its location, functions, composition, legal status and sharing of costs involved.

Substantial consensus that a secretariat should be established to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings and the Committee for Environmental Protection in performing their functions had been reached in previous Consultative Meetings.

An ad hoc contact group, chaired by Prof. Francesco Francioni of the Italian Delegation, produced a document containing positions on such issues as the functions of the secretariat, the composition of its staff, the budget and the legal status (See Annex E to the Final Report of the XVII ATCM). Further discussion on these issues might continue during the XVIII Consultative Meeting, but on the basic of an already reached general agreement.

As far as the location is concerned, no decision was reached during the Venice Meeting. Two Consultative Parties, Argentina and the United States, offered Buenos Aires and Washington D.C. respectively, as headquarters for the secretariat.

1
A number of Delegations expressed themselves in favour of 
the Argentine offer but a final agreement was not reached. In the 
course of the discussions, views were expressed in favour of the 
insertion of a Latin-America State Party in the institutional 
framework of the Antarctic Treaty System.

The need for further work on this matter was acknowledged, 
including further consultations through normal diplomatic 
channels, coordinated by the chairman of the XVIII ATCM.

During the intersessional period the Italian Government, 
through bilateral diplomatic channels, held consultations with 
the other Parties to try and reach a solution, but the positions 
of the Parties involved remained unchanged.

A further examination was made in Heidelberg, where the 
Parties met from 18-20 November 1993, in order to discuss 
liability issues. After the Meeting, an informal discussion took 
place but no progress was made.

Some delegations expressed the view that the secretariat 
should be located in a country in the southern hemisphere.

Anyway a general favour seems to exist on the fact that the 
secretariat should be located in the South American 
sub-continent.

In spite of the different views on the issue of location, it 
seems clear that all Parties are convinced of the need of a 
timely introduction of a Secretariat.

The entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection will increase the requirements of coordination among 
the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, particularly in the areas of 
information exchange and availability.

The Italian Delegation believes that every possible effort 
should be made during the XVIII Consultative Meeting, and if 
necessary during the following intersessional period, to reach an

2
agreement comprising all main issues relating to the
establishment of the Secretariat. This consensus on a package
solution will be of fundamental importance for the institutional
mechanism of the Antarctic Treaty System.

DRAFT PROPOSAL

At XVII ATCM, the Parties acknowledged the progress made in
the consideration of various issues connected to the
establishment of a secretariat. These issues concerned
particularly: 1) the functions of the secretariat, 2) the staff
complement, 3) the method of financing, 4) the legal status.

While considerable agreement was found with regard to the
first three issues in the above mentioned contact group, several
questions remained open with respect to the legal status and
privileges and immunities of secretariat and its staff.

These questions related essentially: 1) to the nature of the
instrument by which privileges and immunities should be granted,
2) the scope of such immunities, 3) whether they should be
enjoyed only in the territory of the host State or in the
territory of all Consultative Parties or State Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty; 4) the way in which pertinent regulation could
be uniformly implemented in the domestic law of State Parties.

With the aim to achieve further progress in the discussion
of these outstanding issues Italy submits the following draft
articles concerning the legal capacity of the secretariat and its
privileges and immunities:

Articles 1
Legal capacity

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (The Antarctic
                3
Treaty Consultative Party on whose territory the secretariat is located) shall confer on the secretariat such legal capacity as is necessary to the discharge of its functions, and in particular the capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of property and to institute legal proceedings.

Article 2
Privileges and immunities

1. The Antarctic Treaty consultative Parties (the Party on whose territory the secretariat is located), subject to their (its) constitutional, legislative or administrative requirements, shall confer the privileges and immunities set out in article 3 below.

2. Privileges and immunities so conferred on the secretariat are in the interest of this institution and of the independent and unimpeded discharge of its functions. Immunity may be waived only by the Executive Secretary (in consultation with the Chair pro tempore of the ATCM).

Article 3
Scope of privileges and immunities

1. The secretariat, its property and assets will enjoy the same immunity from legal process as is enjoyed by foreign States.

2. The premises of the secretariat will be inviolable. Its property and assets will be immune from search, requisition, confiscation and expropriation.

3. The archives of the secretariat shall be inviolable.

4. The secretariat shall not be restricted by financial controls, currency regulations or moratoria of any kind that may impede the holding and use of funds which are necessary to the

4
effective exercise of the secretariat's functions.

    5. The secretariat shall be free to transfer its funds or 
currency from the host country to another country to the extent 
necessary to the exercise of its functions under this instrument.

Article 4
Tax exemptions

1. The secretariat, its property, assets and the income of 
its permanent staff shall be exempt from all direct taxes and 
from custom duties on imports and exports in respect of articles 
which are imported or exported for official use or in connection 
with official use. This will not prevent the Government of the 
host country from regulating the conditions under which articles 
imported under exemptions may be resold in its territory.

2. Indirect taxes shall be allowed only to the extent that 
they represent charges for public utility services.

Article 5
Communications

The secretariat shall enjoy for its official communications 
the same treatment as that accorded to the diplomatic missions.

Article 6
Secretariat officials

Secretariat officials shall enjoy the following privileges 
and immunities:

  1) immunity from criminal and civil jurisdiction in respects 
of acts performed or omissions made by them in their official 
capacity;
5
2) exemption from national service obligations;

3) exemption in respect of themselves, their spouses,
children and relatives dependent on them from immigration
restrictions and alien registration as accorded to diplomatic
agents of foreign States;

4) the right to import free of duty their furnitures and
effects at the time of first taking up their post and to export
the same free of duty at the same time of their leaving the post;

5) the same repatriation facilities in time of international
crisis as diplomatic agents.

Privileges and immunities covered by 2), 3), 4) above shall
not be accorded to nationals and permanent residents of the host
State.

Provided that the officials of the secretariat are covered
by a social security scheme offered or approved by the ATCM, they
will be exempt from compulsory national social security schemes.

Article 7
Identity Card

1. The ATCM may issue an identity card to secretariat staff
on official duty. This card will not substitute for ordinary
travel documents.

2. The card will be issued in accordance with a form to be
approved by the ATCM.

6
```
