ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                                      
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

KYOTO              
11-22 April 1994              

XVIII ATCM/WP 19              
10 April 1994              
Original:English              

  ●                                      
A REVISED 'CODE OF GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS              
TO THE ANTARCTIC              
Agenda Item 13              

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)              

  ●
ATCM XVII, 11-20 November, 1992
Venice

A REVISED 'CODE OF GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE ANTARCTIC'
(Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

mgr/175.1
A REVISED CODE OF GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE ANTARCTIC

Introduction

Recommendation VIII-9 adopted in 1975, set out in its Annex V a succinct 'Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic' - a simple, self-explanatory list of "do's and don'ts" for Antarctic visitors.

A number of similar documents have appeared since, some of which have elaborated on the content of Recommendation VIII-9. These include:-

  1980    A Visitor's Introduction to the Antarctic and 
          its Environment - Scientific Committee on 
          Antarctic Research.

  1989    Antarctica Visitor Guidelines - Society 
          Expeditions.

  1990    Visitors' Guide to the Antarctic - Council of 
          Managers of National Antarctic Programmes.

  1990-91 Antarctic Traveler's Code for Visitors and Tour 
          Companies - Oceanites, Inc.

  1992/93 Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctic Visitors 
          - International Association of Antarctica Tour 
          Operators.

There is a need for Annex V of Recommendation VIII-9 to be reviewed and updated to take account both of these more recent publications and, importantly, the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty adopted in 1991.

The attached paper is an attempt to revise 'The Code of Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic'.

- 2 -
A Revised Code of Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic

(To be seen as a revision of Annex V of Recommendation VIII-9, taking account of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty).

Preamble

In 1991, the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty adopted an Environmental Protocol to the Treaty. This Protocol introduced a set of environmental principles, and regulations to provide comprehensive protection for the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.

The Protocol designates Antarctica a natural reserve devoted to peace and science.

The regulations of the Protocol encompass all activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, including scientific research programmes, tourism, governmental and non-governmental activities. The rules are designed to ensure that man's effects on the fragile environment of Antarctica are kept to the minimum, and require that all activities in Antarctica should undergo an assessment of their environmental impact before they are allowed to proceed.

All visitors to Antarctica can ensure that their activities have minimum impact on the environment by adopting the following simple guidelines:

Antarctic Wildlife is Protected

Do not disturb birds or seals.  In particular:
-   do not operate vehicles, aircraft or boats close to breeding seals or birds;

- 3 -
-   do not approach birds or seals on foot too closely 
    (maintain a distance of at least 5 metres from 
    penguins, breeding birds and true seals, and 15-20 
    metres from Fur Seals, since they can be aggressive 
    and move fast even on uneven or slippery ground);

-   do not startle, chase or handle any bird on its nest; 
    eggs and young chicks can be predated rapidly by Skuas 
    and Sheathbills;

-   do not enter a penguin or other bird colony, but 
    remain outside its margins and observe from a 
    distance;

-   do not touch, handle or attempt to feed birds or 
    seals. The bond between parent and offspring can be 
    easily disrupted, jeopardising survival of young 
    animals;

-   do not get between a seal and its path to the water, 
    or between a parent and its young. Never approach 
    seals with pups too closely. This may cause agitated 
    mothers to attack their own young;

-   never harass wildlife for the sake of photography. 
    Approach wildlife slowly and keep low to the ground;

-   avoid using flash guns;

-   avoid walking or driving vehicles on vegetation and 
    in particular intact moss beds or lichen-covered scree 
    slopes. Antarctic vegetation is fragile, slow-growing 
    and slow to recover;

-   do not uproot or collect plants, particularly 
    conspicuous lichens or moss tufts;

- 4 -
-  do not collect [or take away] biological or geological 
specimens or man-made artefacts (this includes eggs, 
fossils, other interesting mineral specimens, whale-
bone (resulting from the former whaling industry), or 
historical evidence of man's presence in Antarctica);

-  keep noise to the minimum to avoid frightening wild-
life;

-  do not use guns or explosives.

Keep Antarctica Pristine

-  Do not bring any animals or plants into the Antarctic;

-  do not dispose of polluting chemicals or substances in 
the Antarctic.  (Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 
polystyrene chips and pesticides are banned);

-  do not dispose of litter and garbage indiscriminately 
(including matches, cigarette ends, tissues and sweet 
wrappers).  All litter and garbage must be returned to 
a vessel [or base] for proper disposal.  Litter and 
garbage must not be dumped overboard from ships;

-  do not bring food ashore;

-  do not paint names or graffiti on rocks or buildings;

-  open fires must not be lit, except in an emergency.

Respect Others' Interests

-  Do not interfere with scientific equipment, marker 
posts or field experimental plots;

- 5 -
-   in the vicinity of scientific stations, avoid interference with scientific or logistic support work;

-   visits to scientific stations are subject to invitation or prior approval by the station manager. Do not enter buildings, or any part of a building, unless specifically invited to do so.  Respect the property, privacy and work of scientists and support personnel.  The station is their home.  Station managers can deny visits or determine the manner in which they are carried out;

-   do not enter unoccupied or abandoned buildings or emergency refuges, except in an emergency.  If equipment or food has to be used from a refuge or cache for emergency purposes, inform the nearest research station or responsible national operator of this fact at the earliest opportunity and make arrangements for their replacement;

-   do not deface or vandalise occupied, unoccupied or abandoned buildings or emergency refuges;

-   do not enter listed historic huts unless accompanied by a designated governmental representative or properly authorised leader;

-   listed historic sites and monuments must not be damaged, removed or destroyed.

Environmental Protection

-   Do not enter Antarctic Protected Areas (these include Specially Protected Areas (SPAs), and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)) chosen to protect particularly important natural features or scientific interests and activities;

- 6 -
-   for reasons of safety (search and rescue) and 
environmental protection, the use of vehicles, vessels 
and aircraft (including helicopters) in remote or 
pristine areas should be discouraged;

-   where possible, keep to established tracks or trails. 
Avoid walking or driving vehicles on undisturbed 
areas, especially frost-patterned ground. Avoid 
damaging the ground by trampling. Where possible, 
do not drive over streams and melt channels as this 
can seriously alter local drainage patterns.

Safety

-   When ashore, keep together in a party with one of the 
Tour Leaders. Do not wander off on your own or out of 
sight of others;

-   take note of, and act on the advice and instructions 
from Tour Leaders. If you are not sure about some-
thing, ask one of your Tour Leaders;

-   do not hike onto glaciers or large snow fields. There 
is a real danger of falling into hidden crevasses;

-   plan activities with safety in mind at all times. Be 
prepared for severe climatic conditions. Ensure 
equipment and clothing is up to Antarctic standards;

-   do not expect a rescue service. Expeditions must be 
self-sufficient. They should carry adequate 
insurance cover against the risk of incurring 
financial charges or material losses in the Antarctic.

- 7 -
Communications

-    Do not use Marine VHF Channel-16 for anything other than Primary Contact or emergency traffic;
-    a Traffic Information Broadcast by Aircraft (TIBA - 129.7 MHz frequency) has been introduced in the Antarctic Treaty Area. Aircraft operators are advised to use this System.

- 8 -
