ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                 
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                   XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 9

10 April 1994
Original: English

 
CONDUCT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY
IN ANTARCTICA

Agenda Item 13

(Submitted by Australia)
ITEM 13: CONDUCT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN ANTARCTICA

Approach

Australian Government Departments and agencies have undertaken a review of the matters raised in ATCM XVI-13 and at ATCM XVII, having paricular regard to the adequacy of existing Treaty requirements, their implementation and the application of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica.

Australia considers there is no requirement for additional regulations at this stage, but that there is a need to provide guidance to organisers of tourist and non-governmental activities which will assist them in meeting the present obligations under the Treaty system, notably under the Protocol. Advanced notification arrangements need to be improved.

Recognising both the international nature of tourist and non-governmental activity and that several Parties can have an interest in any such activity, Australia also sees a need to establish effective arrangements among Parties for managing tourist and non-governmental activity consistent with Treaty and protocol requirements.

The following draft Recommendation sets out a practical arrangement for achieving co-ordination between Parties and providing guidance for organisers.

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON THE CONDUCT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

The Representatives,

2
Noting the continued increase in tourism and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Concerned that this activity has the potential to have adverse impact on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associate ecosystems, and to disrupt scientific research and raises concerns related to the safety of visitors;

Mindful of Articales IV, VII and X, of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling Recommendations IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9, X-8 and XVI-13;

• Conscious that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes apply to all activities in the Antarcitc Treaty area;

Mindful of Articles 3, 6, 8, 13 and 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognising the need to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty, associated measures and the Protocol are effectivly and uniformly applied to the conduct of tourism and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty area;

• Recognising the desirability of establishing a clear statement of the Treaty requirements which apply to the organisers of tourism and non-governmental activity and which provides for effective arrangements between Parties for managing tourism and non-governmental activity and which improves notification requirements for organisers;

Recommend to their Governments that they adopt the following provisions by way of supplement to the provisions of the Antarctic

3
Treaty and the Protocol as they relate to the conduct of tourism 
and non-governmental activity in Antarctica:

1.  Each Party shall draw the attached Statement of Relevant 
Principles and Provisions for the Conduct of Tourism and Non-
Governmental Activity in the Antarctic Treaty area (Appendix A) to 
the attention of organisers of tourism and other non-governmental 
activities (including operators of such activities and independent 
visitors) and request that they comply with it.

2.  A Party which is notified by an organiser of a tourist or 
other non-governmental activity shall notify, without delay, other 
Parties about the notified activity, in particular those Parites:
*   in whose territory the expedition is being organised
*   from whose territory the expedition will proceed
*   whose legislation implementing the Protocol may extend to the 
notified acitivity;
*   whose station or base the expedition wishes to visit
*   under whose flag the vessel or craft transporting the 
expedition will travel
*   whose nationals are included among the visitors.

3.  Interested Parties shall consult on the approval and conduct 
of the proposed activity to ensure that it is carried out in a 
manner consistent with the Treaty and its associated measures and 
the Protocol.

4.  Following consultation, interested Parties may nominate one or 
more Parties to take a co-ordinating role in:
*   informing at the earliest opportunity, the organiser of the 
activity of obligations under the Treaty and its associated 
measures and the Protocol and the provisions of the attached 
Statement

4
*   approving the required Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

*   liaising with the organiser of the activity, as appropriate, including by monitoring and receipt of follow-up report on the conduct of the activity

*   conveying to other Parties a copy of the activity organiser's report and any other relevant information

*   carrying out such other functions as those Parties may agree.

5.      The nominated Party/Parties shall give early advance notice to other Parties of all activities notified by an organiser. The nominated Party/Parties shall inform interested Parties, or Parties who may be affected of any significant modification of any proposed activity.

6.      The nominated Party/Parties shall promptly assess information received from the organiser, including EIAs and waste management plans, prior to the proposed acitivity commencing. The Party/Parties shall inform other Parties who may be affected, of any determinations it has made in respect of the environmental impact of the proposed activity and of any procedures it may have put in place to assess and verify the impact of the activity.

7.      A Party whose station an organiser proposes to visit shall provide on request, to the nominated Party/Parties and the organiser of the activity, information as promptly as possible regarding the conditions upon which it would grant permission for the visit to the station. Such permission may be withheld unless reasonable assurances are given by the organiser that the proposed visit is in accordance with the Treaty and its associated measures and the Protocol and the conditions applicable at the station to be

5
visited. If a Party refuses access to its facilities it shall 
promptly advise other Parties that may be affected.

8. The Party whose station an organiser proposes to visit shall 
inform the nominated Party/Parties of the outcome of communications 
between that Party and the organiser.

9. Parties shall forward information on prior notification and 
reports of tourist and non-governmental activity to the Committee 
for Environmental Protection, when formed, as soon as practicable.

10. In accordance with Article VII of the Treaty or 3(2)(d) and 14 
of the Protocol, Parties shall, if considered necessary and after 
liaisin with the organiser, appoint an observer to accompany such 
expeditions and/or carry out inspections and monitoring for those 
purposes set out in the Treaty and Protocol.

11. Parties shall report annually to other Parties on the details 
of visits by their nationals or on other tourist and non-
governmental activities which have been notified to them in 
accorcance with these Provisions.

6
APPENDIX

STATEMENT OF RELEVANT PRINCIPLES AND PROVISIONS
FOR THE CONDUCT OF TOURIST AND
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

1.  Organisers of tourism and non-governmental activities,
including operators of such activities and independent visitors,
should inform themselves of and comply with the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty and its associated measures, and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  While this
Statement reflects obligations deriving from the Treaty and its
associated measures, and the Protocol, organisers should also refer
to any relevant national legislation which may implement these
instruments. Organisers may request Parties to provide a copy of
the Treaty and associated measures and the Protocol.

2.  Organisers should take appropriate steps to ensure that all
visitors, for which they are responsible, understand and comply
with the relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its
associated measures, and the Protocol.

Advance Notice by an Organiser of Tourist and Non-Governmental
Activities

3.  The organisers should, in the first instance, provide advance
notice of the details of their proposed acitivity to the Party in
whose territory the activity is being organised.

4.  If the activity is not being organised in the territory of a
Party, such notice should be given to one of the following:
*   the Party from whose territory the expedition will proceed
*   [who, in respect of the Antarctic territory to be visited, are
a Party referred to in Article IV(1)(a) of the Treaty]

7
*   a Party or Parties whose station or base the expedition wishes to visit
*   the Party under whose flag the vessel or craft transporting the expedition will travel
*   a Party whose nationals are included amongst the visitors.

5.  Advance notice is required to be provided as soon as possible and, if practicable, should be provided at least 12 months before commencement of the activity.

6.  Information required in the advance notice should include:

    a.  name, nationlity and contact details of the organiser;
    b.  where relevant, registered name of tour operator and expedition and contact
    c.  details of the name and national registration of any vessel or craft to be used (including name of commanding officer, call-sign, radio frequency, INMARSAT);
    d.  intended itinerary including dates of departure and places to be visited in the Antarctic Treaty area;
    e.  activities to be undertaken;
    f.  number of crew and visitors to be carried;
    g.  carrying capacity of vessel;
    h.  intended use of aircraft; and
    i.  number and type of other vessels to be used in the Antarctic Treaty area.

7.  At least 3 months in advance of the proposed visit, the organiser is required to provide notice to any Party whose station or base they propose to visit with a view to obtaining permission. Parties will advise the organiser of their decision and any conditions which may be attached to permission to visit in order to ensure safety or to safeguard scientific programs.

8
Co-ordination

8. The organiser will be advised of the Party/Parties which will 
take a co-ordinating role in relation to the activities notified by 
the organiser. In this Statement such Party/Parties will be 
referred to as the nominated Party/Parties.

Planning of Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

9. Following contact with the nominated Party/Parties, the 
organiser shall prepare or cooperate in the preparation of an 
environmental impact assessment (EIA), that may be required in 
accordance with the Annex I of the Protocol, before undertaking any 
proposed activity. The proposed activity shall not commence until 
the EIA has been considered, modified if appropriate, and approved 
by the nominated Party/Parties in accordance with Annex I of the 
Protocol. The EIA shall be completed in accordance with national 
procedures proposed by the nominated Party/Parties. The EIA must 
also indicated how the activity will be monitored to ensure impacts 
are not significantly greater or different than predicted.

10. The organiser should provide all information and undertake any 
actions required by the nominated Party/Parties in the preparation 
or implementation of:

a. contingency response plans relevant to any incidents with 
potential to cause adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment, in 
accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol;
b. a waste management plan, in accordance with Annex III of the 
Protocol; and
c. marine pollution contingency plans that appropriately consider 
any incidents which have the potential to cause adverse impacts on 
the Antarctic environment, in accordance with Annex IV of the 
Protocol.

9
11. Any application by the organiser for a permit to enter protected areas should be, as far as possible, directed to the nominated Party/Parties.

12. To ensure the organiser is familiar with and can comply with the appropriate communications, air traffic control and emergency procedures it should consult with the nominated Party/Parties. Advance notice of aircraft flight plans should be provided in accordance with the Treaty and associated measures and the Protocol.

13. The organisers should ensure that the activity is fully self-sufficient and does not require any logistical assistance from Parties for which arrangements have not been agreed in advance.

14. Except where sponsored by a Treaty Party, the organiser should arrange appropriate insurance cover against the risk of incurring financial charges or material losses in the Treaty area.

Conduct of Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

15. The organiser is required to comply with any requirements or conditions identified by the nominated Party/Parties and any conditions or restrictions stipulated by the party whose station they propose to visit, or the commander of that station, including conditions relevant to visitors' safety or to safeguard scientific programs being undertaken at or near the station, in accordance with the Treaty and associated measures and the Protocol.

16. Organisers and visitors, where appropriate, should:
a. provide final confirmation to the station or base they intend to visit between 24 and 72 hours before their arrival;
 
10
b. ensure that all visitors are properly supervised by suitable 
guides and that such guides have adequate experience of, or 
training in, Antarctic conditions and knowledge of the provisions 
of the Antarctic Treaty and its associated measures and the 
Protocol;

c. as far as practicable, monitor the environmental impacts of 
their activities and provide written notification, to the nominated 
Party/Parties, of any unforeseen or adverse impacts resulting from 
an activity that were not addressed by their EIA and of any 
cumulative impacts on an area which come to their attention;

d. operate aircraft in accordance with appropriate procedures set 
down by Treaty Parties in the Antarctic Flight Information Manual. 
Such procedures include communications, air traffic control and 
emergency procedures while in the Treaty area;

e. operate vessels in accordance with Treaty measures on marine 
navigation and safety;

f. abide by all requirements of the management plan for protected 
areas;

g. respect historic sites and monuments ; and

h. cooperate with any inspections, observation and monitoring, 
including of any ships, aircraft and equiment, undertaken in 
accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty or Articles 
3 (2) (d) and 14 of the Protocol.

Reporting

17. At the conclusion of a visit to Antarctica, the organiser 
should report on the conduct of their activities to the nominated

11
Party/Parties. Such a report should provide, as appropriate, 
details of the name and nationality of each vessel or aircraft used 
and the name of their captain, itinerary, the number of visitors 
engaged in the activity, places, dates and purposes of landings and 
the number of visitors landed on each occasion and any 
meteorological observations, including through the Voluntary 
Observing Ships Scheme. The report should also include details of 
any significant changes in activities from those proposed before 
the visit was conducted or observation of any unforeseen 
environmental impacts caused by the activity, or of any other 
impacts. Reports should be provided not later than the thirtieth of 
July following the completion of the activities.

Cases of Emergency

18. This Statement shall not apply in cases of emergency relating 
to the safety of human life or of ships , aircraft or equipment and 
facilities of high value, or the protection of the environment.

19. The organiser should inform the nominated Party/Parties, as 
soon as possible, of any actions which they may have taken in cases 
of emergency.

Visitor Education

20. The organiser should ensure that all visitors under their 
contorl are provided with a copy of the Code of Conduct for 
visitors to the Antarctic and are informed about how safety and 
other requirements, such as waste disposal and protection of fauna 
and flora, will be complied with during their activities.

12
