ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  KYOTO        
                                  11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA       
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XVIII ATCM/WP 36
                                  21 April 1994
                                  Original:English

REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II
TO THE PLENARY OF THE XVIIIth ATCM

(Working paper submitted by the Secretariat)
20 April, 1994

REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II
TO THE PLENARY OF THE XVIIIth ATCM

( ) Working Group II held meetings on 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19 and
20 April, under the chairmanship of Dr. Roberto Puceiro Ripoll and
Mr. Kazuaki Hoshino acting as Secretary, in order to deal with the
following agenda items:

9. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty
    a) Inspections during 1992/93, 1993/94  and  those
       planned for 1994/95.
    b) Inspection Checklists

10. Environmental Monitoring and Data
    a) Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human
       Activities in the Antarctic
    b) Global Change
    c) Data Management
    d) Regulation of the extraction, use and custody of
       scientific sample  obtained in  the Antarctic
       expedition

11. Implementation of Environmental Impact  Assessment
    Procedures
    a) Implementation of procedure for IDDs and CEEs
    b) Examination of CEEs produced during 1992/93

12. The Antarctic Protected Area System
    a) Revised Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs
    b) Historic sites and monuments
    c) Review and Implementation of the System

1
13. International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

14. Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

15. Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the Southern Ocean

( ) The Working Group II drafted a number of paragraphs concerning the above mentioned items, to be included in the Final Report of the XVIIIth ATCM.

Item 9
Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

a) Inspections during 1992/93 and 1993/94 and those Planned for 1994/95

( ) The Meeting considered reports of the Joint United Kingdom, Italian, and Republic of Korea inspection team conducted in 1992/93 (XVIII ATCM/INFO 7) and of the Swedish observers conducted in 1994 (XVIII ATCM/INFO 45).  These reports covered the following stations, abandoned stations and vessels:

      United Kingdom, Italian, and Republic of Korea Inspection Report:

Stations:                                          
The King Sejong (Republic of Korea)              
Faraday (United Kingdom)                         
Rothera (United Kingdom)                         
General San Martín (Argentina)                   
Base E, Stonington Island (United Kingdom)       
Palmer (United States)                           
Comandante Ferraz (Brazil)                       

2
Henryk Arctowski (Poland)
Arturo Prat (Chile)
Esperanza (Argentina)
Juan Carlos Primero (Spain)
Fossil Bluff (United Kingdom)
Gabriel de Castilla (Spain)
Decepción (Argentina)

Abandoned Stations:
    East Base, Stonington Island (United States)
    Deception (United Kingdom)
Vessels:
    MS "Explorer" (Liberia)
    MS "Akademic Sergey Vavilov" (Russia)
    MS "Europa" (Germany)

Swedish Inspection Report:

Stations:
    Neumayer (Germany)
    Halley (United Kingdom)
    Maitri (India)
    Novolazarevskaja (Russia)
    Georg Forster (Germany)
    SANAE III (South Africa)
    Sarie Marais (South Africa)
    SANAE IV (South Africa)
    Aboa (Finland)

( ) The Meeting noted the conclusions of the reports that all active stations and vessels are being operated in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.

( ) The Meeting noted that inspections are now taking account of the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in line with the decision of the Parties to implement the Protocol as far as possible pending its coming into

3
force. It was agreed that, in this interim period, inspection of 
matters covered by the Protocol provides valuable information on 
the degree to which the Protocol is being provisionally 
implemented. The overall view was that substantial progress is 
being made in implementing the provisions of the Protocol. The 
move to more detailed and precise inspections was welcomed. At the 
same time it was recognised that the increasing complexity of 
inspections required new approaches to ensure the accuracy of 
information in inspection reports.

( ) The Swedish delegation stated that its inspection team was 
somewhat handicapped in assessing some of the stations and their 
activities by the late circulation, or in other cases, non-arrival 
of the information required under Article VII, paragraph 5 of the 
Antarctic Treaty. Since the requirement in this provision is 
directly linked to the right to carry out inspections, the Meeting 
urged Parties to submit this information in due time so as to 
maintain the original objective that information can be compared 
with the actual activities being undertaken at the time of the 
inspection.

( ) The Meeting considered ways of improving Antarctic inspections 
noting the comments in papers submitted by Chile (XVIII ATCM/WP 
12), Argentina (XVIII ATCM/WP 30), the United Kingdom (XVIII 
ATCM/WP 33) and the United Kingdom, Italy and the Republic of Korea 
(XVIII ATCM/WP 34). In particular these papers drew attention to 
the need for inspections to be distributed across all facilities in 
the Treaty area and avoid being concentrated on those in the 
Peninsula area. Several delegations made suggestions as to how the 
system of inspections might be made more effective.  A number of 
delegations suggested that Parties should be encouraged to carry 
out further joint inspections in order to reduce the considerable 
costs involved.

4
. 

The Meeting stressed the requirement for exchange of information under Article 7, paragraph 5, of the Antarctic Treaty and that the provision of this information by 30 November in accordance with Recommendation VIII-6 is essential for the effective conduct of inspection.  The Meeting agreed that pre and post inspection exchange of information would be useful in improving coordination and sharing costs of inspections.

To this end it was agreed to publish the list of 161 past inspections provided by the United Kingdom (XVIII ATCM/WP 33) in the report of this Meeting, even though it is incomplete (Annex A). Parties should provide corrections and additions so that more complete lists could be published in the reports of future ATCM.

Some delegations noted that inspections could be improved and reports could be more accurate through observers using the languages of the stations being visited.

( ) The Meeting considered that during inspections there would be advantage in attention being paid to the use of best available technologies.

( ) The opportunity was provided for Parties to advise on any arrangements they had in hand for inspections in 1994/95. None of the Parties were in a position to provide this information at the Meeting.

b) Inspection Checklists **

( ) The Meeting welcomed and considered the report by SCAR and COMNAP describing an inspection checklist for permanent stations (XVIII ATCM/WP 22). The Meeting noted the checklists submitted by the UK for permanent stations, abandoned bases and vessels and developed and used by the UK, Italy and the Republic of Korea

5
during their joint Treaty Inspection in 1993 (XVIII ATCM/INFO 8)
and discussed the Chilean working paper (XVIII ATCM/WP 12).

( ) The Meeting agreed that, as a first step, it would be valuable 
to have a checklist for permanent stations and associated 
installations. The Meeting recognized that it would be useful to 
develop further checklists. SCAR was requested to produce a 
checklist for protected areas to be submitted at the XIX ATCM. The 
UK offered to coordinate the production of checklists for abandoned 
stations, vessels, aircraft, refuges and waste dumps for discussion 
at the XIX ATCM.

( ) The Meeting acknowledged that standard checklists provide 
guidelines that could enhance the quality and consistency of 
inspections.  It was recognized that such checklists would not 
limit a Party's individual action in conducting inspections.

( ) The Meeting agreed Checklist A for permanent Antarctic 
stations and associated installations (Annex B).

Item 10
Environmental Monitoring and Data

(a) Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human 
Activities in Antarctica

( ) The Meeting welcomed the SCAR-COMNAP report describing their 
activities since XVII ATCM and recommending next steps (XVIII 
ATCM/WP 21).

6
With respect to Recommendation XVII-1, SCAR-COMNAP responded as 
follows:

1. (i) Advice on long-term monitoring programmes: 
The Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs 
and Conservation (GOSEAC) has begun to address this 
question and is seeking assistance from other 
scientific groups within and outside SCAR.

(ii) Emission standards: At the request of GOSEAC, 
SCALOP is continuing a survey of all current 
incinerators in the Treaty area. In addition, 
GOSEAC is investigating current emission standards 
and best operating practices used in Europe and 
North America for incinerators.

2. Establishment of research programmes at selected sites: 
SCAR provided COMNAP with a set of criteria concerning 
location, duration and extent of operations, 
disposal of sewage and air strip availability on which to 
select a representative sample.

3. Provide a list of data sets: 
Implementation will depend on implementation of 
recommendations from SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc group on 
Antarctic Data Management.

4. Establish national arrangements for obtaining expert 
advice: this is more appropriately dealt with by national 
authorities.

With respect to the next steps to be taken, SCAR-COMNAP proposed to 
convene technical workshops, as recommended in Recommendation 9 of
7
the First Group of Experts Meeting. The workshops would provide the technical basis for progress in developing the environmental monitoring necessary to verify impact assessments, assess local pollution and provide an index of the health of Antarctic ecosystems. This will assist in verifying that human impacts do not have unforseen effects on Antarctic birds, seals and plants, as requested in paragraph 77 of the Report of XVII ATCM.

( ) The Meeting supported the SCAR-COMNAP proposal for technical workshop(s) and requested that the workshop(s) have the following terms of reference:

1.      Review the priority of impacts which need monitoring,using the recommendation of the First Group of Experts, summarized in paragraph 75 of XVII ATCM as a guide.

2.      Develop hypotheses on which to design monitoring programmes.

3.      Provide technical advice including:

-       minimum monitoring needed to meet the requirements of the Protocol, based on a precautionary approach;

-       baseline information;

-       ecosystem health indices;

-       key variables to be monitored;

-       design of monitoring programmes;

-       scientific protocols for monitoring;

8
- measurement methods, including frequency of measurement;
- standardization and quality assurance of techniques and data;
- applicable technology;
- data management, and 
- criteria for judging whether monitoring programme objectives are being met.

This workshop should be attended by individuals with expertise and competence in one or more of the following areas: Antarctic science, Antarctic programme management, data management, environmental monitoring and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative process.

( ) The Delegation of Russia presented an information paper on coastal pollution monitoring (XVIII ATCM/INFO 63).

b) Global Change

( ) The Representative of SCAR described the history of the development of the strategic plan for Antarctic global change research entitled "The role of the Antarctic in global change: an international plan for a regional" research programme", recently published by SCAR. The integration of this research with existing international research programmes, especially IGBP and WCRP (Wild Climate Research Programme) and its relationship with recommendations of IPCC were noted as important features (XVIII ATCM/INFO 83, Annex 2).

9
( ) The Meeting welcomed this development, noting its importance 
in providing for regional cooperation and the major contribution 
that such research could make to a better understanding of global 
processes including the circulation of the world oceans, climate 
change, pollution, and the biological effects on enhanced UV 
radiation. Whilst encouraging SCAR to continue with this important 
initiative, the meeting recognized the need for a special fund to 
resource it and encouraged national operators to contribute to such 
a fund. The Meeting requested that SCAR forward the strategic plan 
for the Antarctic global change research to the Secretariat of the 
United Nations Commission for Sustainable Development, the 
Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee of the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and the Secretariat of the 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.

( ) The Russian Delegation submitted three Information Papers, on 
multi-year variability of ozone in the atmosphere, on Glacier 
Drilling at Vostok Station and on the tendency of the dynamic 
changes in the Antarctic atmosphere (XVIII ATCM/INFO 70, 62 
and 71).

(c) Data Management

( ) The Meeting welcomed the SCAR/COMNAP report on data management 
(XVIII ATCM/INFO 31). The report described the establishment of a 
SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc Planning Group on Antarctic Data Management and 
the steps this group had taken since XVII ATCM.

The Planning Group recommended the adoption of six principles to 
guide the development of an Antarctic Data Directory system. The 
meeting adopted the following principles based on the SCAR-COMNAP 
recommendation.

10
1. The Antarctic Data Directory is a data directory providing data set descriptions and information on where to access data and not a central database containing the actual data.

2. Antarctic scientific data will be described, including historical data, environmental monitoring data, and data for which access restrictions may apply.

3. Conditions of access to the actual data will be the responsibility of data custodians, such as the funding or managing agencies and institutions.

4. There will be no restrictions on access to the directory. Availability of the directory and associated products will be widely promoted.

5. The directory entries will be compatible with the Directory Interchange Format of the International Directory Network, but with Antarctic specific extensions.

6. The production and maintenance of directory entries is recognized as a critical activity for Antarctic science and must not be considered merely an administrative overhead.

( ) The Meeting noted that the Antarctic Master Directory should include listing of geological and biological archives.

The next step in the development of the Directory will be a seminar to be held at XXIII SCAR. This meeting should invite participation by representatives of potential funding organizations.

11
( ) The Meeting requested SCAR-COMNAP to provide a further report 
on progress on data management to the XIX ATCM.

d)    Regulation of the Extraction, Use and Custody of 
      Scientific Samples Obtained in Antarctic Expeditions

( ) The Meeting took note of SCAR Recommendation XXII-1 (XVIII 
ATCM WP23) and of the Working Paper submitted by the Chilean 
Delegation (XVIII ATCM WP13) referring to the fact that geological 
specimens of scientific value are increasingly being removed from 
Antarctica for non-scientific purposes.  In this regard, the 
Meeting recalled Article 3 and Article 7 of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

( ) The Meeting stressed that the removal of fossils, minerals, 
meteorites, volcanic bombs and ventifacts should be done for 
scientific purposes only.  Such scientifically valuable specimens 
must be properly curated in institutions accessible to the 
scientific community and whenever appropriate should be publicly 
displayed.

( ) The Delegation of Japan submitted a Working Paper (XVIII ATCM 
WP25) describing the management scheme for scientific specimens 
used by the National Institute of Polar Research.

Item 11   
Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

     (a) Implementation of procedures for IEEs and CEEs

( ) The United Kingdom delegation submitted a paper (XVIIIth 
ATCM/INFO 9) which reviewed all Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIAs) prepared to date for proposed activities in Antarctica.  The 
United Kingdom delegation suggested that, until such time as the
12
proposed Treaty Secretariat was in a position to maintain a record 
of EIAs, SCAR could publish a directory of EIAs annually in the 
SCAR Bulletin.

This suggestion received general support and the representative of 
SCAR confirmed that SCAR would be able to publish an annual 
directory of any EIAs notified to SCAR, as an interim arrangement 
only. The Meeting agreed to recommend this course of action.

( ) The delegation of New Zealand presented a draft IEE for the 
decommissioning of Vanda Station (XVIII ATCM/INFO 60) and a summary 
of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme Environmental Audit (XVIII 
ATCM/INFO 59). The audit was tabled as the first environmental 
audit of a national programme's activities in the Antarctic. It 
provides an example of a procedure for reviewing current activities 
in terms of compliance with the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and providing operational 
guidelines for improving environmental management.

( ) Other papers were presented by South Africa and Belgium (XVIII 
ATCM/INFO 61), Argentina (XVIII ATCM/WP 27), IAATO (XVIII ATCM/INFO 
13 and XVIII ATCM/INFO 23). A number of delegations welcomed the 
efforts made by tour operators within IAATO to comply with the 
provisions of the Protocol.

( ) The effectiveness of the distribution of CEEs was raised 
during the discussion of this item.

( ) The Meeting recalled that Annex 1, Article 3 of the Protocol 
requires that CEEs (draft and final) be made publicly available and 
be circulated to all Parties for comments.

 
13
( ) Until the establishment of a CEP and a Secretariat the Meeting proposed the following interim distribution procedure for the Party preparing the CEE:

-       circulate the CEE to Parties through diplomatic channels for comments;

-       provide at the same time as circulating to Parties, one copy each to SCAR and COMNAP who will notify their members of the circulation of the CEE;

-       notify circulation to the next ATCM;

The notification should include: title, date, author(s), organisation and country, address, and date by which comments are required.

It is the responsibility of each Party to make the CEE publicly available and undertake circulation in their own country.

(b) Examination of CEEs Produced during 1992/93

( ) The Meeting extended its special thanks to the delegations of New Zealand and South Africa regarding the papers they submitted covering CEE’s on major projects they are undertaking.  The New Zealand document (XVIII ATCM/INFO 21) dealt with the final CEE on Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in SW Ross Sea, and the paper submitted by South Africa (XVIII ATCM INFO 54) described the process carried out for the South African Sanae IV CEE. The Meeting commended their efforts to comply with Annex 1 of the Protocol, pending its entry into force. In so doing, they set examples from which all will benefit and could follow.

14
Item 12
The Antarctic Protected Area System

a) Revised Management Plans for SPAs and SSSIs

( ) The Meeting welcomed a report from SCAR on progress with the 
several requests made to SCAR at XVII ATCM. It was stated that 
considerable assistance had been provided to individual Parties in 
the revision of existing management plans and in the preparation of 
management plans for new protected and managed areas. Revision of 
the ecosystem classification matrix has begun and new guidelines 
for the inspection of protected areas are under discussion.  It is 
intended that both these products will be provided to XIX ATCM.

( ) The Meeting suggested that, in preparing a handbook to assist 
in the preparation of management plans under Annex V, SCAR should 
consider how the format could be developed to facilitate the use of 
the plans by all scientific and logistic personnel.

( ) Under this item, information papers were submitted by the 
delegations of Australia (XVIII ATCM Info 14), France (XVIII ATCM 
Info 17) and the United Kingdom (XVIII ATCM Info 34).

An Information Paper (XVIII ATCM/INFO 14 Rev 1) tabled by 
Australia, provided corrections to the Management Plan for SSSIs. 
These corrections were accepted by the meeting as set down in 
Annex C.

b) Historical Sites and Monuments

( ) The Chilean Delegation submitted a Working Paper concerning 
the protection of the remains of the whaling station in Whaler's 
Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands (XVIII ATCM/WP 5). 
The installation was badly damaged by a volcanic eruption in 1969.

15
. 

The Chilean Delegation suggested that the installation and its 
associated artefacts should be conserved.

Several delegations stressed the importance of Deception Island 
because of its scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as 
its historic values, and the need to consider these values in an 
integrated fashion.

To ensure the effective protection of Deception Island some 
delegations underlined the value of an integrated management plan 
in the form of an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) within 
which specific areas of value could be further protected by means 
of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) or Historic Sites 
and Monuments.

( ) The Argentinian Delegation submitted a document entitled "The 
Maintenance Work on Sites and Historical Monuments" (XVIII ATCM WP 
26) and the UK Delegation submitted a document on the "Clean-up and 
Conservation of Abandoned British Bases in the Antarctic Peninsula 
Region" (XVIII ATCM INFO 33) on which several delegations 
commented.

c) Review and Implementation of the Antarctic Protected 
Areas System

( ) The United Kingdom Delegation was concerned about the possible 
use of mandatory prohibitions within the Management Plans for 
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) and asked for the Meeting 
to discuss and clarify the situation in the light of the 
distinctions made in articles 4 and 5 of Annex 5 to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Several 
delegations agreed with the need for this clarification.

 
16
. 

The representative of SCAR added that it would be helpful for this 
question to be resolved before the XIX ATCM in order to provide 
guidance in finalizing the management plans for the first Antarctic 
Specially Managed Area (Admiralty Bay) being drafted by Brazil and 
Poland.

( ) Clarification of this matter was not obtained at this Meeting. 
However, such clarification will be necessary before designation of 
any Antarctic Specially Managed Areas under Article 6 of Annex 5 to 
the Protocol.

Item 13
International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

( ) The representative of SCAR presented the text of SCAR Code of 
Conduct regarding experimentation on animals in Antarctica (XVIII 
ATCM/WP 24 and XVIII ATCM/INFO 83, Annex 3). This had been agreed 
within the SCAR framework and represented the minimum standard 
required to meet ethical and moral standards at an international 
level.

The Meeting welcomed the SCAR Code of Conduct and considered that 
their governments should apply the Code consistent with their 
national laws.

( ) Several delegations described with satisfaction their logistic 
and scientific cooperation with other Treaty Parties in the 
Antarctic.

In this regard, papers were submitted by Argentina (XVIII ATCM/ WP 
29), France (XVIII ATCM/INFO 16), Chile (XVIII ATCM/INFO 47), 
Australia (XVIII ATCM/INFO 79), Russia (XVIII ATCM/INFO 82) and New 
Zealand (XVIII ATCM/INFO 86).

17
. 
Several delegations also submitted oral reports regarding this 
subject.

Item 14
Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

( ) Under this item papers were presented by WMO (XVIII/ATCM/INFO 
24) and by Chile (XVIII/ATCM/INFO 46).

( ) The WMO observer reported on the present observation and 
communication networks in Antarctica emphasizing the setting up by 
the World Climate Research Programme of a programme for 
observations by an international fleet of Antarctic buoys. A plea 
was made for further observations of the vertical distribution of 
ozone and the continuing measurement of the concentration of 
atmospheric constituants. Descriptions were given by some 
delegations of their relevant national programmes.

( ) The value of meteorological observations through the WMO 
Voluntary Observing Scheme (VOS) from tourist ships sailing in 
Antarctica was pointed out by several delegations and the IAATO and 
WMO observers agreed to pursue this matter through the appropriate 
channels.

( ) A specific application of meteorological analysis and 
forecasting for the Southern Ocean was introduced by the Russian 
delegation's proposal for cooperation in the establishment of 
arrangements for the exchange of information to support Antarctic 
marine pollution response operations (ATCM XVIII/INFO 88). Some 
delegations indicated the potential value of such services in 
Antarctica and others noted the existence of a number of research, 
operational and modelling capabilities for pollution response in 
various countries. The Meeting agreed that it was of paramount 
importance for Parties to introduce adequate practical response 
18
strategies and to install appropriate equipment which could fully 
utilise the results of any operational computer simulation models.

( ) Delegations considered that there might be advantage in 
developing small scale systems for particular areas. However, a 
number of delegations considered it premature to establish a broad 
scale oil spill modelling and prediction system when the capacity 
to respond on this scale is not available. These delegations 
considered that at this stage it would be more effective to focus 
resources on minimizing risks such as through the use of light 
fuels, improved hydrographic charts or response equipment at 
stations.

( ) The Meeting agreed to ask their COMNAP representatives, in 
consultation as necessary with WMO and SCAR to advise XIX ATCM as 
to their requirements in light of the Russian proposal.

Item 15 
Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the Southern 
Ocean

( ) Under this item a paper was presented by WMO (XVIII ATCM/INFO 
25) outlining the meteorological services provided by the 5 
nominated stations namely Casey, Marambio, McMurdo, Molodezhnaya 
and Presidente Frei and support was sought for the SCAR experiment 
(FROST), to be conducted with the aim of better understanding 
Antarctic weather process and ultimately improving meteorological 
services in the region. The Meeting agreed on the value of the 
work being carried out through the provision of operational 
information and indicated that it should continue to be followed up 
by WMO and COMNAP.

It was suggested that many issues under this agenda item were 
technical and best delt with by COMNAP or SCAR with the advice of 
19
· WMO.  It was agreed that at the next ATCM all meteorological 
matters should be combined into a single item dealing with 
meteorological observations, communications, research and services. 
This item would be entitled Antarctic Meteorology, 
Telecommunications and related Services.

 
                                                            20
ANNEX A

INSPECTIONS BY YEAR, NATIONALITY AND LOCATION
CARRIED OUT UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Year  Party Inspecting  Number of
                  Bases or       Nationality of
                  Ships Inspected  Bases Inspected

1963  New Zealand     3              USA
1964  USA            10             Argentina (Decepcion)
                                      "   (Esperanza)
                                      Chile (Pres. Videla)
                                      "   (Pedro Cerda)
                                      France (D. D'Urville)
                                      New Zealand (Scott)
                                      UK (Base B, Base F)
                                      USSR (Mirny, Vostok)

1964  Australia       3              New Zealand (Scott)
                                      USA (McMurdo, Byrd)
                                      "   (Pole Station)

1964  UK              1              USA (McMurdo)

1965  -               -              -

1966  Argentina       1              USA

1967  USA             8              Argentina (Orcadas)
                                      Australia (Wilkes)
                                      "     (Mawson)
                                      Denmark (M/S Dan)
                                      France (D. D'Urville)
                                      Japan (Syowa)
                                      S.Africa (SANAE)
                                      UK (Signy)
                                      USSR (Molodezhnaya)

1968  -               -              -

1969  -               -              -

1970  -               -              -

1971  USA             3              Australia (Casey,Mawson)
                                      France (D. D'Urville)
                                      USSR (Mirny)

1972  -               -              -

1973  -               -              -

1974  -               -              -

21
Year  Party Inspecting    Number of 
                  Bases or 
                  Ships Inspected        Nationality of 
                                             Bases Inspected

1975  USA              4                  Argentina (Alm. Brown)
                                             Chile (Eduardo Frei)
                                             UK (Argentine Islands)
                                             USSR (Bellingshausen)

1976  -                -                  - 

1977  Argentina        1                  USA
      USA              5                  Argentina (Marambio)
                                             Chile (Eduardo Frei)
                                             New Zealand (Scott)
                                             USSR (Bellingshausen)
                                             " (Druzh[n?]aya IV)

1978  -                -                  -

1979  -                -                  -

1980  USA              6                  Argentina (Alm. Brown)
                                             " (Esperanza)
                                             Chile (Gen B O'Higgins)
                                             Poland (Arctowski)
                                             UK (Rothera)
                                             USSR (Bellingshausen)

1981  -                -                  -

1982  -                -                  -

1983  USA              14                 Argentina (Marambio)
                                             " (Belgrano II)
                                             Australia (Casey,
                                             Mawson, Davis)
                                             France (D. D'Urville)
                                             Germany (G.Von Neumayer)
                                             Japan (Syowa)
                                             South Africa (SANAE)
                                             UK (Halley)
                                             USSR (Novolazarevskaya)
                                             " (Molodezhnaya)
                                             " (Mirny)
                                             " (Leningradskaya)

1984  Australia        Not available     Not available

1985  USA              7                  Argentina (Jubany)
                                             Chile (Rod. Marsh)
                                             " (E. Frei)
                                             China (Great Wall)
                                             Poland (Arctowski)
                                             UK (Faraday)
                                             USSR (Bellingshausen)

                                             22
Year  Party Inspecting     Number of 
                      Bases or 
                      Ships Inspected       Nationality of 
                                            Bases Inspected

1986  Australia         2                   France (D. D'Urville) 
                                            USSR (Not available)

1987  Chile             10                  Argentina (Decepcion) 
                                            "   (Alm. Brown)     
                                            Brazil (Cdte. Ferraz/
                                            China Buque Prof Besnard)
                                            China (Great Wall)  
                                            Poland (Arctowski)  
                                            UK (Faraday)        
                                            USSR (Bellingshausen)
                                            Spain (Buque Alcocero)
                                            Uruguay (Artigas)   

1987  Australia         1                   USSR (Mirny)        

1988  -                 -                   -                   

1989  USA               6                   France (D. D'Urville)
                                            Germany (Gondwana)  
                                            Italy (Terra Nova Bay)
                                            New Zealand (Scott/ 
                                            Cape Bird)          
                                            USSR (Leningradskaya)

1989  USSR              15                  Argentina, Brazil, 
                                            Australia, China,   
                                            FRG , GDR, India,   
                                            Japan, New Zealand, 
                                            Poland, UK, USA     
                                            (Names of stations not available)

1989  New Zealand       3                   UK (Faraday),       
                                            "   (Rothera, Signy) 

1989  New Zealand/UK    11                  Argentina (G. San Martin)
                                            "   (Orcadas)       
                                            Brazil (Cdte Ferraz) 
                                            Chile (Ten. Carvajal)
                                            "   (Ten. R. Marsh)  
                                            China (Great Wall)  
                                            Poland (Arctowski)  
                                            Rep Korea (King Sejong)
                                            Uruguay (Artigas)   
                                            USA (Palmer)        
                                            USSR (Bellingshausen)

1989  France/Germany    8                   Argentina, Brazil, 
                                            Chile, Rep. of Korea,
                                            Spain, Uruguay, UK, 
                                            USA.                
                                            (Names of stations not available)
 
23
Year	Party Inspecting	Number of 
Bases or 
Ships Inspected 	Nationality of 
Bases Inspected

1990	Norway	3	Germany (Von Neumayer)
				South Africa (SANAE)
				UK (Halley)

1990	Brazil	4	Argentina, China, 
				Rep. of Korea, Uruguay
				(Names of stations not available)

1990	Chile	8	Argentina (Decepcion)
				"	(Jubany)
				Brazil (Cdte Ferraz)
				China (Great Wall)
				Ecuador (M/S Orion)
				Poland (Arctowski)
				Spain (Juan Carlos I)
				Uruguay (Artigas)
				USSR (Bellingshausen)

1990	China	7	Argentina, Brazil, 
				Chile, Poland, 
				Rep. of Korea, 
				Uruguay, USSR
				(Names of stations not available)

1991	Chile	4	Ecuador (V. Maldonado)
				Poland (Deception Hut)
				Netherlands	(	"	")
				USA (Seal Island Hut)

1991	Australia	1	China
				(Name of station not available)

1992	-	-	-

1993	UK/Italy/
Rep. of Korea	12	**	Argentina (San Martin)
				"	(Decepcion)
				"	(Esperanza)
				Brazil (Cdte Ferraz)
				Chile (Arturo Prat)
				Germany (M/S Europa)
				Liberia (M/S Explorer)
				Poland (Arctowski)
				Russia (M/S Vasilov)
				Rep. Korea (King Sejong)
				UK (Faraday, Rothera)
				"	(Ston	ington Island)
				"	(Deception)
				"	(Fossil Bluff)
				USA (Palmer)
				Spain (Juan Carlos Primero)

24
Year     Party Inspecting     Number of 
                              Bases or        
                              Ships Inspected     Nationality of 
                                                   Bases Inspected

1994     Sweden               9                   Neumayer (Germany)     
                                                   Halley (United Kingdom)  
                                                   Maitri (India)           
                                                   Novolazarevskaja (Russia)
                                                   George Forster (Germany) 
                                                   SANAE III (South Africa) 
                                                   Sarai Marais (South Africa)
                                                   SANAE IV (South Africa)  
                                                   Aboa (Finland)           
 
25
ANNEX B

ANTARCTIC INSPECTION CHECKLISTS

These checklists, which are not intended to be exhaustive, are designed to provide a guideline to observers conducting inspections in Antarctica in accordance with the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

Not all items in the checklists are necessarily applicable to the activity being inspected or directly related to Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty or the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. It is recognised that some of the items could be addressed through the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information. It is also recognised that the purpose of an inspection is to verify through observation. Therefore any inspection report should clearly identify which information was observed and which was taken from documents.

It is recommended that observers seek out and examine all relevant documents prior to undertaking inspections, including the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information, the relevant national Annual Reports to SCAR and the COMNAP/SCALOP Advance Exchange of Information.

CHECKLIST A
PERMANENT ANTARCTIC STATIONS AND ASSOCIATED INSTALLATIONS

1.    GENERAL INFORMATION
    1.1   Name of station visited
    1.2   Operating nation
    1.3   Location
    1.4   Date established
                        26
. .
1.5     Primary aim of the station (scientific, logistic
etc)
1.6     Plans for future use of the station
1.7     International logistic cooperation
1.8     Availability of the Antarctic Treaty Exchange of
Information

2.      INSPECTION DETAILS
2.1     Date
2.2     Time of visit
2.3     Duration of visit
2.4     Last inspection (nation(s), date)

3.      PERSONNEL
3.1     Name of person in charge
3.2     Total number of personnel on station
3.3     Number of scientists on station
3.4     Number of over-wintering personnel
3.5     Maximum capacity of station
3.6     Responsible agencies or ministries
3.7     Training (survival, first-aid, environmental
protection etc)

4.      SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
4.1     Major scientific programmes supported by the
station
4.2     Dedicated permanent scientific facilities on the
station     
4.3     Number and nationality of exchange scientists from
other Antarctic programmes
4.4     Advance notice, use and control of radio-isotopes

27
5.      PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF STATION
        5.1     Area covered by station
        5.2     Approximate number and type of buildings
        5.3     Age and state of buildings
        5.4     New or recent construction
        5.5     Sketch or map of buildings
        5.6     Major aerial systems
        5.7     Landing or dock facilities
        5.8     Roads
        5.9     Airstrips
        5.10    Helipads
        5.11    Nearby facilities (refuges, field huts etc)

6.      COMMUNICATIONS
        6.1     Communication facilities

7.      TRANSPORT
        7.1     Number and type of ground vehicles
        7.2     Number and type of small boats
        7.3     Number and type of fixed and rotary wing aircraft
        7.4     Number of aircraft movements per year
        7.5     Cargo handling and earth moving equipment
        7.6     Frequency and method of resupply

8.      STATION FACILITIES - FUEL STORAGE/USAGE
        8.1     Types, amount and use of fuel (diesel, petrol,
                aviation fuel etc)
        8.2     Types and capacity of station storage containers
        8.3     Monitoring of fuel pumping systems and storage
                tanks (method)
        8.4     Background information on fuel pipe-work
                (material, above ground, gravity feed, valves etc)
        8.5     Transfer of bulk fuel (include transfer method)

28
. .
8.6     Methods of emptying fuel lines (gravity,
        compressed air etc)
8.7     Field fuel depots (quantity and type)
8.8     Responsibility for fuel management
8.9     Protection against leaks and spills

9.      STATION FACILITIES - WATER SYSTEM
9.1     Type of water supply and storage facility (RO,
        distillation, snow melt, chemical treatment
        etc.)
9.2     Availability and quality of water supply
9.3     Consumption of water per person/day

10.     STATION FACILITIES - POWER GENERATION
10.1    Number, type and capacity of generators
10.2    Annual fuel consumption for power generation
        (tonnes)
10.3    Alternative energy sources
10.4    Filtering and monitoring of emissions

11.     STATION FACILITIES - MEDICAL
11.1    Medical facilities and personnel
11.2    Number of patient beds

12.     STATION FACILITIES - HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS
12.1    Types and quantities of chemicals
12.2    Storage and monitoring arrangements
12.3    Protection against*leaks and spills

13.     FIREARMS/EXPLOSIVES
13.1    Number, type and purpose of firearms and
        ammunition
13.2    Amount, type and use of explosives
13.3    Storage of explosives and method of disposal

29
14.     MILITARY SUPPORT ACTIVITIES

14.1    Describe any military support to the station

14.2    Details of military equipment held at station

15.     ANTARCTIC TREATY LEGISLATION

15.1    Understanding of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and related agreements

15.2    Availability of Antarctic Treaty documentation on station

16.     EMERGENCY RESPONSE CAPABILITY

16.1    General

        a.  Search and rescue capability

        b.  Incidents in the last year resulting in significant damage to station facilities or the environment

        c.  Method of reporting incidents

16.2    Medical

        a.  Mobile medical emergency response capability

        b.  Evacuation plan for medical emergencies

16.3    Fire

        a.  Fire emergency plan

        b.  Fire fighting equipment

        c.  Training of personnel for fire fighting

        d.  Fire fighting exercises (frequency)

16.4    Pollution (oil and chemical spills)

        a.  Risk assessment for spills

        b.  Spill response plan

        c.  Training of personnel to deal with spills

        d.  Spill response exercises (frequency)

        e.  Mobile spill response capability

30
17.     ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA)

17.1    Awareness of station management personnel of the 
        requirement to conduct an EIA for all new 
        activities

17.2    EIAs prepared for activities currently being 
        undertaken

17.3    Environmental monitoring of indicators of possible 
        environmental impacts of the station or associated 
        activities

18.     CONSERVATION OF FLORA AND FAUNA

18.1    Methods of making station personnel aware of the 
        rules relating to the conservation of Antarctic 
        flora and fauna

18.2    Details of any native mammals, birds or 
        invertebrates that have been killed, injured, 
        captured, handled, molested or disturbed during the 
        past year. Methods used to kill, capture and or 
        handle animals. Issue of permits and reasons for 
        their issue.

18.3    Harmful interference with animals and plants in the 
        vicinity of the base. Issue of permits and reasons 
        for their issue.

18.4    Non-indigenous animals or plant species present. 
        Issue of permits and reasons for their issue.

18.5    Actions taken to avoid accidental introduction of 
        non-indigenous species

18.6    Nearby, important wildlife or plant sites

18.7    Local guidelines controlling the use of aircraft 
        and vehicles close to concentrations of wildlife

31
19.     WASTE MANAGEMENT

19.1   Waste management plan for the separation, 
       reduction, collection, storage and disposal of 
       wastes

19.2   Responsibility for waste management on the station

19.3   Production of an annual waste management report

19.4   Training of personnel in waste management and the 
       need to minimise the impact of wastes on the 
       environment

19.5   Publicly displayed notices concerning waste 
       management

19.6   Current waste disposal methods:
       a.  Radioactive materials
       b.  Electrical batteries
       c.  Fuel (both liquid and solid) and lubricants
       d.  Wastes containing harmful levels of heavy 
           metals or acutely toxic or harmful persistent 
           compounds
       e.  Poly-vinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane foam, 
           polystyrene foam, rubber
       f.  Other plastics
       g.  Treated wood
       h.  Fuel drums
       i.  Other solid, non-combustible wastes
       j.  Organic wastes
           -  Residues of carcasses of imported animals
           -  Laboratory cultures of micro-organisms 
               and plant pathogens
           -  Introduced avian products
           -  Other organic wastes (food waste etc)

       k.  Sewage and domestic liquid wastes
       l.  Waste produced by field parties

19.7   Production of waste per person/day

32
19.8 Use of open burning. Disposal of ash. Alternatives planned for by 1998/99
19.9 Use of incineration. Disposal of ash. Control and monitoring of emissions
19.10 Treatment of sewage and domestic liquid 
       wastes. Monitoring of effluent
19.11 Use of landfill or ice pit
19.12 Recycling of wastes
19.13 Measures taken to prevent wastes which are to be 
       removed from the Treaty area being dispersed by 
       wind or accessed by scavengers
19.14 Inventory of the locations of past activities 
       (abandoned bases, old fuel depots etc)
19.15 Clean-up of past activities and future plans

20.    MANAGEMENT OF PROTECTED AREAS
20.1 Protected area(s) in the vicinity of, or 
       containing, the station (type, name, site number)
20.2 Relevant management plans and maps of protected 
       areas held on the station
20.3 Entry by station personnel to protected areas 
       within the past year. Issue of permits and reasons 
       for their issue.
20.4 Problems with station personnel or visitors not 
       observing the restrictions of protected areas
20.5 Marking of the protected area(s) in the vicinity 
       of, or containing, the station
20.6 Monitoring or management of protected areas
20.7 Information as to whether the protected areas 
       continue to serve the purpose for which they were 
       designated
20.8 Additional steps that should be taken to protect 
       the areas
33
21.      TOURIST AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

21.1    Visits to the station by tourists or non-
        governmental expeditions during the past year
        Total number of people
        Numbers ashore at any one time
        Number of cruise ships
        Number of yachts
        Number of aircraft

21.2    Procedures developed to facilitate or control
        tourist and non-governmental
        activities

21.3    Advance permission required for visits to the
        station

21.4    Operational problems for the station caused by
        visitors (unannounced visits etc)

21.5    Environmental impact of visitors at the station or
        nearby

 
34
ANNEX C

SITE DESCRIPTION FOR SSSI 25, MARINE PLAIN, VESTFOLD HILLS,
PRINCESS ELIZABETH LAND

Amendments to the Management Plan for SSSI 25 are shown in bold
below:

Physical Features

-   Under this heading the opening sentence reads "Marine Plain
(23.4 km, lat. 68°38'S. long. 78°08'E)....". This should read:

"Marine Plain (23.4 km², lat.  68°38'S, long.  78°08'E)
.....".

-   The boundary of the site as defined in the second paragraph
under this heading should read:

".....commencing at lat. 68°36'30"S, long. 78°09'00"E it
runs south easterly to lat. 68°36'45"S, long. 78°10'30"E;
then south-easterly to lat. 68°37'30"S, long. 78°12'30"E,
then south along the meridian of long. 78°12'30"E to its
intersection by the low water mark......".

Topography

-   The penultimate sentence under this heading requires the
following alteration:

"....by a marked change in their slope, probably
representing an old (Holocene?) shoreline."

35
Geology

- The third sentence under this heading should read:

"Low lying areas consist of at least 8 metres of early
Pliocene ....".

36
