ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                                  KYOTO       
                                  11-22 April 1994      

TRATADO ANTARTICO       
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      

XVIII ATCM/WP 15      
10 April 1994      
Original: French      


Legal Status of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat      

Agenda Item 8 a      
(submitted by Belgium)
Legal Status of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

(Agenda Item 7 a)

A.  Reminder

1.  In the non paper entitled "Antarctic Treaty Secretariat" submitted in 1992 by the United Kingdom (page 10), two alternatives were put forth regarding the legal status of a future Antarctic Treaty Secretariat.

2.  It may be useful to recall said alternatives:

"Form and legal personality

25. One alternative should be to set up an international organization constituted by an international agreement which would accord international legal personality to the organization, and provide that in the territory of each of its Member States, it would be granted legal capacity.  The agreement would list the functions of the organization, specify where its headquarters were to be, set out basic procedural rules, financial obligations and basic provisions for staffing. The CCAMLR Commission is a good example of such an arrangement.

26. However, it may not be necessary to adopt the above approach at least initially. It would be possible to provide by an ATCM recommendation (or by a decision of a Special Consultative Meeting convened for that purpose) that a secretariat be set up under the law of one Consultative

1
Party, to be given legal personality in that State under the 
law."

3.    The model provided by the 1972 Convention may be added to the 
aforementioned alternatives. Indeed, said Convention entrusts the 
depositary government with a number of tasks. Within this 
framework no provision is made for an independent secretariat. 
Given, however, the importance of the future Antarctic secretariat, 
it appears that this option was not considered.

B.    Report of the contact group which met in Venice during the 
XVII ATCM

4.    Apparently, the contact group which met in Venice opted for 
the second alternative put forward by the United Kingdom. 
According to the document prepared by this group (IV Legal status 
of the secretariat) the secretariat has a legal personality under 
domestic law only on the territory of the host country:

      "The secretariat and its staff shall enjoy, in the territory 
of its host State, such legal capacity as may be necessary to 
perform their functions and enjoy the privileges and 
immunities set out in annex I to this recommendation (in 
agreement with the host State)."

C.    Questions relating to the secretariat's legal nature

a.    A legal personality under domestic law?

5.    To the extent that a legal personality under domestic law is 
given to the secretariat, we may ask ourselves whether it is wise 
to limit said personality to the territory of the host State. 
Indeed, in performing its functions, the secretariat may have to 
file legal documents outside the host State (contracts...). That

2
being the case, it would make sense to recognize this legal 
personality under domestic law with regard to the Contracting 
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

6. This does not in any way imply that the Contracting Parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty must necessarily grant privileges and 
immunities to the secretariat. These two issues are different from 
one another and it would be enough to ensure that the granting of 
such prerogatives is subject to an agreement to be reached either 
amongst the Contracting Parties or between the secretariat and the 
States concerned. This is essentially the track that was followed 
when the CCAMLR Commission was established (article XVIII of the 
1980 Canberra Convention):

"The Commission has a moral personality and enjoys, on the 
territory of each State Party, such legal capacity as may be 
necessary to perform its functions and achieve the objectives 
of the Convention. The privileges and immunities enjoyed by 
the Convention and its staff on the territory of a State Party 
are determined jointly by the Commission and the State Party 
concerned".

    b. A legal personality under international law?

7. One could consider the possibility of recognizing a certain 
international status to the future secretariat. This is nothing 
new. Indeed, throughout the history of the Antarctic system, the 
creation of institutions was usually envisaged from an 
international perspective (see the "Commission of the CCAMLR" or 
the "Commission on Mineral Resources" which CRAMRA intended to 
create).

8. Recognition of an international status entails certain 
advantages. For example, such a status:
 
3
- justifies the granting of possible privileges and immunities (for example in Belgium, the recognition of such prerogatives presupposes an international capacity on the part of the entity which enjoys that status);

- guarantees independence;

- establishes the importance which the Contracting Parties attaches to the role of the secretariat.

9. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that ordinarily, when the States create a body which enjoys a legal capacity only under domestic law, said body is commonly described as being an "international public institution" or a "jointly owned international company" (see the example of the Société internationale de la Moselle established as an S.A.R.L. under German law, referred to by I. Seidl-Hohenveldern, A.I.D.I., 1983, p.8).

Such entities usually perform functions of public interest (public service) while acting according to the terms of private or commercial law, which does not really correspond to the international nature of the Antarctic Treaty's future secretariat.

10. It should also be specified that recognizing an international status to the secretariat does not in any way imply an expansion of the secretariat's currently envisaged functions or structure.

C. An Antarctic Treaty Organization?

11. Should the idea of an international status for the future secretariat be agreeable to the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, additional arrangements might also be considered.

4
12. Indeed, in practice, seldom is a secretariat,  that is an executive body, created alone, without providing for the creation of an intergovernmental plenary organ of which the secretariat is the operational body.

13. In this respect, one can quote the terms used in the UK's non paper: "one alternative would  be to set up an international organization... the CCAMLR Commission is a good example of such an arrangement".

14. If we refer to the example of the CCAMLR, one notes that the 1988 Convention created a Commission (an intergovernmental plenary organ) to which a secretariat run by an executive secretary is associated.

15. We might thus envisage the possibility of creating on the basis of an international agreement, a plenary organ, an "Antarctic Commission" with a small secretariat using as a model the CCAMLR structure.  Rather than creating a new organ, it would in fact be possible, for practical purposes, to make the current meeting of Consultative Parties the plenary organ having an international legal personality in order to perform the functions of the secretariat.

Conclusion

16. The Antarctic Treaty has evolved and everyone agrees on the need to have a small,  efficient and low-cost secretariat.

17. To the extent that the functions envisaged can hardly be performed by a Consultative Party (see the example of the 1972 Convention),  the creation of an independent secretariat is essential.

5
18. A secretariat with a legal capacity under domestic law which 
is recognized solely by the host State is an option which, although 
acceptable, does not reflect the  importance of the Antarctic 
Treaty system within the Community of States. Furthermore, this 
option raises a number of legal issues.

19. The Antarctic Treaty system has undoubtedly reached a degree 
of maturity which requires some institutional improvements and the 
sole purpose of this document is to explore the paths which are 
likely to be followed.

 
                                      6
