ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                    XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                   XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  KYOTO
                              11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 11
10 April 1994
Original: French

Agreed Measures on Tourism in Antarctica

Agenda Item 13

(submitted by France)
Agreed Measures on Tourism in Antarctica

(Draft Recommendation)

(Agenda Item 13)

The representatives,

Reaffirming the exceptional character of the Antarctic
continent, given in particular the fragility of its fauna and flora
and of the setting which it offers for the conduct of scientific
activities,

Acknowledging the increase in the development of tourist
activities in the Antarctic area,

Concerned with the fact that, due to its impact, this type of
activity may interfere with the conduct of scientific activities,
the operation of stations, the preservation of fauna and flora, and
more generally, the protection of Antarctica's natural environment,

Recognizing the need to ensure that the purposes and
provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Washington Treaty are complied with as concerns tourist activities
in Antarctica,

Wishing to this end to specify through regulations the
conditions under which tourist activities in Antarctica are to be
conducted,

Recommending that their governments adopt the following
regulations and take the measures in their power to ensure that
said regulations are abided by.

1
3. Conditions to be met during travel:

The tour operator or the independent visitor commits himself 
to the following:
-   to comply with and ensure the systematic observance of 
    the standards of conduct to be decided by the Consultative 
    Meeting upon the recommendation of the Committee on 
    Environmental Protection;
-   to confirm his visit of the scientific stations for which 
    he has received authorization at the latest 72 hours prior to 
    the scheduled visit;
-   to comply with all the other measures contained in the 
    Protocol and its annexes, as well as in the Recommendations of 
    the ATCM's;
-   to produce a copy of all the insurance policies covering 
    his liability with regard to pollution and all other risks.

4. Obligations to be met following travel:

At the end of every tourist season, any tour operator and any 
independent visitor who is required to provide a global 
environmental impact assessment shall submit, in accordance with 
the procedure mentioned in article 5 of annex I of the Protocol, a 
report on the course of its activities and on the effects of said 
activities on the environment.

II. ACTION OF STATES PARTIES WITH REGARD TO TOURIST ACTIVITIES

1. Each State Party shall take, within the limits of its 
competence, the appropriate measures to guarantee the respect of
    4
the provisions of this recommendation.  It shall determine sanctions in case of violation.  It shall inform the ATCM of the steps that it has taken, including any possible sanction imposed in case of violation.

2.  Each State Party shall prepare the documentation describing the areas open to visitors and explaining the practical instructions to be followed by said visitors.  It shall ensure that the accompanying personnel has received adequate training.

3.  Each State Party shall give prior authorization to the tour operator who has his main place of business in that State or to the independent visitor who is a national of that State and who resides permanently therein.  If the scheduled trip or stay requires a global environmental impact study, the State Party shall take a decision only after the ATCM has put forward its opinion.

4.  Each State Party shall commit itself to take the appropriate measures, in compliance with the United Nations Charter, in order to prevent anyone from carrying out activities, which counter the provisions of this recommendation.  Each State Party shall inform the Consultative Meeting of those activities which go against this Recommendation and of which it is aware.

5.  The State Party concerned shall not authorize, for a period of five years at the most, any trip planned by a tour operator or by an independent visitor who has not met those obligations provided for in the Protocol and its annexes during a previous trip.

6.  Each State Party shall provide the Committee on Environmental Protection with the appropriate information on trips made in Antarctica by its nationals.

5
III. THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION WITH
REGARD TO TOURIST ACTIVITIES

1. The Committee on Environmental Protection may propose the
designation of areas of tourist interest and the management plans
thereof. To this end, it may consult the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programmes.

2. The Committee shall submit to the Parties for consideration
during the consultative meetings recommendations on:

- instructions regarding the conditions of visits to the
areas of interest for tourists and scientific stations;

- instructions with regard to the training of crew members
and the accompanying personnel as well as to the tourist
information on the respect of rules and on the dangers
incurred;

- any other measure which it deems appropriate.

3. The Committee shall make recommendations to the ATCM regarding
scheduled trips and visits of which it has been informed.

4. The Committee shall propose measures to the ATCM to ensure the
monitoring and supervision of said visits and activities.

5. The Committee shall publish on a regular basis statistics on
the number of visitors for each visited area. It shall prepare
for the ATCM's a regular assessment of the course of these
activities, of their impact on the environment and of the
emergencies with which it had to deal.

6
6. The Committee is authorized to propose to the ATCM a temporary 
limit of the number of visitors landed in certain places, and the 
temporary closing of certain areas so that the influx of persons 
and equipment is at all times compatible with the recommendation 
capacity and the preservation of the visited areas.

IV.  THE ROLE OF THE CONSULTATIVE MEETING WITH REGARD TO TOURIST 
ACTIVITIES

1.  On the basis of the recommendation of the Committee on 
Environmental Protection, the ATCM shall notify the State Party in 
which the tour operator has his main place of business or of which 
the independent visitor is a national, of its favorable or 
unfavorable opinion, in pursuance of the conditions provided for in 
paragraph 5 article 3 of annex I.

    In the case of repeated travel to Antarctica, a favorable 
notice cannot extend to a period exceeding two years from 
notification.

2.  The ATCM shall draw the attention of every State Party to the 
Protocol on every tourist activity carried out by its nationals, 
whether they be tour operators or independent visitors, which, in 
its opinion, is contrary to the provisions of this Recommendation.

3.  The ATCM shall draw the attention of every State which is not 
Party to the Protocol on every tourist activity carried out by its 
nationals, whether they be tour operators or independent visitors, 
which is contrary to the provisions of this Recommendation; it 
shall suggest the appropriate measures to prevent damages to the 
environment.

7
V.    REGULATIONS ON THE LOGISTICS OF TOURIST ACTIVITIES

1.    In order to ensure the greatest protection possible of  the 
environment, the structure and the equipment of ships used for the 
transport of passengers and cargo in the Antarctic Treaty area must 
enable them to handle the very particular navigation conditions in 
this region and must avail themselves of the necessary means to 
prevent marine pollution in case of accident.  To every extent 
practicable and feasible:

      -    the hulls must be reinforced for navigation within ice 
fields;

      -    some vital equipment (steering gear, propulsion systems, 
navigation equipment, such as radars, sonars, instruments for 
satellite communication and location beacons) must be 
duplicated;

      -    the rescue equipment must be specially designed for polar 
regions;

      -    the equipment for the disembarcation and embarcation of 
passengers must be adequate, quantitatively and qualitatively, 
and handled by qualified personnel.

2.    During their trips in the Antarctic Treaty area, ships shall 
respect the rules governing the prevention of marine pollution and 
collisions as well as the safety of human lives, including the 
restrictions applied in light of the fact that Antarctica was 
designated as a "special area" by Marpol 73/78.

To this end, crew members shall receive special training for 
navigation in the polar regions and must be experienced.  The 
presence of pilots on board is mandatory.

8
Ships carrying tour groups must to every extent possible have 
helicopters at their disposal. These shall be specially reserved 
for the organization of rescue missions and to assist in 
navigation. The use of helicopters for other purposes must be 
consistent at all times with the principles and provisions of the 
Protocol and its annexes.

3. Tour operators and independent visitors shall confirm to the 
manager of the station the terms and conditions of their visit 72 
hours prior to their scheduled arrival.

4. To every extent possible, visitors shall stay ashore only 
during the day. They shall be authorized to disembark only:

    -   in a scientific station, where they must comply with the 
        instructions of the station's manager;
    -   or in an area of tourist interest where they shall be 
        placed in the care and under the supervision of the travel 
        organizer.

5. The decision to undertake the construction in the Antarctic 
Treaty area of a floating or land-based facility to accommodate 
visitors or for their recreational activities shall be taken in 
accordance with the provisions of annex I of the Protocol.

VI. MONITORING AND INSPECTIONS

1. The monitoring of visited areas, of aircraft and ships shall 
be carried out according to the terms and conditions determined by 
the ATCM's upon notice of the Committee on Environmental Protection 
and in compliance with article 4 of the Protocol.

9
2. To every extent possible, periodic inspections shall be conducted in each of the "areas of tourist interest" as well as in all other parts of the Antarctic continent, in islands located South of 60° South latitude and ice shelves visited for purposes other than scientific ones.

VII. INSURANCE

1. All tour operators and all independent visitors shall take out an insurance enabling them to refund the State Parties for expenses incurred by the latter, in case of accident or damages to the environment, as a result of a rescue, clean-up, repair or any other type of operation.

2. The State Parties which take part in rescue, clean-up or repair operations for damages caused to the environment, are authorized to request the refund of expenses incurred as a result of said operations.

3. The aforementioned provisions are without prejudice to the future rules and procedures with regard to liability set out in article 16 of the Protocol.

VIII. EMERGENCIES

1. The State Parties commit themselves to cooperate and to do their utmost to save human lives in case of accident.

2. This Recommendation shall not apply in cases of emergency involving safety of human life or of ships, aircraft or equipment and facilities of high value, or the protection of the environment. Such emergencies shall require that an activity be undertaken without waiting for the completion of the procedures set out in this Recommendation.

10
3. All the Parties and the Committee shall be immediately notified of activities undertaken in cases of emergency, which would have otherwise required the preparation of a global environmental impact assessment. A comprehensive justification of such activities must be submitted within 90 days following their undertaking.

 
                                                                                                  11
ANNEX

DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Recommendation, the following definitions are given:

1. The expression "visitor on organized tours" refers to any private person who takes part in a trip organized by a "tour operator".

2. The expression "tour operator" refers to any private person or legal entity which performs, for a consideration, an activity which involves either organizing and selling trips, whether individual or collective made in the Antarctic Treaty area, or which sells, as an intermediary, such trips or visits.

3. The expression "independent visitor" refers to any person who organizes on his own behalf a trip to Antarctica for sightseeing purposes.

4. The expression "area of interest" refers to a "special administered area of Antarctica" where tourist activities are carried out.

5. The expression "special administered area of Antarctica" refers to any area such as defined in article 4 of annex V of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.

12
