ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                   XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII éme REUNION CONSULTATIVE                  XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                KYOTO
                                11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 12
10 April 1994
Original: Spanish

Verification or Check List for Inspections

Agenda Item 8 b

(submitted by Chile)
Verification or Check List for Inspections

(Agenda Item 8 b)

The designation of observers and inspectors as provided for in 
article 7 of the Antarctic Treaty has been thus far the best 
control method for the implementation of the principles and 
provisions of this Treaty’s system.

Over the last few years, it has been more frequently used as 
the number of observers has risen due in part to the fact that an 
ever increasing number of countries are taking part in activities 
in Antarctica.  In paragraph 61 of the Final Report of the XVI 
ATCM, it was decided that joint inspections carried out by two or 
several contracting parties would be encouraged, to take into 
account the increasing costs, the need to improve the efficiency of 
operations in Antarctica and the importance of cooperation on this 
continent.

Furthermore, at the same consultative meeting, it was noted 
that inspections could be useful not only to ensure that the 
approved provisions are complied with but also to facilitate the 
exchange of experience and knowledge amongst the Parties.

Currently, the contracting Parties conduct different kinds of 
inspections, that is to say those provided for by the Antarctic 
Treaty and those set out in the Convention on the Conservation of 
Marine Living Resources in Antarctica.  Likewise, we learned that 
some countries send observers to the continent on sightseeing 
trips.  Finally, article 14 of the Protocol stipulates that, in 
order to promote the protection of Antarctica’s environment and to

1
guarantee the compliance with this instrument, the Consultative
Parties shall make arrangements individually and jointly to conduct
inspections.

At the XVII Meeting of Parties in Venice, it was decided that
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and the Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programmes would be asked to draw-up
a check list of inspections based on existing models, given that
this list would in no way limit the inspection activities
undertaken individually by the Parties.

    In light of the above, Chile approves the check list of
inspections in Antarctica which was prepared by the aforementioned
Committee and Council, as it believes that said list shall be a
useful working instrument to enable observers to carry out their
work in a more efficient and coordinated manner.

Without prejudice to the above, Chile also proposes that the
Contracting Parties make arrangements to visit the bases, the
facilities, the protected areas and all other sites referred to in
the Antarctic Treaty so as to avoid that a large number of
observers inspect the same places while other sites go uninspected
because of their location or for other reasons.

                                                    2
