ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                     XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                           XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                        KYOTO
                        11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 20
10 April 1994
Original:English

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(to introduce mandatory provisions for information
exchange and an observation system)

Agenda Item 13

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

(To introduce mandatory provisions for information exchange and an observation system).

The Representatives,

Recalling Articles VII and X of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-6, VIII-9 and X-8;

Recalling also Articles 6, 12 and 14 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty and the provisions for exchange of information in Annexes I-V of the Environmental Protocol;

Noting that the general principles of the Environmental Protocol concerning comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems apply to all activities in Antarctica, including tourism and non-governmental activities conducted under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Aware of the continued significant increase in the number of tourist and non-governmental expeditions visiting the Antarctic Treaty Area, and of their potential impacts on scientific activities and the Antarctic environment;

Desiring to ensure that these impacts are minimised;

Conscious that effective regulation and management of tourism and non-governmental activities must rely on the comprehensive collection, collation and exchange of up to date information;

[Aware that despite Recommendations IV-27, VII-4, VIII-9 and X-8 data collection, collation and exchange has to date been fragmentary].

- 1 -
Aware of the provisions under Article VII of the Antarctic 
Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol regarding 
inspections of activities, including activities of a tourist 
and non-governmental nature;

Desiring to ensure compliance with Antarctic Treaty system 
provisions, to increase the dissemination of information on 
those provisions, and on the Antarctic environment and 
scientific activities carried out therein.

Desiring also to improve reporting procedures on the 
activities of tour operators and non-governmental 
expeditions;

Recommend to their Governments that:

(1)	(a)	they codify and revise the provisions for 
         information exchange relating to the activities 
         of tourist and non-governmental expeditions;

    	(b)	they introduce an observation system for the 
         on-board inspection of tourist vessels and the 
         vessels of non-governmental expeditions.

(2)	Until such time as this Recommendation enters into force 
     in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, 
     it shall be implemented voluntarily by Treaty Parties to 
     the greatest extent possible.

Information Exchange relating to Tourist and non-Governmental 
Expeditions organised in Accordance with Article VII of the 
Antarctic Treaty

[The responsibility of all Contracting Parties are:

- 2 -
(i)     in accordance with Article X of the Antarctic 
Treaty, 'to exert appropriate efforts, consistent 
with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end 
that no one engages in any activity in Antarctica 
contrary to the principles or purposes of the 
present Treaty';

(ii)    to give advance notice in accordance with 
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty of 'all 
expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part 
of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to 
Antarctica organised in a proceeding from its 
territory'.]

To this end tour operators and organisers of non-governmental 
expeditions shall provide, by 30 September each year, Contracting 
Parties in whose territories their operations are registered or 
organised, with the information contained in Annex A. This 
information shall contain details of proposed operations in 
Antarctica for the coming austral summer season and shall be 
submitted in the standardised format of Table A(i).

Tour operators and organisers of non-governmental expeditions 
wishing to visit the Antarctic station of a Contracting Party 
shall provide that Party with the details set forth in Annex B. 
The details shall be submitted in the standardised format of 
Table B(i), not later than 30 June.

Following visits to the Antarctic Treaty Area, tour operators and 
organisers of non-governmental expeditions shall provide, by 
31 May each year, Contracting Parties, in whose territory their 
operations are registered or organised, with a report on their 
activities.  This report shall contain, at minimum, the 
information set out in Annex C, and shll be submitted in the 
standardised formats of Table C(i), (ii) and (iii).

- 3 -
Contracting Parties shall forward information on prior notification and reports of tourist and non-governmental expeditions to the [Committee for Environmental Protection] within two months of receipt.

Observation System

They introduce an on-board Observation System to compliment the Inspection provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. Each Contracting Party may designate observers who shall be nationals of that Party. Designation will be endorsed by the ATCM which shall specify the observation activities which shall be undertaken. These activities are laid down in Appendix 1 and may be modified taking into account advice from the Committee for Environmental Protection [and the SCAR].

Each observer shall carry a document issued by the designating Party in a format approved by the ATCM identifying them as Antarctic Treaty observers.

Observers shall be conversant with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system, and in particular with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. In addition, observers should be knowledgeable about Antarctic wildlife and environmental conservation, Antarctic conditions, scientific activities being undertaken in Antarctica and the practical operation of the tourist industry in Antarctica.

Observers shall submit reports, by June 30, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Article 14 (4) of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.

In order to promote the principles of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty and to ensure compliance with it by tour operators and the organisers of non-governmental expeditions, Parties agree to provide accommodation [and victualling] aboard

- 4 -
their vessels engaged in tourist or non-governmental activities 
in Antarctica. Such accommodation shall be in accordance with 
a bilateral agreement which shall include the items set out in 
Appendix 2.

- 5 -
APPENDIX 1

Functions and Tasks of designated observers on board vessels engaged in tourism operations or non-governmental expeditions.

1. The functions of observers on board vessels engaged in tourism or non-governmental expeditions are to:

- ensure compliance by the crew, passengers, tourists or expeditioners of Antarctic Treaty provisions;

- provide information as required on such provisions;

- provide information on other matters relating to the Antarctic environment, to the Antarctic science programme and to the tourism industry in Antarctica;

- report back on the period of observation.

2. In carrying out these functions, observers will undertake the following tasks; [using where appropriate standardised forms recommended by the Committee for Environmental Protection]:

- record details of the vessel's itinerary including the locations, and dates at anchorage and of visits ashore;

- record details of such visits including their duration, and the numbers of tourists/passengers/expeditioners/ crew ashore;

- record the standards applied by vessel operators in briefing their passengers/tourists/expeditioners on:

    (a) Antarctic Treaty measures and the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, and

    (b) health and safety matters relevant to operations in Antarctica;

- 6 -
- record any infractions against Antarctic Treaty measures 
  or the provisions of the Environmental Protocol to the 
  Antarctic Treaty;

- provide information to the officers, crew, passengers, 
  tourists and expeditioners on Antarctic Treaty measures 
  and the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, by 
  means of direct liaison, lectures or the distribution 
  of prepared literature;

- prepare report(s) on the observation period and 
  submit them in accordance with Article 14(4) of the 
  Environmental Protocol;

- submit copies of relevant reports to the Captain of the 
  vessel;

- assist the Captain of the vessel in the completion of 
  report forms required by this Recommendation.

- 7 -
APPENDIX 2

Any bilateral agreement to place a designated observer on board a 
vessel engaged in tourist or non-governmental activities should 
include the following items:-

    (i)      The designated observer shall be given the status 
             equivalent to a ship's officer. Accommodation and 
             meals provided for the observer shall be of a 
             standard commensurate with that status;

    (ii)    Operators of vessels engaged in tourist operations 
             and non-governmental expeditions shall co-operate 
             fully with designated observers to enable them to 
             undertake the functions and tasks assigned to them 
             by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  This 
             will include access to those operations of the 
             vessel necessary to ensure compliance with the 
             provisions of the Environmental Protocol;

    (iii)  Appropriate security and welfare of designated 
             observers during their period of observation, 
             including the provision of medical care and the 
             safeguard of their freedom and dignity;

    (iv)   Arrangements for messages to be sent and received 
             by the designated observer, using the vessel's 
             communications equipment and operator.  Reasonable 
             costs of such communications shall normally be met 
             by the designating Party;

    (v)     Arrangements for designated observers to be placed 
             on board vessels engaged in tourist operations or 
             non-governmental expeditions shall be organised so 
             as not to interfere with those vessels' activities;

    (vi)   Designating observers shall carry insurance 
             satisfactory to the Parties concerned;

- 8 -
(vii)	Transportation of designated observers to and from 
boarding points shall be the responsibility of the 
designating Party;

(viii)	The equipment, clothing, salary and any related 
allowances of a designated observer shall normally 
be borne by the designating Party, unless agreed 
otherwise. The vessel accepting the designated 
observer shall bear the cost of on-board accommoda-
tion and meals of that observer.

Parties shall provide a copy of each bilateral arrangement to the 
ATCM [or CEP] as soon as it is concluded.

Parties who have designated observers shall take the initiative in 
arranging observation programmes.

- 9 -
Annex A

Prior information to be supplied by tour operators and organisers 
of non-governmental expeditions by 30 September each year.  (For 
format see Table A(i)).

Registered name of Tour Operator or Expedition name.

Address (including Tel, Fax and Telex numbers) of Registered 
company or Expedition organiser.

For each vessel intended to be operated in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area:

•	Name of vessel;

    Port and country of Registry;

    Gross tonnage;

    Name of Captain;

    No of crew;

    Maximum carrying capacity of vessel (No of passengers/
    tourists/expeditioners);

    Nos and Locations of cruises/expeditions planned for the 
    coming season.

•	No and type of aircraft (fixed-wing and helicopter) to be operated 
    in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

    A description of aircraft facilities.

    No and type of other vehicles and vessels (including hovercraft 
    and small boats) to be operated in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

- 10 -
A description of any physical structures to be erected/used in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

For each proposed cruise or expedition the following additional information shall be submitted:-

the dates of leaving for, and arriving in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

the duration of stay in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

the itinerary to and from the Area and the routes intended to be taken within the Area;

the dates and locations of any proposed visits to Antarctic stations or any proposed landings ashore whilst in the Area.

- 11 -
Appendix B

Information to be supplied by tour operators and organisers of 
non-governmental expeditions wishing to visit Antarctic Stations 
of Contracting Parties. (For format see Table B(i)).

Name and address of (including Tel, Fax and Telex numbers) tour 
operator or expedition organiser;

Name of station it is intended to visit;

Purpose of intended visit;

Date of intended visit:  1st choice, 2nd choice, 3rd choice;

Name, port and country of registry of vessel;

Type of vessel;

Name of Captain of vessel;

Name of expedition/cruise leader;

The provisional itinerary of the cruise;

The numbers of visitors intended to be landed;

The expected duration of the visit (hours);

Contact details at sea (including INMARSAT, Tel, Fax and Telex 
numbers, plus radio-call frequency and call sign).

- 12 -
Annex C

Information to be reported on visits made to the Antarctic Treaty Area by tour operators and the organisers of non-governmental expeditions during the previous season. (For format see Form C(i)).

Registered name of tour operator or expedition name;
Address (including Tel, Fax and Telex Nos) of Registered company or expedition organiser.

For each vessel operated in the Area:

      Name of vessel;
      Port and country of registry;
      Gross tonnage;
      Name of Captain;
      No of crew;
      Maximum carrying capacity of vessel (No of passengers/
      tourists/expeditioners);
      No and location of cruises or expeditions undertaken.

No and type of aircraft (fixed-wing and helicopter) operated.

A description of aircraft facilities and other physical facilities utilised.

No and types of other vehicles (including hovercraft and small boats).

- 13 -
For each cruise or expedition undertaken a separate report shall 
be submitted.  This shall include (see Table C(ii)) the following 
additional information:

    The cruise or expedition No.  (No ...... of 19..);
    The dates of departure for, arrival in, and departure 
from the Area;
    The duration of stay in the Area;
    The route of each cruise to, from and within the Area;
    The number, date and location of visits made to Antarctic 
stations or landings made within the Area.

For each visit to an Antarctic station or landing ashore the 
following details shall be supplied (for format see Table C(iii)).

    Visit No.  (Visit No ..... of Cruise No ...... of 19..);
    Site visited;
    Location (with co-ordinates);
    Type of site (Research station, penguin colony etc);
    Date of visit;
    First passengers ashore (time);
    Last passengers from shore (time);
    Duration of visit (total hours/minutes);
    Total No of passengers ashore;
    Total No of crew/staff ashore;
    Total number of tour guides ashore;
    Ratio of passengers to tour guides;
    No of landing craft in use.

- 14 -
