ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

                                  KYOTO        
                                  11-22 April 1994  

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

                                  XVIII ATCM/WP   31  
                                  13 April  1994  
                                  Original:English  

RELATION BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE  
ANTARCTIC TREATY AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS OF A GLOBAL  
SCOPE  

Agenda Item 6 d  

(Submitted by Chile)
Working document on item n° 6 d) submited by the Delegation of
Chile

Relation between the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty and other international agreements of a global
scope

The conservation of the antarctic environment, including its
dependent and associated ecosystems, is a matter of global
relevance. This continent plays a major role in determining the
physical and biological conditions of the entire planet through its
influence on the circulation of the atmosphere and ocean masses and
the regulation of climate conditions. The protection of the
antarctic ecosystem balance is fundamental for the survival of the
food chain that connects marine species of all seas.

The Preamble of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty affirms that the development of a
comprehensive regime for the protection of the antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is in the
interests of mankind as a whole. The Protocol is the first
international agreement adopting the "comprehensive protection
approach", particulary through the designation of the areas south
of 60° south latitude as a natural reserve devoted to peace and
science. The Protocol can also be considered an important
instrument for the prevention of global environmental risks and the
commitment to plan and conduct human activities so as to avoid
adverse effects on climate and weather patterns, on atmospheric or
marine environments and on the distribution, abundance or
productivity of species or populations of species of fauna and
flora are significant examples of a "precautionary approach". In
the light of prevailing trends of international environmental law,
the Committee for Environmental Protection is envisaged to perform
different functions of control on the effective implementation of
the Protocol; procedures for a prompt review and updating of the
Protocol"s Annexes were adopted; and the Final Act of the XI ATSCM
acknowledged the possibility of bridging the gap between signature
and entry into force by means of voluntary compliance by the
Parties to the provisions of those annexes. Last but not least, the
Protocol gives a broader meaning to the rule being developed in
customary international law that binds all states to cooperate in
the protection of the environment.

Principle 24 of the Stockholm Declaration maintains that the
international matters concerning the protection of and improvement
of the environment should be handled in a cooperative spirit by all
countries, big and small, on an equal footing. Cooperation through
multilateral or bilateral arrangements or other appropriate means
is essential to effectively control, prevent, reduce and eliminate
adverse environmental effects resulting from activities conducted
in all spheres, in such a way that due account is taken of the
sovreignty and interests of all states". The Rio Declaration on
Environmental and Development reiterates that nations shall
cooperate to conserve, protect and restore the health and integrity 
of the earth's ecosystems. Furthermore, an agreement was reached to 
include paragraph 17.04 in the UNCED/Agenda 21 document, which 
reads as follows:

"In recognition of the value of Antarctica as an area for the 
conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential 
to understanding the global environment, States carrying out such 
research activities in Antarctica should, as provided for in 
Article III of the Antarctic Treaty, continue to: a) Ensure that 
data and information resulting from such research is freely 
available to the international community; b) Enhance access of the 
international scientific community and specialized agencies of the 
United Nations to such data and information including the 
encouragement of periodic seminars and simposia".

    In order to further implement this pattern of international 
cooperation for the protection of the global environment a survey 
of international agreements that have some application or relevance 
to the area and activities under the Antarctic Treaty and the 
Protocol for Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
should be undertaken. The above mentioned survey should be focused 
on international agreements basically of a global nature that might 
presently have implications in Antarctica, i.a.:

- The Convention on the control of transboundary movement of 
hazardous wastes and their disposal (Basel, 1989).
Article 6 of the Convention states that its Parties agree not to 
allow the export of hazardous wastes or other wastes for disposal 
withing the areas south of 60ø South latitude, whether or not such 
wastes are subject to transboundary movement.

    Such obligation is consistent with the provisions of Annex III to 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection: although no specific rule 
is formulated to that end by the Annex, it is implicit in the 
objectives stated by its Article 1.

- The Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio, 1992).
The Convention aims at the conservation and sustainable use of 
biological diversity. Such diversity is of utmost importance for 
evolution, and for maintaining the life-sustaining systems of the 
biosphere. Under article 4 of the Convention its application is 
considered either on a territorial basis or on the basis of the 
exercise of jurisdiction or control on processes and activities 
related to biological diversity. The obligation to preserve the 
antarctic biological diversity is a major objetive of the Madrid 
Protocol.

- The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (Rio, 1992)
The convention takes a gradualist approach towards an ambitious 
goal: stabilizing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at levels 
that will not dangerously upset the global climate system. It is 
useful to recall, in this context, that, under the Madrid Protocol, 
regular and effective monitoring shall take place to facilitate 
early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities
carried out on both within and outside the Antarctic Treaty area on 
the antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

- The Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (Vienna, 
1985) & the Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer 
(Montreal, 1987) 
Tthe modification of the ozone layer has been a major concern for 
the ATCPS and Contracting Parties of the Antarctic Treaty. The 
above mentioned provisions of the Protocol are equally relevant to 
this end. The Vienna Convention contains the obligation to 
cooperate with competent international bodies to implement 
effectively the Convention and its Protocols.

- Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumpling of 
Wastes and other Matter (London, 1972) 
The convention sets forth the obligation of contracting parties to 
prohibit dumping at sea of wastes comprized in a list of 
particularly noxious substances (black list) and to submit a 
specific authorization for the dumping of other types of waste 
(gray list). During the negotiation of Annex IV to the Protocol, 
several proposals were made to the issue of dumping but no 
consensus was reached thereof, except that the provisions of the 
London Convention apply to the Antarctic Treaty area.

- The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships (London, IMO, 1973) 
Under the MARPOL 73/78 Convention and Protocol the Antarctic Treaty 
area was declared a special area. Annex IV to the Madrid Protocol 
contains detailed reference to the intimate relationship between 
the MARPOL system and the regime established by that Annex.

The limited survey of global environmental conventions demonstrates 
the complexity of the web of relations between the Antarctic Treaty 
System, and more specifically the Protocol for Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and a number of international 
instruments concerned with the protection of the global 
environment, with some application to Antarctica. Most of these 
instruments contain institutional or other mechanisms for 
cooperation.  Articles 11 and 12 of the Madrid Protocol, 
establishing the Committee for Environmental Protection and 
defining its functions, requiere invitation to and consultation 
with relevant scientific, environmental and technical 
organizations. In the meantime, the Antarctic Treaty Parties should 
be fully aware of the need to implement, as soon as possible, the 
actual functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection, in 
order to enable the Antarctic Treaty System to effectively cope 
with the demands for international cooperation on a truly global 
scale.

Finally, it is worth considering a future relationship between the 
systems for the protection of the environment in the Artic and the 
Antarctic, represented by the Declaration on the Protection of the 
Artic Environment of 13 and 14 of June,  1993 (Rovaniemi 
Declaration) and the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on the
Protection of the Environment, of 4 October 1991.
