ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                  KYOTO                
                                  11-22 April 1994                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                  XVIII ATCM/WP 2                
                                                  10 April 1994                
                                                  Original:English                


LIABILITY ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION                
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY                


 Agenda Item 6c                


(Submitted by Germany)
XVIII ATCM/WP 2
10 April 1994
Original: English

Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty
Agenda Item 6 c
(submitted by Germany)
Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty
(Agenda Item 6 c)

I. Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty contains the obligation for the Parties to
elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for
damages arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic
Treaty area and covered by this Protocol. These rules and
procedures shall be included in one or more annexes to the
Protocol.

The XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (October 7-18
1991 in Bonn) discussed the need for early consideration of an
annex on liability and considered that the XVIIth ATCM should
decide when and how this matter should be addressed (Final
report of the XVIth No. 33).

The XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (November
11-20 1992 in Venice) agreed to convene a meeting of legal
experts, in accordance with recommendation IV-24, to elaborate
rules and procedures relating to liability as called for under
Article 16 of the protocol. It was further agreed that, prior
to the convening of that meeting and in order to ensure
adequate preparation of its work, proposals should be prepared
and exchanged through diplomatic channels. On the basis of an
agreement reached through diplomatic channels, a first meeting
of experts should be convened under German chairmanship before
the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting (Final report of the XVIIth
ATCM Nos.    37-40).

The German Government designated Professor Dr. Rudiger
Wolfrum, Director of the Max Planck Institute for Comparative

1
Public Law and International Law in Heidelberg as chairman of
this meeting and entrusted him with making legal preparations
for it.

In December 1992 the Federal Foreign Office sent a letter from
Prof. Wolfrum, a questionnaire and a folder of information
papers on this subject to the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty
(see Annex 1 for the questionnaire).

Based on the replies given by a number of Parties, Prof.
Wolfrum elaborated an first draft (chairman's first offering)
as a possible basis of a liability annex.

The Federal Foreign Office transmitted the chairman's first
offering to the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in June 1993.

In June 1993, also, the Federal Foreign Office invited the
Parties to a meeting of legal experts on this subject, which
took place in Heidelberg from November 18-20, 1993.

Legal experts from 29 Parties to the Antarctic Treaty attended
this meeting.

In January 1994 the Federal Foreign Office sent the Parties a
brief summary of the responses given by the Parties in
reaction to Prof. Wolfrum's questionnaire (see Annex 2).

In February 1994 the Federal Foreign Office transmitted to the
Parties a summary of the results of the meeting in Heidelberg
elaborated by Prof. Wolfrum (see Annex 3).

Based on the discussions in Heidelberg, Prof. Wolfrum
modified some of the comments made in his first draft sent in
June 1993 (see Annex 4 for this draft).

2
II. In order to continue the work on a liability-annex to the 
Protocol, Germany submits the following proposals to the 
XVIIIth Consultative Meeting for decision:

1.  The Consultative Meeting takes note of the work of the 
legal experts in Heidelberg;

2.  The Consultative Meeting extends the mandate of the 
working group;

3.  The Consultative Meeting agrees to convene further 
meetings of legal experts before the XIXth Consultative 
Meeting in Seoul. The Meetings shall continue the work 
started at the legal experts' meeting in Heidelberg, 
taking into consideration all proposals and suggestions 
made on that occasion, including the first offering made 
by the Chairman;

4.  The Consultative Meeting expresses the hope that, as a 
result of these meetings of legal experts, essential 
progress can be made towards elaborating a satisfying 
liability regulation which will be discussed at the next 
ATCM.

3
Annex I

Questionnaire

(1) One of the elements of a future liability regime to be addressed at the beginning of the deliberations is its scope ratione materiae, e.g. which damages are to be covered by the future liability regime. Article 16 of the Protocol refers to "rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area". This could be read to mean all damages which may possibly result from activities in Antarctica such as damage to the Antarctic environment; loss of or impairment to an established use property of a third party of loss of life arising out of damages to the Antarctic environment, etc. However, on the basis of the wording of article 16 of the Protocol, one may argue for a more limited approach.  The first sentence of this article refers to the objectives of the Protocol; this may be read as an indication that the liability regimes is only meant to protect the Antarctic environment itself and not the rights and interests of third parties although those parties are dependent upon the preservation of the Antarctic environment.  The instruments brought to your attention are quite different in this respect.  Only very few of them provide for liability for environmental damage.  Among these are sec. 1653 Alaska Pipeline System Reform Act; article 8 CRAMRA; sec. 1002 Oil Pollution Act; and the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1969.

Question:  Which damages are to be covered by the future liability regime?

(2)  The second question is connected with the first one.  It has to be established whether the future liability regime will cover all activities (for example research and tourism) alike or if it is

1
more appropriate to establish different liability regimes for 
different activities. Since article 16 of the Protocol refers to 
"one or more Annexes" this may be perhaps taken as an indication 
that not a uniform regime but separate regimes for each single 
activity are more appropriate.

Question:  Is it appropriate to provide for a uniform liability 
regime covering all activities or should each activity be dealt 
with separately?

(3)  As more or less every human activity in Antarctica will cause 
an impact upon its environment it will be crucial to define the 
notion of "damage to the environment". Some instruments draw the 
bordering line between impacts tolerated and those giving rise to 
responsibility and liability by introducing the word "serious". 
According to others, however, any illegal act gives rise to 
responsibility and liability. In this respect I would like to 
refer to article III of the International Convention on Civil 
Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, and to article II of the 
Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage resulting 
from Exploration for and Exploitation of Seabed Minerals.  In 
practice, these two approaches may differ from each other only in 
a limited way, if at all. According to article 1, para. 15 of 
CRAMRA was defined as "impact beyond that what is negligible or 
which has been assessed and to be judged to be acceptable". If the 
Group takes the position that the term "damage" as used in article 
16 of the Protocol is to be understood also to cover damage to 
property, established use, etc., the notion of damage will have to 
cover these aspects as well. However, in this respect one may rely 
on the background material.

2
Question:  How is the notion "damage" as used in article 16 of the 
Protocol to be defined?

(4)  Another core element of a future liability regime will be the 
standard of responsibility.  Most international instruments in this 
respect are based upon the principle of strict liability although 
there are some working on the basis of absolute liability and fault 
based liability.  The Convention on International Liability for 
Damage caused by Space Objects, for example, provides for absolute 
liability (art. II) and fault based liability (art. III), depending 
on where the damage occurred.  Perhaps, different forms of activity 
require different standards of liability.

Question:  What is the appropriate standard of liability?  Do 
different  activities or  different  damages require a different 
standard?

(5)  Connected with the previous question is the question as to 
whether the future liability regime shall provide for excuses.  
Most instruments referred to in annex II of this letter provide 
some excuses, although they are sometimes quite limited.  In this 
regard I would like to draw your attention to article 8 para.  4 of 
CRAMRA as well as to sec.  1003 of the Oil Pollution Act and § 1653 
Alaska Pipeline System Reform Act.

Question:  Should the liability regime provide for excuses?  In the 
case of an affirmative answer, which excuses are regarded to be 
acceptable?

(6)  The objective of the obligation to provide for compensation 
for environmental damage is to repair the damage incurred.  This 
basically raises a series of problems as to how to calculate the 
amount of damage owed.  The judgment in the case Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico v.  SS Zoe Colocotroni is quite illustrative in this 
                                                                 3
respect. The Court of Appeal, for example, calculated the damages 
on the basis of the costs of the cleanup and restoration measures. 
According to the Oil Pollution Act, this seems to be the only means 
of calculation. This, however, raises the question whether the 
wrongdoer has to provide for all cleanup and restoration costs or 
only those which were reasonable compared to the seriousness of the 
damages. In my view, it would be hard to accept that no 
compensation was due in these cases since no restoration was 
possible and therefore the basis for the calculation of the 
compensation owed was lacking. Hence, restoration costs may not be 
the only appropriate means to calculate the amount of compensation. 
If the notion of damages does not only cover environmental damage 
but damage suffered by third parties, the question of how to 
calculate the amount of compensation will have to be answered 
differently for these damages. However, for these cases one may 
rely on general international law.

Question: What are the appropriate means to calculate the amount of 
compensation, taking into consideration that the liability regime 
is meant to strengthen the protection of the Antarctic environment?

(7) As far as environmental damage is concerned, it will be 
necessary to identify the proper plaintiff. In this respect I 
would like to draw your attention to the ruling in the Zoe 
Colocotroni case and to sec. 2706 of the US Oil Pollution Act.

Connected with the identification of the proper plaintiff is the 
identification of the payee of compensation for costs other than 
restoration costs. The payee for restoration costs will be easy to 
identify. Here again, I would like to draw your attention to sec. 
1006 of the US Oil Pollution Act.

4
Question:  Who is the proper plaintiff in the case of damage to the Antarctic environment and who is the payee of compensation to be paid for other than the reimbursement of restoration costs?

(8) It will be equally important to identify the debtor for responsibility and liability. The answer to this question has to take into account that according to article 13 of the Protocol each Party shall take appropriate measures within its competence to ensure compliance with this Protocol.  This does not, however, rule out that, in the case of a damage to the Antarctic environment, consequential liability will fall upon the operator that has undertaken the activity in question.  Nevertheless, the role of the Parties will have to be discussed in this respect.  I draw your attention in this regard to article 37 para. 3(a) of CRAMRA which only to a limited extent provided for state liability.  The Convention on Liability for Damage caused by space objects follows a different approach.

Question:  Who is the appropriate debtor in the case of environmental damage? To what extent is it necessary to address the notion of state liability in this context?

(9) Further issues to be addressed are limits and exoneration clauses.  In this respect some inspiration may be drawn from the instruments referred to in annex II to this latter.  The main question in this respect will be who covers the costs exceeding such limits.

Question:  Should the liability regime provide for limits to the compensation owed? In the case of an affirmative answer, what are the means to cover costs exceeding these limits?

(10) Finally it will be necessary to identify the institutions to decide upon claims for compensation.  Dealing with this point may

5
require that some understanding has been reached upon the scope of 
the liability regime, the plaintiff and the debtor.  In this 
respect I would like to refer to article 8 para.  9 or CRAMRA.

Question:  What are the appropriate institutions to decide upon 
claims for compensation?

 
                                                                                        6
Answers of the States to Professor Wolfrum's Questionnaire 
on the Annex on Environmental Liability in Antarctica

The answers to question 1 (Which damages are to be covered by 
the future liability regime?) may be summarized as follows:

One group argued that the liability regime should cover the 
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent or associated 
ecosystems.  This group further supported the regime to embrace the 
loss or damage to persons or property caused by, or in the 
connection with the environmental damage.

A second group followed a more restricted approach, i. e. the 
Annex should only cover damages to the Antarctic environment and 
dependent or associated ecosystems.  Damage caused to property, 
interest of persons or third parties should be made the subject of 
proceedings in existing national courts, proceedings which both as 
to jurisdiction as to applicable law would be governed by existing 
rules of international private law.

A third group followed the approach of the second group, 
however was in favour of limiting the geographical scope of the 
Annex with respect to damages to the environment to the area south 
of 60 degrees South latitude.

The answers to question 2 ("Is it appropriate to provide for 
a uniform liability regime covering all activities or should each 
activity be dealt with separately?") were somewhat more uniform.

One group of states advocated that the Annex should cover all 
activities alike.  It was further added that where damage caused by 
particular activities was already covered in whole or in part by 
another liability regime (as in the case of certain damage caused

1
by certain shipping activities), the same damage should not be compensated twice.

Another group would prefer a distinction as to activities with or without taking into consideration the special role of scientific research activities. According to them, activities in Antarctica should be divided in two categories: Scientific research activities and activities other than Scientific research activities.

Some, although being in favour of a uniform regime, suggested to introduce different standards of liability as to different activities. The decisive element should be the danger involved with the activity concerned.

In essence all were in favour of covering all activities and the differentiation between activities was meant to be undertaken within the regime rather than providing for separate regimes.

In answering question 3 ("How is the notion "damage" as used in article 16 of the Protocol to be defined?") all States referred directly or indirectly to article 1 para. 15 of CRAMRA and established a connection with the environmental impact assessment procedure. According to them damage means any impact on the living or non-living components of the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems, including harm to atmospheric, marine or terrestrial life, beyond that which is negligible or which has been identified and judged to be acceptable pursuant to the environmental impact assessment procedures set out in article 8 of the Protocol.

Divergent views were expressed only with respect to the latter point. Some states were uncertain whether the prior environment impact assessment procedure pursuant to Art. 8 of the Protocol can be used to free the operator from liability.

2
Equally, the answer to question 4 ("What is the appropriate standard of liability? Do different activities or different kinds of damage require a different standard?") was rather homogeneous. As far as liability for environmental damage was concerned, most favoured strict liability.  It was further pointed out that in any case no article in this Annex should be interpreted as affecting or excluding the applicability of other environmental liability rules in international conventions.

Another approach was that different activities required different standards.  It was argued that the notion of strict liability should not apply to scientific research activities.

A further approach did not differentiate between activities but rather between actors. According to this view, it was necessary to provide for a distinction between the responsibility of an individual and the responsibility of a public entity or a State. Reference was made in this context to the 1969 Convention on Civil Liability. As far as State responsibility was concerned, the states favoured a fault-based liability. Reference was made in this context to article 8 para. 3 of CRAMRA.

With respect to the relationship between operator and State responsibility, all States envisaged a subsidiary responsibility of the State.

In respect to question 5 ("Should the liability regime provide for excuses? In case of an affirmative answer, which excuses are regarded to be acceptable?") all States favoured a limitation of excuses, restricting them to "an exceptional natural catastrophe, an armed conflict or a terrorist act, if it is not reasonably predictable or unavoidable ... " Some States further added that it should be made clear that even in such a case the victimized person or legal entity would be best placed to take measures to prevent
                                                                                                                         3
further damage or to minimize the damage caused. Hence, the excuse should not apply to the obligation for restoration.

The following points were added:

-   no liability should be based upon damage which is the result of activities which took place in the past, about 5 years ago;

-   a willful or negligent act of a third party should represent an excuse for a third state or entity.

The most restrictive approach was to exclude excuses altogether.

As to question 6 ("What are the appropriate means to calculate the amounts of compensation, taking into consideration that the liability regime is meant to strengthen the protection of the Antarctic environment?)  the main approach was to relate compensation to the repair costs for the environmental damage - the costs of restoration to a status quo ante should be the most reasonable criteria in this matter.  This approach was favoured by most if not all States.

Some added that even irreparable damage should be covered by the liability regime. If restoration was not possible, the amount of compensation should reflect the significance of the damage to the environment.

Further on, reference was made to article 15 of the Protocol. It was pointed out that this provision required each party to provide for prompt and effective response action to such emergencies which might arise in the performance of scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and

4
non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which 
advance notice is required under article 7 para.  5 of the 
Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities.

The compensation to be recovered by one State Party from 
another would be the reasonable costs of cleaning up since the 
basis for the provision would be the recovery of costs actually 
expanded.  In this context it was further on emphasized that 
consideration should also be given to allowing the recovery of 
reasonable costs or necessary measures to prevent further damage.

With respect to question 7 ("Who is the proper plaintiff in 
case of damage to the Antarctic environment and who is the payee of 
compensation to be paid for other than the reimbursement of 
restoration costs?") different answers were given.  Some argued 
that any Party of the Treaty might act as plaintiff.

Others, while referring to article 4 para. 1 (a) of the 
Antarctic Treaty, identified as such the State which was 
particularly affected by the damage.

Insofar as rights and interests of individuals were concerned 
the affected person was named as plaintiff.

A third position was that the plaintiff should be an organ 
instituted for that objective, so to speak the reunion of the 
Consultative Parties or the Environmental Committee.

As to the payee, the following suggestions were made:
-    the Compensation Fund;
-    the Environmental Committee;
-    the entity or the State having undertaken restoration.

5
As to question 8 ("Who is the appropriate debtor in case of 
environmental damage? To what extent is it necessary to address the 
notion of State liability in this context?") basically three 
options were offered:

-    only States;
-    the private person or legal entity who caused the damage;
-    polluter-pay principle/state liability only in connection 
with the State's responsibility to supervise or approve. 
This liability will then become subsidiary to that of the 
wrongdoer. In general, the regulations should not go 
beyond the liability standards generally accepted by 
international law, and should not fall behind these 
standards either.

As to question 9 ("Should the liability regime provide for 
limits to the compensation owed? In the case of an affirmative 
answer, what are the means to cover costs exceeding these limits?") 
most States argued that the liability regime should not provide for 
limits to the compensation owed. The State should ensure that any 
damage beyond the limit is compensated. Others argued that damages 
exceeding the limits should be paid out of a fund. Apart from 
that the costs of restoration had to be covered.

In the same line was the answer that it seemed realistic for 
insurance purposes to set limits to the compensation owed. The 
redress of environmental damage exceeding such limits should be 
facilitated by the setting up of a general fund to be administered 
by the Consultative Parties.

One can sum up these answers as follows: The total amount of 
compensation should be unlimited, however, the burden of the 
compensation costs should be met by several entities(e.g. operator, 
insurance, fund, States).

6
The answers to question 10 ("What are the appropriate institutions to decide upon claims for compensation?:) were rather preliminary. Everybody wanted to have a clearer picture of the liability regime first. The following answers were given:

-   there should be a special court politically independent with full competence and adjudication powers;

-   courts of the country in which the wrongdoer has its domicile; in case of state liability - arbitration procedures or the International Court of Justice;

-   the International Court of Justice;

-   claims tribunals;

-   courts of the ATCPs in case of damage to personal property;

-   arbitral tribunals;

-   UNEP;

-   Committee for Environmental Protection;

-   bargaining procedures between debtor and plaintiff;

-   International Court of Justice, arbitral tribunal or national courts(eventually a parallel or alternative system).

7
Summary

We now come to the last round of the discussion on the liability regime.  As promised I will attempt to sum up the discussion we had over the last two and a half days.  This is certainly a difficult task and I will not attempt to reflect exactly what was said by every single delegation.

I believe that when coming to Heidelberg many of us, including myself, did not anticipate how difficult it would be to elaborate or even to discuss a new liability regime.  As was said this morning, we have approached several questions, but in dealing with these we found new problems.  Therefore, while we may leave Heidelberg without solutions, and certainly we are not near to drafting, we may have or do have, I hope, a much better understanding of the difficulties we face in the elaboration of a new Annex in accordance with Article 16 of the Protocol.

In trying to draft such a new Annex several features will have to be taken into account.  One of the most important ones, as was highlighted by many participants, is that this new Annex has to be fully integrated into the existing Antarctic Treaty regime including the Protocol and its Annexes.  It is essential that all aspects of the existing Antarctic Treaty regime are fully taken into account and that we do not try to reduplicate what has already been regulated either in the Antarctic Treaty, in CCAMLR or in the Protocol.

Having said that, let me become a little bit more specific.  The mandate for discussing this new Annex is clearly spelled out in Article 16.  We are not only under an obligation to proceed in the elaboration of that Annex, but we also have to take into account the restraints and certain decisions already incorporated in the Protocol, especially in Article 16.  When I refer to Article 16, I

8
will not lose sight of other provisions of the Protocol such as 
Article 15 or the existing Annexes. Article 16 establishes the 
objectives to be pursued by the new Annex. The new Annex is meant 
to be one further element, and certainly an important one, to make 
sure that the Antarctic environment is properly protected.

This brings us to another issue which was brought forward in 
today's late morning discussion. Many pointed out that we do not 
need to provide for more protection that the status of the 
Antarctic environment actually demands. However, I would phrase it 
differently: we definitely will need to provide for as much 
protection as Article 16 requires. I fully endorse the suggestion 
that in future deliberations scientists engaged in Antarctica 
should participate and make their views heard, so that their impact 
can be properly taken into account, and I will recommend this to 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. At this point I would 
like to recommend that every single delegation takes this concern 
raised at the Heidelberg meeting home and enter into a dialogue 
with those undertaking scientific research in Antarctica. The 
competence and expertise of these scientists should be fully 
brought to bear in the future negotiations either directly or via 
those who have participated here.

Let me now try to summarize the individual items we discussed 
in Heidelberg. We began our discussion with the question of which 
activities were meant to be covered. The starting point was 
Article 16 of the Protocol which speaks of "activities", rather 
than "a;" or "the" activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty 
area. Article 3 para. 1 speaks of "all activities" whereas Article 
3 paras. 2 and 3 refer again simply to "activities.". The wording, 
"all activities" or "activities" is all-embracing and means 
basically all activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
However, reference was made to a more limited wording in Article 3 
para. 4 which also occurs in some other parts of the Protocol.

9
These provisions speak of "activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific research programmes.", rather than simply "scientific research". Specifically, Article 3 para. 4 mentions such activities undertaken "pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities for which advance notice has to be given in accordance with Article 7 para. 5 of the Antarctic Treaty". Although we did not finish the discussion on activities, I believe there was a certain tendency in favour of having the scope of the new Annex be fully identical with the scope of the Protocol, meaning the Annex should apply to all activities which are covered by the Protocol, such as those involving mineral resources,  One of the wordings which were suggested in this context was the following:

"This Annex shall apply to activities conducted in the Antarctic Treaty area covered by the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection".

It was made clear by several participants that this general phrase needed further qualification and limitation.  Nobody objected to the statement that, according to the Final Act of the Protocol, the Protocol was not meant to cover fishing, since fishing was fully covered by the regime of CCAMLR.  This needs proper reflection in the wording of definition on activities.  I believe it was equally within the main stream of arguments that nothing in this new Annex shall be interpreted as a derogation from obligations of States parties under other international instruments concerning environmental liability in force and applicable in the Antarctic Treaty area.  In this respect I can refer to Article 2 para. 2 of my Offering. This concluded my assessment of the very in-depth discussion on activities which for practical purposes exhausted the matter.

10
We next turned to the definition of damage. Here, the discussion started form different perspectives. Some argued that one should specify what is meant by the notion of damage. However, in the end I had the feeling that there was a certain tendency to try to define damage in the negative, namely, by indicating what is not damage. And here I believe I am able to identify some areas of a growing tendency towards understanding. However, other areas are still very controversial.  In my view there was nobody who argued that minor or transitory impacts on the Antarctic environment, whether assessed or accepted, are to be regarded as damage. Therefore, one could argue that such impacts are not regarded as damage whether or not assessed. Secondly, there was a certain tendency - here again a rather strong one - according to which all damages, even those going beyond minor and transitory ones which have been assessed and accepted, are not to be regarded as damage. However, I would like to put a question mark on that. At least several delegations pointed out that this places and emphasis on the environmental impact assessment which was previously not anticipated, and I believe consideration has to be given to this intervention. Thirdly, we have to talk about impacts going beyond what may have been assessed and accepted and having a more than minor or transitory nature. Obviously, these are the impacts which were regarded as damage by many, although no very clear-cut solution was offered in that respect. On the issue of damages we are, thus, far from any consensus and I can merely identify certain trends; please do not misunderstand me on this. One element of damage, however, seemed to be rather clear. Obviously, damage means any impact, as qualified by the preceding remarks, on the living or non-living components of the Antarctic environment caused by human activity, whereby the words "human activity" were held to be especially important. If I phase in the differentiation I have just explained, I could continue by saying that damage refers to any such impact beyond that which is negligible or transitory or has been assessed and judged to be acceptable. That would be an

11
attempt at a definition without being able to go any further. I 
believe the question of damage cannot be properly dealt with 
without relevant advice from scientists having a profound knowledge 
of the parameters of the Antarctic environments.

        The next issue is the standard of liability. Generally, we 
agreed to a working basis to distinguish between strict liability, 
on the one hand, and absolute liability, on the other. And we 
agreed again for purposes of a working method that strict liability 
should mean that excuses are generally permitted, as are limits, 
without taking any further decision at this point.  Before I go 
into the details of the discussion I would also like to indicate 
that in the discussion it became quite clear that two different 
systems of responsibility exist: One arises from damage to the 
Antarctic environment which is, so to speak, the operator 
liability, and the other arises from the failure of States parties 
either to fully implement the Protocol and its Annexes or to live 
up to the obligations entered into under these instruments. 
Distinguishing between the two different systems, namely operator 
liability and State liability, one has to take into account that 
State liability already exists whether we establish a liability 
Annex or not, since general international law provides for such 
liability.  However, having accepted that these two parallel 
systems exist, everybody said that it was absolutely necessary to 
provide for a linkage between them. We did not go into the details 
of this linkage but a certain starting point is Article 6 para. 2 
of the Offering and the respective article in CRAMRA.  Certainly, 
this issue can only be discussed further after a decision on 
damage, as well as on the liability and the status of States, and 
the relevance of State liability in this whole system has been 
established.

        Nevertheless, if the existence of these two different types of 
responsibility is accepted, one has to consider another point,
12
namely the standard of liability. Here one has to take into account that , at least for this second track of State liability, international law uses the due-diligence test.

I now come to the standard of liability. With respect to the operator liability, it may be appropriate to start by referring to strict liability. As you see from my very cautious wording, it may be that this point needs further clarification and discussion. There were some who argued that we should not treat all activities alike.  I would like you to give a second thought to the question whether scientific research and tourism should be treated alike under the notion of strict liability.  One could make an argument, as I heard, that scientific research requires a better treatment since the Protocol explicitly provides for the protection and promotion of scientific research in Antarctica.  I leave this question pending and would like you to consider it.

At this juncture I return to the question of damage. So far I have spoken about damage to the Antarctic environment which, according to article 16 of the Protocol, includes damage to dependent and associated ecosystems.  There was a quite intensive discussion whether the notion of damage should cover more, namely damage to property, lost interest and impairment to established use.  I did not hear anybody arguing in favour of including all damages to property, lost interest, etc. in this new regime. However, there were several arguments in favour of including these damages, under the condition that they result directly from a damage to the Antarctic environment, and others against it.  The arguments in favour, laying to rest any question of jurisdiction, pointed out that these damages are inseparable form the damages to the Antarctic environment, and the protection of established use includes the protection of scientific research and thus, as I already indicated with respect to the Protocol, requires the protection of such research.  Those speaking against argued that

13
public international law or international civil law already provide 
enough mechanisms to deal with compensation for these damages and 
that expanding the notion of damage would otherwise tender the 
whole regime overly complicated.  I believe this is an area which 
needs further consideration and discussion, not only here, but also 
at home.

Having spoken about damage and responsibility, let me now come 
to another issue which is closely related, i.e. the question of 
restoration, removal and response action.  I hope I describe the 
trend correctly by saying that there was a very strong emphasis on 
the necessity to have quick response action, with the emphasis on 
"quick".  I remember several delegations referring to the necessity 
to provide incentives for a quick and early response, and I believe 
there was no objection to that.. In general, I would argue that 
different from or more clearly than it was done in CRAMRA one 
should make a distinction in this new regime between a response 
action, on the one hand, and compensation, on the other.  I see the 
interrelation between the two, but perhaps there are some merits in 
keeping these two steps clearly separated from each other, so as to 
put enough emphasis on the response action.  In this respect, the 
following are the points of reference, so to speak.  The first is 
Article 15 of the Protocol which provides for an obligation of each 
party engaged in scientific research programmes, tourism or 
governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic 
Treaty area to provide for emergency response action.  There is, in 
this regard, a further obligation of States parties to establish 
contingency plans and, thirdly, an obligation to cooperate.  
Additional parameters in this connection are Article 12 which 
refers to certain functions of the Committee including advisory 
functions, and one should not lose sight of Articles 8 and 10 of 
Annex 3, the Waste Disposal Annex, where we have certain removal 
obligations.  Here, in particular, it is mandatory that the new 
Annex be well-fitted into the existing regime, and this will make 

14
the drafting, whenever it comes to that, rather complicated. Therefore, we will need a clearer perspective on what is required under those provisions to which I have just referred. The discussion centered, however, around Article 3 of my Offering which is tailored to a certain extent along the lines of Article 8 para. 1 (d) of CRAMRA. In respect of the response action, it was stressed - and I believe this view was endorsed by most - that Article 3 (a) of my Offering needs further differentiation and specification, and it was further stressed that w need the advice of scientists as to restoration. It was pointed out that restoration might not make much sense in the Antarctic environment.

This brings me to my next point, namely the question of compensation. we had in this respect three issues to consider: the calculation of compensation, the question of who is to undertake the removal action or the restoration, if any, and the definition of irreparable damage. As to the calculating of compensation, most seem to be in favour of doing the calculation in accordance with the costs of removal, leaving aside the issue of irreparable damage for the moment. The question of who is to undertake removal or restoration was only touched upon, since this is to a certain extent already covered under Article 15 of the Protocol, and therefore it was argued that we should first elaborate and establish what is to be covered under contingency planning before we consider more details in this respect. The discussion on this issue was accordingly rather brief. The relevant points of reference in my Offering were Article 7 and Article 15.

We had a very long discussion on the third item, namely on irreparable damage, which started with a reference to Article 4 para. 2 of my Offering. Here, at least, further clarification was reached: a damage may be irreparable for physical reasons, for technical reasons and perhaps even for economic reasons. Further, it was pointed out that irreparable damage needs different

15
treatment  as  far  as  damage  to  the  Antarctic  environment  is 
concerned.  On  the  on  hand,  and  damage  to  property  (including  lost 
interest,  etc.)  is  concerned,  on  the  other.  It  was  also  pointed 
out  that  damage  outside  the  Antarctic  Treaty  area  might  again  need 
a  different  treatment.  I  am  not  referring  to  the  high  seas  but  to 
areas  under  coastal  Sate  jurisdiction.  We  did  not  go  into  detail 
in  this  respect,  but  I  want  to  flag  this  issue  and  I  would  like  to 
emphasize  that  it  requires  further  consideration.  In  general,  the 
view  was  expressed,  first  of  all,  that  dealing  with  irreparable 
damage  is  a  very  complicated  issue  and,  second,  that  we  cannot  rely 
on  any  precedent  either  in  international  law  or  national  law. 
internationally,  we  do  not  have  a  precedent,  and  it  was  even 
pointed  out  that  in  some  conventions  on  the  protection  of  the 
environment  this  question  has  been  clearly  avoided  or  circumvented. 
Nationally,  we  have  some  precedents,  e.g.  the  Zoe  Colocotroni  Case 
and  the  Patmos  Case,  but  as  it  was  pointed  out,  these  cases  cannot 
easily  be  compared  with  the  one  with  which  we  are  dealing,  and 
therefore  should  be  kept  on  a  low  profile,  so  to  speak.  I  believe 
personally  -  and  while  everything  I  am  saying  is  done  so  in  my 
personal  capacity,  this  is  a  particularly  personal  opinion  -  that 
a  procedural  approach  seems  the  most  promising  in  this  respect. 
One  might  consider  in  these  cases  a  situation  where  an  operator  is 
called  upon  to  provide  for  a  voluntary  contribution  at  least  when 
a  damage  cannot  be  cleared  for  physical,  technical  or  economic 
reasons.  If,  however,  the  Antarctic  Treaty  Consultative  Parties, 
so  was  the  argument,  are  not  satisfied  with  this  voluntary 
contribution,  the  whole  issue  should  not  be  decided  by  arbitration 
or  adjudication,  but  rather  in  a  more  diplomatic  procedure.  I 
believe  that  the  Antarctic  Treaty  provides  for  a  consultation 
procedure  which  might  be  very  appropriate.  We  did  not  go  into 
further  details.  Thus,  this  approach  will  need  further  elaboration 
and  thinking.

16
The next point involves excuses.  The discussion started with Article 5 of the Offering and CRAMRA, respectively.  Generally, most seemed to favour the wording of CRAMRA and thought that my Offering was too vague and too broad of CRAMRA provisions did not satisfy everybody, especially as far as armed conflict is concerned.  It was also pointed out that only the victim of an armed conflict should be able to assert armed conflict as an excuse.

As to limits, the discussion was a rather brief one.  I believe that nearly everybody agreed that limits might theoretically serve two different purposes.  Some saw limits as restricting the amount of compensation owed and therefore providing for the financial predictability of the risk so to speak. However, the question then arises as to who covers the remainder of the compensation owed.  That could be nobody or a fund.  This was left open. Others, however, argued that they would accept limits only if used to provide for insurance, and that the whole system, taken as a single regime, should provide for full compensation.  For the proponents of this view, limits may only have a certain steering purpose with regard to how to distribute the money flow, but should not limit the compensation owed.  This is one of the areas where I would not venture to identify trends.  Here, I believe we still need further discussion and in-depth consideration.

The next point was the fund.  We started with Article 8 of the Offering and identified the following functions of the fund or a possible fund: to provide for compensation where the contingency fund, and possibly to foster scientific research.  It was absolutely clear, and I believe that this is a question of logic, that the more functions such a fund has, the more important the question of financing the fund becomes.  The more limited the functions of such a fund are, the easier it may be to find the financial resources for it.  As potential financial resources the

17
following were mentioned: taxation, contributions by those active 
in Antarctica, contributions by Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties - contributions may not necessarily be equal - and payments 
for irreparable damage. ultimately, I would say that the views on 
the fund were mixed. I will not go into detail here or venture to 
identify a clear tendency. I believe that this is quite impossible 
before we have a clearer picture of the rest of the system, 
particularly with regard to the financing of the fund which, as 
mentioned, depends on its functions. Though some argued that the 
fund could be a useful means of supplementing the regime on 
liability, there were others who argued that there is no necessity 
for such a fund, and they doubted that it would serve a meaningful 
purpose.  Another group said the fund might be a good idea but 
there were no means of financing it. If pressed harder, I could 
identify at least one tendency, although it is a negative one. 
There was very little which indicated a willingness to provide for 
a fund which is financed by government contributions. Putting it 
in even stronger terms: for the most part, I heard objections only 
to this type of a fund. The reasons are manifold, I do not need to 
reiterate them beyond stating the main reason, i. e. that 
everything going into the fund would have to be deducted from 
Antarctic research and that this would be counter-productive.

My last point which was also the last point in the discussion, 
concerns adjudication. The main question was whether adjudication 
should take place under an international system or a national 
system.  I believe there was a certain trend in favour of an 
international system, which I would not overemphasize since our 
discussion on this subject was brief. However, the argument was 
made that we certainly should not establish something which we 
already have, and therefore reference was made to the Schedule of 
the Protocol.  I believe in the end most felt that any detailed 
discussion on the adjudication system would be premature before we 
know more about the liability system in general and especially

18
about the question who is going to have standing when it comes to
claims for compensation, i.e. either States alone or Sates together
with private entities or, perhaps, States for private entities. It
is very important to decide this before we can decide upon the
structuring of an adjudication system. it is in any event very
clear that any attempt to have the Committee for Environmental
Protection play a dominant role in adjudication did not meet with
a favorable response, to say the least. In that respect my
Offering was rejected by at least everyone who approached this
issue. However, in order not to end with a negative remark, it was
said that if action is required of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties, more than one Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Member should be involved, so that no frivolous claims are brought
against the other members.

As indicated earlier I have presented this summation on a
personal basis. After having gone through my notes of this meeting
I will prepare an equally personal report for the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting.

Coming now to the procedural aspect, I have been asked to
provide you with some information on the States' responses. Since
the responses cannot be distributed as such, I believe it would be
a compromise if I send you the summary I gave initially, without
indicating - as I avoided doing orally and, therefore, will not now
do in writing - which State said what. I will group the responses
to help you in your preparation.

I intend to make my oral report more illustrative by handing
over to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting my questionnaire
as well as my Offering and I hope you will find this acceptable.
I will not change the Offering, otherwise it may be confusing.
However, I will indicate in the explanation the reactions to the
Offering I have mentioned here, so that I do not mislead the

19
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in this respect. However, I 
will emphasize that the Offering as well as my report are submitted 
on a personal basis and leave your position untouched. If there is 
no objection to this procedure, I will proceed as indicated.

 
                                                                 20
Chairman's first offering

Annex on Environmental Liability

Article 1
Purpose

The purpose of this Annex is to implement Article 16 of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and
thereby to contribute to the comprehensive protection of the
Antarctic environment by providing rules and procedures relating
to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in
the Antarctic Treaty area.

Explanations:

The principal aim of the protocol and of all its annexes is
to protect the Antarctic environment from damage and to limit the
adverse impacts of all activities carried out in Antarctica.  Any
rules on liability for damage caused must have as their principle
aim the prevention or limitation of any such damage and the early
taking of effective response action.

The draft provision reflects the wording of article 2 of the
Protocol. Since the Annex on liability is only one among other
means I found it appropriate to speak of a contribution to the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment.  This was
also emphasized in the discussion of the first legal expert
meeting in November 1993 at Heidelberg.  Most participants
highlighted that the Annex has to be fully integrated into the
existing Antarctic Treaty regime including the Protocol and its
Annexes.

As none of my questions submitted to you before the meeting
in Heidelberg addressed this issue, only some of the responses

1
did so. From these responses it could be taken that divergent 
views existed in this respect. Although it seemed to be the 
common view that the Annex on liability should play a dominant 
role in the protection of the Antarctic environment, there were 
divergent views how this objective can be achieved most 
appropriately. Since a clearer understanding on the purpose of 
the Annex on liability and the general principles underlying it 
will help in drafting the Annex, I suggested to have an extended 
debate thereon before entering into a discussion on the other 
articles.

To be more concrete the following items were proposed for 
discussion:
-   Objectives pursued by a liability regime (deterring 
    damage, providing for restoration vis-a-vis accidents or 
    negative impacts?)
-   Application of the polluters-pay principle?
-   Role of States (States are responsible that a person or 
    legal entity is able to provide compensation or compensation 
    to be paid by States which have recourse against their 
    nationals or national entities at the national level).

In the discussion the delegations seized the opportunity to 
give their general views on purpose and structure of a future 
liability regime. The different views will be reflected in the 
explanations given to the relevant articles of the first 
offering. One aspect, however, should be already mentioned here: 
Many participants pointed out that there is no need for more 
protection than the status of the Antarctic environment actually 
demanded to provide for. To phrase it differently: the extent of 
environmental protection provided for in the Annex must 

2
correspond to Art. 16 of the Protocol which requires the 
elaboration of a liability regime as one of the key elements for 
the comprehensive and effective protection of the Antarctic 
environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.  In 
order to establish what is necessary for an effective protection 
of the Antarctic environment the involvement of scientific 
expertise seems to be of utmost importance.

            Article 2

             Scope

1)  This Annex shall apply to any activity undertaken in the 
Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required 
under Article VII paragraph 5 of the Antarctic Treaty 
including activities undertaken pursuant to scientific 
research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and 
non-governmental activities including associated logistic 
support activities.

2)  Nothing in this Protocol shall be interpreted as derogating 
from the obligations of the Parties under other 
international instruments concerning environmental liability 
in force and applicable in the Antarctic Treaty area.

Explanations:

This article was covered by question 2. Most of the 
responses thereto were in favor of a comprehensive liability 
regime covering all the activities addressed in the Protocol 
(scientific research, tourism, logistic and support activities, 
including building and provisioning, passage of ships, overflying 
of aircraft). However it was emphasized that such regime might 
accommodate differences between activities or actors.  For

3
example the usefulness of providing for a mandatory insurance of 
government activitites was questioned.

        In the discussion a certain tendency in favor of having the 
scope of the new annex to be fully identical with the scope of 
the Protocol became evident which means that the scope of the 
Annex should apply to all activities which are covered of 
excluded by the Protocol, such as mineral resources activities. 
The following wording was suggested in this context:

"This Annex shall apply to activities conducted in the 
Antarctic Treaty area covered by the Protocol to the Antarctic 
Treaty on Environmental Protection."

        There was no objection to the statement that, according to 
the Final Act of the Protocol, the Protocol was not meant to 
cover fishing since fishing was fully covered by the regime of 
CCAMLR. This will need proper reflection in the wording of a 
definition on activities. It may be a different question as to 
whether activities of fishing vessels other than fishing are 
covered by the Protocol and its Annexes. This topic needs 
further consideration.

        Paragraph 2, the incorporation of which has been suggested 
several times in the responses to the questionnaire, although 
with a different wording, is meant to ensure the application of 
the strictest standard in force. It seems that there were no 
serious objections in the discussion insofar. In this context 
account has to be taken of the fact that different conventions 
already exist concerning the liability of ships. This category 
needs further consideration.

                                                    4
Article 3
Restoration and Removal

1)      Without prejudice to articles 12 paragraphs 1 (e), (f) and 15 of the Protocol, articles 8 and 10 of Annex III and article 12 of Annex IV, the Parties shall ensure that those undertaking activities as referred to in article 2 of this Annex shall:

     a)  take necessary and timely response action, 
         including prevention, containment, clean up and removal 
         measures, if the activity results of threatens to 
         result in damage to the Antarctic environment or 
         dependent or associated ecosystems;

     b)  restore, unless the impact of the activity has 
         only a minor or transitory effect upon the Antarctic 
         environment, as far as reasonable and technically 
         feasible, the status quo ante of the Antarctic 
         environment.

     c)  Restoration in this context means to restore 
         damaged or destroyed components of the environment or 
         to introduce, where reasonable, the equivalent of these 
         components into the environment.

2)      States Parties shall ensure while undertaking the 
environmental impact assessment that those undertaking 
activities in accordance with article 8 Protocol and Annex I 
have the necessary financial and technical capacity, 
commensurate with the nature and level of the activity 
undertaken and the risks involved, to comply with paragraph 
1 of this article.

5
Explanations:

Although none of my questions referred to restoration and removal, it was addressed in several of the responses.  It was stated that direct response obligation was an appropriate means of mitigating damage. This was also strongly emphasized in the discussion. Several delegations - and there was no objection to that proposal - referred to the necessity to provide for incentives for a quick and early response.

In general, it was suggested to make a clear distinction in the Annex between response action on the one side and compensation on the other, so as to put more emphasis on the response action. The point of reference in this context is Art. 15 of the Protocol which comprises for an obligation of each State party in the performance of scientific research programmes, tourism, governmental and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area to provide for emergency response action. There is further the obligation of States parties to establish contingency plans and to cooperate.  Furthering, one should not lose out of sight articles 8 and 10 of the Waste Disposal Annex providing for certain removal obligations.  It is absolutely mandatory - and this was particularly stressed in the discussion - that the new Annex is well fitted into the already existing regime.  Accordingly, before drafting the Annex it will be necessary to exactly define what is required under the provisions just referred to. Therefore the argument was put forward that first of all it should be elaborated what was covered under Art. 15 of the Protocol - especially who is to undertake removal or restoration measures - before entering into more details of a liability regime.

Subparagraphs (a) and (b) have been formulated very much along the lines of article 8 paragraph 1 CRAMRA which was referred to as an appropriate starting point. This view was
6
confirmed in the discussion although it was stressed that the 
response action as defined in Art. 3 paragraph 1 a) needed 
further differentiation and specification. The same was required 
as to the definition of reasonably and technically feasible 
restoration measures referred to in Art. 3 para 1 a) and b).  In 
this respect, according to the group, the advice of scientific 
experts will be needed.

Paragraph 2 corresponds in its first part with articles 2, 
3, 13 protocol.  In its second part I have tried to take account 
of those voices which were in favor of some flexibility to 
reflect that different activities involve different risks.  In 
the discussion a certain tendency became manifest to treat 
scientific activitites more favorably that e. g. tourism.

Article 4

Liability

1)  If an activity referred to in article 2 has resulted in an 
environmental impact which is more than of a minor or transitory 
nature, those undertaking or having undertaken such activity are 
liable for restoration and removal costs specified in subsection 
(a) - (c) actually undertaken or to be undertaken in response to 
such environmental impact.

Such restoration and removal costs are:

a)  All restoration or removal costs incurred by a Party 
under article 7.

b)  All restoration and removal costs incurred by any person 
for acts by the person undertaken under article 7.

7
c)     All costs of providing increased or additional public
services by the Parties during or after restoration or
removal activities.

2)     The established fact that a removal or restoration of the
damage inflicted upon the Antarctic environment is technically not
feasible does not detract from the obligation to provide for
compensation.  The amount of such compensation shall be
commensurate with the significance of the damage to the
environment, particular account being taken of the loss of/or
impairment to potential future uses and impairment of Antarctica's
aesthetic and wilderness values.  Such compensation shall be paid
into the Fund, as referred to in article 8.

3)     When compensation has been paid other than under this Annex,
liability under this Annex shall be offset by the amount of such
payment.

Explanations:

The content of this draft article was addressed in questions
1, 3, 4 and 6.

In accordance with the answers given in the questionnaire as
to the standard of liability Art. 4 paragraph 1 proposes strict
liability of the operator.  The views expressed in the discussion
were again rather homogeneous although several delegations proposed
that scientific research was required to receive a better
treatment.

As far as question 1 was concerned the responses differed.
Some were in favor of covering all types of damages - "the loss or
damage to persons or property caused by or in the connection with
the environmental damage" - (or all damages as listed in article 8
paragraph 7 CRAMRA but not limited to damages arising from mineral

8
resource activities to which several responses referred), others 
advocated only damages to the environment to be covered.  The 
different views on this issue were also reflected in the 
discussion.  This area will need further in-depth discussion.

The answers to question 3 were much more homogeneous although 
by no means unanimous.  However, at least there was some common 
ground insofar as the relationship between the environmental impact 
assessment (article 8 Protocol) and the damage was emphasized.  
Beyond that, many regarded article 1 paragraph 15 CRAMRA as an 
appropriate starting point.  However, since some responses argued 
that everything for which an environmental impact assessment had 
been undertaken (and the impact did not exceed the assessed one) 
should not cause liability (thus limiting liability to accidents), 
others were in favor of only excluding minor or transitory impacts 
from liability.  A third group wanted to cover the liability regime 
for any impact.  The wording of draft article 4 tries to provide 
for a compromise.

As to the discussion, first, nobody argued that minor or 
transitory impacts upon the Antarctic environment should be 
regarded as damage under the Annex.  Second, there was a tendency 
according to which the following definition would be appropriate:

"Damage means any impact on the living or non-living 
components of the Antarctic environment caused by a human activity, 
beyond those which are negligible or transitory or have been 
assessed and judged acceptable pursuant to the Protocol."

However, several delegations pointed out that this placed an 
emphasis on the environmental impact assessment which was 
previously not anticipated.

9
Although the discussion on the issue was rather controversial it was generally agreed that the question of damage could not be 
properly dealt with without appropriate advice from the side of scientists having a deep knowledge of the parameters of the 
Antarctic environment.

As far as the calculation of compensation is concerned every body seems to see the response action and restoration costs as an 
appropriate means to calculate the amount of compensation. Despite this conformity of views rules are needed on how restoration or 
removal measures are to be initiated. Thus, the reference to removal measures are only part of response actions.

Divergent opinions were expressed concerning the problem of irreparable damage. Further clarification at least was reached what 
could possibly be meant by irreparable damage. A damage may be irreparable for physical, technical and perhaps even for economic 
reasons. Further on, it was pointed out that irreparable damage could need different treatment as far as damage to the Antarctic 
environment on the one side and damage to, property, lost interests etc. on the other side was concerned. Finally, it was argued that 
damages occurring outside the Antarctic Treaty area, especially in areas under coastal State jurisdiction might be treated differently 
as well. There was no in-depth discussion on this point.

Although, in general, the view was expressed that dealing with irreparable damage was first of all a very complicated issue, and 
second that one could not rely on any precedent, neither in international nor in national law, some delegations argued that a 
State Party or a person having damaged the Antarctic environment with no restoration being possible should not be in a better 
position as far as the obligation to provide for compensation is concerned than a State Party or a person having damaged the 
Antarctic environment to a lesser degree. I personally would
10
suggest a more procedural approach in this respect. In case of an irreparable damage one might consider that the responsible operator is called to provide for a voluntary contribution. If, however, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties were not satisfied by the amount offered, the whole issue should be cleared in a diplomatic procedure rather than by arbitration or adjudication. Following this approach one should take into account that the Antarctic Treaty provides for such a consultation procedure which might be appropriate. As the group did not go into further details on this approach, the issue will need further elaboration and thinking.

When talking about the structure of a liability regime the question of limits to the compensation owed comes up for discussion. Summarizing, it can be stated that nearly every body voiced that limits might theoretically serve two different purposed. Either they limit the amount of compensation owed and therefore provide for the financial predictability of the risk. Then the question arises who is covering the exceeding damage. Others, however, argued that they would accept limits only as a means of steering the money flow. According to this approach, the whole system taken as a single regime should provide for full compensation.

Paragraph 3 of the draft article 4 has been copied from CRAMRA as suggested by those having referred to this issue.

Article 5

Exemptions

1) No liability will be caused if it can be proved that the damage resulted directly from, and to the extent that it has resulted directly from:

11
a)     an event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica 
       an exceptional natural disaster which could not 
       reasonably have been foreseen; or

b)     armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the 
       Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism directed against 
       the activities in question, despite appropriate safety 
       measures; or

c)     an intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of 
       another party.

2)     Paragraph 1 is not to be interpreted to detract from the 
       obligation under article 3 paragraph 1.

Explanations;

This issue has been addressed in question 5. Nearly all having 
responded thereto have argued that the excuses set down in article 
8 paragraphs. 4 and 6 CRAMRA with the caveats specified in this 
provision are the most that should be permitted. This position was 
confirmed in the discussion although it was pointed out that even 
the cramra-provisions did not satisfy everybody, especially as far 
as the armed conflict was concerned. It was proposed that only the 
victim of an armed conflict should be entitled to rely on the armed 
conflict as excuse.

Paragraph 2 contains provisions for the obligation of 
operators to provide for prevention (mitigation) and restoration 
even in cases of exemptions. This reflects the fact that even in 
these situations the State Party or entity concerned is in the best 
position to take removal measures. However, the failure to do so 
should not automatically entail liability, otherwise the exemption 
would be meaningless. The obligation to provide for prevention and 
restoration and the obligation to provide for compensation should,
 
12
thus, be kept separately. Perhaps one could even think of a system 
of financial incentives to encourage the operator or State Party 
concerned.

        The whole complex will need very careful further 
consideration.

                                  Article 6

              Obligations of States Parties

1)      Damage of the kind referred to in article 4 above which would 
not have occurred or continued if a State Party concerned had 
carried out its obligations under the Protocol, including its 
Annexes, shall entail liability of that State.

2)      Such liability shall be limited to that portion of liability 
not satisfied by the person or entity having undertaken the 
activity in question.

Explanations:

        Most considered this item in responding to question 8 or 4. 
This draft article has to be read in connection with article 4 
paragraph 2 although this provision does not describe the 
obligations of Stated in an exhaustive manner.

        In the answers to the questionnaire frequent references have 
been made to article 13 paragraph 1 Protocol in this context. It 
has been stated quite frequently that the failure to live up to the 
obligation under article 13 paragraph 1 Protocol will entail 
liability; however, that State liability was to be limited to that 
or equivalent cases.

13
In the discussion it became quite clear that two different systems of responsibility exist, i.e. operator liability arising from damage to the Antarctic environment and State liability arising from the failure of a State party to fulfil the obligations entered into under the Protocol while acting on the same level as operators on the one hand, and State liability arising from the failure of a State party to fully implement the Protocol and its Annexes, especially to control operators, on the other. As to the latter standard of State liability general international law uses the due diligence test. Distinguishing between these two different systems, one has to take into account that State responsibility is already provided for under general international law. There is no need for codification in this respect. Having accepted that these two parallel systems exist, it will be necessary to provide for a linkage between the two. A certain starting point of the discussion was Art. 6 para. 2 of the first offering and the respective provision of CRAMRA, which limits State liability to that portion of liability not satisfied by the person or entity having undertaken the activity in question. A definite solution to this issue certainly depends on the structure of the liability regime. It was for this reason that the group did not go into details on this point.

Article 7

Preventive and Restoration Measures

1)  In the case an incident has occurred which has caused an impact upon the Antarctic environment as referred to in article 3 (b) and the State Party, entity or person responsible does not restore the Antarctic environment to the status quo ante or is for technical or other reasons not in a position to do so, preventive and restoration measures may be taken on its behalf, as follows:

14
a)     any State party, private entity or person may take timely 
        preventive measures; preventive measures in this context 
        means any reasonable measure taken to minimize or limit 
        the impact upon the Antarctic environment;

b)     in the case the activity in question has been undertaken 
        by a State Party, any other State Party, after 
        appropriate consultation with the former, may take the 
        necessary and timely restoration measures;

c)     in the case the activity in question has been undertaken 
        by a private person or entity, any State Party, private 
        entity or person may    take the necessary and timely 
        response action;

2)     Without prejudice to paragraph 1 the Committee for 
        Environmental Protection may engage any State Party, private entity 
        or person to undertake necessary preventive and restoration 
        measures in the case such measures are not undertaken timely or 
        effectively by the State party, private entity or person 
        responsible for the impact upon the Antarctic environment or are 
        warranted for a different reason.

Explanations:

        This is the first attempt to provide for a procedure 
        regulating response and restoration measures undertaken by another 
        State on entity that the one having caused the damage.  A 
        distinction has been made between preventive measures and 
        restoration measures. The former may be taken at once and without 
        undue delay in waiting for the one having caused the impact to 
        react. The reason for lies in the limited nature of preventive 
        measures and the objective pursued therewith.

15
In subparagraphs (b) and (c) a differentiation is made as to whether the impact was caused by a State or a private entity. The reason for such differentiation is evident.

In the discussion the question of who is to undertake removal or restoration was only touched upon, since this is to a certain extent already covered under Art. 15 of the Protocol, and therefore it was argued that one should first of all elaborate and establish what is already going to be covered under the contingency planning before entering into more details in this respect.

In the discussion it was further emphasized that article 7 needs to be harmonized with article 3. The reference to preventive measures in paragraph 1 is not appropriate since preventive measures are only part of response actions. It might be appropriate to differentiate in this article between response action (particularly removal and cleanup), restoration and preventive measures as defined in subparagraph (a).

Article 8

Environmental Protection Fund

1) An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established with the following aim: to provide compensation for negative impacts upon the Antarctic environment as referred to in article 3 to the extent that the other means of compensation are inadequate

2) For the purpose of fulfilling its functions under paragraph 1 the Fund shall pay compensation to those having undertaken preventive or restoration measures,
      a) because no liability arises under the Protocol;

16
b) the cause of the impact in accordance with article 3 
cannot be established.

c) to provide for compensation, on an interim basis, in 
cases a preventive or restoration measure to be 
undertaken on an emergency basis.

3) Contributions to the Fund shall be made by the States Parties, 
private entities and private persons on the basis of the amount of 
crude oil brought into the Antarctic Treaty Area.

Explanations:

Although the draft article on the Fund is at this stage of a 
very preliminary nature, it could serve as a starting point for the 
discussion.  The following functions of the Fund were identified: 
to provide for compensation in cases where there was no liability, 
to provide for compensation where the cause of the impact could not 
be detected, to serve as a contingency Fund, and possibly to foster 
scientific research.  As potential financial resources the 
following were mentioned: taxation, contribution of those being 
active in Antarctica, contribution of Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties - these contribution would not necessarily be equal - and 
those amounts paid for irreparable damages.  The functions 
attributed to the Fund certainly depends on the final structure of 
the liability system and above all on the very delicate question 
how to finance the Fund.  This was also clearly reflected in the 
discussion.

Summarizing it can be stated that the views on the Fund were 
mixed.  Some delegations argued, that the Fund could be a useful 
means to supplement the liability regime; others pointed out that 
there was no necessity for such a Fund and doubted that the Fund 
would serve a meaningful purpose.  Another group said that the 
establishment of a Fund might be a good idea but there were no 

17
means of financing it. With respect to this last item it can be stated that there was very little willingness to provide for a government-contributed Fund. The main reason was that this would affect the research budget which would contravene the purpose of the protocol.

Article 9

Claims Tribunals

1)  Disputes between States Parties concerning the obligation to pay compensation shall be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under the Schedule to the protocol.

2)  If such disputes involve private entities or persons, the State Party in which the Environmental Impact Assessment in accordance with article 8 Protocol and Annex I Has been undertaken or should have been undertaken shall represent the private person or entity in the proceedings.

3)  If such dispute involves the Committee for Environmental Protection, it shall engage one of the States Parties to represent it in the proceedings.

Explanations:

The main question with respect to the question of adjudication was whether an international or national system should be established. There was a certain tendency in the discussion favoring an international system. In this context reference was made to the arbitration procedure provided for in the Protocol to avoid a duplication of institutions. The shaping of the adjudication system certainly depends on the structure of the liability regime as a whole and especially on the question who is going have standing in this respect when it comes to claims for

18
compensation. However, the attempt to have the Committee for Environmental Protection play a dominant role in adjudication was rejected. In case that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties were meant to act it was proposed to rely on a given number of those in order to make sure that there were no frivolous claims brought against the other members.

Article 10

Amendment or Modification

1) This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed t have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that period that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2) Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1) shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party as notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

Explanations:

This provision has been copied from the Protocol. There is no need to consider it now.

19
