ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                                              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


KYOTO              
11-22 April 1994              

              XVIII ATCM/WP 35
              21 April 1994
              Original:English


REPORT OF WORKING GROUP I
TO THE PLENARY OF THE XVIIIth ATCM

(Working paper submitted by the Secretariat)
REPORT OF WORKING GROUP I 
TO THE PLENARY OF THE XVIIIth ATCM

(1) Working Group I held meetings on 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19 and 20 
April in order to deal with the following agenda items:

6.      Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
        Treaty

7.      Tourism and non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic 
        Treaty Area

8.      Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

16.     Questions Related to the Exercise of Jurisdiction in 
        Antarctica

(2) The Working Group I drafted a number of paragraphs concerning 
the above mentioned items, to be included in the Final Report of 
the XVIIIth ATCM.

Item 6 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a) Implementation

(3) The Meeting had an intensive exchange of views on the 
implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. The Parties reported on the progress they had 
achieved with regard to their ratification process including the 
preparation of national legislation to implement the Protocol and

1
its Annexes.  A number of Parties indicated that the legislative 
process in their countries was already well advanced and gives hope 
that enactment of their legislation might be expected this year or 
in 1995.

(4)  The discussion on implementation focused mainly on two key 
issues:  The question of how to enhance the Protocol's practical 
implementation pending its entry into force and the need to clarify 
interpretation of the Protocol's provisions.

(5)  There was general agreement that the practical implementation 
of the Protocol should be advanced as rapidly as possible and some 
proposals were made on how to assist this process.

(6)  As for the interpretation of the Protocol, some believed there 
was a need for clarification of the meaning of certain provisions. 
The Meeting acknowledged that it was desirable to harmonize 
interpretation where possible.  At the same time, however, it 
recognized that uniform application of the Protocol is not possible 
given different national legislative approaches.

(7)  The Meeting acknowledged that exchange of information on 
domestic legislation among Consultative Parties is helpful to both 
the interpretation and implementation issues, thereby facilitating 
the Protocol's entering into force.  In this context, the Meeting 
expressed gratitude to those Parties who made copies of their 
domestic legislation available to other Parties.

b) Committee for Environmental Protection in Antarctica

(8)  Under this item, three Working Papers (XVIII ATCM/WP 4, XVIII 
ATCM/WP 7 and XVIII ATCM/WP 10) were presented by Chile, Australia 
and France respectively.  Following informal contacts between 
participants the Meeting noted that since the XVI ATCM and the 
Final Act of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative
2
Meeting, the ATCPs have recognized the necessity for preparatory 
arrangements pending the entry into force of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection.

(9) At the same time, the ATCPs are conscious that the entry into 
force of the Protocol will have significant implications for the 
conduct of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. The Protocol 
sets forth comprehensive environmental protection measures, and 
incorporates provisions to improve the effectiveness and 
responsiveness of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative mechanism, 
including the operation of the consultative meetings and the 
coordination of the components of the Antarctic Treaty system. It 
provides also for the establishment of a Committee on Environmental 
Protection to which SCAR and CCAMLR are observers. COMNAP would 
also be able to make an important contribution to the work of the 
Committee.

(10) The next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting - ATCM XIX in 
Seoul - should therefore be organized, so far as possible, to 
reflect the Protocol's objectives of improving the way in which the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative mechanism works. This approach would 
be designed both to ensure productive results at ATCM XIX itself, 
and to anticipate and prepare for the entry into force of the 
Protocol, including in particular the Committee on Environmental 
Protection.

To this end, the Meeting took the following decisions with regard 
to preparatory arrangements for the implementation of Article 12 of 
the Protocol in connection with the programme of work of ATCM XIX:

A. Those items on the agenda of ATCM XIX which, under Article 12 
of the Protocol, would be dealt with by the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, should be considered by a Transitional 
Environmental Working Group (TEWG) of the XIXth ATCM reporting to 
its plenary.

3
B. The TEWG should meet during the first week of ATCM XIX so 
that its advice and recommendations may be considered by the 
plenary during the second week.

C. Representatives of the other components of the Antarctic 
Treaty System, SCAR and CCAMLR, as well as COMNAP, and other expert 
bodies as may be invited under Agenda item 17, should participate 
in the detailed work of the TEWG to:

1) provide the results of any specific work requested of them at 
the present ATCM;
 
2) identify ways in which they could contribute to the work of 
future ATCMs; and

3) provide general advice within their competence.

D. In view of the above, it would be desirable if COMNAP's 
annual meeting be held immediately before the ATCM.

E. As a consequence of B above, on the first Monday of ATCM XIX 
the plenary meeting would be limited to the election of the 
Chairman of the meeting, adoption of the agenda, allocation of 
agenda items to working groups, timetable, appointment of chairmen 
of working groups, and such other procedural decisions as may be 
necessary for the conduct of the business of the ATCM.  The 
ceremonial plenary would be held on the second Monday.

F. Working Groups I and II would not meet during the first week, 
but informal groups of legal experts would meet during that period 
to discuss legal issues of liability and the status and privileges 
and immunities of the Secretariat.

4
(11) The Meeting also considered the question of the submission and 
circulation of TEWG documents.  It was agreed that the same 
consideration should be extended to all ATCM documents, and that 
the issue should be dealt with under item 17.

c) Liability Annex

(12) The Meeting took note of the work of the legal experts group 
that was created at the XVII ATCM under the Chairmanship of 
Germany.

(13) On the basis of a working paper (XVIII ATCM/WP2), submitted by 
Germany, a comprehensive report was given by the Chairman of the 
legal experts group, Professor R. Wolfrum.  This was followed by an 
exchange of views.

(14) The Meeting extended in accordance with the recommendation 
IV-24 the mandate of the legal experts group and agreed to convene 
a further meeting of that group in the period before the XIXth ATCM 
in 1995.

(15) The Meeting welcomed an offer made by Netherlands to the group 
of experts to host an intercessional meeting of this group in the 
Hague.

(16) The Meeting also noted that since the admission of observers 
to the experts group would require unanimous agreement,
the participation of the next meeting of the group would be on the 
same basis as that of the previous group.

(17) The meeting asked Germany to continue to chair the experts 
group under Professor Wolfrum.

(18) With regard to future deliberations on liability, the Meeting
5
agreed that the Chairman should set out the priorities of the 
experts group, taking into account the need both to concentrate on 
essential topics and to consider other issues.

d) Relations with other Environmental Treaties

(19) The Meeting considered a Working Paper submitted by Chile 
(XVIII ATCM/WP 31) on the relationship between the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and other 
international agreements of a global scope. The Working Paper 
identified a number of International Agreements that applied or 
were relevant to the Antarctic Treaty area and to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

(20) These include the 1989 Convention on the Control of 
Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (the 
Basel Convention), the 1992 Convention on Biodiversity, the 1992 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the 1985 
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and its 
1987 Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (the 
Montreal Protocol), the 1972 Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matters; and the 
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 
and its Protocol of 1978 (MARPOL 73/78). Attention was also drawn 
to the/Law of the Sea Convention in-1982.

(21) The Working Paper also noted the potential relevance for the 
Antarctic Treaty System of the ongoing development of efforts among 
the relevant States to protect the environment of the Arctic.

(22) The Delegation of Chile stressed in this context the need for 
future contacts between the Arctic and Antarctic regions in matters 
of environmental protection.

(23) The Meeting agreed it was important to ensure proper 
                                                                 6
coordination between global environmental agreements and the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System and, in particular, of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The meeting agreed that the requirements for coordination were specific to each of the agreements and that the primary responsibility for ensuring such coordination lay with the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty that were Parties to the other agreements.

Item 7
Tourism and Non-Governmental Activity

(24) The Meeting received Working Papers from Australia (XVIII ATCM WP 9), Chile and France (ATCM XVIII WP 11) and the United Kingdom (XVIII ATCM WP 18, 19, 20. There were a number of information papers on this item. Some of those described the increasing volume of tourist and non-governmental activity since ATCM XVII.

(25) The Meeting agreed that there would be benefit in using Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAS) in some cases to ensure that tourism and non-governmental activities do not interfere with scientific research or have adverse effects on the Antarctic environment. It was suggested that Parties should take this into account when proposing management plans for ASMAS.

(26) There was wide recognition among Parties that given the increasing volume of tourist and non-governmental activity in Antarctica, and the need to consider how this might be addressed when the Protocol enters into force, it was important that Parties ensure that those organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica be effectively advised of the appropriate requirements, deriving from the obligations on the Parties under the Antarctic Treaty system, to assist in planning and conducting their activities in Antarctica.

7
(27) There was a wide convergence of views that it was timely for 
action to be taken on this matter at this Meeting. There was 
agreement that the objective at this Meeting was not to create new 
rules and regulations but to provide guidance to those visiting 
Antarctica and those organising and conducting tourism and non-
governmental activities there.

(28) Three aspects were identified for consideration:

(1)    guidance for visitors

(2)    guidance for those organising and conducting tourism and non-
       governmental activity

(3)    the role of Parties.

(29) On the role of Parties there were differing views. Some 
Parties argued for the need for consultation and co-ordination 
between the Parties in implementing their obligations in relation 
to tourism and non-governmental activity, notably regarding the 
environmental impact assessment procedures to be established under 
the Protocol. Others believed that this was fully covered by the 
Protocol itself.

(30) Parties agreed on a text for guidance for visitors which sets 
out, in appropriate language, advice on behavior when in 
Antarctica. Parties also reached agreement on a text for guidance 
directed at those organising or conducting tourism and non-
governmental activity, which provides information on the relevant 
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty system, including the Protocol 
when it enters into force, and also sets out procedures which might 
be followed when planning and conducting tourism and non-
governmental activity and in reporting on such activity.

8
(31) The Meeting decided that GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE ANTARCTIC and GUIDANCE FOR THOSE ORGANISING AND CONDUCTING TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC be circulated widely and as soon as possible.
The Meeting adopted Recommendation XVIII-1.

Item 8

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

     a) Organizational aspects. Secretariat

(32) The Meeting noted that during the intercessional period, informal consultations on certain aspects relating to the future establishment of a permanent Secretariat to the Antarctic Treaty were carried out through normal diplomatic channels and with the coordination of Italy, as Chair of the XVII ATCM, on the occasion of the meeting of Legal Experts on liability held at Heidelberg from 18 to 20 November 1993.

(33) Some opening addresses attached to this Final Report refer to this subject.

(34) A number of Working documents were submitted to the XVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting: XVIII  ATCM/WP  8 by Australia, XVIII ATCM/WP 15 by Belgium and XVIII ATCM/WP 16 by Italy.

(35) A contact Group of Working Group I, chaired by Professor Rüdiger Wolfrum (Federal Republic of Germany) discussed this item under the following headings: a) Legal Personality; b) Functions; c) Privileges and Immunities; and  d) the Legal Instrument to establish those status, privileges and immunities (e.g. Protocol, Headquarters Agreement).
(36) The contact group devoted considerable time to discussing the legal status, privileges and immunities as well as the functions of the future Secretariat. It was possible to clarify further the issues involved and to modify and supplement the texts as a focus for future deliberations. However, several issues remained to be agreed upon. Although there was consensus that a permanent Secretariat had to be empowered to pursue its activities in the territory of all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, some delegations wanted the privileges and immunities of the Secretariat to be restricted to the host State. Apart from that, it was the prevailing view within the group that the activities of the Secretariat should be limited to those necessary to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection, and that the privileges and immunities should be commensurate with and limited to those necessary for the performance of its functions.

(37) The progress achieved in the consideration of those items is reflected in the report made by the Chairman of the contact group, attached as Annex I of this Report.

(38) The Meeting acknowledged that further progress on these aspects, and particularly on the other main issues relating to the establishment of the Secretariat, such as its composition, financing and location, was needed. The Meeting therefore urged that every possible effort should be made by all Consultative Parties during the intersessional period to prepare for resolution of all outstanding issues relating to the establishment of the Secretariat , with a view of reaching a consensus at the earliest possible opportunity.

b) Public Availability of Documents

(39) The Meeting agreed to make all documents of the XVIIIth ATCM publicly available without exception.

10
c) Examination of Recommendations

(40) The Meeting decided to consider further at the next ATCM the 
question of the examination of recommendations.

d) Exchange of Information

(41) The Meeting agreed that the exchange of information among 
Contracting Parties needed further improvement, in particular in 
relation to matters covered by item 6 b).

(42) It was agreed that this matter would again be considered by 
the XIXth ATCM.

(43) The United States reported that it had prepared a new (eighth) 
edition of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System.  It would 
be distributed to Parties through their embassies in Washington.

Item 16
Questions related to the Exercise of Jurisdiction in Antarctica

A working paper (XVIIIth ATCM/WP 32) on this item was tabled and 
introduced by Uruguay.

(44) The Meeting recognized the importance of this question, the 
solution of which was left deliberately open in Article IX 
paragraph 1 of the Antarctic Treaty. But it was also understood 
that the question raises some delicate and sensitive problems which 
need more and careful deliberations.

(45) The Meeting therefore agreed to leave the item out of the 
Agenda of the XIXth ATCM and put it again on the Agenda of the XXth 
ATCM in order to give all parties sufficient time to elaborate ways 
and means how to approach the question again in order to find an 
agreeable solution.

11
Recommendation XVIII-1
Tourism and non-Governmental Activities

The Representatives,

Reaffirming the exceptional character of the Antarctic environment given in particular the fragility of its fauna and flora and of the setting which the Antarctic offers for the conduct of scientific activities;

Acknowledging the increase in the development of tourist activities in the Antarctic;

Noting that those who visit the Antarctic and organize or conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic are currently subject to legally binding obligations pursuant to national legislation implementing the Antarctic Treaty and associated legal instruments;

Noting further that such visitors or organizers will be subject to additional legally binding obligations upon entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognizing the need for visitors and organizers to have practical guidance on how to best plan and carry out any visits to the Antarctic;

Recalling the Final Act of the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, at which the Protocol was adopted, in which the signatories of the Final Act decided that the Annexes of the Protocol should be applied in accordance with their legal systems and to the extent practicable;

12
. . 

Desiring to ensure that those who visit the Antarctic carry out 
their visits or tours strictly in accordance with existing 
obligations and in so far is consistent with existing national law, 
in accordance with the Protocol, pending its entry into force;

Desiring further to facilitate the early entry into force of the 
Protocol and of the implementation of its provisions in relation to 
those who visit or organize tours to the Antarctic.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1.  They circulate widely and as quickly as possible the Guidance 
to Visitors to the Antarctic and the Guidance to those 
organizing and conducting tourism or non-governmental 
activities in the Antarctic annexed to this Recommendation.

2.  They urge those intending to visit or organize and conduct 
tourism or non-governmental activities in the Antarctic to act 
in accordance with the annexed guidelines consistent with the 
relevant provisions of their applicable national law.

 
   
 
13
propose to have numbers 
put in again.

A     T     T     A     C     H     M     E     N     T

Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic

Activities in the Antarctic are governed by the Antarctic 
Treaty of 1959 and associated agreements, referred to 
collectively as the Antarctic Treaty system. The Treaty 
established Antarctica as a zone of peace and science.

In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 
which designates the Antarctic as a natural reserve. The Protocol 
sets out environmental principles, procedures and obligations for 
the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment, and 
its dependent and associated ecosystems. The Consultative Parties 
have agreed that, pending its entry into force, as far as 
possible and in accordance with their legal system, that the 
provisions of the Protocol should be applied as appropriate.

The Environmental Protocol applies to tourism and non-
governmental activities as well as governmental activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area. It is intended to ensure that these 
activities do not have adverse impacts on the Antarctic 
environment, or on its scientific and aesthetic values.

This Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic is intended to 
ensure that all visitors are aware of, and are therefore able to 
comply with, the Treaty and the Protocol. Visitors are, of 
course, bound by national laws and regulations applicable to 
activities in the Antarctic.

14
A) PROTECT ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE

Taking or harmful interference with Antarctic wildlife is 
prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by a 
national authority.

  • Do not use aircraft, vessels, small boats, or other means 
    of transport in ways that disturb wildlife, either at sea 
    or on land.

  • Do not feed, touch, or handle birds or seals, or approach 
    or photograph them in ways that cause them to alter their 
    behavior. Special care is needed when animals are 
    breeding or molting.

  • Do not damage plants, for example by walking, driving, or 
    landing on extensive moss beds or lichen-covered scree 
    slopes.

  • Do not use guns or explosives. Keep noise to the minimum 
    to avoid frightening wildlife.

  • Do not bring non-native plants or animals into the 
    Antarctic (e.g. live poultry, pet dogs and cats, house 
    plants).

B) RESPECT PROTECTED AREAS

A variety of areas in the Antarctic have been afforded 
special protection because of their particular ecological, 
scientific, historic or other values. Entry into certain 
areas may be prohibited except in accordance with a permit 
issued by an appropriate national authority. Activities in
15
and near designated Historic Sites and Monuments and certain 
other areas may be subject to special restrictions.

- Know the locations of areas that have been afforded 
special protection and any restrictions regarding entry 
and activities that can be carried out in and near them.

- Observe applicable restrictions.

- Do not damage, remove or destroy Historic Sites or 
Monuments, or any artifacts associated with them.

C) RESPECT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Do not interfere with scientific research, facilities or 
equipment.

- Obtain permission before visiting Antarctic science and 
logistic support facilities; reconfirm arrangements 24-72 
hours before arriving; and comply strictly with the rules 
regarding such visits.

- Do not interfere with, or remove, scientific equipment or 
marker posts, and do not disturb experimental study 
sites, field camps, or supplies.

D) BE SAFE

Be prepared for severe and changeable weather. Ensure that 
your equipment and clothing meet Antarctic standards. 
Remember that the Antarctic environment is inhospitable, 
unpredictable and potentially dangerous.

16
o Know your capabilities, the dangers posed by the Antarctic environment, and act accordingly. Plan activities with safety in mind at all times.

o Keep a safe distance from all wildlife, both on land and at sea.

o Take note of, and act on, the advice and instructions from your leaders; do not stray from your group.

o Do not walk onto glaciers or large snow fields without proper equipment and experience; there is a real danger of falling into hidden crevasses.

o Do not expect a rescue service; self-sufficiency is increased and risks reduced by sound planning, quality equipment, and trained personnel.

o Do not enter emergency refuges (except in emergencies). If you use equipment or food from a refuge, inform the nearest research station or national authority once the emergency is over.

o Respect any smoking restrictions, particularly around buildings, and take great care to safeguard against the danger of fire. This is a real hazard in the dry environment of Antarctica.

                
17
E) KEEP ANTARCTICA PRISTINE

Antarctica remains relatively pristine, and has not yet been 
subjected to large scale human perturbations. It is the 
largest wilderness area on earth. Please keep it that way.

  o Do not dispose of litter or garbage on land. Open burning 
    is prohibited.

  o Do not disturb or pollute lakes or streams. Any materials 
    discarded at sea must be disposed of properly.

  o Do not paint or engrave names or graffiti on rocks or 
    buildings.

  o Do not collect or take away biological or geological 
    specimens or man-made artifacts as a souvenir, including 
    rocks, bones, eggs, fossils, and parts or contents of 
    buildings.

  o Do not deface or vandalize buildings, whether occupied, 
    abandoned, or unoccupied, or emergency refuges.

18
ATTACHMENT

Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting 
Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic

Antarctica is the largest wilderness area on earth, 
unaffected by large scale human activities. Accordingly, 
this unique and pristine environment has been afforded 
special protection. Furthermore, it is physically remote, 
inhospitable, unpredictable and potentially dangerous. All 
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, therefore, should 
be planned and conducted with both environmental protection 
and safety in mind.

• Activities in the Antarctic are subject to the Antarctic 
Treaty of 1959 and associated legal instruments, referred to 
collectively as the Antarctic Treaty system. These include 
the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
(CCAS) (1972), the Convention on the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) (1980) and the 
Recommendations and other measures adopted by the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties under the Antarctic Treaty.

• In 1991, the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. This Protocol sets out environmental 
principles, procedures and obligations for the comprehensive 
protection of the Antarctic environment, and its dependent 
and associated ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have 
agreed that, pending its entry into force, as far as 
possible and in accordance with their legal systems, that 
the provisions of the Protocol should be applied as 
19
appropriate.

The Environmental Protocol designates Antarctica as a 
natural reserve devoted to peace and science, and applies to 
both governmental and non-governmental activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area. The Protocol seeks to ensure that 
human activities, including tourism, do not have adverse 
impacts on the Antarctic environment, nor on its scientific 
and aesthetic values.

The Protocol states, as a matter of principle, that all 
activities are to be planned and conducted on the basis of 
information sufficient to evaluate their possible impact on 
the Antarctic environment and its associated ecosystems, and 
on the value of Antarctica for the conduct of scientific 
research. Organisers should be aware that the Environmental 
Protocol requires that "activities shall be modified, 
suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to 
result in impacts upon the Antarctic environment or 
dependent or associated ecosystems."

Those responsible for organizing and conducting tourism 
and non-governmental activities must comply fully with 
national laws and regulations which implement the Antarctic 
Treaty system, as well as other national laws and 
regulations implementing international agreements on 
environmental protection, pollution and safety that relate 
to the Antarctic Treaty Area. They should also abide by the 
requirements imposed on organisers and operators under the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes, in so 
far as they have not yet been implemented in national law;
20
KEY OBLIGATIONS ON ORGANISERS AND OPERATORS

- Provide prior notification of, and reports on, their 
activities to the competent authorities of the 
appropriate Party or Parties.

- Conduct an assessment of the potential environmental 
impacts of their planned activities.

- Provide for effective response to environmental 
emergencies, especially with regard to marine pollution.

- Ensure self-sufficiency and safe operations.

- Respect scientific research and the Antarctic 
environment, including restrictions regarding protected 
areas, and the protection of flora and fauna.

- Prevent the disposal and discharge of prohibited waste.

 
                                  21
PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY ORGANISERS AND OPERATORS

A) When planning to go to the Antarctic

Organisers and operators should:

• Notify the competent national authorities of the 
appropriate Party or Parties of details of their planned 
activities with sufficient time to enable the Party(ies) 
to comply with their information exchange obligations 
under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty. The 
information to be provided is listed in Attachment A.

• Conduct an environmental assessment in accordance with 
such procedures as may have been established in national 
law to give effect to Annex I of the Protocol, including, 
if appropriate, how potential impacts will be monitored.

• Obtain timely permission from the national authorities 
responsible for any stations they propose to visit.

• Provide information to assist in the preparation of: 
contingency response plans in accordance with Article 15 
of the Protocol; waste management plans in accordance 
with Annex III of the Protocol; and marine pollution 
contingency plans in accordance with Annex IV of the 
Protocol.

• Ensure that expedition leaders and passengers are aware 
of the location and special regimes which now apply to 
Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (and on entry into force of the Protocol and 
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic 
Specially Managed Areas) and of Historic Sites and
22
Monuments and, in particular, relevant management plans.

- Obtain a permit, where required by national law, from the 
competent national authority of the appropriate Party or 
Parties, should they have a reason to enter such areas, 
or a monitoring site (CEMP Site) designated under CCAMLR.

- Ensure activities are fully self-sufficient and do not 
require assistance from Parties unless arrangements for 
it have been agreed in advance.

- Ensure they employ experienced and trained personnel, 
including a sufficient number of guides.

- Arrange to use equipment, vehicles, vessels, and aircraft 
appropriate to Antarctic operations.

- Be fully conversant with applicable communications, 
navigation, air traffic control and emergency procedures.

- Obtain the best available maps and hydrographic charts, 
recognizing that many areas are not fully or accurately 
surveyed.

- Consider the question of insurance (subject any 
requirements of national law).

- Design and conduct information and education programmes 
to ensure that all personnel and visitors are aware of 
relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system.

- Provide visitors with a copy of the Guidance for Visitors 
to the Antarctic.

23
B) When in the Antarctic Treaty Area

Organisers and operators should:

· Comply with all requirements of the Antarctic Treaty system, and relevant national laws, and ensure that visitors are aware of requirements that are relevant to them.

· Reconfirm arrangements to visit stations 24-72 hours before their arrival and ensure that visitors are aware of any conditions or restrictions established by the station.

· Ensure that visitors are supervised by a sufficient number of guides who have adequate experience and training in Antarctic conditions and knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty system requirements.

· Monitor environmental impacts of their activities, if appropriate, and advise the competent national authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties of any adverse or cumulative impacts resulting from an activity, but which were not foreseen by their environmental impact assessment.

· Operate ships, yachts, small bo?ts, aircraft, hovercraft, and all other means of transport safely and according to appropriate procedures, including those set out in the Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM).

· Dispose of waste materials in accordance with Annexes III and IV of the Protocol. These annexes prohibit, among other things, the discharge of plastics, oil and noxious
24
substances into the Antarctic Treaty Area; regulate the 
discharge of sewage and food waste; and require the 
removal of most waste from the area.

- Co-operate fully with observers designated by 
Consultative Parties to conduct inspections of stations, 
ships, aircraft and equipment under Article VII of the 
Antarctic Treaty, and those to be designated under 
Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol.

- Co-operate in monitoring programs undertaken in 
accordance with Article 3(2)(d) of the Protocol.

- Maintain a careful and complete record of their 
activities conducted.

C) On completion of the activities

Within three months of the end of the activity, organisers 
and operators should report on the conduct of it to the 
appropriate national authority in accordance with national 
laws and procedures. Reports should include the name, 
details and state of registration each vessel or aircraft 
used and the name of their captain or commander; actual 
itinerary; the number of visitors engaged in the activity; 
places, dates and purposes of landings and the number of 
visitors landed on each occasion; any meteorological 
observations made, including those made as part of the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO) Voluntary Observing Ships 
Scheme; any significant changes in activities and their 
impacts from those predicted before the visit was conducted; 
and action taken in case of emergency.

25
D) ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION

Most Antarctic Treaty Parties can provide through their 
national contact points copies of relevant provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty system and information about national laws 
and procedures.

• The Antarctic Treaty (1959)
• Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972)
• Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (1980)
• Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty (1991)
• Recommendations and other measures adopted under the 
Antarctic Treaty
• Final Reports of Consultative Meetings
• Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System  (1994)
• Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System (in Spanish, 1991 
edition)

26
ATTACHMENT A - INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED IN ADVANCE NOTICE

Organisers should provide the following information to 
the appropriate national authorities in the format 
requested.

1.  name, nationality, and contact details of the organizer;
2.  where relevant, registered name and national registration 
and type of any vessel or aircraft to be used (including 
name of the captain or commander, call-sign, radio 
frequency, INMARSAT number);

3.  intended itinerary including the date of departure and 
places to be visited in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

4.  activities to be undertaken and purpose;

5.  number and qualifications of crew and accompanying guides 
and expedition staff;

6.  estimated number of visitors to be carried;

7.  carrying capacity of vessel;

8.  intended use of vessel;

9.  intended use and type of aircraft;

10. number and type of other vessels, including small boats, 
to be used in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

11. information about insurance coverage;

12. details of equipment to be used, including for safety
27
purposes, and arrangements for self-sufficiency;
13. and other matters required by national laws.

 
                                  28
ANNEX I

Elements for the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat

I. FUNCTIONS

The Secretariat shall perform the functions in support
of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and the
Committee for Environmental Protection which are entrusted
to it by the ATCM.  In particular, the Secretariat shall
under the direction and supervision of the ATCM exercise
the following functions:

1.  Provide assistance to the Parties, in particular to
the host Governments of the ATCMs and other meetings
held under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the
Protocol) in respect of arrangements for and reports
of such meetings.

2.  Provide in close cooperation with the host government
administrative assistance to the Committee for
Environmental Protection in respect of the functions
entrusted to that Committee by the Protocol.

3.  Facilitate and coordinate communications and exchange
of information amongst Parties on all exchanges and
modifications required under the Antarctic Treaty and
the Protocol.

4.  Assist the  ATCM  to  review  information  exchange
requirements with a view to facilitating timely and
29
responsive exchanges with Parties.

5. Based upon information received from Parties, 
establish data-bases relevant to the operation of the 
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol, and ensure 
publication as appropriate.

6. Circulate to the Parties information received from one 
or more Parties of activity in Antarctica by non-
Parties.

7. Ensure the necessary coordination with all elements of 
the Antarctic Treaty System and those international 
bodies with which the ATCM has entered into contact.

8. Maintain the records of the ATCMs and of other 
Meetings under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol 
and facilitate the availability of information about 
the Antarctic Treaty System.

9. Prepare reports on its activities carried out in 
implementing of its functions and present them to the 
ATCM.

10. Perform such other functions relevant to the purpose 
of the Antarctic Treaty and Protocol as may be 
determined by the ATCM.

30
II.  LEGAL STATUS,  PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITY

Article 1
Legal Personality

The Secretariat shall have full legal personality.

Article 2
Privileges and Immunities

1.    The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (the Party on whose territory the Secretariat is located) shall within the scope of the official activity of the Secretariat confer the privileges and immunities upon the Secretariat and its officials set out below.

2.    Except as provided for in paragraph 3, privileges and immunities of the Secretariat and the officials may be waived only by the Executive Secretary. The Executive Secretary has the authority to waive the privileges and immunities in cases where retaining such privileges and immunities would impede the course of justice and where waiver would be without prejudice to the interests of the ATCM.

3.    The immunity of the Executive Secretary may be waived only by the ATCM.  Paragraph 2 applies mutatis mutandis.

Article 3
Scope of privileges and immunities

1.    The Secretariat, its property and assets, shall enjoy immunity from legal process.

31
2. The premises of the Secretariat as well as its archives will be inviolable. Its property and assets will be immune from search, requisition, confiscation and expropriation.

3. The Secretariat shall not be restricted by financial controls, currency regulations or moratoria of any kind that may impede the holding and use of funds.

4. The Secretariat shall be free to transfer its funds or currency from the host country to another country to the extent necessary to the exercise of its functions.

Article 4 
Tax exemptions of the Secretariat

1. The Secretariat, its property, assets and income shall be exempt from all direct taxes and from custom duties on imports and exports in respect of article which are imported or exported for official use of the Secretariat.

2. This will not prevent the Government of the host country from regulating the conditions under which articles imported under exemption may be disposed in its territory.

3. The Secretariat shall*be exempt from indirect taxes on purchases or services of substantial value.

4. The Secretariat shall pay taxes when they represent charges for public utility services.

32
Article 5
Communications

The Secretariat shall enjoy for its official communications the same treatment as that accorded to diplomatic missions.

Article 6
Secretariat Officials

1. The officials of the Secretariat shall enjoy the following privileges and immunities:

a)  immunity from criminal, administrative and civil jurisdiction in respect of acts performed or omissions made by them in their official capacity, except in cases of civil responsibility for damage caused by traffic accidents;

b)  inviolability of all documents;

c)  exemption from national service obligations;

d)  exemption in respect of themselves, their spouses, children and other persons belonging to their household from immigration restrictions and alien registration as accorded to diplomatic agents of foreign States;

e)  the right to import free of duty their furnitures, one car and effects at the time of first taking up their post and to export the same free of duty at the same time of their

                33
leaving the post. Article 4 paragraph 2 shall 
apply mutatis mutandis;

f) the same repatriation facilities in time of 
international crisis as diplomatic agents.

2. Privileges and immunities covered by paragraphs 1 c, 
d, e and f above shall not be accorded to nationals 
and permanent residents of the host State.

3. Provided that the officials of the Secretariat are 
covered by a social security scheme offered or 
approved by the ATCM, they will be exempt from 
compulsory national security schemes.

4. The officials of the Secretariat shall be exempt from 
taxes on their income provided by the Secretariat.

Article 7
Identity Card

1. The ATCM may issue an identity card to secretariat 
staff on official duty. This card will not substitute 
for ordinary travel documents.

2. The card will be issued in accordance with a form to 
be approved by the ATCM.

34
III. INSTRUMENT FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SECRETARIAT

The following options were discussed:

-   establishment of the Secretariat through a 
    Protocol, privileges and immunities to be 
    enshrined in an Annex plus a headquarters 
    agreement;

-   two protocols, one for the establishment, one 
    for the privileges and immunities and a 
    headquarters agreement;

-   a headquarters agreement only.

 
35
