ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO                
                                  XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA                
                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
                                  XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
KYOTO                
11-22 April 1994                
                                  XVIII ATCM/WP 21                
                                  10 April 1994                
                                  Original:English                


THE ORGANIZATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING                
IN ANTARCTICA                


o                
Agenda Item 8a                
(Submitted by SCAR)                



  



[rest of the page is blank]
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Kyoto, Japan
11-22 April 1994

The Organization of Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica

Environmental Monitoring and Data
Agenda Item 9 a

[Submitted by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
on behalf of SCAR and COMNAP]
THE ORGANISATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING IN
ANTARCTICA

    AN ATCM WORKING  PAPER
prepared by SCAR & COMNAP

CONTENTS

ATCM XVIII - AGENDA ITEM 9a

1.  Summary and Recommendations
2.  Introduction
3.  Recomendations of the First Meeting of the Group of Experts
4.  Development of Protocols
5.  Selection of Variables
6.  Measurement Techniques
7.  Resources and Organisation

---------------------------------------------------

1.  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

*  SCAR and COMNAP considers that before significant progress
can be made with any international monitoring scheme major
technical questions must be resolved. A Second Treaty Meeting
of a Group of Experts on Environmental Monitoring would not seem
the best forum at present to resolve these problems.
*  SCAR and COMNAP recommends instead that technical workshops,
convened under the joint auspices of SCAR and COMNAP should
consider the minimum environmental monitoring required to provide
verification of impact assessments, an index of the health of
the Antarctic ecosystems, and how to achieve these in a cost-
effective way
*  SCAR and COMNAP recommends that such workshops be tasked
to agree on the scientific hypotheses underlying any monitoring
program, recommend which key variables should be monitored and
propose  protocols for methodologies, technology, and for
providing a system for quality control of data
*  SCAR and COMNAP further recommends that the workshops should
consider how existing data and programs might contribute to the
new framework and how monitoring data fit into the proposals for
Antarctic data management.
*  the recommendations from such workshops could be considered
either by a Second Group of Experts Meeting or by an ATCM
2.  INTRODUCTION

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty calls, under Articles 3.2.d and 3.2.e, for regular and effective monitoring to allow assessment of the impacts of on-going activities. This must include the verification of predicted impacts as well as facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities (within and outside the Antarctic Treaty area) on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. The same issue was addressed earlier by ATCM Recommendation XV-5.

In response to this ATCM XVI provided further endorsement of the need for a Group of Experts Meeting and provided Terms of Reference for it (Appendix 1).  This Meeting reported to ATCM XVII, which considered the report and recommendations in detail. The Meeting agreed Recommendation XVII-1 which requested SCAR to provide advice on

a) the types of long-term programmes necessary to verify that human activities do not have significant adverse effects on birds, seals and plants, and

b) emission standards to ensure that combustion of fossil fuels and incineration of waste do not contaminate the Antarctic atmosphere, terrestrial, ice, aquatic or marine environments in a way that would compromise their scientific values.

This constitutes a request to advise on a continent-wide monitoring programme which will also incorporate the earlier requirements for localised monitoring as part of verification of predictions of environmental impact assessment.

This document aims to provide a framework for the next step in the development of such an internationally integrated framework for environmental monitoring.  The object of such monitoring should be to provide efficiently, effectively and at minimum cost a continuing index of the health of the Antarctic terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems at both local and regional levels.

3.  RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE FIRST MEETING OF THE GROUP OF EXPERTS

The Meeting made nine Recommendations. Each is followed by a brief summary of actions by SCAR and those still outstanding.

1)      select, in consultation with SCAR and COMNAP, a representative sample of existing facilities and their activities to assess the nature and scale of their environmental impact. SCAR provided COMNAP with a set of criteria on which to select the representative sample.

2)      develop an international data management system based on a co-ordinated data network for the Antarctic, spread amongst Parties to collect, archive and exchange environmental monitoring data. To this end Parties with active Antarctic programmes should identify their existing data sets, current and planned research and monitoring programmes.
This is now part of the SCAR/COMNAP Data Management initiative (see SCAR Report to XVIII ATCM).

3) make such information available to other ATCPs, SCAR and COMNAP by an agreed date to facilitate the establishment of a data system and lead to the production of an Antarctic Data Directory.
This has been subsumed within the SCAR/COMNAP Data Management initiative.

4) establish national scientific advisory boards to provide guidance on scientific questions and assist in the design of data products and means of data access.
This is a matter for Treaty Parties.

5) invite SCAR to investigate and advise on appropriate standards which will ensure that the scientific values of Antarctica are not compromised by the combustion of fossil fuels, or the products of incinerators.
At the request of GOSEAC, SCALOP is conducting a survey of all current incinerators in the Treaty area. In addition GOSEAC is investigating current emission standards and best operating practices used in Europe and North America for incinerators.

6) invite SCAR to provide advice on the types of long-term monitoring programmes necessary to verify that tourism, scientific research and other activities do not have an adverse impact on the Antarctic flora and fauna.
GOSEAC has begun to address this question and is seeking assistance from other scientific groups within SCAR.

7) invite SCAR to consider and advise on the need to assess and monitor the levels of marine pollution and the establishment of base-line surveillance programmes for the seas of the Antarctic Treaty area.
Advice is being sought from several relevant groups within SCAR and from non-Antarctic organisations.

8) ensure environmental monitoring under the Protocol be closely co-ordinated, where appropriate, with activities within CCAMLR and IWC to complement the ecosystem-related research and monitoring activities undertaken by these groups.
Any relevant proposals will be passed to CCAMLR and IWC for comment at a draft stage.

9) convene a meeting of technical experts on environmental monitoring to examine in greater detail the issues of: design of monitoring programmes, scientific protocols for monitoring, standardisation and quality assurance, applicable technology, and data management.
This has not yet been addressed and constitutes the key area to be considered by a workshop.

4. DEVELOPMENT OF PROTOCOLS

Monitoring, as undertaken in inhabited areas of the globe, is
normally targeted at determining the extent of damage, tracing 
the source of damage or ensuring that legal activities do not 
become illegal by exceeding legally determined levels of 
pollution. Almost always there are economic and social 
considerations involved both in selecting the variables, 
implementing the monitoring and enforcing the actions arising 
from the data collected. In the Antarctic context national 
economic and social considerations are supplanted  by 
international agreements to protect the existing integrity of 
ecosystems, making it much more difficult to decide what to 
measure and how.

There already exist a variety of baseline data for certain 
pollutants measured in Antarctic animals and plants, as well as 
in the sea and in the air. Such data are clearly invaluable in 
assessing the rate and significance of change. In developing a 
more comprehensive framework for Antarctic monitoring a number 
of general features, which underlie all field measurements of 
pollution or damage, need to be recognised.

    a. the importance of any pollutant results only from the 
frequency and distribution of damaging concentrations, not from 
its mere presence in the environment.

    b. the isolated occurrence of acute damage should not lead 
to assumptions about the distribution of chronic damage.

    c. there may be a latent period between exposure and the 
detection of damage, which may result in damage to receptors 
remote from the original point of discharge, making a cause and 
effect relationship difficult to substantiate.

    d. in deciding if any pollutant has caused or will cause 
biological damage some quantifiable and deleterious effect must 
be describable for a target organism.

In the expectation of limited resources for monitoring it will 
also be necessary to prioritise activities by determining those 
key areas where expert advice identifies the highest level of 
risk. This should allow routine measurements of levels of known 
pollutants in order to provide global baseline data to be 
considered alongside more localised measurements of pollution 
attributable to the activities of research stations.

ATCPs have already recognised that monitoring must be firmly 
based on scientific hypotheses and that it will be possible to 
monitor only a limited number of variables in a limited number 
of localities. To maximise the effectiveness and provide the 
continental integration of data prior agreement on protocols is 
necessary.

It would be the principal task of technical workshops convened 
jointly by SCAR and COMNAP to construct a scientific framework 
of hypotheses within which specific measurements could be made. 
The present task identified by ATCM is to assess if tourism, 
scientific research and other activities are having a detrimental 
effect on the Antarctic flora and fauna. Undertaking such an 
assessment carries with it the implicit assumption that 
sufficient data already exist for Antarctic ecosystems to make 
it possible to recognise damage. This would need to be confirmed 
before monitoring is undertaken. There are also other important 
design criteria that would need to be satisfied in any general
scheme for Antarctic environmental monitoring to ensure 
scientific credibility.

Monitoring implies that once detrimental change is detected some 
form of corrective action will be instituted. At a local level 
this presumably will fall to the national operator. At the 
regional or continental level the mechanism for this does not 
presently exist but it is assumed that it will involve action by 
the Committee for Environmental Protection, once established.

Possible assumptions which might be tested are:
a. although some human activity at present undertaken as 
scientific research or in support of scientific research may 
cause localised pollution or limited damage to a terrestrial or 
aquatic ecosystem no unique communities are endangered
b. the principal sources of pollution lie outside the Antarctic 
Treaty Area
c. local sources of pollution can be effectively limited by the 
rigorous application of the Protocol on Environmental Protection

The development of any comprehensive monitoring scheme would of 
necessity involve marine organisms and would be most effectively 
progressed in discussion with CCAMLR.

5. SELECTION OF VARIABLES

The selection of the number and type of variables is best 
conducted by independent scientists in discussion with national 
operators in an international forum. However, some guidance on 
how to assess the most appropriate ones can be given.

The selection process could recognise that there need to be two 
classes:
        primary or core variables that apply regardless of habitat or 
site, and secondary variables that reflect specific features of 
local importance. Core variables to have a value for a wide 
range of sites and habitats whilst secondary variables are 
considered as only locally important. More difficult to measure 
than individual impacts but no less important is the summation 
of impacts and their relationship to ecosystem functionality. 
SCAR has previously proposed that one way forward in this field 
is to define valued ecosystem components (which could be 
considered the core and secondary variables) and, using a score 
for magnitude and relative importance on an interactions matrix, 
select those variables which appear to show the greatest impacts.

6. MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES

SCAR considers that expert scientists in discussion with national 
operators the best way forward is to define and agree the 
measurements to be made and the methodology associated with each 
type of determination. There is much of value to be learnt from 
the present development of monitoring in the Arctic together with
techniques already in use in other regions. There already exist measurement protocols prescribed by CCAMLR for monitoring the impacts of fishing on bird populations. Researchers are at present actively developing methods to allow quantification of human disturbance of birds and physical damage to vegetation. Independent researchers have already begun to develop unofficial networks to co-ordinate hydrocarbon and pesticide monitoring.

There are almost no data on the effects of chemical pollutants on Antarctic species or ecosystems. The Antarctic food chains are unique, both on land and in the sea.  This makes it impossible to transfer temperate data and models of toxicity directly to Antarctica where several of the trophic levels may be missing, and comparable organisms live longer and grow much more slowly in the Antarctic than in temperate regions.

Existing projects are characterising the levels and distribution of a wide variety of chemical compounds in the Antarctic environment but almost no linkage to biological effects has yet been established. Data on the source, uptake, accumulation, and persistence of these compounds must be combined with experimental data for critical dose levels for specific biological effects before any compound can definitely be characterised as damaging.

Two parallel approaches can be suggested as a first step in resolving this problem. First, the initial monitoring should be limited to a very small number of compounds which are known to have deleterious biological effects elsewhere in the world. Possible candidates here would be heavy metals (eg. cadmium, lead, zinc, copper), long-lived organic toxins (eg. PCB, DDE, Lindane, Chlordane) and short-lived combustion products (eg. polycyclic aromatics).

Second, the monitoring should be based on key organisms which occupy different trophic levels and are widely distributed throughout the Antarctic. Experimental studies on these would be needed to determine critical thresholds for specific effects.

The quality of data collected and their inter-comparability are of considerable importance in any monitoring framework. There is a need to provide for international standards and inter-laboratory calibration schemes, especially for chemical compounds.

7. RESOURCES AND ORGANISATION

The proposals in this document are based on a clear recognition that funding for environmental monitoring will be very limited, and that any monitoring will only be worthwhile if it is scientifically based and critically focussed. Nevertheless these proposals amount to a very far reaching and intensive investigation before monitoring begins.

Important features in any international monitoring programme are standardisation, calibration of instrumentation, quality control
of data and effective international collaboration. Mechanisms to 
encourage this will need to be agreed.

Existing data and national monitoring programmes have yet to be 
critically assessed to determine their value. The SCAR/COMNAP 
Data Management initiative will assist in providing guidelines 
on how to handle environmental monitoring data.

•
•
Appendix 1

Terms of Reference for First Group of Experts Meeting in Buenos Aires

To consider monitoring for the following purposes:-

to obtain a regular and verifiable record of activities and environmental data necessary to:
 * assess and quantify impacts of activities, including impacts predicted in the course of environmental impact assessments
 * provide early warning of negative impacts
 * identify preventative or remedial measures needed to reduce or eliminate adverse impacts
 * plan similar activities in the future

Topics to be considered by this Meeting of Experts

* identification of the nature and possible significance of adverse impacts on the values of Antarctica, as set forth in Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which might require monitoring
 * identification of activities, environmental and other data required to detect and monitor possible impacts and to distinguish these impacts from natural variability
 * identification of methodologies and technologies available for monitoring (especially inexpensive and automated systems)
 * identification of steps needed to create national and co-operative data systems which would provide for collection, quality control, archiving, evaluation, exchange and retrieval of environmental data
 * identification of existing relevant data sets, including baseline data repositories, as well as programmes which generate these data

25 March 1994
