ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

KYOTO
11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 8
10 April 1994
Original: English

PRACTICAL PREPARATIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF THE TREATY SECRETARIAT

Agenda Item 8A

(Submitted by Australia)
ATCM XVIII/WP8
10 April 1994
Original: English

Working Paper - Practical Preparations for the Establishment of
the Treaty Secretariat:
    Item 7(a) Organisational Aspects
(submitted by Australia)
Working Paper - Practical Preparations for the Establishment of 
the Treaty Secretariat:
(Item 7(a))

Parties made good progress at ATCM XVIII with in-principle 
agreement on elements for the Antarctic Treaty secretariat (Annex 
E to Final Report).

In taking this matter forward it would be useful for Parties 
to consider the following items with a view to making further 
practical preparations for the establishment of the secretariat:

    (a) Budget for secretariat;
    (b) Priority tasks for the secretariat/possible time-frame;
    (c) Procedures for appointing an Executive-Secretary;
    (d) Legal Status of secretariat;

(a) Budget for Secretariat.

AT ATCM XVII Parties proposed that there be equal cost-sharing 
between ATCPs for a period of three years after the establishment 
of the secretariat and that during that period ATCPs would consider 
equitable contributions.

    The budget would need to be formulated on the basis of staff 
numbers and functions proposed at ATCM XVII, and should reflect 
Parties' indicated preference for a low-cost operation. Thought 
might be given to the budget of the CCAMLR secretariat, bearing in 
mind, however, that the Treaty secretariat would be smaller and 
would not involve the costs of supporting annual meetings. 
Continuing rotation of ATCM hosting arrangements will be more 
effective than having the secretariat responsible for organising 
and funding ATCMs, though the secretariat would assist the meetings 
of the ATCM and CEP.

1
The CCAMLR secretariat, which involves the equivalent of 12 
full-time staff (of which 4 professionals), and an annual budget of 
$US  1.2 million (of which members contributions are $US 0.98 
million, with basic contributions at $US 43,834). A twenty-sixth 
portion of that budget would involve an annual contribution of $US 
46,226). On the basis of the above an annual contribution to a 
Treaty secretariat would be a little less. In due course, Parties 
would need to consider a mechanism for review and audit of the 
budget.

The host government should arrange for the provision at 
nominal rental of suitable permanent premises and for supply of 
public services on terms no less favourable than those enjoyed by 
the government, as under the CCAMLR Headquarters agreement. The 
host nation should also arrange for tax-free status to the 
secretariat and its staff (see legal status and immunities).

(b)    Priority Tasks for a Secretariat (consistent with 
particular functions described at Annex E, ATCM XVII, Final Report)

1.    Provide advice and assistance to the host Governments of 
the ATCMs and other meetings held under the Antarctic Treaty and 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(the Protocol) in respect of arrangements for and reports of such 
meetings.

      · with host government, provide support for the ATCM or 
expert meetings

2.    Provide administrative assistance to the Committee for 
Environmental Protection in respect of the functions entrusted to 
that Committee by the Protocol.

2
On the basis of guidance from the ATCM (see Agenda Item 6 (b))
the secretariat should:

    with host government, provide support for CEP meetings
(annual and intercessional)

    establish effective mechanisms for co-ordinating and
facilitating communications with the Parties on all exchanges and
notifications required under the Protocol

    establish data-bases relevant to the operation of the
Protocol

    establish effective, co-operative links with relevant
Antarctic scientific, logistical and technical agencies and
instruments and with international agencies or instruments which
have an interest in the protection of the Antarctic environment.

3. Facilitate communications and exchange of information
amongst Contracting Parties and components of the Antarctic Treaty
system.

    assist the ATCM to review existing information exchange
requirements with a view to facilitating more timely and responsive
(rather than retrospective) exchanges with Parties, compatible with
the new advance planning requirements set out under the Protocol
and the new annual meeting cycle

    develop an ongoing mechanism for ensuring appropriate
exchanges, including annual calendar, circulars on key pre-season
notifications, and post-season reporting

3
·      assemble and communicate data on tourist and non-
governmental activity, and assist the CEP with relevant data on 
areas visited, impacts, and perceived cumulative impacts

·      advise Parties of activity in Antarctica by non-Parties,
including details of any contacts with non-Parties (as CCAMLR
secretariat does in relation to non-Convention fishing)

·      establish effective and co-operative links with Antarctic
scientific, logistic and technical agencies and institution with a
view to promoting effective exchanges

4. Maintain the records of the ATCMs and of other Meetings
under the Antarctic Treaty and Protocol.

·      Revise, up-date and disseminate Antarctic Treaty Handbook

·      Assist the ATCM in examining the status of Treaty
Recommendations (Agenda Item 7(d))

·      Assist the depository to review and report on the status
of Parties' acceptance of Treaty Recommendation and instruments.

5. Facilitate the availability of information about the
Antarctic Treaty system.

·      Establish co-operative effective links with relevant UN
specialised agencies and other international organisations having
a scientific, technical or environmental interest in or
international instruments which have bearing on Antarctica

·      with guidance from the ATCM and the CEP make available to
such and any other agencies information available under Article III
4
of the Treaty about scientific research, information on the Meetings and resolutions of ATCM and its instruments

      with guidance from the ATCM and CEP prepare publications 
providing information on the Antarctica Treaty and instruments and 
organise information seminars for international participation

Possible Time-frame for Secretariat

In the context of the above-identified priority tasks, the 
following is a possible time-frame for a modest but essential 
workplan for the secretariat:

YEAR ONE - (following agreement and appointment of 
Executive/Secretary)

      establish operations (including proposals for budget)
      prepare ATCM and Treaty support mechanisms, procedures, 
workplan
      review and orchestrate information exchange mechanisms 
(science, environment, logistics, tourism notifications, Article 
III exchanges)
      establish liaison arrangements with relevant 
international agencies

YEAR TWO

      review of Recommendations
      up-date Handbook
      review and orchestrate data collection arrangements

(c) Procedures for Appointing an Executive Secretary

5
In preparation for the establishment of the secretariat it will be useful to agree on procedures for appointing the Executive Secretary.

The election of the Executive Secretary could be along the lines of the CCAMLR arrangement (paras 29 - 30 of CCAMLR VI Final Report attached), but preferably simplified. Tenure might be for four years, which may be renewable for one further term of four years.

The main variations to those procedures would involve:

    the incoming host government of the ATCM at the time a decision is made on the secretariat shall co-ordinate arrangements on behalf of ATCPs, including the circulation to Parties of the text of the advertisement and selection criteria, decision on deadlines for applications etc

    ATCPs would be able to nominate up to two candidates

    the incoming host government of the ATCM would be responsible for receiving applications forwarded by Parties, receiving and recording votes

    ATCPs could nominate another ATCP representative as observer

    The CCAMLR secretariat could be invited to provide technical advice and assistance on this process

On the basis of the CCAMLR process, Parties should give consideration at ATCM XVIII to developing procedures and selection criteria for the appointment of an Executive Secretary.

6
In determining appointments thought will need to be given to 
achieving a balance of the different interests and responsibilities 
of Treaty Parties under the Antarctic Treaty system.

(d)  Legal Status of Secretariat:

At Annex E to ATCM XVII Parties proposed that the secretariat 
and staff should enjoy, in the territory of the host state, such 
legal capacity as may be necessary to perform their functions and 
enjoy the privileges and immunities to be developed with the host 
state. A decision on privileges and immunities will depend on a 
decision about the seat. Such decision could usefully take account 
of the arrangement for legal personality and immunities set out at 
Articles 3, 4 and 5 of the CCAMLR Headquarters agreement 
(attached).

ARTICLE 3

LEGAL PERSONALITY

The Commission has legal personality. It has, in particular, 
the capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of movable and 
immovable property, and to institute and be a party to legal 
proceedings.

ARTICLE 4

PREMISES

1. The Headquarters of the Commission shall be inviolable and 
shall be under the full authority of the Commission.

7
2. The Government shall arrange for the provision at nominal 
rental to the Commission of suitable permanent premises in Hobart, 
Tasmania, Australia.

3. The Government shall take all appropriate steps to protect 
the Headquarters of the Commission against any intrusion of damage 
and to prevent any impairment of its dignity.

4. The Government shall arrange for the Headquarters to be 
supplied by the appropriate authorities with available public 
services, such as electricity, water, sewerage, gas, mail, 
telephone, telegraph, drainage, collection of refuse and fire 
protection, on terms no less favourable than those enjoyed by the 
Government.

5. The Commission shall make known to the Government the need 
for any changes to the location or extent of its permanent premises 
or archives and of any temporary occupation of premises for the 
performance of its official activities. Where any premises other 
than those arranged under Article 4(2) for this Agreement are used 
or occupied by the Commission of the performance of its official 
activities, such premises shall, with the concurrence of the 
Government, be accorded the status of premises of the Commission. 
Where any permanent or temporary changes are made to the premises 
of the Commission in accordance with this paragraph, any additional 
premises occupied by the Commission shall not necessarily be 
provided by the Government at nominal rental.

6. Without prejudice to the terms of this Agreement, the 
Commission shall not permit the Headquarters of the Commission to 
become a refuge from justice for persons avoiding arrest or service 
of legal process or against whom an order of extradition or 
deportation has been issued.

8
7. The appropriate authorities may enter the Headquarters to carry out their duties only with the consent of the Executive Secretary and under the conditions agreed by him. The Executive Secretary's consent shall be deemed to have been given in the case of fire or other occurrence which may require immediate protective action.

ARTICLE 5

IMMUNITIES OF THE COMMISSION

1. Except as otherwise provided in the Convention or in this Agreement, the activities of the Commission in Australia shall be governed by the laws of Australia.

2. Within the scope of its official activities the Commission and its property, premises and assets shall have immunity from suit and other legal process except:

      (a) to the extent that the Commission expressly waives such immunity from such suit and other legal process in a particular case;

      (b) in respect of any contract for the supply of goods or services and any loan or other transaction for the provision of finance and any guarantee or indemnity in respect of any such transaction or of any other financial obligation;

      (c) in respect of a civil action by a third party for death, damage or personal injury arising from an accident caused by a motor vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Commission;

9
(d) in respect of a motor vehicle offence involving a motor 
vehicle belonging to, or operated on behalf of, the Commission;

(e) in the event of the attachment, pursuant to the final 
order of a court of law, of the salaries, wages or other emoluments 
owed by the Commission to a staff member of the Commission or to an 
expert;

(f) in respect of a counter-claim directly connected with 
proceedings initiated by the Commission; and

(g) in respect of the enforcement of any arbitration award 
made under Articles 20(3) or 25 of this Agreement.

3. The Commission's property, premises and assets, wherever 
situated, shall have immunity from any form of restrictions or 
controls such as requisition, confiscation, expropriation or 
attachment. They shall also be immune from any form of 
administrative or judicial constraint provided that motor vehicles 
belonging to or operated on behalf of the Commission shall not be 
immune from administrative or judicial constraint when temporarily 
necessary in connection with the prevention of, and investigation 
into, accidents involving such motor vehicles. These immunities 
shall cease to apply in relation to property,, premises and assets 
which have been abandoned by the Commission for a period in excess 
of twelve months.

10
ARTICLE 6

ARCHIVES

The archives of the Commission shall be inviolable wherever 
they are.

ARTICLE 7

FLAG AND EMBLEM

The Commission shall be entitled to display its flag and 
emblem on the premises and means of transport of the Commission and 
of the Executive Secretary.

11
