ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE            

                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO            
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

                                  XVIII ATCM/WP 37
                                  22 April 1994
                                  Original:English

DRAFT FINAL REPORT OF            
THE XVIIIth ANTARCTIC TREATY MEETING            

(Working paper submitted by the Secretariat)
Draft Final Report
of the XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(1) Pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty,
Representatives of the Consultative Parties (Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany,
India, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, the Russian Federation, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America, and Uruguay) met in
Kyoto from 11 to 22 April 1994, for the purpose of exchanging
information, holding consultations, and considering and
recommending to their Governments measures in furtherance of the
principles and objectives of the Treaty.

(2) The Meeting was also attended by Delegations from Contracting
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty which are not Consultative Parties
(Austria, Denmark, Greece, Czech Republic and Switzerland).

(3) A preparatory meeting with Embassy Representatives was held in
Tokyo on December 2nd, 1993 with the purpose of finalizing the
provisional agenda. Information on the Meeting was distributed to
delegates (XVIII ATCM/INFO 1).

(4) The Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the President of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) were invited to
attend the Meeting as observers in accordance with Rule 2 of the
Revised Rules of Procedure of 1992.

(5) Pursuant to paragraph 25 of the Final Report of the XVIIth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Chairman of the Council
of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) was also
invited to attend the Meeting to present a report on the activities
of COMNAP, on the same basis as Recommendation XIII-2.

(6) Pursuant to Rule 38 of the Revised Rules of Procedure of 1992,
several international organizations having a scientific or
technical interest in Antarctica were invited to designate experts
to attend the XVIIIth ATCM and to assist in discussions of specific
agenda items. The following organizations took part in the
proceedings: UNEP, ASOC, IHO, IUCN, WMO, IAATO, PATA.

(7) IMO, IOC and WTO were also invited to attend but were unable
to take part.

1
(8) The Meeting was formally opened by Mr. Shozo Azuma 
Parliamentary Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan. The 
opening address is reproduced at Annex...

(9) Ambassador Yoichi Yamaguchi, of the Japanese Delegation, was 
elected Chairman of the Meeting. Ambassador Yamaguchi thanked the 
Delegations for having elected him as Chairman.

(10) The Chairman proposed that Mr. Toshiki Kanamori and Mr. 
Hiroshi Oka, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be appointed as 
Executive Secretary and Deputy Executive Secretary of the Meeting 
respectively. This proposal was adopted.

(11) In order to save time and to follow the practice of previous 
Meetings, the Meeting agreed in principle that Delegations would 
not deliver opening statements, but, instead, provide their texts 
for circulation and inclusion in the Final Report. The texts of 
the opening statements are reproduced in Annex...

(12) Several Heads of Delegation made statements in which they 
expressed their hope for the early entry into force of the Protocol 
and explained their points of interest with regard to the XVIIIth 
ATCM.

(13) The delegation of Chile proposed that, beginning at the XIXth 
ATCM, part of the first plenary session be dedicated to short 
declarations of Heads of Delegations who expressed a desire to make 
statements. It was so decided.

(14) The following Agenda was adopted:

1. Opening of the Meeting
2. Election of Officers
3. Opening Addresses
4. Adoption of Agenda
5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports
    a) under Recommendation XIII-2:
        i) the Chairman of the Commission for the 
           Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
           Resources (CCAMLR);

       ii) the Head of the Delegation of the United 
           Kingdom in his capacity as Representative of 
           the Depositary Government of the Convention

2
for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS);
iii) the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
iv) the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty;
v) the Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in the United Nations;
vi) the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP);
b)  in relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty; IHO, WMO, ASOC, IUCN, UNEP.

6.  Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
    a)  Implementation
    b)  Committee for Environmental Protection
    c)  Liability Annex
    d)  Relations with other environmental treaties

7.  Tourism and non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

8.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
    a)  Organizational Aspects. Secretariat
    b)  Public Availability of Documents
    c)  Examination of Recommendations
    d)  Exchange of Information

9.  Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty
    a)  Inspections during 1992/93 and 1993/94 and those planned for 1994/95
    b)  Inspection Checklists

3
10. Environmental Monitoring and Data

      a) Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human 
         Activities in the Antarctic;
      b) Global Change;
      c) Data Management
      d) Regulation of the extraction, use and custody of 
         scientific sample obtained in the Antarctic 
         expedition.

11. Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment.

      a) Implementation of procedures for IEEs and CEEs;
      b) Examination of CEEs produced during 1992/93.

12. The Antarctic Protected Area System

      a) Revised management plans for SPAs and SSSIs;
      b) Historic sites and monuments;
      c) Review and implementation of the System.

13. International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic 
      Cooperation

14. Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

15. Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the 
      Southern Ocean

16. Questions Related to the exercise of Jurisdiction in 
      Antarctica

17. Preparation of the XIXth Consultative Meeting

      a) Date and Place of the XIXth Consultative Meeting
      b) Invitations of International and non-Governmental 
         Organizations.

      c) Preparation of the Agenda of the XIXth Consultative 
         Meeting

18. Any Other Business

19. Adoption of the Report
      4
20. Closing of the Meeting

(15) In accordance with the Chairman's suggestion:

      a) discussion of items 1 to 6 (a), (general 
         presentation) and 17 to 20 took place in plenary 
         session.

      b) the remaining items were remitted to two Working 
         Groups:

         i) Working Group I under the Chairmanship of 
            Ambassador Dietrich Granow of Germany 
            discussed items 6, 7, 8 and 16.

         ii) Working Group II, under the Chairmanship of 
             Dr. Roberto Puceiro Ripoll of Uruguay, 
             discussed items 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.

Item 5

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

      a) Reports under Recommendation XIII-2

(16) Pursuant to Recommendation XIII-2, the Meeting received 
      reports from the following:

         i) the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation 
            of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

         ii) the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in 
             his capacity as Representative of the Depositary 
             Government of the Convention for the Conservation 
             of Antarctic Seals (CCAS);

         iii) the President of the Scientific Committee on 
              Antarctic Research (SCAR);

         iv) the Head of the Delegation of the United States of 
             America in his capacity as Representative of the 
             Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty;

         v) the Permanent Representative of Italy to the United 
            Nations in New York in  his capacity as the

5
Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in 
the United Nations;

vi)    the Chairman of the Council of the Managers of 
           National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP).

(17) The report of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
      Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) was presented, on behalf of its 
      Chairman, by its Executive Secretary Mr. Estêban de Salas.  The 
      report is appended at Annex...

(18) The Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom, Dr. Michael 
      Richardson,  in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary 
      Government of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
      Seals (CCAS),  presented a report.  The report is appended at 
      Annex...

(19) The report of the President of the Scientific Committee for 
      Antarctic Research (SCAR) was presented, by Dr. Richard Laws.  The 
      report is appended at Annex...

(20) The Head of the Delegation of the United States, Mr. R. Tucker 
      Scully, presented a report in his capacity as Representative of the 
      Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty.  He reported that 
      there are now 42 Parties to the Antarctic Treaty as a result of the 
      Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic having succeeded to 
      Czechoslovakia.  He also reported that Ecuador, France, Peru, 
      Norway, Argentina, Australia, Sweden and the Netherlands had become 
      Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
      Antarctic Treaty since ATCM XVII.  Tables covering the status of 
      the Recommendations adopted pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic 
      Treaty and the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on 
      Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty are attached at 
      Annex...

(21) The Head of the Delegation of Italy, Ambassador Giuseppe 
      Jacoangeli,  in his capacity as Representative of the Convenor of 
      the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in New York, presented a 
      report on developments on the Question of Antarctica in the United 
      Nations since Italy assumed the role of the Convenor of the Group. 
      The report is appended at Annex....

(22) The report of the Chairman of the Council of Managers of 
      National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP),  was presented, on behalf of 
      its Chairman, by its Executive Secretary, Mr Alfred Fowler.  The 
      report is at Annex...

(23) The Head of Delegation of Australia in his capacity as 
      Representative of the Depositary Government for the Convention on 
      the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), 

6
informed the Meeting that Ukraine is forwarding to the Depositary 
an instrument of succession to the Convention.

(24) The Meeting expressed its appreciation for the reports which 
provided an important contribution to understanding developments 
affecting the Antarctic Treaty System.  Their presentation also 
provided an opportunity for delegations of the Treaty Parties to 
make general observations on the operation of the system.

(25) In this regard, attention was drawn to the important 
accomplishments of CCAMLR in the field of conservation and 
ecosystem management. Emphasis was also placed on the important 
work being undertaken by SCAR and COMNAP, as well as on the need to 
strengthen coordination of their work with that of the ATCMs, 
particularly in light of the move to annual meetings.

(26) It was pointed out that the suggestions made by SCALOP (the 
SCAR/COMNAP Standing Committee on Logistics and Operations) for 
referral of items to the International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
needed further consideration by the Treaty Parties.

b)    Reports in relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic 
Treaty.

(27) The Meeting also received reports from a number of experts 
representing international organizations having a scientific or 
technical interest in Antarctica that had been invited to attend 
and to assist in the discussion of specific agenda items.

(28) The Representative of the International Hydrographic 
Organization (IHO) Mr. Hishida, submitted a report to the Meeting 
concerning the recently established permanent Working Group on 
Hydrographic Cooperation in Antarctica and its first meeting in 
Valparaiso, Chile, which was held in July 1993.  The report is at 
Annex...

(29) To follow up the report of IHO, the delegation of Chile, as 
representative of the host country of the IHO Conference on 
Hydrographic Charting of Antarctica, pointed out that the existing 
hydrographic charts, which are incomplete and inaccurate in places 
are sometimes the cause for maritime accidents and therefore 
stressed the need to support IHO undertaking to draw accurate 
hydrographic charts.

(30) The representative of the World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO), Dr. Neil A. Streten, presented a report to the Meeting on 
the activities of WMO in relation to Antarctica.  The report is at 
Annex...

(31) The Representative of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean 
Coalition (ASOC), Mr. James Barnes, presented a report to the

7
meeting on the activities of ASOC in relation to Antarctica. The 
report is at Annex...

(32) The Representative of IUCN - The World Conservation Union, Ms. 
Catherine Wallace, presented a report to the Meeting on the 
activities of IUCN in relation to Antarctica. The report is at 
Annex...

(33) The Representative of United Nations Environment Programme, 
Ms. Philomene Verlaan, presented a report to the Meeting on the 
activities of UNEP in relation to Antarctica. The report is at 
Annex...

Item 6 

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

     a) Implementation

(34) The Meeting had an intensive exchange of views on the 
implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. The Parties reported on the progress they had 
achieved with regard to their ratification process including the 
preparation of national legislation to implement the Protocol and 
its Annexes. A number of Parties indicated that the legislative 
process in their countries was already well advanced and gives hope 
that enactment of their legislation might be expected this year or 
in 1995.

(35) The discussion on implementation focused mainly on two key 
issues: The question of how to enhance the Protocol's practical 
implementation pending its entry into force and the need to clarify 
interpretation of the Protocol's provisions.

(36) There was general agreement that the practical implementation 
of the Protocol should be advanced as rapidly as possible and some 
proposals were made on how to assist this process.

(37) As for the interpretation of the Protocol, some believed there 
was a need for clarification of the meaning of certain provisions. 
The Meeting acknowledged that it was desirable to harmonize 
interpretation where possible.  At the same time, however, it 
recognized that uniform application of the Protocol is not possible 
given different national legislative approaches.

(38) The Meeting acknowledged that exchange of information on 
domestic legislation among Consultative Parties is helpful to both 
the interpretation and implementation issues, thereby facilitating 
the Protocol's entering into force.  In this context, the Meeting 
                                                                 8
expressed gratitude to those Parties who made copies of their 
domestic legislation available to other Parties.

b) Committee for Environmental Protection in Antarctica

(39) Under this item, three Working Papers (XVIII ATCM/WP 4, XVIII 
ATCM/WP 7 and XVIII ATCM/WP 10) were presented by Chile, Australia 
and France respectively. Following informal contacts between 
participants the Meeting noted that since the XVI ATCM and the 
Final Act of the XIth Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative 
Meeting, the ATCPs have recognized the necessity for preparatory 
arrangements pending the entry into force of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection.

(40) At the same time, the ATCPs are conscious that the entry into 
force of the Protocol will have significant implications for the 
conduct of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. The Protocol 
sets forth comprehensive environmental protection measures, and 
incorporates provisions to improve the effectiveness and 
responsiveness of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative mechanism, 
including the operation of the consultative meetings and the 
coordination of the components of the Antarctic Treaty system. It 
provides also for the establishment of a Committee on Environmental 
Protection to which SCAR and CCAMLR are observers. COMNAP would 
also be able to make an important contribution to the work of the 
Committee.

(41) The next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting - ATCM XIX in 
Seoul - should be organized, so far as possible, to reflect the 
Protocol's objectives of improving the way in which the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative mechanism works. This approach would be 
designed both to ensure productive results at ATCM XIX itself, and 
to anticipate and prepare for the entry into force of the Protocol, 
including in particular the establishment of the Committee on 
Environmental Protection.

(42) To this end, the Meeting took the following decisions with 
regard to preparatory arrangements for the implementation of 
Article 12 of the Protocol in connection with the programme of work 
of ATCM XIX:

A.  Those items on the agenda of ATCM XIX which, under 
Article 12 of the Protocol, would be dealt with by the 
Committee for Environmental Protection, should be 
considered by a Transitional Environmental Working Group 
(TEWG) of the XIXth ATCM reporting to its plenary.

B.  The TEWG should meet during the first week of ATCM XIX so 
that its advice and recommendations may be considered by 
the plenary during the second week.

9
C.  Representatives of the other components of the Antarctic Treaty System, SCAR and CCAMLR, as well as COMNAP, and other expert bodies as may be invited under Agenda item 17, should participate in the detailed work of the TEWG to:

1)  provide the results of any specific work requested of them at the present ATCM;

2)  identify ways in which they could contribute to the work of future ATCMs; and

3)  provide general advice within their competence.

D.  In view of the above, it would be desirable if COMNAP's annual meeting be held immediately before the ATCM.

E.  As a consequence of B above, on the first Monday of ATCM XIX the plenary meeting would be limited to the election of the Chairman of the meeting, adoption of the agenda, allocation of agenda items to working groups, timetable, appointment of chairmen of working groups, and such other procedural decisions as may be necessary for the conduct of the business of the ATCM.  The ceremonial plenary would be held on the second Monday.

F.  Working Groups I and II would not meet during the first week, but informal groups of legal experts would meet during that period to discuss legal issues of liability and the status and privileges and immunities of the Secretariat.

(43) The Meeting also considered the question of the submission and circulation of TEWG documents. It was agreed that the same consideration should be extended to all ATCM documents, and that the issue should be dealt with under item 17.

    c) Liability Annex

(44) The Meeting took note of the work of the legal experts group that was created at the XVII ATCM under the Chairmanship of Germany.

(45) On the basis of a working paper (XVIII ATCM/WP2), submitted by Germany, a comprehensive report was given by the Chairman of the legal experts group, Professor R. Wolfrum. This was followed by an exchange of views.

10
(46) The Meeting extended in accordance with the recommendation 
IV-24 the mandate of the legal experts group and agreed to convene 
a further meeting of that group in the period before the XIXth ATCM 
in 1995.

(47) The Meeting welcomed an offer made by Netherlands to the group 
of experts to host an intersessional meeting of this group in the 
Hague.

(48) The Meeting also noted that since the admission of observers 
to the experts group would require unanimous agreement, 
the participation of the next meeting of the group would be on the 
same basis as that of the previous group.

(49) The meeting asked Germany to continue to chair the experts 
group under Professor Wolfrum.

(50) With regard to future deliberations on liability, the Meeting 
agreed that the Chairman should set out the priorities of the 
experts group, taking into account the need both to concentrate on 
essential topics and to consider other issues.

d) Relations with other Environmental Treaties

(51) The Meeting considered a Working Paper submitted by Chile 
(XVIII ATCM/WP 31) on the relationship between the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and other 
international agreements of a global scope. The Working Paper 
identified a number of International Agreements that applied or 
were relevant to the Antarctic Treaty area and to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

(52) These include the 1989 Convention on the Control of 
Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (the 
Basel Convention), the 1992 Convention on Biodiversity, the 1992 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the 1985 
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and its 
1987 Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (the 
Montreal Protocol), the 1972 Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matters; and the 
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 
and its Protocol of 1978 (MARPOL 73/78). Attention was also drawn 
to the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention.

(53) The Working Paper also noted the potential relevance for the 
Antarctic Treaty System of the ongoing development of efforts among 
the relevant States to protect the environment of the Arctic.

(54) The Delegation of Chile stressed in this context the need for 
future contacts between the Arctic and Antarctic regions in matters 
of environmental protection.

11
(55) The Meeting agreed it was important to ensure proper coordination between global environmental agreements and the operation of the Antarctic Treaty system and, in particular, of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The meeting agreed that the requirements for coordination were specific to each of the agreements and that the primary responsibility for ensuring such coordination lay with the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty that were Parties to the other agreements.

Item 7

Tourism and Non-Governmental Activity

(56) The Meeting received Working Papers from Australia (XVIII ATCM WP 9), Chile and France (ATCM XVIII WP 11) and the United Kingdom (XVIII ATCM WP 18, 19, 20). There were a number of information papers on this item. Some of those described the increasing volume of tourist and non-governmental activity since ATCM XVII.

(57) The Meeting agreed that there would be benefit in using Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) in some cases to ensure that tourism and non-governmental activities do not interfere with scientific research or have adverse effects on the Antarctic environment. It was suggested that Parties should take this into account when proposing management plans for ASMAs.

(58) There was wide recognition among Parties that given the increasing volume of tourist and non-governmental activity in Antarctica, and the need to consider how this might be addressed when the Protocol enters into force, it was important that Parties ensure that those organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica be effectively advised of the appropriate requirements, deriving from the obligations on the Parties under the Antarctic Treaty System, to assist in planning and conducting their activities in Antarctica.

(59) There was a wide convergence of views that it was timely for action to be taken on this matter at this Meeting. There was agreement that the objective at this Meeting was not to create new rules and regulations but to provide guidance to those visiting Antarctica and those organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activities there.

(60) Three aspects were identified for consideration:

1)      guidance for visitors

2)      guidance for those organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activity

12
3) the role of Parties.

(61) On the role of Parties there were differing views. Some 
Parties argued for the need for consultation and co-ordination 
between the Parties in implementing their obligations in relation 
to tourism and non-governmental activity, notably regarding the 
environmental impact assessment procedures to be established under 
the Protocol. Others believed that this was fully covered by the 
Protocol itself.

(62) Parties agreed on a text for guidance for visitors which sets 
out, in appropriate language, advice on behavior when in 
Antarctica. Parties also reached agreement on a text for guidance 
directed at those organising and conducting tourism and non-
governmental activity, which provides information on the relevant 
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty system, including the Protocol 
when it enters into force, and also sets out procedures which might 
be followed when planning and conducting tourism and non-
governmental activity and in reporting on such activity.

(63) The Meeting decided that GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS TO THE 
ANTARCTIC and GUIDANCE FOR THOSE ORGANISING AND CONDUCTING TOURISM 
AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC be circulated 
widely and as soon as possible.
The Meeting adopted Recommendation XVIII-1.

Item 8

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

    a) Organizational aspects. Secretariat

(64) The Meeting noted that during the intersessional period, 
informal consultations on certain aspects relating to the future 
establishment of a permanent Secretariat to the Antarctic Treaty 
were carried out through normal diplomatic channels and with the 
coordination of Italy, as Chair of the XVII ATCM, on the occasion 
of the meeting of Legal Experts on liability held at Heidelberg 
from 18 to 20 November 1993.

(65) Some opening addresses attached to this Final Report refer to 
this subject.

(66) A number of Working documents were submitted to the XVIII 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting: XVIII ATCM/WP  8 by 
Australia, XVIII ATCM/WP 15 by Belgium and XVIII ATCM/WP 16 by 
Italy.

(67) A contact Group of Working Group I, chaired by Professor 
Rüdiger Wolfrum (Federal Republic of Germany) discussed this item
13
under the following headings: a) Legal Personality; b) Functions; 
c) Privileges and Immunities; and d) the Legal Instrument to 
establish those status, privileges and immunities (e.g. Protocol, 
Headquarters Agreement).

(68) The contact group devoted considerable time to discussing the 
legal status, privileges and immunities as well as the functions of 
the future Secretariat. It was possible to clarify further the 
issues involved and to modify and supplement the texts as a focus 
for future deliberations. However, several issues remained to be 
agreed upon.  Although there was consensus that a permanent 
Secretariat had to be empowered to pursue its activities in the 
territory of all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, some 
delegations wanted the privileges and immunities of the Secretariat 
to be restricted to the host State. Apart from that, it was the 
prevailing view within the group that the activities of the 
Secretariat should be limited to those necessary to assist the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, and that the privileges and immunities 
should be commensurate with and limited to those necessary for the 
performance of its functions.

(69) The progress achieved in the consideration of those items is 
reflected in the report made by the Chairman of the contact group, 
attached as Annex... of this Report.

(70) The Meeting acknowledged that further progress on these 
aspects, and particularly on the other main issues relating to the 
establishment of the Secretariat, such as its composition, 
financing and location, was needed. The Meeting therefore urged 
that every possible effort should be made by all Consultative 
Parties during the intersessional period to prepare for resolution 
of all outstanding issues relating to the establishment of the 
Secretariat , with a view of reaching a consensus at the earliest 
possible opportunity.

b) Public Availability of Documents

(71) The Meeting agreed to make all documents of the XVIIIth ATCM 
publicly available without exception.

c) Examination of Recommendations

(72) The Meeting decided to consider further at the next ATCM the 
question of the examination of recommendations.

d) Exchange of Information

(73) The Meeting agreed that the exchange of information among 
Contracting Parties needed further improvement, in particular in 
relation to matters covered by item 6 b).

14
(74) It was agreed that this matter would again be considered by 
the XIXth ATCM.

Item 9

Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

      a) Inspections during 1992/93 and 1993/94 and those Planned 
for 1994/95
(75) The Meeting considered reports of the joint 1992-93 United 
Kingdom, Italian, and Republic of Korea inspection team (XVIII 
ATCM/INFO 7), and of the Swedish observers who conducted 
inspections in 1994 (XVIII ATCM/INFO 45). These reports covered 
the following stations, abandoned stations and vessels:

      United Kingdom, Italian, and Republic of Korea Inspection 
Report:

      Stations:
            The King Sejong (Republic of Korea)
            Faraday (United Kingdom)
            Rothera (United Kingdom)
            General San Martin (Argentina)
            Palmer (United States)
            Comandante Ferraz (Brazil)
            Henryk Arctowski (Poland)
            Arturo Prat (Chile)
            Esperanza (Argentina)
            Juan Carlos Primero (Spain)
            Fossil Bluff (United Kingdom)
            Gabriel de Castilla (Spain)
            Decepción (Argentina)

      Abandoned Stations:
            East Base, Stonington Island (United States)
            Base E, Stonington Island (United Kingdom)
            Deception (United Kingdom)

      Vessels:
            MS "Explorer" (Liberia)
            MS "Akademik Sergey Vavilov" (Russia)
            MS "Europa" (Germany)

      Swedish Inspection Report:

      Stations:
            Neumayer (Germany)
            Halley (United Kingdom)
            Maitri (India)
            Novolazarevskaja (Russia)
            Georg Forster (Germany)
            SANAE III (South Africa)
            Sarie Marais (South Africa)
            SANAE IV (South Africa)

                                                                  15
Aboa (Finland)

(76) The Meeting noted the conclusions of the reports that all 
active stations and vessels are being operated in accordance with 
the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.

(77) The Meeting noted that inspections are now taking account of 
the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty in line with the decision of the Parties to 
implement the Protocol as far as possible pending its coming into 
force. It was agreed that, in this interim period, inspection of 
matters covered by the Protocol provides valuable information on the 
degree to which the Protocol is being provisionally implemented. 
The overall view was that substantial progress is being made in 
implementing the provisions of the Protocol. The move to more 
detailed and precise inspections was welcomed. At the same time it 
was recognized that the increasing complexity of inspections 
required new approaches to ensure the accuracy of information in 
inspection reports.

(78) The Swedish delegation stated that its inspection team was 
somewhat handicapped in assessing some of the stations and their 
activities by the late circulation, or in other cases, non-arrival 
of the information required under Article VII,(5) of the Antarctic 
Treaty. Since the requirement in this provision is directly linked 
to the right to carry out inspections, the Meeting urged Parties to 
submit this information in due time so as to maintain the original 
objective that information can be compared with the actual 
activities being undertaken at the time of the inspection.

(79) The Meeting considered ways of improving Antarctic inspections 
noting the comments in papers submitted by Chile (XVIII ATCM/WP 
12), Argentina (XVIII ATCM/WP 30), the United Kingdom, Italy and 
the Republic of Korea (XVIII ATCM/WP 33) and the United Kingdom 
(XVIII ATCM/WP 34). In particular these papers drew attention to 
the need for inspections to be distributed across all facilities in 
the Treaty area and avoid being concentrated on those in the 
Peninsula area. Several delegations made suggestions as to how the 
system of inspections might be made more effective. A number of 
delegations suggested that Parties should be encouraged to carry 
out further joint inspections in order to reduce the considerable 
costs involved.

The Meeting stressed the requirement for exchange of information 
under Article 7, (5), of the Antarctic Treaty and that the 
provision of this information by 30 November in accordance with 
Recommendation VIII-6 is essential for the effective conduct of 
inspection.  The Meeting agreed that pre and post inspection 
exchange of information would be useful in improving coordination 
and sharing costs of inspections.

16
To this end it was agreed to publish the list of 181 past inspections provided by the United Kingdom (XVIII ATCM/WP 33) in the report of this Meeting, even though it is incomplete (Annex...). Parties should provide corrections and additions so that more complete lists could be published in the reports of future ATCMs.

Some delegations noted that inspections could be improved and reports could be more accurate through observers using the languages of the stations being visited.

(80) The Meeting considered that during inspections there would be advantage in attention being paid to the use of best available technologies.

(81) The opportunity was provided for Parties to advise on any arrangements they had in hand for inspections in 1994/95. None of the Parties were in a position to provide this information at the Meeting.

b) Inspection Checklists

(82) The Meeting welcomed and considered the report by SCAR and COMNAP describing an inspection checklist for permanent stations (XVIII ATCM/WP 22). The Meeting noted the checklists submitted by the UK for permanent stations, abandoned bases and vessels and developed and used by the UK, Italy and the Republic of Korea during their joint Treaty Inspection in 1993 (XVIII ATCM/INFO 8) and discussed the Chilean working paper (XVIII ATCM/WP 12).

(83) The Meeting agreed that, as a first step, it would be valuable to have a checklist for permanent stations and associated installations. The Meeting recognized that it would be useful to develop further checklists. SCAR was requested to produce a checklist for protected areas to be submitted at the XIX ATCM. The UK offered to coordinate the production of checklists for abandoned stations, vessels, aircraft, refuges and waste dumps for discussion at the XIX ATCM.

(84) The Meeting acknowledged that standard checklists provide guidelines that could enhance the quality and consistency of inspections. It was recognized that such checklists would not limit a Party's individual action in conducting inspections.

(85) The Meeting agreed Checklist A for permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations (Annex...).

Item 10

Environmental Monitoring and Data
                                                                             17
a)     Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human Activities in Antarctica

(86) The Meeting welcomed the SCAR-COMNAP report describing their activities since XVII ATCM and recommending next steps (XVIII ATCM/WP 21).

With respect to Recommendation XVII-1, SCAR-COMNAP responded as follows:

1.     (i) Advice on long-term monitoring programmes:

       The Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) has begun to address this question and is seeking assistance from other scientific groups within and outside SCAR.

       (ii) Emission standards:

       At the request of GOSEAC, SCALOP is continuing a survey of all current incinerators in the Treaty area. In addition, GOSEAC is investigating current emission standards and best operating practices used in Europe and North America for incinerators.

2.     Establishment of research programmes at selected sites:

       SCAR provided COMNAP with a set of criteria concerning location, duration and extent of operations, disposal of sewage and air strip availability on which to select a representative sample.

3.     Provide a list of data sets:

       Implementation will depend on implementation of recommendations from the SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc group on Antarctic Data Management.

4.     Establish national arrangements for obtaining expert advice:

       This is more appropriately dealt with by national authorities.

With respect to the next steps to be taken, SCAR-COMNAP proposed to convene technical workshops, as recommended in Recommendation 9 of the First Group of Experts Meeting. The workshops would provide the technical basis for progress in developing the environmental monitoring necessary to verify impact assessments, assess local pollution and provide an index of the health of Antarctic ecosystems. This will assist in verifying that human impacts do

18
not have unforeseen effects on Antarctic birds, seals and plants, 
as requested in paragraph 77 of the Report of XVII ATCM.

(87) The Meeting supported the SCAR-COMNAP proposal for technical 
workshop(s) and requested that the workshop(s) have the following 
terms of reference:

1.      Review the priority of impacts which need 
        monitoring,using the recommendation of the First Group of 
        Experts, summarized in paragraph 75 of XVII ATCM as a 
        guide.

2.      Develop hypotheses on which to design monitoring 
        programmes.

3.      Provide technical advice including:
        -   minimum monitoring needed to meet the requirements 
            of the Protocol, based on a precautionary approach;
        -   baseline information;
        -   ecosystem health indices;
        -   key variables to be monitored;
        -   design of monitoring programmes;
        -   scientific protocols for monitoring;
        -   measurement methods, including frequency of 
            measurement;
        -   standardization and quality assurance of techniques 
            and data;
        -   applicable technology;
        -   data management, and
        -   criteria for judging whether monitoring programme 
            objectives are being met.

This workshop should be attended by individuals with expertise and 
competence in one or more of the following areas: Antarctic 
science, Antarctic programme management, data management, 
environmental monitoring and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
process.

(88) The Delegation of Russia presented an information paper on 
coastal pollution monitoring (XVIII ATCM/INFO 63).

19
b)     Global Change

(89) The Representative of SCAR described the history of the development of the strategic plan for Antarctic global change research entitled "The role of the Antarctic in global change: an international plan for a regional research programme", recently published by SCAR (XVIII ATCM/INFO 83, Annex...). The integration of this research with existing international research programmes, especially International Geosphere and Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) and its relationship with recommendations of International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) were noted as important features

(90) The Meeting welcomed this development, noting its importance in providing for regional cooperation and the major contribution that such research could make to a better understanding of global processes including the circulation of the world oceans, climate change, pollution, and the biological effects on enhanced UV radiation. Whilst encouraging SCAR to continue with this important initiative, the meeting recognized the need for a special fund to resource it and encouraged national operators to contribute to such a fund.

The Meeting requested that SCAR forward its strategic plan for Antarctic global change research to the Secretariat of the United Nations Commission for Sustainable Development, the Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee of the Framework Convention on Climate Change, and the Secretariat of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.

(91) The Russian Delegation submitted three Information Papers, on multi-year variability of ozone in the atmosphere, on Glacier Drilling at Vostok Station and on the tendency of the dynamic changes in the Antarctic atmosphere (XVIII ATCM/INFO 70, INFO 62 and INFO 71).

c)     Data Management

(92) The Meeting welcomed the SCAR/COMNAP report on data management (XVIII ATCM/INFO 31). The report described the establishment of a SCAR-COMNAP ad hoc Planning Group on Antarctic Data Management and the steps this group had taken since XVII ATCM.

The Planning Group recommended the adoption of six principles to guide the development of an Antarctic Data Directory system.  The meeting adopted the following principles based on the SCAR-COMNAP recommendation.

1.    The Antarctic Data Directory  is a data directory providing data set descriptions and information on where
20
to access data and not a central database containing the actual data.

2. Antarctic scientific data will be described, including historical data, environmental monitoring data, and data for which access restrictions may apply.

3. Conditions of access to the actual data will be the responsibility of data custodians, such as the funding or managing agencies and institutions.

4. There will be no restrictions on access to the directory. Availability of the directory and associated products will be widely promoted.

5. The directory entries will be compatible with the Directory Interchange Format of the International Directory Network, but with Antarctic specific extensions.

6. The production and maintenance of directory entries is recognized as a critical activity for Antarctic science and must not be considered merely an administrative overhead.

(93) The Meeting noted that the Antarctic Master Directory should include listing of geological and biological archives.

The next step in the development of the Directory will be a seminar to be held at XXIII SCAR. This meeting should invite participation by representatives of potential funding organizations.

(94) The Meeting requested SCAR-COMNAP to provide a further report on progress on data management to the XIX ATCM.

d) Regulation of the Extraction, Use and Custody of Scientific Samples Obtained in Antarctic Expeditions

(95) The Meeting took note of SCAR Recommendation XXII-1 (XVIII ATCM/WP23) and of the Working Paper submitted by the Chilean Delegation (XVIII ATCM/WP13) referring to the fact that geological specimens of scientific value are increasingly being removed from Antarctica for non-scientific purposes. In this regard, the Meeting recalled Article 3 and Article 7 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

(96) The Meeting stressed that the removal of fossils, minerals, meteorites, volcanic bombs and ventifacts should be done for scientific purposes only. Such scientifically valuable specimens must be properly curated in institutions accessible to the

21
scientific community and whenever appropriate should be publicly 
displayed.

(97) The Delegation of Japan submitted a Working Paper (XVIII ATCM/
WP25) describing the management scheme for scientific specimens 
used by the National Institute of Polar Research.

Item 11

Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

    (a) Implementation of Procedures for IEEs and CEEs

(98) The United Kingdom delegation submitted a paper (XVIII 
ATCM/INFO 9) which reviewed all Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIAs) prepared to date for proposed activities in Antarctica. The 
United Kingdom delegation suggested that, until such time as the 
proposed Treaty Secretariat was in a position to maintain a record 
of EIAs, SCAR could publish a directory of EIAs annually in the 
SCAR Bulletin.

This suggestion received general support and the representative of 
SCAR confirmed that SCAR would be able to publish an annual 
directory of any EIAs notified to SCAR, as an interim arrangement 
only. The Meeting agreed to recommend this course of action.

(99) The delegation of New Zealand presented a draft IEE for the 
decommissioning of Vanda Station (XVIII ATCM/INFO 60) and a summary 
of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme Environmental Audit (XVIII 
ATCM/INFO 59). The audit was tabled as the first environmental 
audit of a national programme's activities in the Antarctic.  It 
provides an example of a procedure for reviewing current activities 
in terms of compliance with the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and providing operational 
guidelines for improving environmental management.

(100) Other papers were presented by South Africa and Belgium 
(XVIII ATCM/INFO 61), Argentina (XVIII ATCM/WP 27), IAATO (XVIII 
ATCM/INFO 13 and INFO 23). A number of delegations welcomed the 
efforts made by tour operators within IAATO to comply with the 
provisions of the Protocol.

(101) The effectiveness of the distribution of CEEs was raised 
during the discussion of this item.

(102) The Meeting recalled that Annex I., Article 3 of the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty requires that 
CEEs (draft and final) be made publicly available and be circulated 
to all Parties for comments.

                                                      22
(103) Until the establishment of the CEP and a Secretariat the Meeting proposed the following interim distribution procedure for 
the Party preparing the CEE:

-   circulate the CEE to Parties through diplomatic channels for comments;

-   provide at the same time as circulating to Parties, one copy each to SCAR and COMNAP who will notify their 
members of the circulation of the CEE;

-   notify circulation to the next ATCM;

The notification should include: title, date, author(s), organization and country, address, and date by which comments are 
required.

It is the responsibility of each Party to make the CEE publicly available and undertake circulation in their own country.

    b) Examination of CEEs Produced during 1992/93

(104) The Meeting extended its special thanks to the delegations of New Zealand and South Africa regarding the papers they submitted 
covering CEE's on major projects they are undertaking.  The New Zealand document (XVIII ATCM/INFO 21) dealt with the final CEE on 
Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in the South West Ross Sea, and the paper submitted by South Africa (XVIII ATCM/
INFO 54) described the process carried out for the South African Sanae IV CEE. The Meeting commended their efforts to comply with 
Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, pending its entry into force.  In so doing, they 
set examples from which all will benefit and could follow.

Item 12

The Antarctic Protected Area System

    a) Revised Management Plans, for SPAs and SSSIs

(105) The Meeting welcomed a report from SCAR on progress with the several requests made to SCAR at XVII ATCM.  It was stated that 
considerable assistance had been provided to individual Parties in the revision of existing management plans and in the preparation of 
management plans for new protected and managed areas. Revision of the ecosystem classification matrix has begun and new guidelines 
for the inspection of protected areas are under discussion.  It is intended that both these products will be provided to XIX ATCM.

23
(106) The Meeting suggested that, in preparing a handbook to assist 
in the preparation of management plans under Annex V, SCAR should 
consider how the format could be developed to facilitate the use of 
the plans by all scientific and logistic personnel.

(107) Under this item, information papers were submitted by the 
delegations of Australia (XVIII ATCM/INFO 14), France (XVIII ATCM/
INFO 17) and the United Kingdom (XVIII ATCM/INFO 34).

An Information Paper (XVIII ATCM/INFO 14 Rev 1) tabled by 
Australia, provided corrections to the Management Plan for SSSI 25. 
These corrections were accepted by the meeting as set down in 
Annex...

b) Historical Sites and Monuments

(108) The Chilean Delegation submitted a Working Paper concerning 
the protection of the remains of the whaling station in Whaler's 
Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands (XVIII ATCM/WP 5). 
The installation was badly damaged by a volcanic eruption in 1969. 
The Chilean Delegation suggested that the installation and its 
associated artifacts should be conserved.

Several delegations stressed the importance of Deception Island 
because of its scientific, nature conservation, wildlife as well as 
its historic values, and the need to consider these values in an 
integrated fashion.

To ensure the effective protection of Deception Island some 
delegations underlined the value of an integrated management plan 
in the form of an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) within 
which specific areas of value could be further protected by means 
of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) or Historic Sites 
and Monuments.

(109) The Argentinean Delegation submitted a document on The 
Maintenance Work on Sites and Historical Monuments (XVIII ATCM/WP 
26) and the UK Delegation submitted a document on the Clean-up and 
Conservation of Abandoned British Bases in the Antarctic Peninsula 
Region (XVIII ATCM/INFO 33) on which several delegations commented.

c) Review and Implementation of the Antarctic Protected 
Areas System

(110) The United Kingdom Delegation was concerned about the 
possible use of mandatory prohibitions within the Management Plans 
for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) and asked for the 
Meeting to discuss and clarify the situation in the light of the 
distinctions made in Articles 4 and 5 of Annex V to the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Several 
delegations agreed with the need for this clarification.

24
The representative of SCAR added that it would be helpful for this 
question to be resolved before the XIX ATCM in order to provide 
guidance in finalizing the management plans for the first Antarctic 
Specially Managed Area (Admiralty Bay) being drafted by Brazil and 
Poland.

(111) Clarification of this matter was not obtained at this 
Meeting.  However, such clarification will be necessary before 
designation of any Antarctic Specially Managed Areas under Article 
6 of Annex... to the Protocol.

Item 13

International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

(112) The representative of SCAR presented the SCAR Code of Conduct 
regarding experimentation on animals in Antarctica (XVIII ATCM/WP 
24 and INFO 83, Annex...).  This had been agreed within the SCAR 
framework and represented the minimum standard required to meet 
ethical and moral standards at an international level.

The Meeting welcomed the SCAR Code of Conduct and considered that 
their governments should apply the Code consistent with their 
national laws.

(113) Several delegations described with satisfaction their 
logistic and scientific cooperation with other Treaty Parties in 
the Antarctic.

In this regard, papers were submitted by Argentina (XVIII ATCM/ WP 
29), France (XVIII ATCM/INFO 16), Chile (XVIII ATCM/INFO 47), 
Australia (XVIII ATCM/INFO 79), Russia (XVIII ATCM/INFO 82) and New 
Zealand (XVIII ATCM/INFO 86).

Several delegations also submitted oral reports regarding this 
subject.

Item 14

Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

(114) Under this item papers were presented by WMO (XVIII ATCM/INFO 
24) and by Chile (XVIII ATCM/INFO 46).

(115) The WMO observer reported on the present observation and 
communication networks in Antarctica emphasizing the setting up by 
the World Climate Research Programme of a programme for 
observations by an international fleet of Antarctic buoys. A plea 
was made for further observations of the vertical distribution of 
25
ozone and the continuing measurement of the concentration of 
atmospheric constituents.  Descriptions were given by some 
delegations of their relevant national programmes.

(116) The value of meteorological observations through the WMO 
Voluntary Observing Scheme (VOS) from tourist ships sailing in 
Antarctica was pointed out by several delegations and the IAATO and 
WMO observers agreed to pursue this matter through the appropriate 
channels.

(117) A specific application of meteorological analysis and 
forecasting for the Southern Ocean was introduced by the Russian 
delegation's proposal for cooperation in the establishment of 
arrangements for the exchange of information to support Antarctic 
marine pollution response operations (XVIII ATCM/INFO 88).  Some 
delegations indicated the potential value of such services in 
Antarctica and others noted the existence of a number of research, 
operational and modelling capabilities for pollution response in 
various countries.  The Meeting agreed that it was of paramount 
importance for Parties to introduce adequate practical response 
strategies and to install appropriate equipment which could fully 
utilize the results of any operational computer simulation models.

(118) Delegations considered that there might be advantage in 
developing small scale systems for particular areas.  However, a 
number of delegations considered it premature to establish a broad 
scale oil spill modelling and prediction system when the capacity 
to respond on this scale is not available.  These delegations 
considered that at this stage it would be more effective to focus 
resources on minimizing risks such as through the use of light 
fuels, improved hydrographic charts or response equipment at 
stations.

(119) The Meeting agreed to ask their COMNAP representatives, in 
consultation as necessary with WMO and SCAR, to advise XIX ATCM as 
to their requirements in light of the Russian proposal.

Item 15

Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the Southern 
Ocean

(120) Under this item a paper was presented by WMO (XVIII ATCM/INFO 
25) outlining the meteorological services provided by the five 
nominated stations namely Casey, Marambio, McMurdo, Molodezhnaya 
and Presidente Frei and support was sought for the SCAR experiment 
(FROST), to be conducted with the aim of better understanding 
Antarctic weather processes and ultimately improving meteorological 
services in the region.  The Meeting agreed on the value of the 
work being carried out through the provision of operational
26
information and indicated that it should continue to be followed up 
by WMO and COMNAP.

It was suggested that many issues under this agenda item were 
technical and best dealt with by COMNAP or SCAR with the advice of 
WMO.  It was agreed that at the next ATCM all meteorological 
matters should be combined into a single item dealing with 
meteorological observations, communications, research and services. 
This  item  would  be  entitled  Antarctic  Meteorology, 
Telecommunications and Related Services.

Item 16

Questions related to the Exercise of Jurisdiction in Antarctica

A working paper (XVIIIth ATCM/WP 32) on this item was tabled and 
introduced by Uruguay.

(121) The Meeting recognized the importance of this question, the 
solution of which was left deliberately open in Article IX 
paragraph 1 of the Antarctic Treaty. But it was also understood 
that the question raises some delicate and sensitive problems which 
need more and careful deliberations.

(122) The Meeting therefore agreed to leave the item out of the 
Agenda of the XIXth ATCM and put it again on the Agenda of the XXth 
ATCM in order to give all parties sufficient time to elaborate ways 
and means how to approach the question again in order to find an 
agreeable solution.

Item 17

Preparation of the XIXth Consultative Meeting

a)  Date and Place of the XIXth Consultative Meeting

(123) The Meeting received with special satisfaction the invitation 
of the Republic of Korea to host the XIXth Consultative Meeting, 
from 8 to 19 May 1995, in Seoul.

b)  Invitation of International and Non-Governmental 
Organizations

(124) The Meeting decided that the following International and 
non-Governmental Organizations having a scientific or technical 
interest in Antarctica shall be invited to designate an expert: 
UNEP, ASOC, IHO, IMO, IOC, IUCN, WMO, WTO, IAATO, PATA, to attend

27
the forthcoming meeting in order to assist it in its substantive work.

(125) With reference to the Rule 41 of the revised Rules of Procedure of 1992, it was decided that these experts could attend the Meeting during the discussion of all items on the provisional Agenda of the XIXth Consultative Meeting except for the following:

    4. Adoption of Agenda

    8. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
        a) Organizational aspects. Secretariat

    18. Preparation of the XXth Consultative Meeting

        c) Preparation of the Agenda of the XIXth Consultative Meeting

(126) The Meeting approved the Preliminary Agenda of the XIXth Consultative Meeting, appended at Annex...

(127) The Meeting suggested the following allocation of Agenda Items.

    1. Plenary        1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 a, 18, 19, 20, 21

    2. TEWG          7 b, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17 b

    3. WG I          5 c, 6, 7 a, c, 8

    4. WG II         9, 14, 15, 16, 17 a

(128) With the aim of assisting a more timely and orderly submission and circulation of documentation to and by the host Government, the Meeting suggested that the Parties and the host Government undertake the best possible efforts to facilitate the circulation of documents by the host Government as quickly as possible. The Meeting also considered questions of time-lines for the pre-sessional circulation of documents and agreed that it deserved further consideration.

Item 18

Any Other Business

28
Item 19
Adoption of the Report

Item 20
Closing of the Meeting

 
                  29
Recommendation XVIII-1

Tourism and non-Governmental Activities

The Representatives,

Reaffirming the exceptional character of the Antarctic environment given in particular the fragility of its fauna and flora and of the setting which the Antarctic offers for the conduct of scientific activities;

Acknowledging the increase in the development of tourist activities in the Antarctic;

Noting that those who visit the Antarctic and organise or conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic are currently subject to legally binding obligations pursuant to national legislation implementing the Antarctic Treaty and associated legal instruments;

Noting further that such visitors or organisers will be subject to additional legally binding obligations upon entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;

Recognizing the need for visitors and organisers to have practical guidance on how best to plan and carry out any visits to the Antarctic;

Recalling the Final Act of the Eleventh Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, at which the Protocol was adopted, in which the signatories of the Final Act decided that the Annexes of the Protocol should be applied in accordance with their legal systems and to the extent practicable;

Desiring to ensure that those who visit the Antarctic carry out their visits or tours strictly in accordance with existing obligations and in so far as is consistent with existing national law, in accordance with the Protocol, pending its entry into force;

Desiring further to facilitate the early entry into force of the Protocol and of the implementation of its provisions in relation to those who visit or organise tours to the Antarctic.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They circulate widely and as quickly as possible the Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic and the Guidance for Those
1
Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic annexed to this Recommendation.

2. They urge those intending to visit or organise and conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic to act in accordance with the attached guidance consistent with the relevant provisions of their applicable national law.

 
                                                                                              2
ATTACHMENT

Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic

Activities in the Antarctic are governed by the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and associated agreements, referred to collectively as the Antarctic Treaty system. The Treaty established Antarctica as a zone of peace and science.

In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which designates the Antarctic as a natural reserve. The Protocol sets out environmental principles, procedures and obligations for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment, and its dependent and associated ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have agreed that, pending its entry into force, as far as possible and in accordance with their legal system, the provisions of the Protocol should be applied as appropriate.

The Environmental Protocol applies to tourism and non-governmental activities as well as governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. It is intended to ensure that these activities do not have adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment, or on its scientific and aesthetic values.

This Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic is intended to ensure that all visitors are aware of, and are therefore able to comply with, the Treaty and the Protocol. Visitors are, of course, bound by national laws and regulations applicable to activities in the Antarctic.

A) PROTECT ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE

Taking or harmful interference with Antarctic wildlife is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by a national authority.

1)      Do not use aircraft, vessels, small boats, or other means of transport in ways that disturb wildlife, either at sea or on land.

2)      Do not feed, touch, or handle birds or seals, or approach or photograph them in ways that cause them to alter their behavior. Special care is needed when animals are breeding or moulting.

3)      Do not damage plants, for example by walking, driving, or landing on extensive moss beds or lichen-covered scree slopes.

3
4)     Do not use guns or explosives. Keep noise to the minimum to avoid frightening wildlife.

5)     Do not bring non-native plants or animals into the Antarctic (e.g. live poultry, pet dogs and cats,
       house plants).

B) RESPECT PROTECTED AREAS

A variety of areas in the Antarctic have been afforded special protection because of their particular ecological,
scientific, historic or other values. Entry into certain areas may be prohibited except in accordance with a permit
issued by an appropriate national authority. Activities in and near designated Historic Sites and Monuments and certain
other areas may be subject to special restrictions.

1)     Know the locations of areas that have been afforded special protection and any restrictions regarding
       entry and activities that can be carried out in and near them.

2)     Observe applicable restrictions.

3)     Do not damage, remove or destroy Historic Sites or Monuments, or any artifacts associated with them.

C) RESPECT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Do not interfere with scientific research, facilities or equipment.

1)     Obtain permission before visiting Antarctic science and logistic support facilities; reconfirm arrangements 24-72 hours before arriving; and comply
       strictly with the rules regarding such visits.

2)     Do not interfere with, or remove, scientific equipment or marker posts, and do not disturb experimental study sites, field camps, or supplies.

D) BE SAFE

Be prepared for severe and changeable weather. Ensure that your equipment and clothing meet Antarctic standards.
Remember that the Antarctic environment is inhospitable, unpredictable and potentially dangerous.

4
1)     Know your capabilities, the dangers posed by the Antarctic environment, and act accordingly. Plan 
      activities with safety in mind at all times.

2)     Keep a safe distance from all wildlife, both on land and 
      at sea.

3)     Take note of, and act on, the advice and instructions 
      from your leaders; do not stray from your group.

4)     Do not walk onto glaciers or large snow fields without 
      proper equipment and experience; there is a real danger 
      of falling into hidden crevasses.

5)     Do not expect a rescue service; self-sufficiency is 
      increased and risks reduced by sound planning, quality 
      equipment, and trained personnel.

6)     Do not enter emergency refuges (except in emergencies). 
      If you use equipment or food from a refuge, inform the 
      nearest research station or national authority once the 
      emergency is over.

7)     Respect any smoking restrictions, particularly 
      around buildings, and take great care to safeguard 
      against the danger of fire. This is a real hazard in 
      the dry environment of Antarctica.

E) KEEP ANTARCTICA PRISTINE

Antarctica remains relatively pristine, and has not yet been 
subjected to large scale human perturbations. It is the 
largest wilderness area on earth. Please keep it that way.

1)     Do not dispose of litter or garbage on land. Open 
      burning is prohibited.

2)     Do not disturb or pollute lakes or streams. Any 
      materials discarded at sea must be disposed of 
      properly.

3)     Do not paint or engrave names or graffiti on rocks 
      or buildings.

4)     Do not collect or take away biological or geological 
      specimens or man-made artifacts as a souvenir, 
      including rocks, bones, eggs, fossils, and parts or 
      contents of buildings.

      5
5)   Do not deface or vandalize buildings, whether 
     occupied, abandoned, or unoccupied, or emergency 
     refuges.

 
•
•
 
         6
Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting 
Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic

Antarctica is the largest wilderness area on earth, 
unaffected by large scale human activities. Accordingly, 
this unique and pristine environment has been afforded 
special protection. Furthermore, it is physically remote, 
inhospitable, unpredictable and potentially dangerous. All 
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, therefore, should 
be planned and conducted with both environmental protection 
and safety in mind.

• Activities in the Antarctic are subject to the Antarctic 
Treaty of 1959 and associated legal instruments, referred to 
collectively as the Antarctic Treaty system. These include 
the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
(CCAS) (1972), the Convention on the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) (1980) and the 
Recommendations and other measures adopted by the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties under the Antarctic Treaty.

In 1991, the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. This Protocol sets out environmental 
principles, procedures and obligations for the comprehensive 
protection of the Antarctic environment, and its dependent 
and associated ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have 
agreed that, pending its entry into force, as far as 
possible and in accordance with their legal systems, that 
the provisions of the Protocol should be applied as 
appropriate.

• The Environmental Protocol designates Antarctica as a 
natural reserve devoted to peace and science, and applies to 
both governmental and non-governmental activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area. The Protocol seeks to ensure that 
human activities, including tourism, do not have adverse 
impacts on the Antarctic environment, nor on its scientific 
and aesthetic values.

• The Protocol states, as a matter of principle, that all 
activities are to be planned and conducted on the basis of 
information sufficient to evaluate their possible impact on 
the Antarctic environment and its associated ecosystems, and 
on the value of Antarctica for the conduct of scientific 
research. Organisers should be aware that the Environmental
7
Protocol requires that "activities shall be modified, suspended or cancelled if they result in or threaten to result in impacts upon the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems."

Those responsible for organising and conducting tourism and non-governmental activities must comply fully with national laws and regulations which implement the Antarctic Treaty system, as well as other national laws and regulations implementing international agreements on environmental protection, pollution and safety that relate to the Antarctic Treaty Area. They should also abide by the requirements imposed on organisers and operators under the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes, in so far as they have not yet been implemented in national law.

 
                                                                                                        8
KEY OBLIGATIONS ON ORGANISERS AND OPERATORS

1)    Provide prior notification of, and reports on, their activities to the competent authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties.

2)    Conduct an assessment of the potential environmental impacts of their planned activities.

3)    Provide for effective response to environmental emergencies, especially with regard to marine pollution.

4)    Ensure self-sufficiency and safe operations.

5)    Respect scientific research and the Antarctic environment, including restrictions regarding protected areas, and the protection of flora and fauna.

6)    Prevent the disposal and discharge of prohibited waste.

 
                                                                 9
PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED BY ORGANISERS AND OPERATORS

A) When planning to go to the Antarctic

Organisers and operators should:

1)      Notify the competent national authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties of details of their planned activities with sufficient time to enable the Party(ies) to comply with their information exchange obligations under Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty. The information to be provided is listed in Attachment A.

2)      Conduct an environmental assessment in accordance with such procedures as may have been established in national law to give effect to Annex I of the Protocol, including, if appropriate, how potential impacts will be monitored.

3)      Obtain timely permission from the national authorities responsible for any stations they propose to visit.

4)      Provide information to assist in the preparation of: contingency response plans in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol; waste management plans in accordance with Annex III of the Protocol; and marine pollution contingency plans in accordance with Annex IV of the Protocol.

5)      Ensure that expedition leaders and passengers are aware of the location and special regimes which apply to Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (and on entry into force of the Protocol, Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas) and of Historic Sites and Monuments and, in particular, relevant management plans.

6)      Obtain a permit, where required by national law, from the competent national authority of the appropriate Party or Parties, should they have a reason to enter such areas, or a monitoring site (CEMP Site) designated under CCAMLR.

7)      Ensure that activities are fully self-sufficient and do not require assistance from Parties unless arrangements for it have been agreed in advance.

10
8)     Ensure that they employ experienced and trained 
       personnel, including a sufficient number of guides.

9)     Arrange to use equipment, vehicles, vessels, and 
       aircraft appropriate to Antarctic operations.

10)    Be fully conversant with applicable communications, 
       navigation, air traffic control and emergency 
       procedures.

11)    Obtain the best available maps and hydrographic 
       charts, recognizing that many areas are not fully or 
       accurately surveyed.

12)    Consider the question of insurance (subject to 
       requirements of national law).

13)    Design and conduct information and education 
       programmes to ensure that all personnel and visitors 
       are aware of relevant provisions of the Antarctic 
       Treaty system.

14)    Provide visitors with a copy of the Guidance for 
       Visitors to the Antarctic.

B) When in the Antarctic Treaty Area

Organisers and operators should:

1)     Comply with all requirements of the Antarctic Treaty 
       system, and relevant national laws, and ensure that 
       visitors are aware of requirements that are relevant 
       to them.

2)     Reconfirm arrangements to visit stations 24-72 hours 
       before their arrival and ensure that visitors are 
       aware of any conditions or restrictions established 
       by the station.

3)     Ensure that visitors are supervised by a sufficient 
       number of guides who have adequate experience and 
       training in Antarctic conditions and knowledge of 
       the Antarctic Treaty system requirements.

4)     Monitor environmental impacts of their activities, 
       if appropriate, and advise the competent national 
       authorities of the appropriate Party or Parties of 
       any adverse or cumulative impacts resulting from an

11
activity, but which were not foreseen by their 
environmental impact assessment.

5)	Operate ships, yachts, small boats, aircraft, 
hovercraft, and all other means of transport safely 
and according to appropriate procedures, including 
those set out in the Antarctic Flight Information 
Manual (AFIM).

6)	Dispose of waste materials in accordance with Annex V 
of the Protocol. These annexes prohibit, among 
other things, the discharge of plastics, oil and 
noxious substances into the Antarctic Treaty Area; 
regulate the discharge of sewage and food waste; and 
require the removal of most waste from the area.

7)	Co-operate fully with observers designated by 
Consultative Parties to conduct inspections of 
stations, ships, aircraft and equipment under 
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, and those to be 
designated under Article 14 of the Environmental 
Protocol.

8)	Co-operate in monitoring programs undertaken in 
accordance with Article 3(2)(d) of the Protocol.

9)	Maintain a careful and complete record of their 
activities conducted.

C)  On completion of the activities

Within three months of the end of the activity, organisers 
and operators should report on the conduct of it to the 
appropriate national authority in accordance with national 
laws and procedures. Reports should include the name, 
details and state of registration of each vessel or aircraft 
used and the name of their captain or commander; actual 
itinerary; the number of visitors engaged in the activity; 
places, dates and purposes of landings and the number of 
visitors landed on each occasion; any meteorological 
observations made, including those made as part of the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO) Voluntary Observing Ships 
Scheme; any significant changes in activities and their 
impacts from those predicted before the visit was conducted; 
and action taken in case of emergency.

12
D) Antarctic Treaty System Documents and Information

Most Antarctic Treaty Parties can provide through their national contact points copies of relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty system and information about national laws and procedures, including:

• The Antarctic Treaty (1959)
• Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972)
• Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980)
• Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991)
• Recommendations and other measures adopted under the Antarctic Treaty
• Final Reports of Consultative Meetings
• Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System (1994)
• Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System (in Spanish, 1991 edition)

 
13
ATTACHMENT A

INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED IN ADVANCE NOTICE

Organisers should provide the following information to the appropriate national authorities in the format requested.

1. name, nationality, and contact details of the organiser;
2. where relevant, registered name and national registration and type of any vessel or aircraft to be used (including name of the captain or commander, call-sign, radio frequency, INMARSAT number);
3. intended itinerary including the date of departure and places to be visited in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
4. activities to be undertaken and purpose;
5. number and qualifications of crew and accompanying guides and expedition staff;
6. estimated number of visitors to be carried;
7. carrying capacity of vessel;
8. intended use of vessel;
9. intended use and type of aircraft;
10. number and type of other vessels, including small boats, to be used in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
11. information about insurance coverage;
12. details of equipment to be used, including for safety purposes, and arrangements for self-sufficiency;
13. and other matters required by national laws.

14
Preliminary Agenda for the
XIXth ATCM

1.  Opening of the Meeting
2.  Election of Officers
3.  Opening Addresses
4.  Adoption of Agenda
5.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

a)  under Recommendation XIII-(2):

i)  the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation 
    of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

ii) the Head of the Delegation of Australia in his 
    capacity as Representative of the Depositary 
    Government for the Convention on the Conservation 
    of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

iii) the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in 
    his capacity as Representative of the Depositary 
    Government of the Convention for the Conservation 
    of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

iv) the President of the Scientific Committee on 
    Antarctic Research "(SCAR)

v)  the Head of the Delegation of the United States of 
    America in his capacity as Representative of the 
    Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty

15
vi) the Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty 
    Parties in the United Nations

vii) the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National 
    Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP)

b) in relation to the Article III (2) of the Antarctic 
   Treaty

c) relevance of developments in the Arctic to the Antarctic

6. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

   a) Implementation
   b) Liability Annex
   c) Relations with other environmental treaties

7. Tourism and non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic 
   Treaty Area

   a) Tourism and non-Governmental Activities
   b) Environmental Impact of Tourism
   c) Environment education and training

8. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

   a) Organizational Aspects. Secretariat
   b) Public Availability of Documents
   c) Examination of Recommendations
   d) Exchange of Information

9. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

   a) Inspections during 1994/95 and those planned for 1995-96
   b) Inspection Checklists

16
10. Environmental Monitoring and Data Requirements

a)	Environmental Monitoring of the Impacts of Human Activities in the Antarctic
b)	Data requirements
c)	Regulation of the extraction, use and custody of scientific samples obtained in the Antarctic expeditions

11. Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

a)	Implementation of Procedures for IEEs and CEEs
b)	Examination of CEEs produced during 1994-95

12. The Antarctic Protected Area System

a)	Revised management plans for SPAs and SSSIs
b)	Historic sites and monuments
c)	Review and implementation of the System

13. Specific Environmental Protection Measures

a)	Marine pollution
     i)	Maritime safety
     ii)	Prevention of marine pollution
b)	Waste disposal and waste management
c)	Conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna

14. International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

15. Antarctic Meteorology, Telecommunications, and related Services

16. Data Management and Data Bases

17
17. Global Change

a)	Scientific work of Global Change in the Antarctic
b)	Environmental effects of Global Change in the Antarctic

18. Preparation of the XXth Consultative Meeting

a)	Data and Place of XXth ATCM
b)	Invitations of International and non-Governmental 
      organizations
c)	Preparation of the Agenda for the XXth ATCM

19. Any other business

20. Adoption of the Report

21. Closing of the Meeting

                                  18
