ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                   XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                        KYOTO
                        11-22 April 1994

XVIII ATCM/WP 3
10 April 1994
Original:English

MARINE POLLUTION AND SHIP SAFETY

Agenda Item 6a and 6d

(Submitted by COMNAP)
KYOTO ATCM XVIII
April 1994

Working Paper
submitted by COMNAP on
MARINE POLLUTION AND SHIP SAFETY
(Agenda Items 6a& 6d : Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty)
MARINE POLLUTION AND SHIP SAFETY
(Agenda Items 6a & 6d: Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty)

1.      Purpose

1.1     To submit for consideration by Treaty Parties (under Agenda Items 6a & 6d) the 
proposal that the following matters of ship safety be referred to the 
International Maritime Organisation (IMO) for consideration by a meeting of 
technical experts:

1.2     To consider:

        (i)     whether there is a need to specify minimum standards for vessels 
operating in particular regions or ice conditions of Antarctica including, 
but not limited to, considerations of vessel classification, crewing 
experience, navigation equipment, etcetera;

        (ii)    whether there is a need to apply different classification standards to 
resupply, tourist and other vessels operating in Antarctic waters;

        (iii)   whether Antarctica should be designated a 'Particularly Sensitive Area' 
under the IMO MARPOL Convention;

        (iv)    any other matter relating to the safety of ships and ship-borne personnel 
in the Antarctic.

It is further proposed that invitation to participate in the meeting be extended 
by the IMO to representatives of classification societies and experts with 
relevant operating experience from the national Antarctic programmes.

2.      Background

2.1     ATCM Recommendation XV-4 requires Treaty Parties to develop contingency 
plans and to consider additional requirements to reduce and prevent pollution 
of the Antarctic marine environment. The Recommendation also proposes 
that a Meeting of Experts be held to consider and provide advice on these 
matters, although such a meeting has not been held.

2.2     The development of guidelines for contingency planning was undertaken by 
COMNAP through its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and 
Operations (SCALOP). In addition, SCALOP also developed a series of 
guidelines and other recommended measures focused on the prevention of 
marine pollution in the Antarctic.
2.3  The Madrid Protocol was signed in October 1991 and Annex IV specifically deals 
with the prevention of marine pollution. The Annex reflects the requirements 
of previous ATCM Recommendations and includes requirements for the 
development and implementation of contingency plans and for Parties to keep 
under continous review the provisions of the Annex and other measures to 
prevent, reduce and respond to pollution of the Antarctic marine environment. 
In addition the Annex requires that in the design, construction, manning and 
equipment of ships engaged in or supporting Antarctic operations each Party 
shall take into account the objectives of the Annex.

2.4  The topic of marine pollution was discussed at the Bonn ATCM XVI. The 
Meeting welcomed the work of SCALOP, however, it recognised that other 
wider marine pollution issues still had to be addressed fully. The Meeting 
noted the provision of Recommendation XV-4 for the Parties to convene a 
Meeting of Experts and agreed to encourage SCALOP to convene the meeting in 
close consultation with the Marine Environment Protection Committee 
(MEPC) of the IMO to:

     i)   review the work carried out by SCALOP on the prevention of oil 
          pollution and the development of oil spill contigency plans in 
          Antarctica and their application to non-governmental activities;

    ii)   assessment of the environmental effects of marine dumping and the 
          disposal of sewage and food wastes into the sea in the Antarctic Treaty 
          Area, and review the best practicable means to prevent or reduce such 
          pollution;

   iii)   investigation of the best practicable means to monitor marine pollution 
          in the Antarctic, particularly as regards compliance with Annex IV of the 
          Protocol and the proposed amendments for the designation of the 
          Antarctic Treaty Area as a "Special Area" under Annexes I, II and V of 
          MARPOL 73/78, as well as the establishment of base line survelllance 
          programs to quantify actual levels of marine pollution in the Antarctic 
          Treaty Area.

The above tasks were considered by the 1992 Meeting of Experts on 
Environmental Monitoring in Buenos Aires. The Meeting agreed to refer Items 
i) and iii) to SCAR for consideration and expert advice. SCALOP initiated 
liaison with the IMO regarding Item ii).

2.5  Representatives of SCALOP met with the Chairman of the MEPC in March 
1992. Although the meeting was very constructive and the MEPC Chairman 
expressed a strong interest in the work being undertaken by SCALOP, there was 
no action taken at that time to initiate a Meeting of Experts in accordance with 
ATCM IV-24 procedures.

2.6  In the COMNAP Report to the Venice ATCM XVII, it was proposed that the 
topics of contingency planning and response should be continued to be 
developed by COMNAP/SCALOP but the matters of ship safety and 
classification should be referred to the IMO by the ATCM. As the topic of 
marine pollution was not included on the agenda of ATCM XVII this latter 
proposal was not discussed.
3

2.7   At the April 1993 meeting of the SCALOP Sub-group on Oil Spill Prevention 
      and Response a representative of the IMO was in attendance. The issue of ship 
      safety was again discussed. The meeting concluded that there is a significant 
      risk of serious accidents occurring in the Antarctic Treaty Area, especially in 
      view of the increasing amount of tourist traffic. Particular concern was 
      expressed at ships entering Antarctic waters crewed by officers who appear to be 
      unaware that many of the available hydrographic charts are incomplete and not 
      necessarily accurate. Furthermore, it is believed that some vessels may be of 
      inadequate standard to cope with the ice conditions likely to be encountered.

2.8   It is considered that the potential for a major maritime disaster involving 
      perhaps hundreds of passengers is very real. Marine accidents close to the 
      continental margins also pose a serious environmental threat. In view of 
      ongoing concerns regarding ship safety in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and the 
      implications for the safety of life and potential environmental damage, 
      COMNAP recommends that Treaty Parties consider the proposal to refer 
      matters of ship safety (as outlined in paragraph 1.2) to the IMO for consideration 
      by a meeting of technical experts.
