ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                                  KYOTO               
                                  11-22 April 1994               
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XVIII REUNION CONSULTATIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM WP/26              
13 April 1994              
Original: Spanish              

•
              
Maintenance work on sites and historical monuments              
by the Argentine Republic              

Agenda item 12 b              

(submitted by Argentina)              

•
Maintenance work on sites and historical monuments by the Argentine Republic

(Agenda item 12 b)

1. Monument no 38

Location: Cerro Nevado Island. Lat. 64°21'54"S Long.56°59'54"0.
Type: pre-fabricated wooden cabin
Origin: Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld's Swedish expedition (1901-1903).

The small plateau of soft earth on which this structure is 
located, is experiencing severe erosion due to meteorological 
phenomena and water currents that flow through the lateral cracks 
thereby reducing its surface area. In January 1993, a landslide at 
the north end left one of the piles of the cabin's pillars without 
support. This required the building of a wooden brace fixed with 
steel wire to the sturdiest part of the surrounding area. The site 
was filled with several dozen cubic meters of building material 
while a stone wall 7 meters wide and 1-2 meters high was erected to 
hold the entire structure in place.

Following excavations, on the other side at the point of 
access to the cabin, a concrete beam was built along the 
construction site and at a distance of 1.5 meters from same. To 
prevent landslides caused by human traffic, a concrete staircase 
was built on the access way with 9 steps measuring 40x35 cm across, 
and 12 cm high. In addition, a fence with wooden battens was 
erected around the perimeter as a visual guide to prevent traffic 
in areas subject to landslides. It should be pointed out that the 
site is visited by tour groups. In the cabin, there are brochures

1
which contain information on the origin of the site, and are 
distributed to the visitors.

Regular maintenance work has been performed. Some parts of the 
external ruberoid under-cladding were replaced, while the cabin's 
exterior has been entirely covered with asphaltic paint.

Collection of recent garbage has been initiated. Such trash is 
placed in a barrel which is sent to the Marambio Station then to be 
transferred to South America. The purpose is to lay the groundwork 
for a future archeological survey.

•   Inside the cabin, a chain has been placed in the upper 
    section which is connected to external wire strainers.  This gives 
    a greater coherence to the entire structure as was the case 
    initially.

    The three windows restored thus far have been equipped with 
glass and protective acrylic panels. The existing components of 
other windows were collected to complete their restoration and 
installation during a future campaign.

2.  Monument no 39

•   Location: Bahia Esperanza. Lat. 63°23'04"S. Long. 56°59'04"0.
    Type: stone hut 
    Origin: Dr.Otto Nordensköld's Swedish Expedition (1901-1903)

    In October 1992, on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary 
of the establishment of the Esperanza Station, and of the first 
meeting on location of Iberian-American Antarctic historians, was 
initiated the restoration work on this historical monument.

2
The first task was to replace the parts of the wall that had 
fallen, returning them to their original height with slabs from a 
nearby quarry which had probably been used by members of the 
Swedish expedition.

The new materials were marked with red paint. A canvas roof 
similar to the tent used by the builders was installed. A fence of 
concrete pillars has been built, soon to be installed to give the 
monument a unique look. The station has received brochures to be 
distributed to the tourists. With the help of young inhabitants of 
the Esperanza Station, snow and recent garbage was removed from the 
inside, with the future archeological survey in mind. To test the 
polyester resin, a catalyst was used with accelerants in varying 
proportions to be applied to future works.

3.     Monument no 41   

Location: Paulet Island. Lat 63°35'S. Long 55°46'0.

Type: stone hut 
Origin: Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld's Swedish Expedition (1901-1903)

A barbed wire fence was purchased to be installed next season 
for the purpose of protecting the historical monument, and enabling 
the restoration and the archeological survey of the site to be 
subsequently undertaken. A small flag was used, to indicate where 
materials are to be disposed of to prevent adverse environmental 
impact. The remains of a facility, which in all likelihood served 
as toilets for the "Antarctic" shipwrecked explorers were 
discovered. Pictures were taken of the site. Viewed from the air, 
a mound of stones on the island's highest point was observed, 
having been built to attract the attention of an emergency 
expedition. Once this structure has been renovated, we intend to 
request that it be registered on the Antarctic Treaty's list of 
sites and historical monuments.

3
4.      Monument no 60

Location: Marambio Island. Lat. 64°17'43"S. Long. 56°59'54"O.
Type: Wooden panel and reinforced concrete monolith with two bronze 
plates.
Origin: Sign left by the "Uruguay" Argentine corvette on November 
10th, 1903 on the occasion of the rescue of Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld's 
Swedish expedition, and the I.A.A. and D.N.A. commemorative plaques 
installed in 1992.

     In January 1993, the wooden plaque of the Bay of Penguins was 
dismantled in order to be sent to the laboratories of the Museum of 
Natural Sciences of the La Plata National University for 
restoration and preservation. Indeed, after having been exposed for 
90 years to the elements of the area, it was damaged externally and 
its structure weakened. A low density polyester resin treatment and 
an external cover made of the same material, restored it back to 
its initial state. It was thus reinstalled in January of 1994 on 
its original site. Also, the rock base which holds the plaque's 
post was rebuilt.

     Additional outcrops of the remains of food stock crates 
abandoned on the site by the Uruguay corvette were detected. This 
is the reason why a survey of the site is planned, to recover 
museum materials.

4
Historical monument no 60 (Recommendation XVII-3).

Original wooden plaque and stone monolith in the Bay of 
Penguins.

 
5
