ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII éme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTATIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/WP 13
10 April 1994
Original: Spanish

The regulation of the extraction, use and custody
of scientific sample obtained in
the investigation of the Antarctic

Agenda Item 9 d
(submitted by Chile)
The Regulation of the Extraction, Use and Custody of 
Scientific Samples Obtained in the 
Investigation of Antarctica

(Agenda Item 9 d)

The Delegation of Chile has requested that this item be placed 
on the agenda of the XVIII ATCM in light of the concerns expressed 
by national scientific circles on this issue.

The bases and antecedents for the discussion of this matter 
are as follows:

a)  Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty entitled "conservation of Antarctic fauna and 
flora" stipulates in paragraph 1 article 3 that "taking or harmful 
interference shall be prohibited except in accordance with a 
permit" and, in paragraph 3 subparagraph a that "the issue of such 
permit  shall be limited  so as to ensure that  no more native 
mammals, birds or plants are taken than are strictly necessary...".

This annex does not specifically refer to other scientific 
specimens biological in nature other than the aforementioned 
specimens, whether they be paleontological, geological, 
archaeological or of special scientific value.  The latter are 
neither regulated nor explicitly protected in the Protocol itself 
or any of its annexes.

b)  National scientific circles have expressed concern over the 
fact that the Antarctic Treaty's system does not contain clear and 
precise regulations establishing the procedures to be followed to 
remove from the Antarctic continent the samples obtained in 

1
scientific research, in order to facilitate the use and subsequent 
custody thereof by those responsible for such specimens, and to 
promote the exchange of information thereon. Currently, specimens 
obtained by experts are usually found in the collections of 
universities, museums and even private homes, while the number of 
such specimens and what is done with them are often unknown.

c)  The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, through 
recommendation XXIII Geo1-2, merely guarantees the conservation of 
geological samples such as fossils, minerals, meteorites, volcanic 
bombs and other geological specimens of scientific value, 
indicating that these must be used exclusively for scientific 
purposes and duly placed under the supervision of institutions to 
which scientific circles have access and, that the sale, 
modification or traffic of said specimens is prohibited. It would 
be useful to extend this recommendation to all types of scientific 
specimens.

d)  Let us not forget that there is an increase in the scientific 
research conducted in Antarctica by an ever larger number of 
experts. This is why it is necessary to establish procedures to 
prevent the unjustified removal of scientific specimens and to 
avoid the duplication of efforts undertaken to obtain them. 
Likewise, it is important to prevent the irrational and 
indiscriminate extraction and use thereof.

In light of the above, Chile believes it is essential to 
safeguard this scientific heritage in the interest of science and 
future generations. Thus, it suggests that the following proposals 
be considered:

1.  That available information from scientific circles be 
gathered in order to properly examine the issue at hand. In this 
regard, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research shall be
                                 2
asked to study and analyze these matters in order to determine whether it is necessary to put in place regulations which would supplement annex II of the Protocol (conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora), extending them to include all classes of scientific specimens or whether it is preferable to establish a different set of regulations.

2.      Furthermore, we should ask ourselves whether it is necessary, within the context of the annual exchange of information provided for in recommendation VII-6 of the Antarctic Treaty to extend item XII on the "Annual Report on the Number of Animals of each Species Sacrificed in the Antarctic Treaty area..." in order to carry out exchanges of data on different scientific specimens obtained during Antarctic missions, by indicating their type, their class or their species, the area where they are found and their availability for scientific use.

3.      Finally, it may be useful to establish a data bank or a list of scientific specimens in order to protect the Antarctic areas in which such samples are frequently taken. This would help to prevent the possible excessive use thereof and would thus contribute to the preservation of Antarctica's environment while avoiding a duplication of efforts undertaken to obtain these specimens.

                                                                                                                                  3
