ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIII th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIII ème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                  KYOTO
                                  11-22 April 1994

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XVIII REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XVIII ATCM/WP 17
10 April 1994
Original:English

PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Agenda Item 6a

(Submitted by Japan)
Protcol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

Agenda Item 6a

I.    A number of provisions of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty require further clarification in 
order for the prospective Parties to the Protocol to be able to 
implement it fully.

II.   Following are some of such questions which may be useful to 
be put to the delegations at the XVIII ATCM for exchange of views 
in order to arrive at a better understanding of the sense of the 
provisions.

                                                                         1
1. Article 8 and Annex I

(1) The Protocol does not contain provisions regarding concrete criteria to judge whether the impact of the activities to be studied by the Environmental Impact Assesment (EIA) have "a minor or transitory impact" on the environment of the Antarctica. In the meantime, Japan intends to establish preliminary criteria based on the common consensus of the countries concerned. In this context, we should be greatful if you could answer the following questions.
(i) Other than bases and airstrip construction, what activities require the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) that evoke "more than a minor or transitory impact"?
(ii) As for one-time expeditions, can they be considered basically having "less than a minor or transitory impact", on condition that the recommendations with regard to protecting the environment to be regulated by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) be followed?

(iii) Regarding tour groups that will be visiting Antarctica more than twice, taking almost the same route during the same austral summer season, can such tours be interpreted basically as an activity having "a minor or transitory impact"? If your country considers that this "minor or transitory impact" depends on the number of Antarctic visitors and their length of stay, what guidelines do you think would be appropriate?

(2) (i) There are no provisions in the Protocol regarding who will implement the EIA with regard to the activities of individuals. May we consider that in the case of sight-seeing tours, the organizer of the tour ought to do the assessment, and in the case of individuals who go to the area without joining such a tour, should these persons do it individually?

(ii) In the case of individual visitors and their activities, it is difficult to obtain details of such trips if nationals of one country leave for Antarctica from a second or a third country. How does your country handles such cases?

2
2. Appendix C to Annex II
Inspection of dressed poultry is required when brought in to prevent the spread of disease, such as Newcastle disease, tuberculosis and yeast infections. What types of diseases are assumed to belong to "yeast infection" in your country? The United Kingdom informally listed fungal infections, fungus and Candida during the least Consultative Meeting. Does your country agree with their listing? Are there any other diseases which should also be included?

3. Annex III
Article 5-2
      Disposal in the sea of the by-probucts of sewage treatment by the Rotary Biological Contacter process or similar processes are stipulated to be disposed of by following the regulations contains in Annex IV. However no particular disposal regulation that contains this wording is found in Annex IV. Which provision in Annex IV is to be followed?

4. Annex IV
(1) Article 2 (application)
      It is understood that chartered ships from nations that do not belong to the parties of this Protocol are included in the provision that says "This Annex applies with respect to each Party, to the ships entitled to fly its flag and to any other ship engaged in or supporting its Antarctic operations etc." When a contracting party charters a ship sailing under a flag of a non-contracting party, is it sufficient to oblige those responsible for this ship to comply with the contens of the Protocol in the charter contract that has been concluded for the Antarctic Operation? In addition, in the charter contract to be concluded by a national of a contracting party must the national legislation of the contracting
3
party contain provisions that oblige the chartered ship the non-
contracting parties to comply with the regulations of the Protocol?

(2) Article 4 (discharge of noxious liquid substances)
(i) Can it be interpreted that the substances regulated by this 
article are only noxious liquid substances at present, and that the 
phrase "and any other chemical or other substances" has been 
included to expand the range of regulated substances in the future? 
Can the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) clearly 
identify this latter range of substances?
(ii) Can it be interpreted that the discharge criterion to ensure 
regulation "the prohibition of discharging substances into the sea 
in quantities or concentrations that are harmful to the marine 
environment" is satisfied by following the criterion of Annex II of 
MARPOL 73/78, which is a representative multilateral treaty 
stipulating regulations governing such discharges?

(3) Article 5-6 (garbage record books), and Article 6-2 (sewage 
record books)

    Can it be interpreted that each Party may deside what cases 
require the keeping of garbage record books and sewage record 
books, and what list of items should be recorded in thses books?

(4) Article 6-1 (discharge of sewage)
(i) Definition of "untreated sewage" that cannot be discharges.

"Sewage" has been defined (Annex IV of MARPOL73/78), but 
there is no definition of "untreated sewage" prohibited from 
discharge in this Annex. Can it be interpreted that "untreated 
sewage" means other sewage, apart from sewage allowed to be 
discharged under Annex IV of MARPOL 73/78 ("sewage treated in an 
approved sewage treatment plant which has been certified by the 
Administration to meet the operational requirements" within 4 
nautical miles, and "comminuted and disinfected sewage using a 
system approved by the Administration" over 4 nautical miles)?

4
(ii) Article 6-1(b) regulates discharge of sewage from a holding 
tank of a ship a distance of more than 12 nautical miles from a 
coast or an ice shelf, and the requirement of discharging is more 
permissive than that of Article 6-1(a). As the specifications of 
this holding tank mentioned in Article 6-1(b) are not clear, can it 
be interpreted that the installation of a holding tank is not 
always necessary if discharge is done in compliance with the 
regulation in Article 6-1(a) at a distance of more than 12 nautical 
miles from a coast or an ice shelf?

(5) Article 7-1 (cases of emergency)

        Although there is a provision in this Annex that exempts 
following the regulations about discharge resulting from damage to 
a ship or its equipment this provision, it refers only to the 
"discharge of oil" (article 3-2) and the "disposal of garbage 
(article 5)". However, the discharge of noxious liquid substances 
(article 4) and the discharge of sewage should also be included.
(i) The disposal of Noxious liquid substances and sewage is not 
exempted from regulations, in cases of an emergency. Dose this mean 
that sricter regulations must govern these disposals or is it 
naturally assumed that such regulations do not apply in an 
emergency?

        (ii) If your country interpretes that the regulations governing the 
disposal of noxious liquid substances and sewage are exemped from 
application in case of damage occuring to a ship, which articles 
from basis of your interpretation?

(6) Article 7-2

        (i) Is there any facter to be considered, in addition to the Annex 
IV, with regard to what you think are "cases of emergency" that 
require a report? And what are these factors, if any?

        (ii) Report of activities done in case of emergency

        If a ship flies the flag of the contracting Party of the 
Protocol, the parties that taken on the obligation to report are

5
both the country whose flag flies on ship and the Party concerned with the activity in which that ship is engaged. To ensure fulfilment of this obligation to report, it is better to decide which Party takes on the primary obligation to report. Which Party do you think should be more responsible for the obligation? (On the other hand, if the ship does not sail under the flag of the contracting Party, the party being concerned obligation? (On the other hand, if the ship does not sail under the flag of the contracting Party, the party being concerned with the activity in Antarctica that the ship is engaged in naturally has the obligation to report).

 
                                                                                                                                  6
