ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ        
девятое консультативное совещание

Agenda Item 3                  

                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                  NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                  LONDON          TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                  ANT/1X/64
                                  19 September 1977

OPENING STATEMENT BY HE MR F ZEGERS
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHILE
Mr Chairman

As our proceedings begin, the Chilean delegation is happy to 
salute the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
as a friendly country with a distinguished record of polar 
achievement, which has so cordially welcomed us to its capital 
city.

The Delegation also wishes to pay special tribute to the memory 
of the great Norwegian jurist and public figure, Edward Hambro, 
now no longer with us, who presided with such distinction over the 
Eighth Consultative Meeting, and rendered invaluable service to 
the Antarctic system.

This Ninth Consultative Meeting is taking place at a critical 
juncture in the history of the Washington Treaty, when various 
circumstances appear to threaten both the privileged status 
conferred upon the continent by that instrument, and the political 
and legal equilibrium which gave it birth and allowed it to evolve.

Looking back over the nearly twenty years which have elapsed 
since the Treaty was negotiated, we have good grounds for affirming 
that it has produced a set of achievements. The Antarctic sub-
system is in many ways more effective than the global system applied 
to problems on a world scale. In Antarctica we have established 
an ecological reserve; an absolutely clear field for the advancement 
of human knowledge through scientific research; disarmament, that 
gives expression to its fundamental character, of being a peaceful 
continent; and effective co-operation among countries differing 
in respect of latitudes, stages of growth and political systems. 
This is an impressive achievement, both in its preservation of the 
marvels of nature and its creation of a legal and political system 
unique in contemporary history.

The work of the Treaty Parties active in the area, on whom 
the primary responsibility in Antarctic matters has devolved, 
in the past as in the present, is to be regarded as an important 
contribution for the benefit of mankind, in complete conformity with 
the aims and objectives of the United Nations Charter.

/The
The challenge to the Treaty's achievement and progress during twenty years of work by the Consultative Parties, has taken the form of the drive to discover and benefit from new resources, partly directed towards the seas and land masses of Antarctica. Such possibility of exploring for and exploiting the living and mineral resources existing in the Treaty area jeopardizes the very status the Treaty sought to confer upon Antarctica, as an ecological reserve for the benefit of all mankind.  In other words it threatens the natural wonders of Antarctica which have caught the admiration of poets and scientists and are of such vital importance to the world ecosystem.  It also imperils the political equilibrium which the Treaty achieved between countries having rights or claims to sovereignty in Antarctica, and other States pursuing activities and interests in that continent.

These problems do not, of course, mean that the Consultative Parties now assembled can seek indefinitely to prevent the utilisation of these resources or to hold back the tide of history which sometimes carries all before it.  But any system of exploration and exploitation we may establish must on the one hand be compatible with, and even subordinate to, the status of Antarctica achieved in 1959, which implies safeguarding the rights which were deliberately subordinated to obligations under the Treaty for the purpose of certain goals, which will henceforward no longer be the only ones.

Chile is the country nearest Antarctica and possesses indubitable and age-old rights of sovereignty there which are safeguarded by Article IV of the Treaty, and need to be emphatically reaffirmed on this momentus occasion.  It cannot, therefore, stand apart in any way from any agreements and measures which may be adopted in respect of existing resources in the lands and seas to which they apply.

This very proximity means that the Chilean ecosystem is closely enmeshed in the Antarctic ecosystem as a whole, and this relationship involves on our side a special interest in the agenda item "Man's impact on the Antarctic environment", and its essential corollaries, those dealing with mineral and living resources.  The President of
/the
the Republic of Chile reaffirmed this dual definition during his 
recent visit to Antarctica.

The Treaty, and later developments in the form of Recommendations 
and action by the Consultative Parties, have defined the whole of 
the Treaty zone as a Special Conservation Area, in the terminology 
used in the Agreed Measures for the protection of its fauna and 
flora.  The Consultative Parties have acknowledged, and accepted, 
in these and other agreements, a special responsibility for the 
Antarctic ecosystem, which ought to be reaffirmed in a solemn 
declaration.

This responsibility should find expression in according the 
necessary priority to the preservation of the environment over 
any utilisation of Antarctica's resources, and in adopting adequate 
measures for the conservation of all living resources found within 
the Treaty Area.

The new state of affairs cannot and should not cause the Treaty 
and Antarctica to lose their status or priorities: as a peaceful 
area, open to scientific research, and as an ecological reserve.

As one aspect of their special responsibility, the Parties 
should fully accept the joint undertaking enshrined in Article X, 
by endeavouring in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations 
to ensure that no one engages in any activity in the Treaty area 
contrary to the principles and purposes of the Treaty as clarified 
and developed in its lifetime of almost two decades.

At this meeting we should give separate consideration, under 
Items VI and VII, to the problems posed by the question of the 
exploitation of minerals and living resources.  Nevertheless, each 
should, following the example of the Eighth Consultative Meeting, 
be tackled in relation to the topic of Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
Environment.

We believe that these matters should be despatched, albeit 
without undue haste, with all due urgency, but no precipitation 
liable to make us commit irreparable errors.

/Without
Without prejudice to the intensive discussion we can devote to 
these fundamental issues, we should consider the possibility of 
calling, if necessary, a Special Consultative Meeting during the 
coming year at which further consideration could be given to all 
or some of them.  And the annual frequency of Consultative 
Meetings that prevailed during the early years of the Treaty's 
operation, could be reinstated on a permanent basis.

As to the substance of these issues, we must never lose sight 
in our work of the objectives set by the Treaty and the twofold 
necessity of not spoiling the natural world of Antarctica nor 
upsetting the equilibrium so arduously achieved twenty years ago. 
Antarctica is no uncharted territory, and it is moreover covered 
by a special legal system which has proved its worth over time and 
at the bar of history.

Mr Chairman

Chile most emphatically reiterates its espousal of the 
Antarctic Treaty and dedication to the understanding, preservation 
and development of this continent, to which it is indissolubly 
linked.

At this decisive moment in our debates - perhaps the most 
important in the history of the Treaty - my Delegation trusts that 
they will at this meeting be sufficiently illuminating for our 
acts to be accompanied by all the wisdom that present circumstances 
demand.

Thank you.
