ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание               NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                            LONDON

Agenda Item 10                                         ANT/IX/49 (Rev. 1)
                                                        Date: 6 October 1977
                                                        Original:  English

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

(Draft Recommendation submitted by Chile)

The Representatives,

Recommend to their Governments that they approve the
following statement on the Protection of the Antarctic
Environment,

The Governments participating in the Ninth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting,

Deeply aware that the Antarctic environment is unique and
vulnerable to contamination and disturbance,

Determined to protect the Antarctic environment from harmful
interference,

Having particular regard to the conservation principles
developed by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions,

Recalling their obligation to exert appropriate efforts,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end
that no one engages in any activity in Antarctica contrary to
the principles or purposes of the Antarctic Treaty,

Declare as follows:

1. The Consultative Parties recognise their prime
    responsibility for the protection of the Antarctic
    environment from all forms of harmful human inter-
    ference, pollution, contamination and disturbance.

2. They will ensure in planning future activities that
    the question of environmental effects and of the
    /possible
possible impact of such activities on the relevant 
ecosystems are duly considered.

3. They will refrain from activities having an inherent 
tendency to modify the Antarctic environment unless 
appropriate steps have been taken to foresee the 
probable modifications and to exercise appropriate 
controls with respect to harmful environmental effects.

4. They will continue to monitor the Antarctic environment 
and to exercise their responsibility for informing the 
world community of any significant changes in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area caused by man's activities.

* * * *

The Chilean Delegation also proposes that the following be 
inserted in the Final Report of the Ninth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting:

Man's Impact on the Antarctic environment

With the items on the agenda concerning Antarctic resources 
particularly in mind, the Representatives discussed the question 
of man's impact on the Antarctic environment. They recalled 
the numerous steps already taken by Consultative Parties designed 
to protect the Antarctic environment from unnecessary interference, 
including:

(i) The designation by the Consultative Parties of the 
Treaty Area as a Special Conservation Area and the 
adoption of the "Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of the Antarctic Fauna and Flora".

(ii) The designation of "Specially Protected Areas" to 
preserve their unique ecological system and "Sites 
of Special Scientific Interest" to enable scientific 
investigations to be carried at those sites without 
interference.

(iii) The negotiation of the Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Seals (London 1972).

/(iv)
(iv) The adoption of measures to preserve and protect from damage historic monuments situated in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

(v) The adoption of a Code of Conduct to be observed at their stations and by their expeditions within the Antarctic Treaty Area.

(vi) In close co-operation with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions, and through SCAR with other international organizations, they have sought to:

      (a) identify the types and assess the extent of human interference which has occurred in the Treaty area as a result of man's activities;

      (b) assess the possible impact on the environment of the Treaty Area and other dependent ecosystems if mineral exploration and/or exploitation were to occur there;  and

      (c) they have developed plans for the comprehensive study of the Southern Ocean considered as an integral part of the Antarctic environment.

The Representatives, while considering the next steps to be taken with regard to questions concerning Antarctic resources, decided to recommend that their Governments should reaffirm their commitment to environmental protection.  Accordingly, the Representatives drew up the statement contained in Recommendation XI - .
