ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 5                                     ANT/IX/33
                                                    Date: 23 September 1977
                                                    Original: English

REPORT SUBMITTED TO PLENARY FROM THE
GROUP OF EXPERTS ON ANTARCTIC MINERALS

(Draft prepared by the Chairman for
consideration by the group of experts)

The Group conducted its business according to the terms of
reference established at the Special Preparatory Meeting, 1976
(ANT/IX/2) and the Guidelines submitted to the Plenary (ANT/IX/4
and 5).  The following agenda was adopted by the group (ANT/IX/27).

I   To review the present state of technology for exploration and
    exploitation of minerals in the Antarctic

    (a) geophysical and other exploratory techniques

    (b) construction techniques for on-shore or off-shore
        installations

    (c) drilling and other extraction techniques

    (d) processing and storage techniques

    (e) transport techniques.

II  To review the probable impact of such exploration and
    exploitation on the environment.

III To review measures for the prevention or restoration of damage
    to the environment

    (a) techniques for the prevention of pollution

    (b) remedial and restorative techniques

    (c) techniques for monitoring

    (d) techniques for the assessment (prediction) of environmental
        impact.

IV  To suggest preliminary guidelines on appropriate methods for
    exploration and exploitation.

The following report of the group's discussion is submitted to
plenary for consideration.

-1-
I. A REVIEW OF THE PRESENT STATE OF TECHNOLOGY 
FOR EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION OF MINERALS 
IN THE ANTARCTIC

A. Geophysical and other exploratory techniques

1. It is convenient to look separately at exploratory techniques 
on land and at sea. It is also useful to distinguish three 
successive stages in the process commencing with exploration and 
ending in the exploitation of minerals. These stages are:

     (i) basic exploration, which involves many activities 
inseparable from those in normal geological and geophysical 
research and seeks to define the rock structures most prom-
ising for detailed examination.

    (ii) exploratory drilling in restricted areas chosen as a result 
of such preliminary investigations;

   (iii) full scale exploitation.

2. In this section of the Report attention is concentrated on the 
first phase ( basic exploration ), on the methods available, and 
on their environmental impact. Drilling techniques are considered 
Section B below.

3. The Antarctic remains one of the world's least known regions. 
Much of its land surface is mantled in ice, and its shallow seas 
obscured by ice shelves and pack. The development and application 
of geophysical methods, especially those employing remote sensing, 
are vital to its exploration for science, irrespective of possible

-2-
mineral exploitation. Only about 1% of other comparable
continental areas contain hydrocarbon resources, so that
little of this exploration will lead to possible commercial
development.

4.  Geophysical exploration needs to be combined with other
techniques. On land the continued mapping of ice thickness
and sub-ice relief and the extension of geological investiga-
tions are needed as well as gravimetric magnetic or seismic
investigations if crustal structures are to be defined.  At
sea bathymetric surveys and geological sampling of the sea
bed are important, alongside more specialised geophysical
techniques.  If exploratory or commercial drilling are con-
templated, climatic information and knowledge of wave and ice
patterns at sea and biological systems both on land and sea
will be needed before such activities can be located in the
most acceptable places,

5.  In the exploratory phase, established gravimetric, magnetic
and most seismic geophysical techniques developed in other
regions have also been shown to be safely and successfully
applicable in the Antarctic, at appropriate seasons,  They
cause no greater pollution or other adverse environmental impact
than many other research activities.

6.  At present there is no proof that hydrocarbon minerals exist
in Antarctica. Aeromagnetic techniques using a fairly widely
spaced network of traverse.lines are particularly appropriate to
the search for basins containing substantial thicknesses of
sediment.  At sea the use of "sniffer" methods involving the
-3-
sampling of water just above the sea bed in the search for traces 
of hydrocarbon seepage is another possible environmentally safe 
technology, as a supplement to the seismic studies that are 
likely to be instituted on an increasing scale.

7.  Seismic surveys undertaken at sea involve two kinds of 
technique. Reflection methods, now widely used by the petroleum 
industry, involve long multi-channel arrays and energy sources 
which include "air-gun" systems. Despite the problems posed by 
sea, ice; these systems can be used in many parts of the 
Antarctic at certain seasons. They can give penetration of the 
sea bed for up to 10-15 Km, which is sufficient for exploration 
for hydrocarbon minerals and they have no damaging impact on the 
marine flora and fauna. However, because the images provided 
sometimes lack ideal clarity, and because of a desire for cross-
calibration, many commercial operations also use refraction 
methods to a limited degree. These methods involve higher 
energy pulses, generally obtained by high explosives. This 
method is likely to cause severe local damage to marine biota 
and for this reason and because it is not considered essential 
to the exploratory process it has been prohibited in some regions 
(such as the Norwegian continental shelf).

8.  Refraction seismic studies using explosives, on the other hand, 
are unavoidable at present in certain fundamental fields of 
crustal geophysics where the aim is to study deep structure (to 
30-40 Km) as when examining the relationship between the 
Antarctic and other continents. On land, too, detonation of 
explosives in areas chosen carefully for the absence of vulncrable
-4-
and valuable flora, fauna or geomorphological features need not
cause unacceptable damage. It is considered unwise to seek to
entirely prohibit the use of explosives in seismic research in
the Antarctic, but they should only be used where essential and
with due regard to environmental sensitivities, and they do not
appear to be necessary on any scale (if at all) in programes of
exploration for hydrocarbon minerals.

9.      While satisfactory geophysical methods appear to be available
for scientific exploration and the search for minerals in
Antarctica, there are dangers in over-generalization: not all
methods may be usable under allconditions on sea or land. One
thing is however clear. The present ignorance of the structure of
much of the Antarctic land and continental shelves, coupled with
the hostile environment and the extent of ice cover, means that
the exploratory phase is likely to be prolonged in most areas,
before exploratory drilling could be considered. The length of
this initial phase will obviously vary, however, from place to
place and the velicity of this general statement should not be
held to imply that some exploratory drilling may not be proposed
in the best known areas on a time scale of years rather than
decades.

-5-
B.  Drilling and other extraction techniques

10. The Expert Group agreed with a number of previous national and 
international evaluations, including those by SCAR, that concluded 
that exploration for hydrocarbon minerals on the continental shelves 
around Antarctica was foreseeable, and commercial exploitation was a 
serious possibility in the longer term.  The exploitation of 
metallic minerals and fossil fuels on land appeared much less 
probable in the foreseeable future although it would be unwise to 
discount it in the long term.  Should offshore oil or gas reserves 
be exploited, moreover, there would be likely to be onshore mining 
of rocks and quarrying of aggregates for use in construction. 
While the technology for exploration for and exploitation of 
hydrocarbons received most urgent attention therefore, some attention 
was given to that employed for other minerals.

11. In discussing mineral exploration and exploitation techniques 
generally it is desirable to discriminate between the position on 
land (and there between ice-free and ice-covered terrain) and at 
sea.  Marine situations should be examined in three categories: 
areas of sea bed situated beneath floating ice shelves several 
hundred metres thick, areas beneath pack ice that persists for 9 or 
more months in the year, and areas beneath seas open for at least 
three summer months.

12. Mining of metallic minerals and other hard rock minerals and 
quarrying for construction materials on land in the Antarctic appears 
to be feasible, in areas not covered by any significant depth of 
ice, using technology already employed in Arctic regions.  Such 
operations would have a major local environmental impact.  On the 
other hand technology is not available for the exploitation of such 
minerals under a substantial ice cover and it seems unlikely that 
it will be worth while to develop it.

-6-
13. Considerable experience of drilling has been gained on land in 
the joint Japanese-New Zealand-United States Dry Valley Drilling 
project. Existing technology developed in the Arctic could 
readily be used to explore for and exploit hydrocarbon minerals 
on land in the Antarctic (where permafrost problems may indeed 
be less acute). The environmental impact of such activities, with 
the substantial associated influx of personnel could however 
be considerable because the soils are readily disturbed and bacterial 
contamination of naturally sterile or near-sterile situations is 
inevitable. Conversely no technology exists for drilling through 
moving ice-sheets on land and it is unlikely that there will be 
much incentive to develop it.

14. Exploratory drilling for hydrocarbons is most likely at first 
in areas of the Antarctic seas free of ice for at least 3 summer 
months, which is usually sufficient time to drill a deep borehole 
using available technology. Considerations of cost and 
environmental protection alike make it desirable that these 
activities are preceded by geological and geophysical studies along 
the lines described in section [A], defining the most promising 
sedimentary basins. As section [A] also states, substantial 
meteorological data and knowledge of tides, currents and bathymetry 
will be required for these areas in advance of drilling. However, 
drilling has from time to time proved its value as an exploratory 
tool in its own right and revealed hydrocarbons in areas whose 
geological structure appeared unpromising and its use in this 
sense in the Antarctic cannot be ruled out.

15. In considering offshore drilling technology it is useful to 
discriminate between strictly technological aspects (for example 
relating to platforms, drilling systems or prevention of blow-outs)

-7-
and environmental factors determining the period for which drilling 
is feasible and the special hazards to be guarded against.

16. Technology already exists for drilling from dynamically 
positioned mobile floating platforms in depths down to 1000 metres. 
Research now in progress may extend the capability to 1500-3,000 
metres or more by 1985 and this would be needed in many areas 
of the Antarctic since seas with a sufficiently long summer open 
season are commonly 2,000m or more deep.  Existing technology has 
been proven in Arctic waters, where platforms have been able to 
remain on station in moderate pack ice and where it has proved 
possible to tow small icebergs away.  There seems no reason to 
doubt that it could be used in those parts of the Antarctic ocean 
where sea bed depths are not too great (300-1,000m) and the water is 
ice-free or covered by only light pack for three months or more per 
annum.  These areas form a small proportion of the Antarctic seas 
as a whole but still extend to around 100,000 km2 in the Ross Sea 
alone.

17. Experience off Labrador has come from the use of a Pelican-type 
dynamically positioned ship.  Such a vessel may not be ideal for 
exploratory drilling in the Antarctic because it has insufficient 
stability, and a semi-submersible dynamically-positioned platform may 
be preferable.  Technology for drilling from pack ice is being 
developed in Canada and may be available in about six years. 
This could well be operable in the Antarctic, although not on 
thick ice shelves.

18. Even in the relatively open seas there are significant 
differences between Arctic and Antarctic.  For example many 
Antarctic icebergs are much larger and could not readily be towed 
away from a drilling platform.  A platform would therefore need to 
be able to cease work and move away if threatened.  Experience 
-8-
of Labrador confirms that towing can change the direction of drift 
of the smaller icebergs sufficiently to approximately halve the 
number of times the drilling vessel needs to disconnect from the 
borehole.  Towing is at present impracticable with icebergs 
exceeding two million tonnes weight, and when the sea is rough, 
or the berg inconveniently shaped or unstable.

19. At any time in a drilling process high gas pressures may be 
encountered.  Technology exists for shutting down and disconnecting 
from such wells, and re-entering them afterwards, but the shut-down 
process would take up to l2 hours and hence an effective "early 
warning" system of approaching icebergs would be needed.  Forecasts 
of the frequency of such encounters are also required since drilling 
would be unacceptably protracted if it had to stop very often. 
Such operations would also demand reliable meteorological 
information in advance of developing storms.  Environmental 
studies designed to ensure the safety of exploratory drilling 
activities appear to need urgent development.

20. It is important to discriminate between exploratory drilling 
to obtain sea bed geological samples, to only shallow depths, and 
exploratory drilling for hydrocarbons.  The latter requires 
blow-out preventers and other safety devices while the former 
does not.  Generally shallow drilling to confirm sea bed geology 
should precede deep drilling for hydrocarbons.

21. Existing technology does not appear suitable for drilling in 
those parts of the Antarctic seas covered by heavy pack ice for 
over 9 months of the year, or by floating ice shelves.  For these 
reasons most of the shallowest areas of sea are inaccessible at 
present.  Technology for drilling from installations on the sea bed 
is being developed and is likely to become available within a matter 
of decades, and this would open new areas for exploration, but such 
installations would need to be located in areas not liable to 
-9-
iceberg scour.  No technology is being developed suited to operation below the major ice shelves.

22. Exploratory drilling is not an end in itself.  It costs large sums, and is undertaken in the hope that it will lead on to exploitation.  Hence the technology for exploration and exploitation needs to be considered together, but there is the important difference that while the former can be done satisfactorily in areas of sea open for 3 months in summer the latter demands year-round operations for which there is no technology appropriate to the Antarctic at present.  However, a gap of 10-15 years between the commencement of exploration and the start of exploitation is not uncommon in other parts of the world and it would be unwise to assume that exploration for hydrocarbons in Antarctica will be delayed until exploitation is proved feasible:  it could well be that the discovery of potential resources will be needed as a spur to the perfection of means of exploitation.

23. Accidents on oil rigs, leading to environmental hazard, commonly involve human error and no technology can eliminate this, but it can reduce its probability and the scale of the consequences.  Generally speaking human errors are commonest in routine operations involving less qualified personnel.  In opening up a new region, in an exploratory phase, highly skilled staff are likely to be employed and the risk of error reduced.  Because the Antarctic is a peculiarly hostile environment, more than normal care is likely to be taken during the early stages.  The risks from human error are likely to increase once there is a transition from exploration to exploitation, with a strong element of routine.  But there is no reason to predict a higher likelihood of human error in the Antarctic than elsewhere (the reverse is more likely, because

-10-
operating conditions are never likely to be easy).  It is important 
to discriminate between the process of drilling (whether for 
exploration or production wells) and the control of production. 
Drilling is always done at present from ships or platforms at the 
sea surface, but there are several systems allowing control of 
production wells by structures on the sea bed.  At present all 
of these are in shallow water and many are controlled from a surface 
vessel to which oil is piped.

C.  Construction techniques for on-shore and off-shore 
installations

24.  At sea, the transition from preliminary geophysical exploration 
through the successive stages of exploratory drilling and 
exploitation might well take as long as 25 years (there being 
a 10 year gap between the start of exploration and the first 
exploratory drilling and a further 15 years from then to production 
coming on stream).  A long time is therefore available for the 
development of exploitation technology.

25.  It is none the less important to begin now to obtain the 
environmental data base that will allow wise decisions 10 years 
or more from now.  Information is needed about wave and storm 
heights, periodicities and spectra;  the persistence of storms 
and of spells of good weather;  currents;  pack ice (including 
pressures in pack);  iceberg size, depths, frequency and rate of 
movement;  and the depths of iceberg scour in areas that might be 
explored for hydrocarbons.  Information is also needed on the 
composition and stability of sea bed sediments and rocks to which 
structures might be moored or on which they could be based.  This 
programme of data gathering could well take ten years.

-11-
26. At present three kinds of platform are used in oil exploitation at sea.  Fixed structures of concrete or steel are used in depths of water down to 130 and 300 m respectively, and have been developed for safe operation even in seismic zones.  One floating platform, linked by risers to production wells is in use in the North Sea.  About 100 underwater well head systems are in use, mainly in shallow water and none below 300 m.  Despite considerable advances in the design of platforms, risers (the link between ocean floor and surface platform) and safety devices, none of these platform systems is suitable for installation in the Antarctic. While considerable progress has been made in developing surface platforms to withstand storms, and pack ice, none is proof against icebergs on an Antarctic scale.  At the present, the design of equipment for use in oil exploitation in the Antarctic remains in the conceptual stage.

27. The first action in evaluating a newly discovered oilfield is to determine its size, and where the technology for exploitation is very expensive a field needs to be very large if it is to be worth exploiting.  In the Antarctic a further constraint would be imposed by limited access.  It is difficult to envisage any Antarctic oilfield being exploited if it were only accessible to transport removing the production for 3 months of the year even though this period would suffice for the actual drilling of wells.

28. In the North Sea, using today's technology (but with year-round access), it is not considered economic to develop an oilfield with a potential recoverable production of less than 200 million barrels. In the Antarctic costs would almost certainly be substantially higher, making only very large fields appropriate for exploitation. The limit will however depend on world energy costs and on the available technology some decades ahead.  Should oilfields be found and technology allow their exploitation, using sea bed installations with the transport of produce via submarines hence permitting year-round operation, it would be unwise to assume that they might not become economically attractive some decades hence.

29. If hydrocarbon minerals are exploited in Antarctic seas it is most unlikely that fixed or floating surface platforms will be used:

-12-
structures on the sea bed or even below the sea bed (thus
avoiding iceberg scour) are most likely.  Advances are being
made in the design of sea bed systems both for drilling and for
the operation of production wells in deep waters.  The water
depth presents no inherent problem because these systems are
unmanned, and their maintenance is undertaken using submarines
rather than by divers.

30.  The difficulties in the way of the different production
systems in different water depths may well cancel one another
out.  In shallow seas, existing technology could be applied
but for the problems of iceberg collision and scour.  In deeper
waters iceberg scour is not a hazard but new production technology
is needed.

31.  The design of structures for drilling, production, oil
collection, processing, storage and transportation of the final
products from the Antarctic must be based on recommended practices
adopted either internationally or nationally.  Guidelines will
need to be laid down to ensure that structures are designed,
installed and maintained in a manner that provides safeguards
against pollution, the waste of resources, or risks to life.
Over the 25 years before exploitation is likely on a commercial
scale, attention must be given to the negotiation of such
standards internationally: this is a matter for the
attention of the Plenary.  Any platforms used
for oil exploitation in the Antarctic would almost certainly
be constructed in a region of warmer waters outside the region
and towed to the point of installation.  There are no
technological problems in this process, but seas in the area of
installation would need to be ice-free at least for the period of
1-3 days needed for correct positioning.

32.  The logistic support of exploitation activities will also
need careful planning.  It could involve the construction of
supply bases on land in the Antarctic if there were suitable
sites nearby, or outside the region (the latter being the more
likely).  Structures used in the Antarctic are likely to be
more self-contained than those used elsewhere, in less exacting

-13-
climates.  Hence the exploitation of hydrocarbon minerals 
off-shore in the Antarctic is unlikely to demand major construction 
activities on land with their associated environmental impact.

33.  Should mineral exploration or exploitation occur on-shore 
the associated construction of bases for support personnel, 
processing plant, or other installations would be possible 
employing technology already developed in Arctic regions and 
in building the larger Antarctic stations.

D.  Processing and storage operations: hydrocarbon minerals at sea

34.  All oil emerging from a well is a mixture of liquid 
hydrocarbons, gas and (especially as the exploitation of a field 
continues) water.  The gas needs to be separated from the oil 
before the latter can be transported (since transport of oil 
takes place at atmospheric pressure).  The hydrocarbon gases 
produced are generally ei ther flared (burned) or re-injected 
into the strata of the oil reservoir, thereby maintaining 
pressure and helping continued exploitation.  The water is 
separated from the oil by gravity and can also be injected back 
either into the rocks of the oil reservoir or into some other 
strata.

-14-
35. Existing technology for this separation and reinjection could be employed in any fixed or floating surface production platforms used in the Antarctic (it would be more difficult to liquefy the separated gas and remove it also as a fuel). Appropriate technology has also been developed and tested in production well head structures on the sea bed, operated by remote control from the surface, could be developed as an integral  part of the perfection of such submerged structures for use in the Antarctic.

36. In the North Sea, the larger oilfields discharge their oil to the shore by pipeline, whereas some smaller fields store oil for loading into tankers. The reason for this difference is that tanker loading can be interrupted for many days at a time by bad weather, and unless enormous storage capacity were provided, this would result in slowing production at the large fields at such times.  In the Antarctic, it is unlikely that pipelines would be used to transfer separated oil to an on-shore terminal and tanker loading port:  it would probably generally be better to process the oil at sea and load directly into ships. Substantial storage capacity might therefore be required, in view of the inevitable interruption of surface shipping operations by storms, and occasionally by heavy pack or icebergs.  Even sub-sea installations loading into submarines might require considerable storage volume.

Processing and storage operations: non-hydrocarbon minerals on land

37. If metalliferous minerals were exploited on-shore in the Antarctic, it is likely that they would also (as elsewhere in the world) need to be enriched before transport away from the mining area.  This processing would demand substantial installations, although the technology would be likely to be the same as was applied elsewhere, for example in the Arctic.  Large amounts of fuel would be required since the processing of such ores is an energy-intensive process.  Large volumes of water would also be needed - again demanding energy, in most parts of the Antarctic, to melt ice.  Substantial volumes of wastes would be produced. Although the Working Group considered that such exploitation was unlikely at present, when there were more accessible sources of minerals, it was noted as a potential environmental impact in the future.

-15-
E. Transport techniques

38. Transport would be required for two purposes should 
mineral exploration or exploitation occur in the Antarctic.
It would be needed to support personnel and installations
and to remove the products of their activities.

39. Present technology, as used to supply Antarctic bases,
would be adequate for the support role although the volume
of equipment and numbers of people moved might be much greater
(in exploratory drilling two or three service ships might be
needed to support the 100 or so men on a rig and the tugs
employed in iceberg towing). Small storage bases might be needed
on shore should this be possible near enough to areas being
explored. At the development stage even larger numbers of people
might need to be supported (although much would depend on the
technology employed).

40. Removal of oil could be done by specially modified surface
vessels or by submarines. The 'Manhattan' project demonstrated
that ships could be designed to operate commercially through
Arctic pack ice. Another possibility lies with submarines.
The concepts behind the design of both types of vessel (perhaps
using nuclear power) are being explored actively, and it is
likely that technology would be available by the time Antarctic
oil exploitation became possible on other grounds.

41. Pipelines are a third option. While their use is unlikely
in many parts of the Antarctic, especially because of iceberg
scour but also because there is little attraction in removing
oil from the open sea to coastal areas which might be no more
easily accessible by tankers, modern techniques of tunnelling
in the sea floor at depths of up to 300 m could possibly be
developed to the point where pipelines could be adequately
protected.

-16-
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION

42. The Expert Group had before it the Report of the SCAR
Group of Specialists on the Environmental Impact Assessment
of Mineral Exploration/Exploitation in Antarctica (EAMREA).
Attention was also drawn to a number of other papers, including
that presented to the Special Preparatory Meeting in Paris in
June 1976 by the Soviet delegation (Paper RPS 6) and the summary
of the Report on Environmental Impact Assessment by Dr D H Elliot
(ANT IX/INF 2).

43. The EAMREA Report, taken in conjunction with the other papers,
provides a valuable foundation for the assessment of the likely
impact on the Antarctic environment of various possible technological
developments. It remains preliminary, and a continuing dialogue
with various technical developments in mineral exploration and
exploitation and experts on Antarctic environmental assessments.
Only through a continuing interaction of this kind will it be
possible to keep evaluation of likely environmental impacts
appraised of the evolution of scientific understanding and
technological advance. The Consultative Meeting may wish to consider
the best machinery for ensuring this dialogue.

44. The Expert Group considered that it might be helpful for its
report to be conveyed to the EAMREA Group, in order to inform that
Group of the latest technological assessments. Several specific
items identified in discussion also merit EAMREA's attention, and
these are indicated in the following paragraphs.

45. The estimate, on page 23, of the EAMREA document ( and published
in the Oil and Gas Journal for November 1976) that 45 billion
barrels of oil and 115 trillion cubic feet of gas "may" exist
on the Antarctic Continental shelf  off Marie Byrd Land, even
with the qualifications attached to it in the text, is regarded

-17-      /as
as an unfounded speculation, and in view of the tendency such
figures have to be lifted out of context, should not be used
until supported by much firmer evidence.

46. The Expert Group agrees that exploration for minerals,
both onshore and offshore in the Antarctic, involving aeromagnetic
and seabourne-magnetic surveys, gravimetric surveys, and seismic
surveys alongside established geological techniques are likely
to have only a small and localised environmental impact.  Mineral
exploration may well, however, increase the number of people,
vessels, overland vehicles and aircraft engaged in Antarctica,
thus increasing the general load of pollution and waste, increasing
the scale of base installations, and multiplying the number of
points of local impact. Hence, any expansion of this activity
needs to be conducted with full awareness of a survey's require-
ments, especially in sites of high scientific interest.  Particular
attention should be devoted to waste disposal techniques.

47. It is important that such extensive research is used to
define as quickly as possible those restricted areas where there
is a real prospect of exploitable minerals, on which more detailed
investigations can then "zoom in".  Detailed studies of those sites
and their environmental properties are needed before exploratory
drilling, with its greater risk of environmental disturbance,
can begin.  Such drilling could bring impact which, although
still localised (assuming that blow-outs and consequent major
oil escapes are prevented), would still be on a larger scale than
hither-to experienced in the Antarctic.

48. There are a number of critical environmental properties to
be assessed before the location of the impact of oil exploitation
could be considered.  They include seabed stability, faulting,
tendency to slumping (which could cause pipeline failure), sediment
/strength

-18-
strength and properties, and the extent to which sediments 
might move in suspension or as sand waves on the seabed. 
Techniques to determine all these are available, and include 
sidescan, sonar and high resalution seismic studies. 
49. More studies of the potential impact of oil on Antarctic 
eco-systems are needed (as the SCAR EAMREA Group point out). 
Oil is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons, and its toxicity 
depends on its detailed composition, increasing as the proportion 
of short-chain aromatics and alkanes rises. The composition 
of crude oil often varies from field to field within one 
geographical area, and it cannot be assumed that all "Antarctic 
oil" will be the same. Hence, it will only be possible to 
evaluate its biological toxicity step by step as fields are 
discovered.

-19-
MEASURES FOR THE PREVENTION OR RESTORATION OF 
DAMAGE TO THE ENVIRONMENT

(a)  Prevention of Pollution by Oil

50.  Problems of oil pollution can arise during drilling (whether 
for exploration or production), processing, storage or transportation 
under both normal operations and in the event of accident.

51.  When drilling for oil is begun, the presence of oil is not 
proven.  At any stage gas, oil or water pressure can be encountered, 
tending to force the drill to the surface.  Mud heavy enough to 
hold down any foreseeable pressure is therefore used to prevent 
blow-outs.  It is important that sufficient mud of a composition 
appropriate to the operating conditions is available at the drilling 
rig:  over-provision is prudent.  It should be noted that these 
muds.  may contain special additives to make them suitable for use 
in the Antarctic and these have a potential to cause some local 
pollution if released in the environment.  As drilling proceeds 
the hole is lined by casing.  It is again important to over-design 
the system to overcome all foreseeable pressure, allowing a wide 
safety margin.  This over-design is especially vital in exploration 
wells in new areas.

52.  When installing casing, cementing practices must be good enough 
to ensure that oil cannot burst laterally through the casing into 
flanking rocks and ultimately to the surface.

53.  In production wells the knowledge acquired in appraisal wells 
is naturally applied.  The next series of pollution prevention 
measures relate to proper procedures for the cleaning of operating 
systems, and replacement of components.  These are naturally 
vulnerable operations because some control equipment is often itself 
taken out of use, and precautions must be especially strict in 
extreme environments.

54.  The training of personnel is an essential element in these 
safety precautions, and this must include "refresher" courses 
bringing staff up to date with new methods.

55.  Thorough surveys in advance of drilling are a major help to the 
prevention of pollution.  High resolution seismic studies can detect 
layers where gas pressures may be encountered near the surface.  
Pressure measurement is also desirable during drilling.  In a 
permafrost environment frozen gas (or gas and oil) may sometimes be 
/encountered
-20-
encountered just below a sealing ice layer, and present an
added hazard.

56. On drilling platforms at sea the prevention of pollution
is of the first importance because opportunities for
rehabilitation are few if spillage occurs. It is essential
to undertake exploration cautiously, to prevent blowouts. It
is essential to be able to stop and re-start drilling, and to
abandon and re-enter wells without risk of pollution: wherever
possible equipment should be recovered before contact with a
well is severed but in emergency a platform can move off station
in under a minute without risk of pollution. With sound
technology, training and vigilance the risk of blow-outs should
be very small.

57. Oil storage below the sea depends on the displacement of
sea water from the tanks. The interface is always kept within
the tank, and there are reliable ways of preventing hydrocarbons
being discharged, but when water is drawn off it is necessary
to separate the oil. Techniques and standards will need to be
drawn up for seabed storage systems in the Antarctic.

58. The main risk of oil spillage in the Antarctic probably
arises at the point of transfer from production wells to
storage and thence to tankers. If seabed pipelines are used,
it will be because technology allows their burial below the
depth of iceberg scour, in areas not liable to slumping or
movement along geological faults.

59. Tankers to be used in the Antarctic will almost certainly
be specially built. Besides observing the rules of the 1973
IMCO Convention concerning "Load on Top", crude washing and
segregated ballast (thus avoiding the discharge of oily ballast
water), they will be ice-strengthened and probably have double
hulls. The discharge of oily ballast water remains a significant
source of marine pollution and stringent standards of ships
operation and design should be sought, through international
agreement, for the Antarctic.

60. Ice conditions in the Antarctic, which differ in many ways
from the Arctic, pose several special problems. Not only are
icebergs larger (greatly reducing the potential value of towing
to avoid their collisions with rigs) but ice formation on the
/seabed

-21-
seabed, in supercooled water "seeded" by installations, could 
pose special problems.

61. The techniques of risk analysis, covering fire as well as 
the other hazards identified above should be applied in the 
design of all equipment for use in oil exploration or exploitation 
in the Antarctic, and a substantial safety margin provided. 
Fire is equally a hazard on land, where its threat is increased by 
the general unavailability of liquid water for fire-fighting 
except in limited areas near freshwater lakes  and the sea.

62. On land, drilling for oil brings the risk of local 
contamination with oil and muds, and the introduction of 
chemicals and microorganisms. Where drilling takes place on 
land it is important that minimal damage is done to permafrost 
soils (wells being sealed as to avoid this), that reservoirs of 
fuel used to power drilling are located on an insulated bed, 
that all fuel tanks are surrounded by banks to contain spillage, 
that all debris is incinerated or removed, and that the land 
area is afterwards rehabilitated as far as possible.  It is 
particularly important to ensure that water does not penetrate 
and freeze between the casing strings of wells, since the 
resulting expansion could cause bursting and pollution.

63. The maintenance and repair of Antarctic installations 
and the corrosion of structures (or measures like the use of 
sacrificial electrodes to combat corrosion) may also have some 
environmental impact.

63a. If oil were piped or transported ashore and then exported 
in tankers, bilge  and ballast handling and treatment facilities 
would be needed, and the scale and nature of these must be geared 
to local needs. A standard for the permissible maximum oil 
concentration in ballast water discharged to the sea should be 
set, together with standards for volatile hydrocarbons released 
to air:  both must depend on assessments of the environmental 
quality to be sustained.  It is important to note that if tankers 
arrived in the Antarctic in ballast, from ports elsewhere, the 
ballast water could contain a range of dissolved industrial 
effluents, and these could bring low concentrations of new 
contaminants to the Antarctic even if oil levels in the emissions 
were satisfactorily controlled.

-22-
(b) Prevention of pollution from mining of minerals on land

64. Major local pollution could be caused by mining of metal-
liferous minerals on land in the Antarctic, especially for 
elements like iron, where large volumes of spoil would be 
produced (this would be a lesser problem with elements like 
gold or platinum).  Such mining or the quarrying of construction 
materials on land could release large amounts of dust, contaminate 
drainage with metal salts, and produce tailings or waste heaps 
with high concentrations of toxic metals.  While these could 
have a deleterious effect on land, freshwater and inshore marine 
biota in the vicinity, they could also be a hazard to human 
health, especially if water supplies were contaminated.

(c) Rehabilitation

65. Areas of Antarctic land damaged by mineral exploration 
and exploitation cannot be rehabilitated in the fashion adopted 
in the Arctic, involving the fertilization of the soil and the 
sowing of the seeds of vascular plants.  The two vascular plant 
species native to the region are unlikely to be suited to 
cultivation in this way, the introduction of alien species 
would contravene conservation agreements (and be unlikely to 
succeed) and the bryophyte vegetation of coastal areas in the 
Maritime Antarctic is equally unsuited to propagation.  It 
seems likely therefore that the most that could be done to 
restore land sites disturbed by man would be to remove all 
equipment and imported debris and grade the land mechanically 
leaving natural colonization to occur very slowly.

66. No rehabilitation of disturbed ice site (other than a 
clean-up procedure to remove extraneous debris) appears 
feasible.

67. Should oil be spilled at sea in the Antarctic, especially 
in periods of high wind and waves or among ice, its recovery 
or even containment does not appear possible using present 
technology.  Research into such means of containment and 
recovery, and perhaps the development of non-toxic biodegradable 
dispersants should be pursued, so that appropriate technology 
is available 10 years ahead, when exploratory drilling may be 
likely.

-23-
(c) Environmental Impact Assessment and Monitoring

68. In order to keep adequate watch over the environmental impact of mineral exploration and exploitation, information needs to be gathered in the following five steps:

    (a) initial baseline information about the 
         major environmental systems and pollution 
         levels (from on-going monitoring)

    (b) site-specific studies within the areas 
         where particular projects may be located;

    (c) studies of the process of development, 
         allowing continued assessment of its impact 
         and the making of essential adjustments;

    (d) monitoring after completion and  during 
         operation, to check the continuing validity 
         of predictions;

    (e) long-term studies (20 years) of selected 
         major developments as a continuation of 
         the process.

69. Generally such assessments need to involve the direct and close interaction of environmental scientists, technologists concerned with development, and people concerned with overall administrative policy.  Simulation modelling, workshops and other methods may be used to facilitate analysis and information flow.

70. There are many components of the Antarctic environment and Antarctic ecosystems that require study and monitoring in order to facilitate the prediction of impact.  But in view of the probability that the first mineral exploration to be considered seriously will be for hydrocarbons at sea, it would seem logical to concentrate on research and monitors to define the baseline for such activities and the specific properties of the most likely locations.

/The
-24-
71. The Working Group agreed with the EAMREA conclusion that more information was needed to support weather forecasting in the Antarctic and the prevalence of fine spells and storms: more also needed to be known about sea conditions (and periodicities), iceberg movement (satellite technology would aid in such monitoring) and about the structure, depths, sedimentary features and currents in areas over the Continental Shelf.

72. Research was also needed to define baseline levels of hydrocarbons in the sea, and the effects of low concentrations, especially of aromatic compounds on marine organisms. Standardised monitoring techniques would probably need inter-national agreement. Work on the biodegradation of oil in the Cold Antarctic marine environment should receive high priority in view of uncertainties over extrapolation from Arctic or temperate conditions.

73. Many mathematical models to stimulate the movement of oil at sea have been developed.  It would be valuable to exchange these between Antarctic Treaty States and consider their adaptation to Antarctic conditions.

74. Much work on the effects of oil on fish, birds and other marine organisms is also in progress, and information on it needs continuing exchange.

- 25 -
4. PRELIMINARY GUIDELINES ON APPROPRIATE METHODS 
FOR EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION. AND ON 
PREVENTIVE, CORRECTIVE AND RESTORATIVE MEASURES FOR 
THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT.

75. Many of the issues noted above demand international 
collaboration. The Expert Group consider that if mineral 
exploration or exploitation is to be considered in the Antarctic, 
guidelines need to be developed and agreed covering scientific 
baseline studies, site studies, environmental impact assessment 
and many technical details of the actual operation of activities 
related to minerals. Not only should existing international 
agreements such as those on Safety at Sea, pollution from 
shipping, and the prevention of pollution by dumping be upheld, 
but consideration should be given to the development of special 
rules related to the exacting conditions of the Antarctic. 
The attached draft Guidelines identify some of the areas where 
such action appears most essential.

GENERAL GUIDELINES

(a) Exploratory techniques other than drilling

76. Most established geological and geophysical techniques 
including magnetic, gravimetric and seismic profiling systems 
can be used safely and successfully for exploration for mineral 
resources in the Antarctic at appropriate seasons.  Their 
evironmental impact is no greater than that of many normal 
research activities, and their use needs to be controlled only 
in the way that other research is controlled (for example under

/the

-26-
the Agreed Measures for the Protection of Antarctic Fauna 
and Flora). 

77. Seismic techniques using high explosives as an energy 
source are required for geophysical research on deep crustal 
structures, and may be used occassionally in hydrocarbon 
mineral exploration at sea, to confirm the findings of 
other methods. However the detonation of explosives can 
have severe local impact on the biota and their use should 
be kept to a minimum. They should not be used on land 
(or in fresh waters) of known biological of geomorphological 
interest.

(b) Exploratory drilling 

78. Exploratory drilling is unlikely to be used widely 
on land in the Antarctic, but where it is undertaken it 
should be carefullly localized and steps taken to minimize 
the disturbance of vulnerable Antarctic soils or the 
importation of chemical and microbial contamination. 
79. Exploratory drilling for hydrocarbon minerals at sea 
should generally begin only after extensive geophsical, 
bathymetric and geological surveys (the latter sometimes 
employing the drilling of short cores to identify superificial 
strata) have defined the areas with most promising structure. 
80. Before such exploratory drilling at sea begins it is 
also important to undertake environmental studies to 
determine factors such as climate, tides, currents, 
frequencies of various ice conditions and evidence of ice

-27-
scour on the sea bed.  Surveys of biota will also be desirable 
in order to predict the likely scale and acceptability of 
environmental impact and select optimum sites.

81. Exploratory drilling at sea appears feasible with present 
and immediately foreseeable technology only in areas which are 
free of significant ice for at least three summer months.  Even 
here, however, it will be necessary for vessels or platforms to 
be able to move off-station should they be threatened by icebergs.  
Because gale pressures can be encountered at any time, at least 
twelve hours warning of iceberg approach (and of storms that 
might also require movement off-station) will be needed to 
ensure shut-down.

82. The development of installations on the sea bed from which 
exploratory drilling could be carried out is probable within the 
next 20 years and would allow operations in less accessible areas 
(but not below ice shelves).  It is essential that such 
installations are located in areas not liable to iceberg scour, 
and that they are equipped with reliable choke valves/blow out 
preventers.

83. Advanced technology can minimize the consequences of human 
error, but cannot eliminate it.  Under the exacting conditions 
of the Antarctic, and because of its environmental sensitivity, 
only expert personnel should be employed on exploratory drilling 
and a high standard should be sustained in any subsequent 
exploitation.

(c) Mining on land

84. Severe local devastation could be caused by the mining on 
land of metals, metalliferous minerals or fossil fuels or 
quarrying for aggregates and rock for use in construction.

-28- 
/Such
Such mining or quarrying should be located only after thorough
environmental surveys to avoid damage to features of biological,
geological or geomorphological importance, and the site should be
landscaped or restored when extraction is completed (see guideline
below).

(d)    Hydrocarbon production at sea

85.  Although it is likely to take about 25 years for exploitation
of offshore hydrocarbon minerals to become a practical proposition
in Antarctica, it is urgent to commence now a programme to obtain
the environmental information that will guide sensible decisions
about locations and technology.  This information should include
wave and storm heights, periodicities and spectra;  persistence of
storm and good weather;  currents;  pack ice distribution, types
and pressures;  iceberg size, frequence, drift rate and direction
and location of contemporary ice scour.  Information is also needed
about the composition, stability and strength of seabed sediments
and strata on which installations might be based.

86.  There is no technology presently suited to year-round oil
production in the Antarctic.  The concepts behind such eventual
technology need to be developed carefully, probably in the direction
of self-contained, unmanned installations on the sea bed.  It is
important  that guidelines are agreed internationally to ensure
that design, installation and maintenance are to the highest standard
so as to prevent pollution, waste of energy and other resources, and
hazard to human life.  These guidelines will need continual review
until technology is improved:  a standing organisation may be
required for this purpose.

87.  Platforms and other installations for use in Antarctica should,
wherever possible, be constructed outside the region and towed to
their location.  Onshore bases for the support of exploratory and
exploitative activities should be kept as few and small as possible 
in the Antarctic and sited in areas where environmental damage is 
minimal, after thorough environmental surveys.  Installations for 
oil exploitation in the Antarctic should be as self-contained as 
possible.

88. High standards should be set for the processing of hydrocarbons 
exploited in the Antarctic.  Gas should not be flared, but re-
injected into the reservoir, as should water emerging with the 
oil.

89. Further studies are required on the means of storage and 
transportation of oil produced in the Antarctic.

90. If metalliferous minerals are exploited in the Antarctic 
substantial terrain modification is likely, and there will 
inevitably be demand for energy, water, and the production of 
large volumes of waste.  The siting of any such mining needs to 
follow thorough environmental evaluation, and its operations need to 
be monitored so as to keep damage to a minimum.

            NOTES FOR SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

91. Standards for discharges of oil in ballast water, and 
hydrocarbons in gas vented to air, need to be set in relation to 
the quality required in the receiving environment.  Procedures to 
control the importation of industrial contaminants to the Antarctic 
in ship's ballast may also be needed.

92. Drilling, especially in the exploratory phase, should be 
conducted with deliberate over-design to ensure safety.  Codes 
of practice for this, for maintenance of installations, and for 
training of personnel should be agreed.

-30-
/93.
93. Surveys in advance of drilling, using high resolution seizmic methods to detect possible pressure zones near the surface, should be undertaken.
94. At sea, proper procedures to ensure that pollution is prevented even if a well has to be abandoned hastily should be laid down.
95. The design, construction, and installation of offshore structures sound be carried out in accordance with the standards and practices set by international (or in their absence, national) standards, with due regard for the special environmental factors and risks involved in the Antarctic.
96. Risk analyses should be performed to identify possible modes of failure under extreme environmental conditions or accident, and provision made for redundant paths or systems to ensure against catastrophic failure.
97. Transport systems shall have separated ballast and use load-on-top or similar methods to prevent discharge of oily ballast or polluted seawater to the near-shore Antarctic waters.
98. On land, all drilling sites should be managed so as to minimize disruption of permafrost soils, breakage of well linings through freezing of water penetrating the case strings, and so as to contain any fuel inadvertently spilled.
99. Collection and Interpretation of Environmental Criteria for Design, Construction, and Installation of Offshore Structures should be carried out over an extended period in those areas judged to be of potential interest for hydrocarbon production.

/100.

-31-
100. These shall include special attention to storm wave characteristics; persistence of various sea states;  surface and sub-surface currents;  winds;  pack ice occurrence, movement, and strength (on a macro-scale);  iceberg size, keel depth, movements, extent;  geological features, especially near-surface geology, sediment properties, susceptibility to liquefaction, mud slide, and slump.

101. These should be determined and presented on an engineering basis, on a scale appropriate to that of potential offshore structures.

102. Provision should be made for on-going inspection and maintenance.

103. The processing of produced hydrocarbons (oil and gas) along with water and sand, shall provide for re-inspection or similar non-polluting means of disposal of the products not destined for utilization.

104. Storage systems should provide for separation of hydrocarbons from displaced seawater, to an acceptable level.

105. Methods for the containment, recovery or safe dispersion of oil spilled at sea in the Antarctic need to be pursued urgently.

106. Rehabilitation of sites disturbed by mineral exploration or exploitation on land cannot include artificial re-vegetation but should at least include grading of the land surface and removal of all possible extraneous material.

107. Methods for environmental impact assessment in the Antarctic should be developed in accordance with recent developments in the concept.

-32-                                  /108
108. Internationally-coordinated programmes of scientific 
research, monitoring and information exchange should be 
developed in a number of specific fields identified by the 
EAMREA Group and by this meeting.

                                -33-
