MINII CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                       TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание                           NEUVIEME REUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                            NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                            LONDON

Agenda Item 5                                               ANT/IX/51
                                                            Date:  27 September 1977
                                                            Original:  English

REPORT OF THE GROUP OF EXPERTS ON                            EXPLOITATION
MINERAL EXPLORATION AND

1.  The Expert Group was established in accordance wi.th
Recommendation VIII-14, operative paragraph 4.  The Group
met between 20 and 28 September 1977.

2.  The Group conducted its business according to the terms
of reference established at the Special Preparatory Meeting
held in Paris in June 1976 (ANT/IX/2) and the Guidelines
submitted to the Plenary (ANT/IX/4 and 5).

3.  At its first session the Expert Group elected Dr M W
Holdgate (UK) as its Chairman.

4.  The Expert Group adopted the following Agenda

I   To review the present state of technology for exploration
    and exploitation of minerals in the Antarctic

    (a) geophysical and other exploratory techniques

    (b) construction techniques for on-shore or off-
        shore installations

    (c) drilling and other extraction techniques

    (d) processing and storage techniques

    (e) transport techniques

II  To review the probable impact of such exploration and
    exploitation on the environment.

III To review measures for the prevention or restoration of
    damage to the environment

    (a) techniques for the prevention of pollution

    (b) remedial and restorative techniques

    /(c)
(c) techniques for monitoring
(d) techniques for the assessment (prediction)
of environmental impact.

IV  To suggest preliminary guidelines on appropriate methods 
for exploration and exploitation and on preventative,
corrective and restorative measures for the protection
of the environment.

5.  The attached record of the discussions and conclusion
of the Expert Group is presented in the following order:

    I   A summary of the principal conclusions

    II  Guidelines on appropriate methods for mineral exploration
and exploitation in the Antarctic, and for the protection
of the environment

   III  A record of the group's discussion, arranged in
accordance with Items I - III of its Agenda.

6.  The Expert Group notes that the implementation of all the
guidelines, including the proposals for scientific research, set
out in the Report wo d demand substantial effort before the
extraction of hydrocarbons or other minerals began (if
this in fact does occur) in the Antarctic.

7.  The Group also stresses that these guidelines will need
regular review as technology and scientific understanding advance.
The standards, pollution levels, environmental impact and other
parameters referred to in the Guidelines will also need careful
quantification.

8.  The Report is submitted to the Plenary for consideration.
