ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                       TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ      NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                    LONDON

Provisional Agenda Item 5                       ANT/IX/13
                                                    Date: 14 September 1977
                                                    Previously: ANT/EPM/2
                                                    Date: 14 March 1977
                                                    Original: English

Effects of Tourists and non-governmental expeditions in the
Antarctic Treaty Area.
(Working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

1.      Recommendation VIII-9 recommends that Governments "use
their best endeavours to ensure that all those who enter
the Antarctic Treaty Area, both those sponsored by
Governments and those not so sponsored, are aware of the
Statement of Accepted Practices and the Relevant
Provisions of the Antarctic Treaty in Annex A" to that
Recommendation.

2.      No statement was drafted for consideration at the VIIIth
Consultative Meeting and a footnote at the Recommendation
indicates that it is to be discussed at the IXth
Consultative Meeting. The attached paper sets out the
views of the United Kingdom delegation on the content of
such a Statément.
STATEMENT OF ACCEPTED PRACTICES AND THE RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Introduction

The Antarctic Treaty was negotiated in Washington in 1959
by the states which had established scientific stations in the
Antarctic during the International Geophysical Year (1957-58)
in order to perpetuate the close scientific co-operation which
had marked that period.  The following statement is intended
for the guidance of all those who wish to visit the Antarctic.
It is not intended that this statement should in any way
support the Treaty itself or the measures which have been
adopted under it.

1.      The Antarctic Treaty

Principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty include,
inter alia, that:

        1.1.    the Antarctic shall be used for peaceful
purposes only and that any measures of a
military nature shall be prohibited (from
Article I);

        1.2.    there shall be freedom of scientific
investigation and that the results of such
investigation shall be made freely available
(from Articles II and III);

        1.3.    no acts or activities taking place while the
Treaty is in force shall constitute a basis for
asserting, supporting or denying a claim to
territorial sovereignty in the Antarctic (from
Article IV);

        1.4.    Nuclear explosions and the disposal of radio-
active waste in the Antarctic is prohibited
(from Article V);

        1.5.    notification of an expedition to the Antarctic
shall be provided in advance (from Article VII);

        /1.6.
1.6.     each of the Antarctic Treaty Go vernments shall 
exert appropriate efforts to the end that no 
one engages in any activity in Antarctica 
contrary to the prin iples or purposes of the 
Antarctic Treaty (from Article X).

2. Recommendations of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings
The Treaty requires that meetings shall be held from time 
to time to consider and recommend measures in furtherance 
of its principles and objectives. [Nine] such meetings 
have been held and have recommended a total of [     ] 
such measures. Amongst these are measures of which all 
those who enter the Antarctic Treaty Area, both those 
sponsored by Governments and those not so sponsored, should 
be aware. The following notes indicate the nature of these 
measures and the reader is referred to the Recommendations 
of successive Consultative Meetings for the details

2.1.     CONSERVATION OF WILDLIFE

         Wildlife in the Antarctic is in almost all cases 
tame and is therefore peculiarly vulnerable to 
disturbance. Both animals and plants are living 
under extreme conditions and great care has to 
be taken to avoid upsetting the natural 
ecological system. Wildlife and plants are 
protected by five mechanisms under the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora:

2.1.1.  Protection of native fauna:

         The killing, wounding, capturing or molesting 
of any native mammal or native bird is prohibited 
except in an emergency or  in accordance with a 
permit issued under the authority of a 
Participating Government.

2.1.2.  Harmful Interference

         Every effort shall be made to minimise harmful 
interference with the normal living conditions 
of any native mammal or bird.

         /2.1.3.
2.1.3.     Specially Protected Species

Two species of seal, Fur Seals and the Ross Seal 
have been designated as Specially Protected 
Species and permits may only be issued in 
relation to these species in accordance with 
certain restrictive criteria.

2.1.4.     Specially Protected Areas

Representative areas of biologically outstanding 
scientific interest have been designated as 
Specially Protected Areas in order to preserve 
their unique natural ecological system (see 
Annex I).  No person may enter such an Area 
except in accordance with a permit issued under 
the authority of a Participating Government.  
Such permits may only be issued in accordance 
with certain restrictive criteria.

2.1.5.     Introduction of non-indigenous species, parasites 
and diseases

No species of animal or plant not indigenous to 
the Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought into 
the Area except in accordance with a permit 
issued under the authority of a Participating 
Government.

2.2.     PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

The ecosystem of the Antarctic Treaty Area is 
particularly vulnerable to human interference 
and the Antarctic derives much of its importance 
from its uncontaminated and undisturbed 
condition.  For these reasons the Consultative 
Parties have assumed responsibility for the 
protection of the environment and the wise use 
of the Treaty Area.

/2.2.1.
2.2.1.     In addition to the measures for the conservation
  o  Antarctic wildlife outlined above, the
Consultative Parties have prepared a Code of
Conduct for Antarctic Expeditions and Station
Activities including, inter alia, recommended
procedures for waste disposal -- see Annex II.

2.2.2.    Protection of Historic Monuments
Every effort shall be made to prevent damage or
destruction to any historic monument listed in
Annex III

2.2.3.    Pelagic Sealing

The Consultative Parties, having regard to the
possibly damaging ecological consequences that
might arise from the exploitation of Antarctic
seals for commercial purposes, negotiated the
1972 Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals. This is an instrument separate
from the Antarctic Treaty.

2.3.      FACILITATION OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

2.3.1.    Sites of Special Scientific Interest  There are
many scientific investigation being carried out
in the Antarctic which could suffer from
accidental interference. For example, long term
studies of the population dynamics of a penguin
colony may require that visitors be kept to an
absolute minimum; intensive scientific work in
one are may require that a nearby ecologically
similar area be kept undisturbed and
uncontaminated for reference purposes or certain
electromagnetically "quiet" areas where sensitive
instruments have been installed for recording
minute signals associated with upper atmosphere
studies may require that visits to the site should
be kept to a minimum.

For these and similar reasons certain Sites of
/Special
Special Scientiflc Interest have been designated
in the Antarctic (see Annex IV). Each site is
subject to a management plan designed to protect
the pa: ticular scientiflc investigations being
undertaken. Persons wishing to visit Sites of
Special Scientif: Interest should, well in
advance, consult .ny national office responsible
for the administration of a permenent Antarctic
scientific expedition or, if this is not possible,
should consult the station commander of the
scienti ic stati n nearest the site which it is
intended to visit.

2.3.2.     Use of radio-isotopes in the Antarctic

Some scientific investigations require the use
of radio-isotopes but their use can jeopardise
subsequent scientific investigations in the same
locality. For this reason it is required that
prior notification of the intended use of radio-
isotopes for sc ntific purposes should be
provided to a n appropriate national office
responsible for the administration of a permanent
Antarctic scientific expedition to allow time for
consultations with other investigai rs who may
wish to carry out experiments in the same locality
at a later date.

2.4.     TOURISM AND EXPEDITIONS NOT SPONSORED BY AN
ANTARCTIC TREATY GOVERNMENT

2.4.1.     An important feature of the Antarctic Treaty is
that co-operation under it is facilitated by the
iprior exchange of information about planned
activities. The Commitment covers any
expedition organised in or proceeding to the
Antarctic from the territory or any state which
is a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
A consolidated list of the information to be
exchanged is attached at Annex V.

                                      /2.4.2.
2.4.2.     Special measures relating to tourist and other 
           non-scientific expeditions

The number of non-governmental expeditions to the 
Antarctic is steadily increasing and there is a 
tendency for these expeditions to concentrate 
on the more easily accessible parts of the 
Antarctic.  Frequent visits to scientific 
stations or undue dependence on the facilities 
of such stations can prejudice their scientific 
work. It is therefore required that the 
organisers of a tourist or other non-scientific 
expedition should furnish notice as soon as 
possible to any oth.r Government whose station 
the expedition plans to visit. Any such 
Government may refuse to :ccept a visit or may 
lay down donditions upon which it would grant 
permission including, inter alia, that:

2.4.2.1.   reasonable assurance be given of compliance with 
           the provision of the Antarctic Treaty, measures 
           adopted under it and the conditions applicable 
           at stations to be visited;

2.4.2.2.   final arrangemets to visit any station be made 
           with that station between twenty-four and 
           seventy-two hours in advance of the expected 
           time of arrival;

2.4.2.3.   all tourists and other visitors comply with any 
           conditions or restrictions on their movements 
           which the staion commander may stipulate for 
           their saf.ty or 'o safeguard scientific 
           programmes being undertaken at or near the 
           station;

2.4.2.4.   visitors must not enter Specially Protected Areas 
           and must respect designated historic monuments;

2.4.2.5.   that tour organisers should report to the 
           Governments whose stations they have visited, 
           after completion of the tour, the name and 
           /nationality
nationality of the ship, the name of the 
captain, the itinerary of each separate cruise,
the number of tourists accompanying each 
cruise and the places and dates at which landings
were made in the Antarctic Treaty Area, with the 
number of persons landed on each occasion.

2.4.2.6     /Areas of Special Tourist Interest/

ANNEX I
    Specially Protected Areas

ANNEX II
    Extract from the Code of Conduct for Antarctic 
    expeditions and station activities relating to 
    waste disposal

ANNEX III
    List of Historic Monuments

ANNEX IV
    Sites of Special Scientific Interest

ANNEX V
    Standard format for the annual exchanges of 
    information
