ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
девятое консультативное совещание
Agenda Item 3

LONDON

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
ANT/1X/70
19 September 1977


OPENING STATEMENT BY HE MR M I BOTHA
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF SOUTH AFRICA
I wish first of all to express the appreciation of my delegation 
that the Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth 
Affairs honoured us with his presence, and opened our session 
with such a clear exposé of the particular importance of 
Antarctica and of the special responsibility which consequently 
rests upon Treaty Parties in regard thereto.

I would like also to convey to you the most sincere con-
gratulations of the South African delegation, on your election 
as Chairman of the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 
Your outstanding qualities as Chairman are not unknown to us 
who attended the July Special Consultative Meeting.  For that 
reason we cannot but feel satisfaction and pleasure knowing that 
our deliberations during the next three weeks will be guided 
most expertly.

May I, Mr Chairman, also convey our thanks to the government 
of the United Kingdom in acting as host to the Ninth Antarctic 
Treaty Meeting as well as our appreciation of the extensive 
preparations for the meeting and the fine accommodation and 
facilities that have been placed at our disposal.

The Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will probably 
go down in history as one of the most important meetings of the 
Treaty powers ever to be held.  But it will also be remembered 
as the meeting when the number of the Consultative Parties was 
increased by the addition of Poland to the original signatory 
States.  I would like to make use of this opportunity to 
welcome Poland to consultative status.  We are confident that 
Poland's membership of the consultative group will serve to 
strengthen our efforts in achieving the objectives of the 
Antarctic Treaty.

Mr Chairman, we are in London to discuss an agenda which con-
tains some items of immense importance and may I add unusual 
complexity.  I am, of course, referring to the items dealing

2/.
- 2 -

with the question of Antarctic mineral resources and
Antarctic Marine Living Resources.  It is under the present
circumstances perhaps to be expected, that while we are dis-
cussing these items at this meeting there are increasing
signs of interest from outside in regard to these very items.
It is hoped that such outside pressures, if nothing else,
would serve as a stimulus to the Treaty powers in their search
for just and equitable solutions to these issues within the
context of the Antarctic Treaty regime.

Mr Chairman, it is not my intention to make any detailed
comments on the individual agenda items at this stage.
May I merely stress that my delegation stands prepared to
work together actively with all concerned to find solutions
to the many problems faced by this meeting.  We do believe
that it is our duty to spare no effort to ensure the con-
tinued success of our Treaty.  In doing so we shall have to
strengthen our co-operation in that spirit of mutual goodwill
and common understanding which has always guided us in the past
and will become ever more important in the future.  As our
task becomes increasingly difficult this can be the only
guarantee of success.
