ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                                      
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ             
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ 
                                      
LONDON                            
                                      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE    
                                      
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA        
                                      

ANT/IX/14        
Original: English        
19 September 1977        

Provisional Agenda Item 7        

ANNOTATED DRAFT AGENDA FOR MINERAL TECHNICAL EXPERTS MEETING        
(submitted by United Kingdom)        

Explanatory Note        

The terms of reference for the meeting are contained in        
the report of the Special Preparatory Meeting, Paris 1976.        
Guidelines for the discussion are contained in ANT/IX/4 and        
5.  Neither of these are in the form of a working Agenda        
for this meeting.  The items which follow are an attempt to        
provide an agenda and thus a framework for the meeting.        

1.  Election of Chairman        

    [This will be necessary if Plenary has not        
    already appointed a Chairman]        

2.  Adoption of Agenda        

3.  Probable areas, types and impacts of mineral exploration        
and exploitation in the Antarctic.        

    [These questions are considered in the SCAR EAMREA        
report.  The meeting might summarise these aspects        
of the report and comment where necessary, taking        
account of ANT/IX/Inf 1]        

4.  Appropriate techniques for mineral exploration and        
exploitation in Antarctic conditions.        

    [This item draws together the sections of part I of        
the Guidelines.  The meeting might summarise such        
techniques indicating, where there is a choice,        
which techniques would have the least impact on the        
Antarctic environment. ]        

5.  Appropriate methods for the prevention of environmental        
damage and the rehabilitation of damaged areas.        

    [This item draws together sections f, g and h of part        
II of the Guidelines.  The meeting might consider this        
item in two parts:        

    (a)
(a) environmental damage resulting from 
system failures - i.e. accidents - and the 
consequent requirement for, and feasibility 
of, rehabilitating damaged areas;

(b) the requirement for, and the feasibility of, 
rehabilitating areas affected by exploration and 
exploitation after such activities have ceased.]


6.       Appropriate methods for environmental monitoring

[This item takes up section i of part II of the 
Guidelines.  The meeting might consider this item 
in two parts:

(a) monitoring of known local impacts in areas 
affected by exploitation;

(b) monitoring of the impact of mineral exploitation 
on the Antarctic environment as a whole.]


7.       Appropriate methods for environmental impact evaluation

[This item arises from both the terms of reference and 
the Guidelines.  The meeting might consider it in two 
parts:

(a) appropriate methods for evaluating the probable 
environmental impact of proposed exploration and 
exploitation activities;

(b) appropriate methods for continuing environmental 
impact evaluation involving inter-action between 
developers, environmental scientists and 
administrators.

8.       Recommendations for further studies

9.       Report to Plenary
