ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  LONDON

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

Agenda Item 3                                  ANT/IX/63
                                                 Date: 19 September 1977


OPENING STATEMENT BY MR A VAN DER ESSEN
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF BELGIUM
Mr Chairman,

May I first of all offer the sincere congratulations of the 
Belgian delegation on your unanimous election as Chairman of the 
Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Congratulations also 
to the Secretary General, Mr Smallwood.

It is particularly fortunate that the Ninth Consultative Meeting, 
which will undoubtedly be of considerable importance, should be held 
in London.

The United Kingdom has a very long history of Antarctic 
investigation.  From the early nineteenth century it organized       
expeditions to Antarctica which made a substantial contribution to 
the discovery of its particular features.  Names such as Ross,      
Scott, Shackleton or Fuchs are in everyone's memory, and we need do 
no more than list them to emphasize the particular merits of our    
host country in the field of exploration and discovery.  The most   
famous of special centres, the Scott Polar Institute, Cambridge,    
bears witness to Britain's admirable and unceasing endeavours in     
this direction.

And finally it was in London that the Convention for the           
Conservation of Antarctic Seals was concluded and signed in 1972,   
the culmination of persevering efforts in British circles, by       
Dr Brian Roberts in particular.

All this seems to augur well for the success of our Consultative 
Meeting.

I should be most grateful, Mr Chairman, if you would act as our    
interpreter in thanking the British Government for the welcome      
accorded to us.

*   *   *

The Belgian delegation is approaching the Ninth Consultative       
Meeting in a completely open and co-operative spirit.  Of course    
we may hope that Antarctica will remain for ever as an outstanding 
research laboratory, with its own very special environment unimpaired.
Basically this is, I think, the real wish of the signatory Powers, 
who have reason to be proud of the highly innovative diplomatic     

/instrument
instrument they drew up in 1959.  But a realistic view requires us 
to take into consideration the increasing interest shown elsewhere 
in what is held to be the wealth of Antarctica.  To meet this need, 
we must devise a suitable system for the exploration of these 
resources which takes other countries into account.  This is a 
task which devolves upon the signatory Powers to the Antarctic 
Treaty, for they alone are inherently capable of bringing it to a 
successful conclusion while safeguarding the principles and 
purposes of the Treaty.  But in the light of the provisions of 
Article IV it will not be an easy task.

Richelieu said that whatever is necessary must be made possible: 
an attractive idea, but something which is certainly easier said 
than done.  Yet duty requires us to make every effort to put it 
into practice, despite the serious legal, political or psychological 
problems we shall have to tackle.  I have no doubt that such attempts 
will be made, and my most ardent wish is that they may be brought 
to a successful conclusion at our meeting.

*   *   *

Mr Chairman,

The Belgian delegation cannot conclude without expressing its 
satisfaction at the presence of Poland at our Consultative Meeting. 
The establishment of the Henryk Arctowski Station gave Poland this 
right, which was placed on record by the Special Consultative 
Meeting held in July.  Poland was the first Power to accede to 
the Treaty, as early as 1961, and its nationals have a long history 
of participation in Polar exploration, for Henryk Arctowski was the 
meteorologist on the "Belgica" expedition, which was the first, 
in 1898, to winter south of the Antarctic Circle.
