ANTARCTIC TREATY               
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING               

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               


                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE               
                                  NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE               

                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO               
                                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA               

LONDON               

Provisional Agenda Item 7               

ANT/IX/4
Date:  14 September 1977
Previously: ANT/E?M/12
Date: 18 March 1977
Original: English               

DETAILED OUTLINE OF DISCUSSION FOR A GROUP OF
EXPERTS MEETING ON THE OCCASION OF THE IXTH
CONSULTATIVE MEETING               

1. Recommendation VIII-14 of the Eighth Consultative Meeting
placed the subject "Antarctic Resources - The Question of
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" on the Agenda for the
Ninth Consultative Meeting, and recommended that Governments
"undertake to study the environmental implications of mineral
resource activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and other
related matters".               

2. A Special Preparatory Meeting which convened in Paris in
June 1976 to discuss "Questions of Mineral Exploration and
Exploitation ... in all its aspects" deferred consideration of
the technological aspects of environment protection for possible
consideration by a group of experts on the occasion of the Ninth
Consultative Meeting.               

3. Following an invitation from the Paris Meeting through
National Antarctic Committees, to SCAR to consider further
action, a SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Impact
Asses:sment of Mineral Resource Exploration/Exploitation in
Ant:arctica was established at XIV SCAR at Mendoza and is
preparing an assessment of the possible environmental impact of
mineral resource exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic,
to be available before the Ninth Consultative Meeting. (The suggestec
outline is reproduced in ANT/EPM/3/1.)               

4. To help Governments decide whether to include experts in
their delegations to the Ninth Consultative Meeting for the
discussion of the environmental aspects of various technological 
procedures associated with mineral development (mentioned in 
paragraph 18 (a)-(d) of the Report of the Working Group on 
Scientific Technological, Ecological and Economic Aspects at the 
Paris Meeting), the Extended Preparatory Meeting drew up the 
following guidelines to serve as a detailed outline (as envisaged 
in paragraph 20 of that Report).

Guidelines

5.  If mineral exploration and exploitation were to occur  the 
sensitive nature of the Antarctic environment will require the 
application of exploration and exploitation technology and 
environmental protection technology that is significantly different 
to that required in less hazardous parts of the world and that 
this may act as a major and perhaps decisive constraint on the 
development of Antarctic resources.

6.  In order to assist the assessment of the possible impact on the 
Antarctic environment by exploration or exploitation of Antarctic 
mineral resource if it were to occur there this meeting should 
discuss the following topics, with special reference to the 
identification of present or forseeable technological methods 
that would be needed in the Antarctic that are, or would be, 
significantly different from those used elsewhere in order to 
avoid the environmental impact of possible mineral developments:

I   Exploration and Exploitation Techniques
    a.  geophysical and other exploratory techniques;
    b.  construction techniques for on shore or off 
        shore installations;
    c.  drilling and other extraction techniques;
    d.  processing, storage techniques;
    e.  transport techniques;

II  Preventive, Remedial and Restorative Activities
    f.  techniques for the prevention of pollution;
    g.  remedial techniques in the event of environ ental 
        pollution; and
discussion of the environmental aspects of various technological
procedures associated with mineral development (mentioned in
paragraph 18 (a)-(d) of the Report of the Working Group on
Scientific Technological, Ecological and Economic Aspects at the
Paris Meeting), the following guidelines were prepared to serve
as a detai]ed preliminary outline (as envisaged in paragraph 20
of ihat Report) subject to their acceptance by Governments through
diplomatic channels.

Guidelines

5.      If mineral exploration and exploitation were to occur, the
sensitive nature of the Antarctic environment may require the
application of exploration, exploitation and environmental
protection technologies significantly different from those
required in less hazardous parts of the world.  These may act as
major and perhaps decisive constraints on the development of
Antarctic resources.

6.      In order to assist the assessment of the possible impact on the
Antarctic environment by exploration or exploitation of Antarctic
mineral resource if it were to occur there this meeting should
discuss the following topics, with special reference to the
identification of present or forseeable technological methods
that would be needed in the Antarctic that are, or would be,
significantly different from those used elsewhere in order to
avoid the environmental impact of possible mineral developments:

I   Exploration and Exploitation Techniques

    a.  geophysical and other exploratory techniques;
    b.  construction techniques for on shore or off
        shore installations;
    c.  drilling and other extraction techniques;
    d.  processing, storage techniques;
    e.  transport techniques;

II  Preventive, Remedial and Restorative Activities

    f.  techniques for the prevention of pollution;
    g.  remedial techniques in the event of environmental
        pollution; and
    h.  techniques
h. techniques to restore affected areas as nearly as 
possible to their original condition.

7. In considering the above topics the experts should bear 
in mind, insofar as this is related to technological development, 
that SCAR would welcome guidance on a "time scale on which 
information [from SCAR7 is needed by the contracting parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty ..." (XIV SCAR-30).
