ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание                        NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         LONDON
Agenda Item 3                                            ANT/1X/65
                                                         19 September 1977

OPENING STATEMENT BY MR S HESSEL
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF FRANCE
The French Delegation would like to begin by offering you its warm congratulations on your being elected to assume the chairmanship of our Meeting.  We have no doubt that, under your enlightened guidance, the present Ninth Consultative Meeting will be as fruitful as those which have preceded it.  May I also be permitted to express our congratulations to the Secretary General, Mr. Smallwood, and to Mr. Loader.

But, first and foremost, I would like to address myself to the Norwegian Delegation to tell them how profoundly we regret the passing last year of our friend, Ambassador Edvard Hambro, who was not only an eminent diplomat but also possessed an uncommon knowledge of matters relating to the Antarctic.  He was unremitting in his devotion to our cause and we shall doubtless frequently have occasion to feel the want of the excellent advice which he was able to offer us with so much wisdom, insight and friendship.

In my turn, I wish to express my satisfaction at seeing in our midst a Polish Delegation; for the first time and in circumstances provided for by the Treaty.  May I also take this opportunity, Mr. Chairman, of expressing to you on behalf of my delegation our deep gratitude to the British Government, whose generous hospitality has made it possible for us to meet here and who have this year very efficiently arranged two Preparatory Meetings, the organization and usefulness of which have been much appreciated by us.

Our delegation is, naturally, fully aware of the far-reaching importance of this meeting, to which the Minister of State, Mr. Ted Rowlands, drew attention so effectively in his opening address.  I believe that I should even be correct in saying that, from many points of view, the present meeting is the most significant of all those held since 1959.

In this context, the agenda covers two main issues: the possible prospecting for and exploitation of mineral resources, and the marine resources of Antarctica. We all understand the complexity of these questions, but in my view this provides a powerful argument for reaffirming our solidarity and for the joint exercise of the full range of our responsibilities.

Be that as it may, I hope that during the course of the present Meeting, while continuing firmly in our support for the stated objectives of the Treaty -
- 2 -

the preservation of the Continent for all time from military confrontation,
the protection of the environment and the freedom of scientific research -
we shall approach the new problems which will inevitably arise in this part
of the world in the same spirit of loyal and active cooperation.

With this in mind, my delegation hopes that the present Meeting will
lead to a very clear expression of the intention of the Consultative Parties
to go ahead with the formulation of principles and directives to regulate
future activities connected with prospecting and the exploitation of resources
in the Antarctic.
