ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                   NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 5                                     ANT/IX/52
                                                   Date: 27 September 1977

SUMMARY OF KEY POINTS IN THE REPORT ON MINERALS
FROM THE WORKING GROUP OF EXPERTS, PREPARED
BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE GROUP

Technology

1.  There is no proof of oil and gas deposits in Antarctica;
however based on geological relationships to other areas many
geologists consider it likely that such deposits exist.

2.  Geophysical exploration of the Antarctic is technically
feasible using existing or slightly modified exploration
techniques.

3.  Exploratory drilling in limited areas of sea less than 1,000 m
deep and free of ice for the three summer months is technically
feasible at present using existing techniques.

4.  More extensive exploratory drilling on the Antarctic contin-
ental shelf areas is likely to be technically feasible within the
next decade.

5.  The exploratory phase of hydrocarbon development is likely
to be prolonged due to present ignorance of Antarctic continental
shelf geology and adverse weather conditions.

6.  Existing technology and research in progress indicate that
exploitation of hydrocarbon resources on the Antarctic continental
shelf between 500 and 3000 meters may well be technically feasible
within the next 15 years.

7.  There are significant differences between the Arctic and the
Antarctic, both in weather conditions and in sea ice and especially
iceberg dimensions, and these make caution necessary when extra-
polating from experience of hydrocarbon exploration and production
operation in the Arctic.

8.  Exploratory drilling and exploitation operations will be
heavily dependent on rapid and accurate meteorological and ice
forecasts. It is likely that existing techniques can be improved
to provide this information.
9. Fixed or floating platforms used in the exploitation of hydro-
carbons on the Antarctic continental shelf would probably be con-
structed outside the treaty area and towed into place. Seabed
systems could also be used for production.

10. Exploitation of Antarctic continental metallic or other hard
rock minerals is unlikely in the foreseeable future except possibly
in support of continental shelf hydrocarbon operations.

11. Subsea storage techniques are now in operation and it is
likely that such systems could be operational for Antarctic condi-
tions within the next decade.

12. Transportation of any Antarctic hydrocarbons would require
especially designed ships. Present research and past Arctic
projects indicate that development of such ships is technically
feasible.

13. Pipeline development from the sea floor to the continent for
pickup or storage while potentially feasible is unlikely, due to
many factors.

Environmental Impact

14. The report of the SCAR Group of Specialists on the Environ-
mental Impact Assessment of Mineral Exploration/Exploitation in
Antarctica (EAREA) is a valuable preliminary assessment of the
possible impacts of hydrocarbon and hard rock exploration and
exploitation on Antarctic ecosystems and the expert group recognises
its general conclusions.

15. The impacts of non-explosive geophysical exploration are
minor and local and activities can be controlled through the
present Treaty measures.

16. Geophysical exploration using explosives can have severe
local impact on the environment. In Antarctica it is technically
necessary for deep seismic work only.

17. It is possible though unlikely, that exploratory drilling
could result in an uncontrolled blow-out with significant environ-
mental impacts of a type not previously experienced in Antarctica.

18. More information is needed on the effects of oil on Antarctic
biota and environment. This could be done in laboratory experi-
ments using a wide range of oil types from other areas since any
Antarctic oil would likely have properties within the range of
existing oils.
19. To accurately predict environmental impacts of mineral 
exploration and exploitation it is necessary to begin now to 
define baseline levels of hydrocarbons and their effect on marine 
sustems.

revention and Restcration

20. Prior to exploratory drilling a number of environmental 
factors must be assessed including seabed stability, faulting, 
slumping, sediment strength and properties, meteorological condi-
tions, surface and bottom currents, sea ice and iceberg conditions. 
This can be done with existing or slightly modified techni.ues in 
open water.

21. Accidents resulting in environmental damage can occur at any 
time in hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation operations. Cver-
design is necessary to provide a wide margin of safety.

22. Highly trained personnel, strictly supervised, are necessary 
to minimize "human error", the primary cause of most accidents.

23. Initial prevention of accidents is of primary importance 
because recovery of spilled oil with present technology is unlikely 
in any but the best of Antarctic conditions.

24. To minimise environmental risk it is necessary to be able to 
stop, re-start, re-enter, or abandon wells without pollution.

25. The primary risk of accidents is particularly high at the 
point of transfer from production or storage to tankers for trans-
port.

26. Bilge and ballast handling and treatment would be necessary 
to minimize the introduction of contaminated waters to Antarctica.

27. Rehabilitation of contaminated ice is very difficult with 
existing technology, and few significant technical advances are 
likely to be available in the near future.

28. In icefree seas present technology can recover some oil 
fractions in up to a meter wave heights. Some gradual increase in 
technological capability is likely allowing recovery in higher seas. 
Significant recovery of spills under most Antarctic conditions: at 
sea is not possible with existing technology.
Guidelines

29. The Expert Group believes that if exploration and exploitation 
of Antarctic minerals are addressed technical guidelines on scien-
tific research, environmental impact assessment, and exploratory and 
exploitive operations be developed.  In addition existing inter-
national standards should be applied wherever appropriate.

30. The guidelines within this report are a preliminary attempt to 
identify the technical aspects to be incorporated in any minerals 
regime to the risk of accidents and environmental damage.
