ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                                                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
                                                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                                                
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ANT/1X/44              
Date: 26 September 1977              


                                                
Agenda Item 6              


                                                
WORKING GROUP ON MARINE LIVING RESOURCES:              
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN              


The list of documents before us begins with the terms of              
reference in ANT/1X/39. There are substantive proposals, in              
reverse order of submission in the following:              

USSR              ANT/1X/37              
Argentina         ANT/1X/34              
Chile             ANT/1X/30              
S Africa          ANT/1X/25              
Australia         ANT/1X/22-21              

There are also the papers reproduced from the Preparatory meeting              
(ANT 1X/6 ANT 1X/8) and the paper on the Biomass programme              
(ANT 1X/10). There is a procedural proposal by the French              
Delegation (ANT 1X/38)              


The substantive elements of the various proposals seem to reveal              
two basic treads.              

But first there would seem to be the question raised by at least              
one delegation as to the need to examine at the outset the              
scientific basis for any measures adopted.  It would perhaps be              
desirable to dispose of this question at the start of our              
discussion.              

The two basic threads to which I refer are:              

(a) the need for this meeting to adopt certain measures,              
    at the least including support for the Biomass Programme              
    and collection and exchange of information or possibly              
    going so far as a system of voluntary restraint, within              
    existing treaty procedures and following existing treaty              
    procedents, to cover the interim period between now              
    and the time that a definitive regime is adopted.
(The importance of showing an active concern for the marine living resources to the outside world seems to many delegations a major factor in the Exercise).

(b) The desirability of a "second stage" which will require perhaps the drafting of a recommendation relating to the convening of a subsequent meeting (whether of the Treaty Powers or on a wider basis) and consideration of the question of adequate preparation for such a meeting (perhaps by the inclusion in the draft recommendation or in our report of a number of agreed elements if that point can be reached).

Delegations will note that these items correspond closely with the terms of reference of the Working Group. They also encompass in a simplified form the slightly more detailed agenda proposed by France in ANT IX/38.

If it is agreed that these are the broad areas to be discussed, the next question is the order in which they should be discussed. The scientific aspects will be present no doubt at many points of the discussions. If the Working Group felt it necessary, however, to review specifically the current situation of the scientific aspects and prospective trends to use the wording of the French paper, one possible way of taking the question further could be for a restricted scientific group of interested countries' experts to meet in parallel with the Working Group. Even if it were not felt necessary to follow this procedure at the outset, it could be kept in reserve.

So far as points (a) and (b) above are concerned, the question next to be posed would be whether these should be considered seriatim or whether they should be the subject of a single discussion from which, at a later stage, a draft recommendation or recommendations as well as a report could be drawn as a conclusion to our proceedings.
