ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ       
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                      

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

TRATADO ANTARTICO       
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA      

LONDON                                    

Agenda Item 6                            

ANT/IX/37 (Rev.1)                        
Date: 26 September 1977                  
Original: Russian                        

(Paper submitted by the Delegation      
of the Soviet Union)                      

                                   
MAIN OUTLINES                             
OF THE STRUCTURE OF AN INTERNATIONAL AUTHORITY 
CONCERNED WITH THE CONSERVATION AND RATIONAL     
USE OF ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES       

The Contracting Parties,                   

Recognizing that there are in Antarctica marine living
resources effective conservation of which requires regulation
by international law;                    

Being aware of the inadequacy of information regarding 
Antarctic marine living resources and of the need to establish a
firm scientific basis for appropriate measures for the conservation
of these resources;                       

Recalling Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Seeking to co-operate for the purpose of the conservation and
rational use of Antarctic marine living resources;

Have agreed on the following:             

I.   Measures to be applied for the conservation and rational
use of Antarctic marine living resources.  

II.  The area to be covered by the measures for the conservation
and rational use of Antarctic marine living resources.

III. The species to be covered by the measures for the
conservation and rational use of Antarctic marine living resources.

IV.  The establishment under the Antarctic Treaty of an
Authority to carry out the measures for the conservation and
rational use of Antarctic marine living resources.

                                     /The
The initial members of the Authority shall be the Consultative
Parties and all other States Parties to the Treaty interested in 
harvesting in the area.

V. Structure of the Authority.

     - Commission - all members of the Authority
     - Scientific Council - all members of the Authority
     - Secretariat

VI. Functions of the Commission.

1. To further the study of the stocks of Antarctic marine living 
resources.

2. To examine data submitted by the Scientific Council regarding 
the state of stocks of the different species of Antarctic marine 
living resources.

3. To adopt, on the basis of the data submitted by the Scientific 
Council and the evidence available to it, recommendations concerning 
measures necessary for the maintenance and restoration of 
populations of harvested species.

4. To make, on the basis of the data submitted by the Scientific 
Council and the evidence available to it, recommendations concerning 
the maximum allowable catch for each species of Antarctic marine 
living resources, having due regard to the relevant ecological 
factors.

5. The Commission may invite the attention of any Government 
which is not a member of the Authority to any matters related to 
the harvesting activities of its nationals and vessels in the area 
determined in Article II of this document.

6. The Commission shall prepare and adopt the annual budget 
of the Authority. It shall determine the procedure for 
contributions to the budget of the Authority and approve the annual 
budget for each fiscal year of its activities.  The financial 
activities of the Authority shall be subject to an annual audit 
by external auditors nominated by the Commission.

VII. The Commission shall meet in regular session at its 
headquarters located at ..........

                                                     /VIII.
VIII. The Commission shall adopt recommendations by a two-thirds majority, including concurring votes of the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

IX. The total quotas of catch recommended by the Commission for each species shall be allocated among the States Members of the Authority engaged in harvesting a particular species of marine living resources or starting the organization of its harvesting.

In allocating quotas of catch for individual species, account shall be taken of the level reached in previous years by every State concerned in harvesting a particular species, contribution made by States to scientific research on Antarctic marine living resources and the interests of countries bearing the costs of providing various services in connection with research, conservation and rational use of marine living resources in a given area.

X. Functions of the Scientific Council

1. To collect, summarize and analyze information regarding Antarctic marine living resources and to distribute it among the States Members of the Authority.

2. To recommend scientific research programmes and lists of desirable statistical and biological data to be collected on Antarctic marine living resources, and to coordinate the activities of the States Members of the Authority in connection with such programmes.

3. In collecting and evaluating information on Antarctic marine living resources and developing scientific research programmes, to co-operate with SCAR and, where necessary, to seek the technical assistance of other competent international organizations (United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO, etc.)

4. To submit to the Commission data on the state of stocks of the different species of Antarctic marine living resources.

5. On the basis of the evidence available to it, to notify the Commission of any cases where the harvesting of any species has reached a level at which its reproduction may become seriously threatened.

/XI.
XI. Each member of the Authority shall appoint its representatives to the Scientific Council.

XII. Secretariat

1. The Secretariat shall consist of a secretary and such staff members as the Authority may require.  The Secretary shall be appointed by the Commission.  He shall be chief executive officer of the Authority.

2. The Secretariat shall provide the Commission and the Authority with services for the exercise of their functions.  The Secretary shall submit to the Commission an annual report on the activities of the Authority.

XIII. Any Government not a party to the Antarctic Treaty but engaged in harvesting in the area subject to the activities of the Authority may become a member of the Authority.
