ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  LONDON

Agenda Item 5                                      ANT/IX/40
                                                       Date: 23 September 1977
                                                       Original: French

ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES

The attached three papers, RPS 1, 2 and 3,
are copies of Working Documents submitted by its
Chairman to the Special Preparatory Meeting for
the Ninth Consultative Meeting held in Paris in
1976. They are submitted to the Ninth Consultative
Meeting by the French Delegation.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SPEC:  PREPARATORY MEETING                       REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                             TRATADO ANTARTICO
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ                     REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL
СОВЕЩАНИЕ

PARIS 28 JUIN 1976

Special Preparatory Meeting for the              Resources of Antarctica
IXth Consultative Meeting of the                 Exploration and Exploitation
Antarctic Treaty                                 of Mineral Resources
Paris, 28 June to 10 July, 1976

                                                  RPS - 1

WORKING DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE CHAIRMAN - No.1

Study of the compatibility with the Antarctic Treaty
of any exploration and exploitation of mineral resources carried
out by States signatories to the Treaty (or by companies belonging
to those States) and by other States (or by companies belonging
to those States).

I. Does the Treaty or do the Recommendations of the Consultative
Parties contain any provisions concerning the exploration
and exploitation of mineral resources?

A/Treaty

1. The Antarctic Treaty contains two principal and complementary
objectives in line with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter;

    1) To ensure that the area south of 60° South Latitude
shall be used exclusively for peaceful purposes.

    2) To pursue and develop scientific research in this
region in accordance with two principles; the freedom
of such research and international co-operation.

    3) Another objective connected with Article IX-1 (f) of
the Treaty was gradually added to these two objectives: the
protection of the ecosystem of the region.

2. The Treaty never specifically mentions the mineral resources
of the area. It simply refers in Article IX-1 (f) to "the
living resources" of the region among the questions on which
-2-

the representatives of the signatory States should consult each 
other periodically to study, formulate and recommend to their 
governments measures designed to ensure respect for the principles 
and pursuit of the objectives of the Treaty.

B/Recommendations

A recommendation of the Consultative Parties dated                  1972

(                        VII-6), however, calls for a study to be made of 
the subject "Resources of the Antarctic - Effects of Mineral 
Exploration". Although it does not deal with the subject 
substantially, the preamble to this recommendation includes several 
pertinent principles.

II.  Are the provisions of the Treaty compatible with the exploration 
and exploitation of mineral resources?

A/ Compatibility with the exploration of mineral resources

The "scientific" exploration of the mineral resources of 
the area covered by the Treaty should be distinguished from the 
"commercial" exploration of such resources:

1.  Scientific exploration

    a) There is no doubt that such exploration is compatible 
with the Treaty. Although the Treaty does not specifically 
envisage the scientific exploration of the minerals to be found 
in the area it covers, such research is clearly part of scientific 
research in general, the development of which constitutes one 
of the main objectives of the Treaty.

    b) The principles of the Treaty governing scientific 
research in general are therefore applicable to research on 
mineral resources.

      The following principles are involved;

1) The principle of the freedom of scientific research

  This principle is raised in the preamble and in Article II 
in   Antarctica and co-operation toward that end, as applied
-3-

during the International Geophysical Year, shall continue,
subject to the provisions of the present Treaty."

This principle may be interpreted in two different ways:

1. First of all, any State, whether a signatory of the Treaty
or not, as well as any company belonging to that State could
engage in the scientific exploration of the mineral resources of
the area in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty, that
is to say, in particular, in accordance with the principles
concerning scientific research other than freedom of research.

2. Secondly, on the other hand, only the States parties to
the Treaty, or the companies belonging to those States could
engage in such exploration.  Article II, like the preamble,
speaks of scientific research "as applied during the International
Geophysical Year", that is to say among bodies accepting the
provisions subsequently included in the Treaty.

2. The principle of international co-operation

The principle of international co-operation in scientific
research, which is raised in general terms in the preamble and in
Article II of the Treaty, may also be interpreted in two different
ways as in respect of the principle of freedom of research.

Several other clauses of the Treaty give further details
on this point by envisaging:

1- Co-operation among States parties to the Treaty:
Article III provides that States parties to the Treaty shall, as far
as possible, exchange information and scientific personnel;
Article VII, paragraph 5, stipulates that the States parties to
the Treaty shall inform the other Contracting Parties of all
expeditions, scientific stations and military personnel or
equipment intended to be introduced by it into Antarctica.

2- Co-operation between States parties to the Treaty and
certain international organizations:
Article III, paragraph 2, provides for "every encouragement"
-4-

to be given to co-operation on the one hand among the States 
parties to the Treaty and on the other hand with "those 
Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and other international 
organizations having a scientific or technical interest in 
Antarctica".

    3- Reference is made in Article IX, sub-paragraph 1 (c) to 
measures to be taken by the Consultative Parties to facilitate 
"international scientific co-operation in Antarctica".

3. Inspection rights envisaged in respect of the Consultative 
Parties.

    Article VII provides that the Consultative Parties may 
carry out inspections at any time and in any part of Antarctica 
"in order to promote the objectives and ensure the observance of 
the provisions of the Treaty".

2. Commercial exploration

    Contrary to scientific exploration, commercial exploration 
is specifically carried out for the purpose of exploiting the 
mineral resources involved.

    It may, however, be difficult in practice to draw a clear 
distinction between scientific and commercial exploration. It 
is for this reason that the following definition which, while 
not being rigorous, has the advantage of being "operational", 
is proposed;

    According to this definition all activities for the explora-
tion of mineral resources, even if they are clearly directed 
towards their exploitation, are considered as scientific research 
activities, so long as they are in line with the principles 
concerning such activities laid down in the Treaty. Other 
exploration activities are assimilated with exploitation.

B/Compatibility with the exploitation of mineral resources

    Unlike scientific prospecting, the exploitation of mineral 
resources is not envisaged either explicitly or implicitly in 
the Treaty.
-5-

Several theses have been put forward, particularly during the unofficial meeting of experts held from 30 May to 9 June 1973 under the auspices of the NANSEN Foundation, regarding the compatibility of such exploitation with the Antarctic Treaty:

1er thesis:  Such exploitation, whether carried out by a State Party to the Treaty or not, is incompatible with the provisions of the Treaty for the following reasons:  scientific research, which constitutes one of the principal objectives of the Treaty would be disturbed by exploitation activities which would seriously threaten the ecosystem of the region.

      In addition, the launching of commercial mining operations would raise delicate legal problems.

      Mining exploitation operations are therefore impossible, unless the Parties to the Treaty amend the relative provisions on this point.

2nd thesis:  The Antarctic Treaty does not specifically authorize the above-mentioned exploitation operations.  Nor does it specifically forbid them.

      Such activities would only be incompatible with the purpose of the Treaty if they led to Antarctica becoming an area of international discord.

      They may therefore be undertaken, whether launched by States Parties to the Treaty or not, but on condition that all the Consultative Parties agree to them, within the framework of their responsibility to take measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty (Article IX) and in particular measures regarding "the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes only".

3rd thesis:  The Antarctic Treaty neither specifically authorizes nor forbids mining exploitation activities, but such activities would only be compatible with the Treaty to the extent that

1) they were carried out by Parties to the Treaty,

2) they did not run counter to the following provisions of the Treaty or the Recommendations:
-6-
- The prohibition of activities other than peaceful activities (preamble and Article I).

- The principles of the Treaty concerning scientific research : the principle of freedom and the principle of international co-operation (including in particular the duty to exchange information).

- The need that these activities should not affect the status of the specially protected areas or be prejudicial to the fauna and flora (Recommendations III - VIII and III - IX).

- The responsibilities of the Consultative Parties concerning the protection of the environment (for example, Recommendation VI - 4).

The supporters of this thesis consider that prospecting and exploitation, while constituting a sector which falls within the sphere of competence of each individual State, are also matters on which the Consultative Parties may consult each other under Article IX. They believe therefore that the question of the commercial prospecting and exploitation of the mineral resources of Antarctica should be resolved through a multilateral consultation carried out within the framework of Article IX.

Consideration of the arguments developed in the three above-mentioned theses prompts one to put the problem thus :

(1) The commercial prospecting and exploitation of mineral resources in the area are not envisaged by the 1959 Treaty which neither specifically authorizes or forbids them.

(2) Such activities would only be compatible with this Treaty if :

        (a) they did not run counter to the "peaceful nature" of the Treaty,

        (b) they did not hamper scientific research,

        (c) they did not seriously threaten the environment of the area.
-7-

(3) If it is wished to open up the mineral resources of the 
Treaty area to commercial exploration and exploitation, or if 
it is impossible to prevent such activities from being under-
taken, the question at issue will be that of how to fulfil the 
three conditions laid down in (2).

This question raises that of the usefulness of the activities 
concerned.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                            TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SPECIA REPARATORY MEETING              REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                      TRATADO ANTARTICO
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ           REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL
СОВЕЩАНИЕ

PARIS 28 JUIN 1976

Special Preparatory Meeting for the        Resources of Antarctica
IXth Consultative Meeting of the          Exploration and Exploitation
Antarctic Treaty                          of Mineral Resources
Paris, 28 June to 10 July, 1976

                                           RPS - 2

WORKING DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE CHAIRMAN - NO. 2

Study on whether or not it would be useful to establish
precise regulations concerning the exploration and exploitation
of the mineral resources of Antarctica.

Study of the time which may be required to establish
such regulations.

--------------------------------------------------------

I. Arguments of a legal nature in favour of the usefulness
of such regulations.

  It might be argued that such regulations would be
useless since prospecting for and exploitation of the mineral
resources of Antarctica should be free and since no interna-
tional instrument forbids them.

  The arguments in favour of the usefulness of such
regulations, however, appear to be more telling.

A/Arguments in favour of regulations in general

1.) Connected with the 1959 Treaty

  Such regulations might appear necessary to the States parties
to the 1959 Treaty in order to avoid the putting into question
(or to enable the attainment) of the two principal objectives
of this text: the preservation of the peaceful nature of the
area of application of the Treaty and the development of scientific
research, which presupposes the preservation of the ecosystem
of the region.

  The lack of regulations might in fact lead any company to
carry out activities for prospecting and exploiting mineral 
resources in a "disorderly" fashion.  Such disorder would be 
likely to result in conflicts and in a deterioration of the 
environment which is particularly sensitive, in the region.

2.) Connected with national jurisdictions exercised in

Antarctica

In the absence of precise regulations, the exploration 
and exploitation of the mineral resources of Antarctica would 
be likely to lead to problems of competition between different 
jurisdictions.  Such problems might place in opposition the 
States to which the undertaking carrying out the exploration 
and exploitation work belonged against the States having 
asserted their rights of sovereignty over sectors of Antarctica. 
They might also place these last States in opposition among 
themselves, to the extent that sovereignty over certain parts 
of the region is claimed by several States at the same time.

B/Arguments in favour of control by the "Twelve"

1.) Connected with the United Nations

In the framework of the Conference on the Law of the Sea, 
States non-Parties to the Treaty might use the absence of uniform 
regulations concerning the exploration and exploitation of the 
resources of the area of application of the Treaty as an argu-
ment on which to base a request that the whole of that area 
be included in the "common heritage of humanity" (cf. the 
initiative of the delegate of Sri Lanka) and that activities 
connected with its resources be controlled in the framework 
of the United Nations.

The International Sea-bed Authority might in particular 
wish to go so far as to include in its sphere of activity 
the whole of the maritime part of Antarctica, except for the 
territorial sea of the continent.  It might thus, in so doing, 
wish to include the maritime surface corresponding to the 
exclusively economic area and the continental shelf of Antarctica.
-3-

In fact, the question of whether or not an exclusively
economic area and a continental shelf exists in Antarctica on
the basis of the national assertions of sovereignty or on a
global basis is a controversial one (cf. the working document
on the study of the problems raised for States signatories
of the Antarctic Treaty in connexion with the exploration and
exploitation of mineral resources by the control of the sea
bed envisaged by the Conference on the Law of the Sea).

2.) Connected with the 1959 Treaty

It might be in the interests of the Twelve States
signatories of the 1959 Treaty to draw up such regulations
before new "Consultative Parties" joined them.  This possibility,
which is opened up by Article IX, paragraph 2 of the Treaty(1)
should be envisaged in the near future in view of the increasing
interest which the possibility of carrying out activities for
the exploitation of the mineral resources of the region is
likely to arouse (cf. working document on the problems which
the establishment of regulations might raise, p.3).

II. Length of time required for the establishment of such
regulations

A/The extent to which the establishment of regulations
for the exploration and exploitation of the mineral resources
of Antarctica may be considered urgent depends both on the
conclusion reached on the reasons of a legal nature in favour
of establishing such regulations and on considerations put
forward on the subject on the scientific and economic levels.

If it were considered urgent to establish such regulations,
it might be desirable for the representatives of the States
signatories at their next consultative meeting (London 1977)

(1) According to whose terms any Party to the Treaty may become
a Consultative Party during such time as it demonstrates its
interest in Antarctica by conducting substantial scientific
research activity there, such as the establishment of a station
or the despatch of an expedition.
-4-

to draw up a recommendation (a draft of which might be prepared 
during the June 1976 meeting) calling for the establishment of 
such regulations. The adoption of the regulations, a 
preliminary draft of which might be prepared during the Paris 
meeting in June 1976 and during another meeting held between 
that meeting and the following meeting of the Consultative 
Parties, might form the subject of a conference which should 
be held shortly after the London meeting, before the end of 
1977.

B/Whatever the case may be, the question is raised as 
to whether or not conservation measures should be taken during 
the time which might be required for the establishment of 
regulations on the activities of exploration and exploitation 
of the mineral resources of the area is raised.  If the reply 
to this question is in the affirmative, these measures should 
be the subject of a recommendation on the part of the next 
consultative meeting.

Among such conservation measures, a moratorium on the 
activities in question might be envisaged.  Two questions 
would be raised in this connexion:

  The first is whether or not the moratorium should apply 
both to exploration and exploitation or only to exploitation, 
for it would be necessary to consider if a moratorium on 
exploration would not run counter to the provisions of the 
Washington Treaty concerning the pursuit of scientific research, 
the latter being hard to distinguish from commercial research.

  The second question relates to the scope of the moratorium, 
according to whose terms no exploration and exploitation 
licence (or only exploitation licence) would be delivered by 
the Consultative Parties until the latter had reached an agree-
ment on the methods of regulating these activities.  But such 
a moratorium would not be opposable to the States non-Parties 
to the 1959 Treaty.  To reply to third States who put forward 
this argument, the arguments developed for others who argued 
that the 1959 Treaty was not opposable to them might be
-5-

invoked (cf. the working document on the problems which might 
be raised by possible establishment of regulations).
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SPEC. - PREPARATORY MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ
СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
RÉUNION PRÉPARATOIRE SPÉCIALE
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
REUNIÓN PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL

PARIS 28 JUIN 1976

Special Preparatory Meeting for the 
IXth Consultative Meeting of the 
Antarctic Treaty                      
Paris, 28 June to 10 July 1976      

Resources of Antarctica              
Exploration and Exploitation         
of Mineral Resources                 

WORKING DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE CHAIRMAN - No. 3
Problems which might be raised by the possible 
establishment of regulations              
----------------------------------------------

I. The authors of the regulations        

Several hypotheses might be envisaged leading to the 
establishment of a more or less "closed" system according to 
whether the authors of the regulations were:

A/ The seven States which have asserted their sovereignty 
over certain sectors of the Antarctic continent        

Each of these States would base the regulations envisaged 
on its national jurisdiction.  The regulations might either 
be of an individual nature (hence a plurality of regulations) 
or of a collective nature.                 

In any event, one or more sets of regulations established 
on this basis would be likely to be contested by the States 
which have not recognized these assertions of sovereignty.

In addition, the question of whether or not national 
jurisdictions cover the seas bordering Antarctica is a matter 
of controversy.  In any case, if the existence of these juris-
dictions is recognized, their limits should be those fixed 
for the exclusively economic area and the continental shelf 
following the Conference of the Law of the Sea.  As a result, 
the set or sets of regulations prescribed by the States involved
-2-

concerning the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources 
could not exceed these limits.

B/ The Consultative Parties which are now considered
as the 12 States signatories to the 1959 Treaty

1. - The competence of the 12 States signatories to establish 
the regulations envisaged might first of all be based on the 
provisions of the Treaty:

Article IX of the Treaty, sub-paragraph 1 (a), provides 
for the Consultative Parties to take measures connected with 
all peaceful uses of Antarctica (such measures come into force 
as soon as they are approved by all the Consultative Parties). 
This provision alone is sufficient to justify the competence of 
the Twelve to regulate the exploration and exploitation of 
mineral resources.  It is further strengthened by the terms 
of sub-paragraph 1 (f) of the same Article which stipulates that 
they must preserve and conserve the living resources in 
Antarctica.

2. - Regulations established on this basis might cover the same 
area of application as that of the 1959 Treaty (namely the 
whole area located south of 60o South Latitude), since they 
would not, by definition, be based on national jurisdictions 
but on rights exercised in the framework of the 1959 Treaty.

3. - Such regulations would have no effect on the assertions 
of sovereignty of certain signatories nor on the non-recognition 
of those assertions by other signatories, in view of the terms 
of Article IV of the 1959 Treaty.

4. - In response to other States who might argue that the 1959 
Treaty did not apply to them, the competence of the 12 signa-
tories might be based:

    - on the idea that Antarctica constitutes a special 
case, particularly in view of its climatic peculiarities;
-3-

- on the idea that the 12 signatory powers have the most experience in this region, such experience placing them in the best position to deal with the problems linked with the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources and conferring on them responsibility to regulate such activities with a view to serving the aims and principles of the United Nations Charter in accordance with the 1959 Treaty.

5.- At present the 12 signatory states are the only "Consultative Parties".  Now Article IX, paragraph 2, of the Treaty provides that any party to the Treaty (to which all Member States of the United Nations may accede)may become a Consultative Party during such time as it "demonstrates its interest in Antarctica by conducting substantial scientific research activity there, such as the establishment of a scientific station or the despatch of a scientific expedition".  Until recently, the problem had never arisen in that no party which had acceded to the Treaty had considered that it had the right to become a Consultative Party.  It seems likely that the problem will arise shortly.

     In any event, even if the 12 can use the responsibility they assume for Antarctica as an argument, stricto sensu they can only base on the Treaty their competence to draw up the regulations envisaged in the capacity of "Consultative Parties".

     In that event, if they wish to maintain responsibility for laying down the regulations, the following possibilities are open to them:

1.  to draw up such regulations outside the framework of the 1959 Treaty by means of a special treaty.  This could weaken their position vis-à-vis third States;

2.  to draw up such regulations within the framework of the Treaty:

     a) by putting forward a very restrictive interpretation of Article IX, paragraph 2.  This appears to be difficult.
b) by drawing up such regulations before new Consultative
Parties have joined the 12 signatory powers.

c) by limiting the number of Consultative Parties to that
of the 
Treaty (which presupposes unanimity among the 12).

6.-  It might, however, be agreed that the Consultative Parties
(whether or not their number exceeded that of the States
signatories) were in a position to lay down regulations.

C/ All of the States parties to the Washington Treaty

- Such a hypothesis, although rather more "open" than
the preceding ones, would be more difficult to justify before
third States than that of the "Twelve".  The competence of these
Parties could not be based either on Article IX of the Treaty
or on special experience acquired or responsibility assumed.

D/ The international community

- If Antarctica as a whole, as it is wished in certain
circles, should enter into the "common heritage of humanity",
it would be up to the United Nations, should the need arise,
to establish regulations concerning the exploration and exploi-
tation of the mineral resources of the area.

- Such a hypothesis would be confronted by existing
obstacles: on the one hand the obstacle constituted by the
assertion by certain States of their sovereignty over a large
part of the continent and on the other hand the obstacle
constituted by the specific character of the region which would
call for special regulations.

- In the same line of thinking, the possibility that the
Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and subsidiary organs
might request to be associated with the establishment of the
regulations, as is indicated by the recent attempts by UNEP
and FAO to gain recognition for a certain degree of competence
in respect of Antarctica, should also be noted.
-5-

II. Form of possible regulations

- If the set or sets of possible regulations were based 
on national jurisdictions, it or they could be established 
by unilateral instruments on the part of the powers which have 
asserted their sovereignty over certain sectors of the area 
or by one or more agreements entered into by these powers.

- If, however, action were taken within the framework 
of the Washington Treaty, the form of the possible regulations 
on prospecting for and exploitation of mineral resources would 
depend on whether or not such activities were considered as 
compatible with the terms of the Treaty.

A/ Amendment of the 1959 Treaty

If it were considered that the commercial exploration 
and exploitation of mineral resources were incompatible with 
the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, it would be advisable, 
if it were wished to regulate these activities within the 
framework of the Treaty, to amend the latter.

The procedure for amendment would be that envisaged 
in Article XII, sub-paragraph 1 (a) of the Treaty which 
stipulates that the latter may be modified or amended at any 
time by unanimous agreement of the Consultative Parties.

Practically speaking the steps to be taken in making 
such an amendment would be the following: the representatives 
of the Consultative Parties, during one of the meetings referred 
to in Article IX of the Treaty, would recommend to their 
Governments that they amend the Treaty in accordance with the 
provisions of Article XII.  Such an amendment might indicate 
the general principles governing the activities of commercial 
prospecting for and exploitation of the mineral resources and 
include as an annex detailed regulations concerning such 
activities.

B/ Protocol to the 1959 Treaty and simplified procedure

On the other hand if it were considered that the
-6-

activities involved were not incompatible with the provisions 
of the Treaty, it would not be necessary to have recourse to 
an amendment in order to authorize them and to base the legiti-
macy of their control in relation to the Treaty.

    i) the regulation of these activities might thus take the 
        form of a Protocol to the Treaty.

        In practice, the representatives of the Consultative 
Parties would recommend to their Governments, during one of 
the meetings referred to in Article IX, to establish detailed 
regulations for the activities involved.  Such regulations, 
which would take the form of a Protocol to the Washington 
Treaty, might be adopted during a conference convened for that 
purpose.  Such a Protocol would in a way constitute an economic 
complement to the Antarctic Treaty.

    ii) It would not be necessary to have recourse to a 
        Protocol to lay down the regulations which, in this event, 
would be established following a recommendation under Article 
IX.

III. Contents of the possible regulations

    A/ Sphere of application

The problem of the sphere of application of the 
regulations is linked, in respect of the maritime sector of its 
sphere of application, with the problem of the powers of the 
future international sea-bed "authority".

Several formulae may be considered:

    1. - The area of application of the Washington Treaty

According to Article VI of the Treaty, this means 
the "area south of 60° South Latitude including all ice-shelves".

    1. Article 6 also stipulates that "nothing in the 
present Treaty shall prejudice or in any way affect the rights 
of any State under international law with regard to the high 
seas within that area".  Since the high seas by definition are
-7-

composed of super-jacent water surfaces, this clause could not 
be incompatible with the choice of the area south of the 60th 
parallel as the sphere of application of the regulations 
envisaged.

2. It might be claimed that part of the maritime area 
south of the 60th parallel entered into the "common heritage 
of humanity" and fell under the responsibility of the future 
international sea-bed Authority.

    In reply to this, however, it might be argued that 
Antarctica constitutes a special case and that, in the same 
way that Article VI of the Treaty is applicable in so far as 
the freedom of research, non-militarization etc. are concerned, 
it may also be applicable in so far as the exploitation of the 
maritime subsoil beyond the limits of national jurisdictions 
is concerned.  In fact the Twelve assume special responsibilities 
towards Antarctica in the framework of the aims and principles 
of the United Nations.  It is their duty to regulate explora-
tion and exploitation activities in view of their special 
experience of the problems involved.

    The regulations adopted in the framework of this formula 
should in any case envisage measures designed to protect the 
environment of the region and to provide for the Third 
World countries to benefit from any resources which may be 
drawn from exploitation activities.

3. The adoption of such a formula would clearly depend 
on the identity of the authors of the regulations.  Such a 
formula could only be used if the authors of the regulations 
were the Twelve, the Consultative Parties or the parties to 
the Treaty.

2. - The area covering, apart from the continent, all the 
sea-bed which by application of the general standards identified 
by the Conference on the Law of the Sea will form part of the 
"exclusively economic area" or of the continental shelf of the 
Antarctic continent.
-8-

1. This economic area or this continental shelf will extend at least 200 nautical miles beyond the basic lines used in calculating the extent of territorial waters.

2. The adaptation of this formula would raise two problems:

      a) To the extent that the existence of an economic area or of a continental shelf in Antarctica depended on the existence of national jurisdictions on the continent, the problem of the assertions of sovereignty of certain States, not recognized by other States, would be raised.  One way of avoiding the raising of this problem would consist in recognizing the existence of an exclusively economic area and of a continental shelf in Antarctica based on the idea that, globally speaking, the Antarctic continent has jurisdiction over the maritime areas.

      b) A precise calculation of the extent of the exclusively economic area and of the continental shelf would have to be made, in other words it would be necessary to determine the contour lines serving as the starting point for calculating the limits of the territorial waters.

         For this purpose, precise studies would need to be carried out to trace as clearly as possible the outlines of the coast of the land as distinct from the glacial coasts. It would in particular be necessary to study where to draw a line joining the tips of the bays with a view to fixing such contour lines.

3. - The area including, apart from the Antarctic continent, the sea-bed as defined in the second paragraph to the extent to which they are located south of the 60th parallel.

The comments made in the second paragraph are applicable to this formula.
-9-

4. - The area including, apart from the continent, the 
sea-bed as defined in the second paragraph as well as the 
sea-bed which does not enter into this definition but is 
located south of the 60th parallel.

This formula gives the widest definition of the 
area but carries the disadvantages of the first and second 
formulae.

B/Main principles of the regulations envisaged

Without totally prohibiting the exploration and exploi-
tation of the mineral resources of Antarctica, the regulations 
envisaged should mainly consist in provisions concerning the 
ways and means of issuing licences for the exploration and 
exploitation of the above-mentioned resources to undertakings 
wishing to carry out such activities.

1. Who would enforce the regulations? that is to say 
who would be competent to issue the licences and control their 
utilization?

The reply to this question is linked with that concerning 
the authors of the regulations.  The same possibilities are 
open and they give rise to the same comments. A combined system 
might also be worked out according to which responsibility 
for enforcing the regulations would lie both with the State 
having asserted its sovereignty over the area for which an 
application for a licence was made and either with a given 
group of States or with the Authority described below (p.12).

Two questions, however, deserve special consideration:

(1) The first concerns the mechanism for decision-
taking to be envisaged:  if the exclusive competence of the 
States having asserted their sovereignty over Antarctica to 
issue such licences is recognized, what rule should be envisaged?
Should the State for whose territory the licence had been 
applied for have sole competence to issue or refuse it? or 
should it seek the opinion of other States?
-10-

If the competence on the basis of the Treaty of the
Twelve States signatories to issue such licences is recognized,
should there be unanimity among them? or should provision be
made for a majority decision or a qualified majority decision
to be taken?

(2) The second question would arise if the Twelve
current Consultative Parties to the Treaty drew up these
regulations.  Should they decide that the Consultative Parties
to the Treaty are competent to issue licences and control
their utilization?

In fact, Article IX, paragraph 2, of the 1959 Treaty
stipulates that any party to the Treaty may become a Consultative
Party "during such time as it demonstrates its interest in
Antarctica by conducting substantial scientific research
activities there such as the establishment of a scientific
station or the despatch of a scientific expedition".

Up to the present no State apart from the Twelve has
been recognized as a Consultative Party.  If the area were
opened up to the exploitation of mineral resources and if
responsibility for putting the regulation of these activities
into operation fell on all of the Consultative Parties, it may
be expected that many States will accede to the 1959 Treaty and
ask to be recognized as Consultative Parties.

In these circumstances, the Twelve current Consultative
Parties might deem it necessary to state in the regulations
that they alone are competent, in view of their experience
and the responsibility they assume in Antarctica and particularly
the fact that they have drawn up the regulations, to issue the
licences and control their utilization, failing which a situa-
tion might be reached in which all States in the world would
be competent to do so.

It might also be possible to have recourse to the
solutions envisaged regarding the authors of the regulations
(p.3)
-11-

2. Who could apply for licences?

In the same way as in respect of the issuing of 
licences, the arrangements envisaged would be more or less 
"closed" according to the reply given to this question.  The 
following hypotheses might be envisaged:

a) Only the States having territorial claims on Antarctica 
and possibily bodies who were nationals of these States;
- or only the 12 States signatories (or Consultative 
Parties) and possibily bodies who were nationals of these 
States.

The choice of either of these formule would be 
particularly advantageous for the few beneficiaries (subject 
to the comments made concerning the term "Consultative Parties"). 
But it would undoubtedly give rise to lively reactions on the 
part of third States.  Such a risk would be much slighter in 
the following hypotheses:

b) All bodies, whatever their nationality or their legal 
entity (individuals, private companies, national undertakings...). 
This would be the most open system.

A slightly less "open" system would consist in providing 
for States alone to apply for licences.  It might also be 
stipulated that they should in the first place accede to 
the Washington Treaty which in accordance with its Article XIII 
is open for accession by all States, Members of the United 
Nations or invited to accede to the Treaty by the Consultative 
Parties.

The Twelve might thus decide on the one hand to assume 
sole competence for the establishment and enforcement of the 
regulations envisaged, but on the other hand to act in such a 
way that such regulations would be non-discriminatory and 
consequently acceptable by third States by allowing undertakings 
of all nationalities to participate in the exploration and 
exploitation of the mineral resources of Antarctica, subject 
only to obligations which were the same for all concerned.
-12-

3. By what means would the licences be issued and their 
utilization controlled?

There are several possibilities:

a) The States responsible for enforcing the regulations 
might consider applications for licences, issue the licences 
themselves once any consultations had been carried out and 
control their utilization.

b) An international authority or agency might be set up 
by the States responsible for enforcing the regulations.  Such 
an authority would be empowered by them to consider applications 
for licences, to issue such licences in accordance with a 
procedure to be worked out and to control their utilization.

c) The tasks involved might be shared among the States 
entitled to apply for licences and the authority:  such States 
would receive the applications for licences submitted by 
their nationals and would in their turn submit them if appro-
priate to the Authority.  The latter would consider such 
applications and issue the licences requested in accordance 
with a procedure to be worked out.

    A system might also be envisaged according to which 
the Authority would attribute "zones" in which the States 
entitled to apply for them would have the benefit of a monopoly 
over the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources. 
Within its "zone", the State would deliver licences to under-
takings of its choice, it being understood that it would observe 
the provisions of the regulations.  It would be up to the States 
concerned to ensure observance of the provisions of the licences 
thus delivered.  The Authority would, however, in the final 
instance have a power of control over the "zones" and the 
"licences" delivered to the undertakings concerned.

    Similar action to that taken by the Authority might also 
be taken as appropriate by the State having asserted its 
sovereignty over the territory for which the licence or the
-13-

"zone" was applied for.

4. Who would exercise jurisdiction over the operator?

In this case again, several hypotheses may be envisaged depending in particular on whether or not the regulations were based on one or more national jurisdictions:

a) The State on the territory of which the mineral resources to which the licence applied were located.

b) The State considering the application for a licence or the State submitting it or the State assignee of the area.

5. Factors to be taken into consideration in connexion with the issuing of licences (or of "zones") and in controlling their utilization.

a) Protection of the scientific research mentioned in the 1959 Treaty and that of the environment of the area.

b) Definition of the bodies entitled to carry out exploration and exploitation activities:

     (i) legal and physical entities or only legal entities?

     (ii) should consideration be given to whether or not these entities have the technical and financial capacities required to carry out the activities envisaged?

c) The definition of licences:

     (i) one or more types of licence, depending on whether permits are requested for exploration or exploitation:

     (ii) the limitation of licences in time and space:

1 - in time : Standard time limits would need to be envisaged,

2 - in space : Each licence would cover a precisely limited geographical area.  It might also be deemed necessary that the regulations provide that the total surface of the
-14-

zones under the responsibility of a State could not exceed
a given area with a view to avoiding a situation in which one
or more States might assume a monopoly or a semi-monopoly
over the mineral exploration and exploitation of the zone
thanks to their technical superiority.  On the other hand,
it might also be deemed necessary to include in the regulations
a clause designed to prevent one or more countries from
"blocking" prospecting and exploitation in a given area by
failing to use the licence they had received for that purpose.

6. Settlement of disputes

A system for the settlement of disputes likely to arise
between States or between the Authority and one or more States
should be provided for in the regulations.

Several solutions might be envisaged in this connexion:
- The first would be to reproduce as it stood the clause
concerning the settlement of disputes contained in Article XI
of the 1959 Treaty which indicates that should a dispute
arise between two or more of the parties to the Treaty concerning
the interpretation or application of the Treaty they must
consult among themselves with a view to having the dispute
resolved by negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement or any other peaceful means
of their choice.  Article XI provides that should such consul-
tations fail the dispute should be refered to the International
Court of Justice, but with the consent in each case of all the
parties concerned.

- Another solution would be to render compulsory
for all parties to the dispute recourse in the event of a
dispute to settlement by arbitration or judicial settlement.
The organ responsible for making a ruling might be:

- either an arbitration tribunal on whose composition
the parties to the dispute should agree within a given time-
limit,
-15-
- or a pre-established judiciary body with general 
competence such as the International Court of Justice for 
example,

- or a special technical body to which the parties to 
the dispute would be obliged to refer the matter and which 
would act in the capacity of conciliator and in the capacity 
of arbitrator should conciliation fail.

7. Financial provisions

The issuing of a licence should normally be accompanied 
by the collection of fees.

Such fees should in the first place cover the operating 
expenses of the Authority if it is created.

- They might in addition be allocated to two funds:

  A fund for assistance to the "Third World",
  A fund to combat the pollution of Antarctica 
which might be set up by the regulations.

- The methods of calculating such fees would need to 
be worked out.
