ANTARCTIC TREATY                 
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                              NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ         TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                              NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 7                              ANT/IX/79 (Rev. 1)
                                              Date:  6 October 1977
                                              Original:  French

IMPROVEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

1.   In accordance with the mandate conferred upon it by the
Ninth Consultative Meeting (document ANT/IX/11, Revision 1)
a Working Party met on 30th September, 1977, to consider the
measures which should be taken in regard to telecommunications.
Two meetings were held under the chairmanship of M.S. Hessel
(France) during which views were exchanged on the basis of
information documents and proposals put forward by the
Delegations of the United Kingdom (ANT/IX/INF. 16 and INF. 17),
Argentina (ANT/IX/36 and 36 Appendices A to F) and the USSR
(ANT/IX/12 and 12 Appendix 1).

2.   In the course of the discussion it became clear that the
present and foreseeable development in the requirements of both
countries and international organizations, chiefly in regard to
meteorological information but also for the rapid and regular
transmission of scientific, administrative and operational data,
called for a thorough up-dating of information concerning operation,
working methods and equipment of the telecommunications network
serving the Antarctic. It was also apparent that the data supplied
to the Ninth Consultative Meeting were not sufficient to enable
this up-dating to be carried out.

3.   The Working Party discussed the most efficient means of adapting
the network to current needs for improving the speed and value of
the information transmitted and of arranging for the study of those
scientific and technical developments in telecommunications which
apply to the Antarctic.

4.   The Working Party noted with gratitude the offer of the
United States delegation to collate the assembled data and prepare
a draft plan which it would make available to the other Consultative
Parties.

/The
The Representatives,

Considering that requirements in the field of telecommunications as regards collection and dissemination of meteorological data and the need for, scientific, administrative and operational traffic have developed substantially since the second telecommunications meeting of experts of the Consultative Parties held in Buenos Aires in 1969;

Considering that the implementation of Recommendation VI.26 and VII.7, and participation in the programmes of the World Meteorological Organisation, particularly the World Weather Watch, require a thorough review and improvement of the network operating in the Antarctic;

Recommend to their Governments that they:

1. Compile comprehensive data, each for its own part, on the types of traffic, modes of transmission, timing, frequencies of their telecommunications schedules and current equipment of their telecommunications programmes in the Antarctic, as well as on projects in the process of implementation and proposed improvements, in particular by designating, where appropriate, stations capable of replacing others in the event of breakdown.

2. Forward all such data to each of the other Consultative Parties via diplomatic channels on the one hand and on the other by direct despatch to the departments concerned.

3. Arrange for a meeting of telecommunications experts to be held, on the initiative of the Government of the host country, before the Tenth Consultative Meeting, to analyse the data thus compiled, suggest desirable measures of harmonisation and put forward recommendations on improvements to be made in the operation of the telecommunications network in the Antarctic;

4. Request SCAR through their National Antarctic Committees to undertake, at the earliest opportunity, a study of the most recent applications of science and technology to the specific problems of the Antarctic in the field of propagation of radio waves, and to pass on its conclusions to the Consultative Parties prior to their Tenth Meeting or if necessary to the next Consultative Meetings.
