ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA RCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 5                                 ANT/IX/51 (Rev I)
                                                  Date: 29 September 1977
                                                  Original: English

REPORT OF THE GROUP OF EXPERTS ON
MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION

1. The Expert Group was established in accordance with 
Recommendation VIII-14, operative paragraph 4, and the Report of 
the Special Preparatory Meeting held in Paris in June 1976.  The 
Group met between 20 and 29 September 1977.

2. The Group conducted its business according to the terms of 
reference established at the Special Preparatory Meeting 
(ANT/IX/2) and the Guidelines submitted to the Plenary (ANT/IX/4 
and 5).

3. At its first session the Expert Group elected Dr M W Holdgate (UK) 
as its Chairman.

4. The Expert Group adopted the following Agenda

I To review the present state of technology for exploration 
and exploitation of minerals in the Antarctic

    (a) geophysical and other exploratory techniques
    (b) construction techniques for on-shore or off-shore 
        installations
    (c) drilling and other extraction techniques
    (d) processing and storage techniques
    (e) transport techniques.

II To review the probable impact of such exploration and 
exploitation on the environment.

III To review measures for the prevention or restoration of 
damage to the environment

    (a) techniques for the prevention of pollution
    (b) remedial and restorative techniques

/(c)
(c) techniques for monitoring
(d) techniques for the assessment (prediction)
of environmental impact.

IV  To suggest preliminary guidelines on appropriate methods
for exploration and exploitation and on preventive,
corrective and restorative measures for the protection
of the environment.

5.  The attached record of the discussions and conclusions of the
Expert Group is presented in the following order:

    I   Guidelines on appropriate methods for mineral exploration
and exploitation in the Antarctic, and for the protection
of the environment

    II  A record of the group's discussion, arranged in accordance
with Items I - III of its Agenda.

6.  The Expert Group notes that the implementation of all the
guidelines, including the proposals for scientific research, set
out in the Report would demand substantial effort before exploratory
drilling or the extraction of hydrocarbons or other minerals began
(if this in fact does occur) in the Antarctic.

7.  The Group also stresses that these guidelines will need regular
review as technology and scientific understanding advance.  The
standards, pollution levels, environmental impact and other
parameters referred to in the Guidelines and Report will also need
careful quantification.

8.  The Report is submitted to the Plenary for consideration.
I

GUIDELINES ON APPROPRIATE METHODS FOR MINERAL 
EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION IN THE ANTARCTIC,
AND FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT

Introduction

1.	The Expert Group consider that were it thought possible to 
commence mineral exploration or exploitation in the Antarctic,
guidelines would need to be developed and agreed covering scientific
baseline studies, site studies, environmental impact assessment
and many technical details of the actual operation of activities
related to minerals.

2.	Not only should existing international agreements such as those 
on safety at sea, pollution from shipping, dumping at sea and other
marine environmental matters be upheld, but consideration should
be given to the development (in pursuance of Recommendation VIII-11)
of special rules related to the exacting climatic conditions of the
Antarctic, and the importance of safeguarding its unique environment
and ecosystems.

3.	Programmes of scientific research, monitoring and information 
exchange should be set in hand, according to procedures established
by Consultative Meetings under the Antarctic Treaty, so as to 
provide as complete a foundation as possible before exploration or
exploitation is likely to be considered.

Geological and Geophysical Investigations Prior to 
Exploratory Drilling for Hydrocarbons

4.	Areas which may contain hydrocarbons are likely to be identified 
only after extensive, basic geophysical and geological surveys.
Before any exploratory drilling was undertaken there would be a need
for further detailed geological and geophysical studies and the 
investigation of environment factors that determine the feasibility
of safe drilling operations.  This second category of information 
should include sea state data; weather trends during different 
seasons;  currents;  pack ice distribution, types and pressures;
iceberg size, frequency, drift rate and direction;  and location of 
contemporary icebergs scour.  Information is also needed about the

/composition
composition, stability and strength of sea bed sediments and strata on which installations might be based.

5. Most established geological and geophysical techniques, including geological and geochemical surveys and magnetic, gravimetric and seismic profiling systems, can be used safely and successfully for exploration for mineral resources in the Antarctic at appropriate seasons.  Their initial environmental impact is likely to be no greater than that of present research activities, and can probably be controlled in the way that research is controlled (for example under the Agreed Measures for the Protection of Antarctic Fauna and Flora), but revised standards may be required should there be a marked increase in the scale of these activities.

6. Seismic techniques using high explosives as an energy source are required for geophysical research on deep crustal structures, and may be used occasionnally in hydrocarbon exploration at sea, to confirm the findings of other methods.  However, the detonation of explosives can have severe local impact on the biota and their use should be kept to a minimum. They should not be used on land (or in fresh waters) of biological or geomorphological interest.

Exploratory drilling for hydrocarbons at sea

7. Before any exploratory drilling is undertaken, there should be foundation investigations using methods such as high-resolution seismic and a range of physical studies of sea bed conditions at the proposed drill site.

8. Because of the special environmental conditions and environmental sensitivity, any exploratory drilling in the Antarctic should be arranged with particularly thorough attention to safety precautions, both in the design of the equipment and installations and in its operation.

9. Floating structures used for exploratory drilling in the Antarctic should conduct their operations so as to be able to stop drilling rapidly and move away when threatened by icebergs, and subsequently recover their boreholes, without risk of pollution.

/Because
Because it is most efficient to undertake such disconnection 
in an orderly way, early warning of approaching icebergs and storms 
that might also require movement off station is essential.

10. There is a divergence of expert opinion on how far technological 
developments might permit exploratory drilling from installations 
on the sea bed within the mid-term (10-25 years).  Such developments 
would allow operations in areas inaccessible at present (although 
not below ice shelves).  It would be essential for such 
installations (and similar sea bed installations used in exploitation 
to be located in areas not liable to iceberg scour.

11. Platforms and other installations for use for oil exploration 
or exploitation in the Antarctic should, wherever possible, be 
constructed outside the region and towed to their location. 
On-shore bases for the support of exploratory and exploitative 
activities should be kept as few and as small as possible and sited 
with great care so that the least possible environmental damage 
results.  Installations for oil exploitation in the Antarctic should 
be as self-contained as possible.

12. Under the exacting conditions of the Antarctic, and because of 
its environmental sensitivity, special attention should be given 
to the thorough training of technical personnel and to the 
elaboration and enforcement of strict codes of conduct governing 
drilling operations.

Design of installations for the exploitation of 
hydrocarbons at sea

13. There is no technology presently suited to year-round oil 
production in the Antarctic.  The concepts behind such potential 
technology are being developed actively, and may lead in the 
direction of self-contained,unmanned installations on the sea bed. 
It is important that guidelines are agreed to ensure that design, 
installation and maintenance are to the highest standard so as to 
prevent pollution, waste of energy and other resources, and hazard 
to human life. These guidelines will need continual review as 
the technology is developed.

14. Risk analyses should be performed to identify possible modes of 
failure of installations under the extreme environmental conditions 
of the Antarctic (which would need careful definition to this end), 
/or
or through accident, and provision should be made for redundant 
paths or systems to insure against serious failure.

15. High standards should be set for the processing of hydrocarbons 
exploited in the Antarctic.  As a general rule, gas should not be 
flared but used to provide energy for local needs, re-injected, 
or exported from the Antarctic.  Water emerging with the oil 
should be re-injected.

16. Storage systems should be designed so as to ensure that 
hydrocarbons are separated from displaced seawater in accordance 
with agreed standards.

17. Further studies are needed in order to develop suitable 
vessels for use in the transportation of hydrocarbons from the 
Antarctic.  These vessels should conform to advanced design 
standards and include systems for the prevention of the discharge 
of oily ballast water or polluted seawater south of 60o South.

Mineral Exploration and Exploitation on Land

18. Exploratory drilling is unlikely to be undertaken widely on 
land in the Antarctic, but should be carefully localized and 
controlled so as to minimize the disturbance of vulnerable Antarctic 
soils and the importation of chemical and microbial contamination.

19. Although the mining of minerals on land in the Antarctic is 
not likely in the foreseeable future, were it to occur severe 
local impact could be caused.  This could also result from 
quarrying of aggregate and rocks for use in construction. 
Processing of ores would demand substantial energy and water, 
and generate large volumes of wastes.  Sites and associated 
transport routes for any such mining or quarrying need a thorough 
environmental evaluation, and its operation would need careful 
monitoring to minimize damage.

Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental 
Protection or Rehabilitation

20. Methods for environmental impact assessment in the Antarctic 
should be developed in accordance with recent developments in the 
concept.  Such assessments should involve the close association of 
environmental scientists, specialists in the technology of mineral 
exploration and exploitation, and others concerned with the 
regulation of such activities.  Impact assessment should be so 
/conducted
conducted as to aid the adjustment of proposed developments
so as to reduce their environmental effects, and should lead on
to continuing monitoring.

21. Methods for the containment, recovery or safe dispersion
of oil spilled at sea in the Antarctic in all but ideal conditions
do not exist at present, and need urgent development.  Research
on this topic (or on that described in the following paragraph)
should not, however, involve the deliberate release of oil
onto the sea in the Antarctic.

22. Knowledge is insufficient at present to allow reliable
estimation of the impact of possible oil spills on Antarctic
ecosystems, and it is vital that research on this subject be
expanded.

23. There are no effective methods for the full restoration of
sites on land, on ice, or at sea in the Antarctic disturbed by
mineral exploration or exploitation.  Artificial re-vegetation
of land areas, as practised in the Arctic, does not appear
appropriate in the Antarctic because of differing habitat
conditions and a lack of suitable indigenous plant species.
The most that can be done is to grade land surfaces and remove
all possible extraneous material.
II

RECORD OF THE DISCUSSION OF THE EXPERT GROUP

A.  REVIEW OF THE PRESENT STATE OF TECHNOLOGY FOR EXPLORATION
AND EXPLOITATION OF  MINERALS IN THE ANTARCTIC

(i) General Considerations

1.  In discussing mineral exploration and exploitation techniques
it is desirable to discriminate between the position on land (and
there between ice-free and ice-covered terrain) and at sea.
Marine situations should be examined in three categories:  areas
of sea bed situated beneath floating ice shelves several hundred
metres thick, areas beneath pack ice that persists for 9 or more
months in the year, and areas beneath seas open for at least
three summer months.

2.  It is also useful to distinguish three successive stages in
the process commencing with exploration and ending in the
exploitation of minerals.  These stages are:

    (i) basic exploration, which involves many activities
inseparable from those in normal scientific geological and
geophysical research and seeks to define the
structures of the strata most promising for
detailed examination.

    (ii) exploratory drilling in restricted areas chosen as
a result of such preliminary investigations;

   (iii) full-scale exploitation.

3.  Although there is a wide range of opinions concerning the
likely location and extent of hydrocarbon and other mineral
deposits in the Antarctic, at present there is no proof that
significant deposits exist south of latitude 60° south.  However,
the Expert Group agrees with a number of previous national and
international evaluations, including those by SCAR, that
exploration for hydrocarbons on the continental margins around
Antarctica is foreseeable, and commercial exploitation is a

/possibility
possibility in the longer term. The exploitation of metallic 
minerals and fossil fuels on land appears much less probable 
in the foreseeable future, while there are more accessible 
deposits in other regions, but it would be unwise to exclude 
it completely. Should offshore oil or gas reserves be exploited, 
moreover, there could be onshore mining of rocks and quarrying 
of aggregates for use in construction. While the technology 
for exploration for and exploitation of hydrocarbons has 
received most urgent attention therefore, some attention has 
been given to that employed for other minerals.

4. The Antarctic remains one of the world's least known 
regions. Much of its land surface is mantled in ice, and its 
shallow seas obscured by ice shelves and pack. The development 
and application of geophysical methods, especially those 
employing remote sensing, are vital to its exploration for 
science, irrespective of possible mineral exploitation. Only approxi-
mately 1% of other geologically comparable areas contain 
hydrocarbon resources, so that most of this exploration is 
unlikely to lead to possible commercial development.

5. Exploration or exploitation of hydrocarbons seems likely 
to be technically feasible at some time, but estimates of the 
likely time scale vary and there was a wide divergence of views 
in the Expert Group. No delegation believed that exploratory 
drilling in the Antarctic would begin in less than 5 years, 
and most of the experts considered that it was unlikely in 
less than 10 years. The time scale for possible exploitation 
is even more uncertain, but in the much less exacting conditions 
of the North Sea ten years elapsed between exploratory drilling 
and the commencement of exploitation.

6. It is important that a sufficient environmental data base to 
allow wise decisions about the conduct of exploratory drilling 
is obtained. Information is needed about sea states and depths; 
the persistence of storms and of spells of good weather; 
pack ice (including pressures in pack); iceberg 
size, depths, frequency and rate of movement; and the depths 
of iceberg scour in areas that might be explored for hydrocarbons.

/In
In such areas information is also needed on the composition 
and stability of sea bed sediments and rocks to which 
structures might be moored or on which they could be based. 
Areas of faulting and slumping, which could threaten the 
integrity of structures, need to be defined. Techniques to 
determine all these features are available (including side 
scan sonar and high-resolution seismic studies of the sea bed) 
but this programme of data gathering could well take ten years. 

7. The design of structures for drilling, production, oil 
collection, processing, storage and transportation of the 
final products from the Antarctic must be based on recommended 
practices. Guidelines will need to be laid down to ensure 
that structures are designed, installed and maintained in a 
manner that provides safeguards against pollution, the waste 
of resources, or risks to life.
(ii) Geophysical and other exploratory techniques

8. Geophysical exploration needs to be combined with other techniques.  On land the continued mapping of ice thickness and sub-ice relief and the extension of geological investigations are needed as well as gravimetric magnetic or seismic investigations if crustal structures are to be defined.  At sea bathymetric surveys and geological sampling of the sea bed are important, alongside more specialised geophysical techniques.

9. Aeromagnetic techniques using a fairly widely spaced network of traverse lines are particularly appropriate to the search for sins containing substantial thicknesses of sediment.  At sea, methods involving the sampling of water just above the sea bed in the search for traces of hydrocarbon seepage is another possible environmentally safe technology, as a supplement to the seismic studies that are likely to be instituted on an increasing scale.

10. Seismic surveys undertaken at sea involve two kinds of technique.  Reflection methods, now widely used by the petroleum industry, involve long multi-channel arrays and energy sources which include non-explosive systems (such as "air guns").  Despite the problems posed by sea ice, these systems can be used in many parts of the Antarctic at certain seasons.  They can give penetration of the sea bed for up to 10-15 km, which is sufficient exploration for hydrocarbon minerals and they have no damaging impact on the marine flora and fauna.  However, additional velocity information may be required, and therefore many commercial operations also use refraction methods to a limited degree. These methods involve "air guns", or occasionally high explosives. Use of explosives is not considered essential in exploring for hydrocarbons, and it has been prohibited in some regions (such as the Norwegian continental shelf) because  of the severe local damage it can cause to the marine biota.

11. Refraction seismic studies using explosives, on the other hand, are unavoidable at present in certain fundamental fields of crustal geophysics where the aim is to study deep structure (to 30-40 km) as when examining the relationship between the Antarctic and other continents.

/12.
12. While satisfactory geophysical methods appear to be available for scientific exploration and the search for minerals in Antarctica, there are dangers in over-generalization.  One thing is however clear.  The present ignorance of the structure of much of the Antarctic land and continental margin*, coupled with the hostile environment and the extent of ice cover, means that the exploratory phase is likely to be prolonged in most areas, before exploratory drilling could be considered.

(iii) Drilling and other extraction techniques

13. Considerable experience of drilling has been gained on land in the joint Japanese-New Zealand-United States Dry Valley Drilling Project.  Technology developed in the Arctic could be used under certain conditions to explore for and exploit hydrocarbons on land in the Antarctic.  Conversely no technology exists for drilling through moving ice-sheets on land and it is unlikely that there will be much incentive to develop it.

14. In considering off-shore drilling technology it is useful to discriminate between strictly technological aspects (for example relating to platforms, drilling systems or prevention of blow-outs) and environmental factors determining the period for which drilling is feasible and the special hazards to be guarded against.

15. It is important to discriminate between drilling to only shallow depths to obtain geological samples of sea bed strata for scientific purposes and exploratory drilling for hydrocarbons. The latter requires blow-out preventers and other safety devices while the former may not.  Generally shallow drilling to confirm sea bed geology should precede deep drilling for hydrocarbons.

16. Technology already exists for drilling from dynamically positioned mobile structures in depths below 1,000m.  It appears theoretically possible in the Antarctic in areas free of ice and where massive icebergs are infrequent for at least three months in summer.  Such areas are rare and of very limited extent.

/Thorough

*In this report the term "continental margin" is used to include the continental shelf, continental slope and continental rise.
Thorough studies of environmental conditions in such areas would be required before operations could be conducted without risk.

17. The Expert Group was informed by several delegations of the development of technology (such as large floating caisson structures) in their countries that would allow drilling in deeper waters and in areas covered with Arctic pack ice throughout the year.  Such technology would need very careful evaluation before its use was considered in the Antarctic, but it might allow the exploration of larger areas on the Antarctic margin (but not the regions below thick ice shelves).

18. Experience off Labrador has come from the use of a Pelican-type dynamically positioned ship.  Such a vessel may not be ideal for exploratory drilling in the Antarctic and a floating dynamically-positioned structure may be preferable.

19. Ice conditions in the Antarctic, which differ in many ways from those in the Arctic, pose certain special problems.  There is an annual discharge to the oceans around Antarctica of about 4,000 km3 of icebergs, many of which persist for several years. Antarctic icebergs are much larger, and many could not readily be towed away from a drilling platform.  A platform would therefore need to be able to cease work and move away if threatened. Experience off Labrador confirms that towing can change the direction of drift of the smaller icebergs sufficiently to approximately halve the number of times the drilling vessel needs to disconnect from the borehole, but in the Antarctic the benefit might be considerably less.  Towing is at present impracticable with icebergs exceeding two million tonnes weight, and when the sea is rough, or the berg inconveniently shaped or unstable.

20. Technology exists for shutting down and disconnecting from wells, and re-entering them afterwards without risk of pollution, but it is desirable to conduct the shut-down process in an orderly fashion because this facilitates re-entry, and hence an effective "early warning" system of approaching icebergs would be needed. Forecasts of the frequency of such encounters are also required since drilling would be unacceptably protracted if it had to stop very often.  Such operations would also demand reliable meteorological information in advance of developing storms.

/Environmental
Environmental studies designed to ensure the safety of exploratory 
drilling activities appear to need urgent development.

21. Exploratory drilling is not an end in itself. It costs large 
sums, and is undertaken in the hope that it will lead on to 
exploitation.  Hence the technology for exploration and 
exploitation needs to be considered together, but there is the 
important difference that while the former can be done 
satisfactorily in areas of sea open for 3 months in summer 
the latter demands operations for a much longer period, for which 
there is no technology appropriate to the Antarctic at present.
22. It is important to discriminate between the process of drilling (whether for exploration or production wells) 
and the control of production. Drilling is always done at 
present from ships or platforms at the sea surface, but there 
are several systems allowing control of production wells by 
structures on the sea bed. At present all of these are in 
shallow water and many are controlled from a surface vessel 
to which oil is piped.

23. Existing technology does not appear suitable for exploratory 
drilling in those parts of the Antarctic seas covered almost 
throughout the year by pack and fast ice of many years' 
accumulation or by floating ice shelves and glaciers.  For these 
reasons most of the seas on the Antarctic margin are inacces-
sible for exploratory drilling at present, and fixed or floating 
platforms of the kind used in oil exploitation today seem equally 
unsuited to these areas.  Technology permitting drilling from 
installations on the sea bed in other regions is being developed 
and may help to overcome this obstacle except in those areas 
where icebergs ground on the sea bed.  Advances are also being 
made in the design of systems both for drilling and operating 
production wells on or below the sea bed in deep waters.  The 
water depth presents no inherent problem because such systems 
would be unmanned and their maintainance would be likely to be 
undertaken by submarines rather than divers. Such systems 
have not yet been developed for the conditions prevailing in the 
Antarctic.

(iii) Construction techniques for on-shore and off-shore 
installations

24. At present several kinds of platform are used in oil 
exploitation at sea. Fixed structures of concrete or steel are 
being used today in depths of water down to 130 and 300 m 
respectively, and have been developed for safe operation even 
in seismic zones. One floating platform, linked by risers to 
production wells is in use in the North Sea. About 100 under-
water well head systems are in use, mainly in shallow water 
and none below 300 m. Despite considerable advances in the design 
of platforms, risers (the link between ocean floor and surface 
platform) and safety devices, none of these platform systems is

/suitable
suitable in their present form for installation in the Antarctic. While considerable progress has been made in developing surface platforms to withstand storms, and pack ice, none is proof against icebergs on an Antarctic scale. At the present, the design of equipment for use in oil exploitution in the Antarctic remains in the conceptual stage.

25. The first action in evaluating a newly discovered oilfield is to determine its size, and where the technology for exploit-ation is very expensive, a field needs to be very large if it is to be worth exploiting.  In the Antarctic a further constraint would be imposed by limited access.  It is difficult to envisage any Antarctic oilfield being exploited if it were only accessible to transport removing the production for 3 months of the year even though this period would suffice for the actual drilling of wells.

26.  In the North Sea, using today's technology (but with year-round access), before an oilfield is exploited the potential recoverable reserves need to be of the order over 100-200 million barrels.  In the Antarctic it is likely that only very large fields would be attractive for exploitation.  The limit will however depend on world energy costs and on the available technology in the future. Should oilfields be found and technolog allow their exploitation, it would be unwise to assume that they might not become economically attractive in the future.

27.  Any structures used for oil exploitation in the Antarctic would almost certainly be constructed in a region of warmer waters outside the region and towed to the point of installation.  There are no technological problems in this process, but seas in the area of installation would need to be ice-free at least for the period of 1-3 days needed for correct positioning.

28.  The logistic support of exploitation activities will also need careful planning.  It could involve the construction of supply bases on land in the Antarctic if there were suitable sites nearby, or outside the region (the latter being the more likely).  Structures used in the Antarctic are likely to be more self-contained than those used elsewhere, in less exacting climates.  These features are likely to reduce the extent of major construction activities on land with their associated environmental impact.

/29.
29. Should mineral exploration or exploitation occur on-shore 
the associated construction of bases for support personnel, 
processing plant, or other installations would be possible 
in the building of the larger Antarctic stations.

(iv) Processing and storage operations: hydrocarbon minerals 
at sea

30. All oil emerging from a well is a mixture of liquid 
hydrocarbons, gas and (especially as the exploitation of a field 
continues) water.  The gas needs to be separated from the oil 
before the latter can be transported (since transport of oil 
in tankers takes place at atmospheric pressure).  The hydrocarbon 
gases produced are generally either flared (burned) or re-injected 
thereby maintaining pressure and helping continued exploitation. 
The water is separated from the oil and can also be injected 
back into the oil reservoir or into some other strata.

31. Existing technology for this separation and reinjection 
could be employed in any fixed or floating surface production 
platforms used in the Antarctic (it would be more difficult 
to liquefy the separated gas and remove it for marketing). 
Some gas could be used as a fuel, power drilling and other 
operations: The Expert Group advises that gas should not generally 
be flared in the Antarctic (Guidelines para 15).  Appropriate 
technology has also been developed and tested in production 
well head structures on the sea bed, operated by remote control 
from the surface, could be developed as an intergral part of 
the perfection of such submerged structures for use in the 
Antarctic.

32. Substancial storage capacity might be required at install-
ations at sea from which separated oil was loaded directly into 
ships, because of the inevitable interruption of surface shipping 
operations by storms, and occasionally by heavy pack or icebergs. 
Even sub-sea installations loading into submarine tankers might 
require considerable capacity.

(v) Processing and storage operations: minerals on land

33. If minerals were exploited on-shore in the Antarctic, it 
is likely that they would also (as elsewhere in the world) 
need to be enriched before transport away from the mining area.

/This
This processing would demand substancial installations, although 
the technology would be likely to be the same as was applied 
elsewhere, for example in the Arctic.  Large amounts of fuel 
would be required since the processing of such ores is an 
energy-intensive process.  Large volumes of water would also 
be needed - again demanding energy, in most parts of the 
Antarctic, to melt ice.  Substantial volumes of wastes would 
be produced.

(vi) Transport techniques

34. Transport would be required for two purposes should mineral 
exploration or exploitation occur in the Antarctic.  It would 
be needed to support personnel and installations and to remove 
the products of their activities.  Present technology, as used 
to supply Antarctic bases, would be adequate for the support 
role although the volume of equipment and numbers of people 
moved might be much greater (in exploratory drilling two or 
three service ships might be needed to support the 100 or so 
men on a rig and the tugs employed in iceberg towing).  Small 
storage bases might be needed on shore should this be possible 
near enough to areas being explored.  However, exploitation of 
hydrocarbons would require a considerable increase in the number 
of personnel at drilling installations, with the possible 
resulting need to build land bases with the least possible damage 
tp the environment.

35. It seems likely that separated oil would be loaded directly 
into ships at installations at sea for removal from the Antarctic.  
Either specially designed surface vessels ot by submarines could 
be used to remove oil.  Information obtained during the voyage 
of the "Manhattan" may allow the design of tankers that could 
operate commercially through Arctic pack ice.  The attraction 
of submarines lies in their greater certainty of year-round 
access.  The concepts behind the design of both types of vessel 
are being explored actively, and it is likely that technology 
would be available by the time Antarctic oil exploitation became 
possible on other grounds.  Pipelines, however, provide a third 
option.  Their use is unlikely in many parts of the Antarctic, 
especially because of iceberg scour but also because there is 
little attraction in removing oil from the open sea to coastal

/areas
areas which might be no more easily accessible by tankers,
modern techniques of tunnelling in the sea floor at depths
of up to 300 m could possibly be developed to the point where
pipelines could be adequately protected.
B.  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF MINERAL EXPLORATION AND
EXPLOITATION

36. The Expert Group could not undertake a thorough study of
the impact of mineral exploration and exploitation on the
Antarctic environment.  However the discussion of the technical
aspects of mineral exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic
showed that the question of the impact of these activities on the
environment has been studied very inadequately and that there is
an urgent need for a further examination of this problem.  The
Expert Group considers that measures for the protection of the
Antarctic environment need to be worked out prior to any commercial
exploration for, or exploitation of mineral resources in Antarctica,
should such activities occur there.

37. The Expert Group had before it the Report of the SCAR Group of
Specialists on the Environmental Impact Assessment of Mineral
Exploration/Exploitation in Antarctica (EAMREA) prepared at the
request of the Eighth Consultative Meeting and the Special
Preparatory Meeting in Paris in June 1976.  Attention was also
drawn to a number of other papers, including those presented to
the Special Preparatory Meeting in Paris by the Soviet delegation
(Paper RPS 6) and by the Australian delegation (Paper RPS 11) and
the summary of the Report on Environmental Impact Assessment by
Dr D H Elliot (ANT IX/INF 2).  The Expert Group considered that
the EAMREA Report, taken in conjunction with the other papers,
provided a useful starting point for the assessment of the likely
impact on the Antarctic environment of various possible technological
developments and for the development of a programme to provide
more precise assessments.

38. The Expert Group advises the Consultative Meeting that
technological and ecological experts need to work together in
the further evaluation of these questions.  Only through a direct
interaction of this kind will it be possible to define the ways
in which new technological advances may alter physical and chemical
properties of the Antarctic as a habitat and apply the most recent
advances in scientific understanding of Antarctic environments
and ecosystems so as to predict the ecological changes that are
likely to result.  A series of carefully prepared expert seminars

/or
or workshops bringing together appropriate specialists may well 
provide the most effective forum for this dialogue.

39. More research will unquestionably be required before 
satisfactory predictions can be made of the nature and scale 
of the impact of possible alternative mineral exploration and 
exploitation technologies in the Antarctic. Opinions expressed 
in the Report (e.g. in paragraphs 5, 6, and 19 of the Guidelines 
and paragraphs 9, 10, or 20 of the Record of The Group's 
discussions, should be regarded as provisional, pending such 
research.) The Expert Group did not attempt to specify all the 
subjects needing attention, but did identify the following areas:

    (i) basic bathymetric, geological, geophysical and 
geochemical studies leading to a more realistic 
definition of those areas in the Antarctic where 
exploration for minerals may be considered, and 
where surveys consequently need to be undertaken 
to define environmental and ecological features;

   (ii) research leading to improve weather forecasting, and 
data on current directions and velocities and on the 
distribution and frequency of occurrence of various 
sea states, ice conditions and icebergs of various 
dimensions;

  (iii) definition of the fundamental structure and functioning 
of those types of Antarctic ecosystem most likely to be 
affected by mineral exploration and exploitation, 
including the flow of nutrients and energy through 
the system and primary and secondary biological 
production (and the factors influencing them). 
Simulation modelling of the essential processes within 
these ecosystems could assist the prediction of how they 
are likely to respond to various impacts;

   (iv) surveys to determine baseline levels in the environment 
(including ice caps) and in plants and animals of 
hydrocarbons and other substances whose environmental 
concentrations may be raised as a consequence of mineral 
exploration and exploitation;

    /(v)
(v) research to establish quantitatively the effect on Antarctic organisms which are particularly important ecologically or economically (e.g. krill) of a range of concentrations of hydrocarbons and other possible pollutants;

(vi) research on the mechanism and rate of biodegradation of oils of various kinds under Antarctic conditions (it being emphasised that this research should not involve the deliberate liberation of oil in the Antarctic).

Ecologists who were members of the Expert Group stressed the need for selection, based on a critical analysis of existing knowledge, in the development of this research programme.  It would be quite impossible to measure all environmental variables, or describe all Antarctic ecosystems in detail.  The dialogue between technological and ecological experts described in paragraph 38 should have as a major objective the selection of key factors and organisms for detailed study.

40. The first of these areas of research is equally important if the potential of the Antarctic as a source of minerals is to be evaluated.  The Expert Group recorded its view that the estimate* published in the Oil and Gas Journal for November 1976 and quoted in the Report of the SCAR EAMREA Group that 45 billion barrels of oil and 115 trillion cubic feet of gas "may" occur on parts of the Antarctic continental margin, even with the qualifications attached to it by the EAMREA Group, was only a speculation and should not be cited unless supported by much firmer evidence.

41. There are other fields of research which the Expert Group noted as essential if exploration for minerals in the Antarctic was to be properly directed, and its impact predicted and controlled. The studies mentioned in paragraph 39 (ii) above fall into this category and form part of the data base that the Group considered was essential before exploration for hydrocarbons could safely begin on the Antarctic margin.  The following other topics were mentioned:

(i) detailed site investigations in areas that might possibly be considered for exploration;

     /(ii)

*The Expert Group was informed that this figure originated from an unpublished, highly provisional calculation, using methodology which has since been revised, in an internal document within the United States Geological Survey.
(ii) research on methods for the containment, recovery 
or safe dispersal of spilled oil (the Expert Group 
emphasised that this was a topic of the highest 
priority);

(iii) studies on the likely physical condition of oil 
spilled on the cold Antarctic seas, and on mathematical 
models for the prediction of the movements of oil 
slicks under Antarctic conditions (there are numerous 
existing models, developed in other regions, which 
could provide a starting point);

(iv) techniques for the safe disposal of wastes arising 
from mineral exploration and exploitation in the 
Antarctic.

42. If mineral exploration or exploitation were to occur in the 
Antarctic it would be essential to monitor both the operations 
themselves and consequential changes in the environment.  There 
would need to be a system providing immediate warning of an accident 
leading to significant pollution and monitoring of the dispersion 
and effects of the pollutants released, and of the effectiveness 
of any measures for containment or recovery.  This would be 
particularly difficult under Antarctic conditions.
C.  MEASURES FOR THE PREVENTION OR RESTORATION OF DAMAGE 
TO THE ENVIRONMENT

(i) Prevention of Pollution by Oil

43. Problems of oil pollution can arise during drilling (whether 
for exploration or production), extraction, processing, storage 
or transportation under both normal operations and in the event 
of accident.  Some delegations considered that these problems may 
be especially acute in the very cold Antarctic seas where the 
natural degradation of oil is likely to be extremely slow.

44. Thorough surveys in advance of drilling are essential for the 
prevention of pollution.  High resolution seismic studies can 
detect layers where gas pockets may be encountered near the surface. 
Pressure measurement is also desirable during drilling.  In a 
permafrost environment frozen hydrates (or hydrates and oil) may 
sometimes be encountered and present an added hazard.

45. At any time during drilling, fluid under pressure (gas, oil 
or water) may be encountered.  It is therefore important to 
maintain at all times all the equipment and materials necessary 
to control unexpected pressure.  This equipment includes blow out 
preventers, communications and remote control equipment, reserves 
of mud, and additives and degasification equipment.  It should be 
noted that these muds may contain special additives to make them 
suitable for use in the Antarctic and these have a potential to 
cause some local pollution if released in the environment.  When 
the well has reached a certain depth casing is carried out. 
Casing of a well is a very important safety factor, and it will 
be necessary to determine length of each casing appropriate to 
the nature of the rock formation and the pressures that may be 
encountered.  Cementing practices must be good enough to ensure 
that oil cannot escape laterally through the casing into flanking 
rocks and ultimately to the surface.  Over-design is essential in 
exploration wells in new areas.

46. Additional pollution prevention measures should include 
proper procedures for well work-over (including the cleaning of 
operating systems, and replacement of components).  These are 
naturally vulnerable operations because some control equipment 
is often itself taken out of use, and precautions must be

/especially
especially strict in extreme environments.

47. Accidents on oil rigs, leading to environmental hazard, 
commonly involve human error and no technology can eliminate 
this, but it can reduce its probability and the scale of the 
consequences. Generally speaking human errors are commonest 
in routine operations involving less qualified personnel.  In 
opening up a new region, in an exploratory phase, highly skilled 
staff are likely to be employed and the risk of error reduced. 
Because the Antarctic is a peculiarly hostile environment, more 
than normal care is likely to be taken during the early stages. 
The risks from human error are likely to increase once there is 
a transition from exploration to exploitation, with a strong 
element of routine.  But there is no reason to predict a higher 
likelihood of human error in the Antarctic than elsewhere (the 
reverse is more likely) because operating conditions are never 
likely to be easy. Therefore, the training of personnel is an 
essential element in these safety precautions, and this must 
include "refresher" courses bringing staff up to date with new 
methods.

48. On drilling platforms at sea the prevention of pollution is 
of the first importance because opportunities for rehabilitation 
if spillage occurs are few or non-existent under the exacting 
conditions of the Antarctic.  It is essential to undertake 
exploration cautiously, to prevent blowouts.  It is essential 
to be able to stop and re-start drilling, and to abandon and 
re-enter wells without risk of pollution:  wherever possible 
equipment should be recovered before the link with a well is 
severed but in emergency a platform can move off station in under 
a minute without risk of pollution.  With sound technology, 
training and vigilance the risk of blow-outs would be very small.

49. The maintenance and repair of Antarctic installations and 
anti-corrosion measures (for example the use of sacrificial anodes) 
may also have some environmental impact.

50. Where drilling takes place on land it is important that 
minimal damage is done to permafrost soils (wells being sealed

/as
as to avoid this), that reservoirs of fuel used to power drilling 
are located on an insulated bed, that all fuel tanks are surrounded 
by bunds to contain spillage, that care is taken to minimize 
contamination with oil, muds, chemicals and microorganisms, that 
all debris is incinerated or removed, and that the land area is 
afterwards rehabilitated as far as possible. It is particularly 
important to ensure that water does not penetrate and freeze between 
the casing strings of wells, since the resulting expansion could 
cause bursting and pollution.

51. The techniques of risk analysis, covering fire as well as 
the other hazards identified above should be applied in the 
design of all equipment for use in oil exploration or exploitation 
in the Antarctic, and a substantial safety margin provided. Fire 
is equally a hazard on land, where its threat is increased by the 
generally unavailability of liquid water for fire-fighting except 
in limited areas near freshwater lakes and the sea.

52. Oil storage below the sea depends on the displacement of sea 
water from the tanks. The interface is always kept within the 
tank, and there are reliable ways of preventing hydrocarbons 
being discharged, but when water is drawn off it is necessary to 
separate the oil. Special techniques and standards will need to 
be drawn up for seabed storage systems in the Antarctic.

53. A major risk of oil spillage probably lies in the transfer 
from production wells to storage and thence to tankers. If 
seabed pipelines are used, it will be because technology allows 
their burial below the depth of iceberg scour, in stable areas 
not liable to substantial movements.

54. Tankers to be used in the Antarctic will almost certainly 
be specially built. In addition to being ice strengthened and 
having greater power such tankers will presumably operate within 
the guidelines of the safety and marine pollution prevention 
conventions to which the Antarctic Treaty nations are signatory. 
The ship design, construction and equipment features may include 
segregated ballast, double hulls or double bottoms, crude washing, 
inert gas systems, and discharge monitoring and control devices 
or some combination of these. The adoption of such features would 
/prevent
prevent pollution through the discharge of oily ballast water,
which remains a significant source of marine pollution in other
areas. It is anticipated that Treaty Countries would operate
their ships in an environmentally safe manner with special regard
for the fragile nature of the Antarctic environment.

55. There are few suitable sites for tanker terminals on land in
the Antarctic. If oil were brought ashore and then exported in 
tankers, bilge and ballast handling and treatment facilities might
be needed (depending on ship design, discussed in paragraph 54),
and the scale and nature of these must be geared to local needs.
A standard for the permissible maximum oil concentration in process
water discharged to the sea should be set, together with standards
for volatile hydrocarbons released to air: both must depend on
assessments of the environmental quality to be sustained. It is
important to note that if tankers arrived in the Antarctic in
ballast, from ports elsewhere, the ballast water could contain
a range of dissolved industrial effluents, and these could bring
low concentrations of new contaminants to the Antarctic even if
oil levels in the emissions were satisfactorily controlled.

(ii) Prevention of pollution from mining and processing of
minerals on land

56. Major local pollution could be caused by mining quarrying
and processing of coal or hard rock mineral resources on land in
the Antarctic, especially for elements like iron, where large
volumes of spoil would be produced. Such mining or the quarrying
of construction materials on land could release large amounts of
dust, contaminate drainage with metal salts, and produce tailings
or waste heaps with high concentrations of toxic metals. Not only
could these have a deleterious effect on land, freshwater and
inshore marine biota in the vicinity, but they could also be a
hazard to human health, especially if water supplies were
contaminated.

(iii) Rehabilitation

57. Areas of Antarctic land damaged by mineral exploration and
exploitation cannot be rehabilitated in the fashion adopted  in the
Arctic, involving the fertilization of the soil and the sowing of
/the
the seeds of vascular plants.  The two vascular plant species 
native to the region are unlikely to be suited to cultivation 
in this way, the introduction of alien species would contravene 
conservation agreements (and be unlikely to succeed) and the 
bryophyte vegetation of coastal areas in the Maritime Antarctic 
is equally unsuited to propagation.  It seems likely therefore 
that the most that could be done to restore land sites disturbed 
by man would be to remove all equipment and imported debris and 
shape any disturbed land so as to favour the slow process of 
natural colonization.  The rehabilitation of disturbed ice sites 
on land, or of areas of sea bed, (other than a clean-up procedure 
to remove extraneous debris) does not appear feasible except by slow 
natural processes.

58.    Should oil be spilled at sea in the Antarctic, especially 
in periods of high wind and waves or among ice, its recovery or 
even containment does not appear possible using present technology. 
It is essential to take every precaution to prevent the spillage 
of oil in the Antarctic because of the risk of unacceptable impact 
on the environment, but in case such spillages occur, research into 
means of containment and recovery of oil, and perhaps the further 
development of non-toxic biodegradable dispersants should be 
pursued.
