ANTARCTIC TREATY           
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

TRATADO ANTARTICO           
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA           

                                   LONDON

Provisional Agenda Item 5           
(submitted by the Delegation of Argentina)           

                                  ANT/IX/24           
                                  19 September 1977           
                                  Original: Spanish           

Recommendation VIII-9, Annex A, draft "Rules of           
conduct for Tourists" (for the use of tourists), to be           
appended to the declaration on provisions of the           
Antarctic Treaty and accepted practices.           

1.    Any person or member of tourist expeditions, whether travelling           
as crew-member, journalist, scientist, technician, guide, etc. will           
be regarded as a "tourist" for the purposes of these rules.           

2.    The leader or person responsible in the first instance for           
each expedition, and the Master of the ship concerned as regards           
areas specifically within his competence, are responsible for           
compliance with these regulations, which must be strictly           
obeyed by tourists.           

3.    No tourist may disembark or travel alone in any part of           
Antarctica; he must do so as member of a group, under the authority of           
personnel empowered for this purpose, whose guidance and instructions           
he must observe.           

4.    The Head of the base or research station is the only person entitled           
to authorize a visit by tourists to the base or station or installations           
or neighbouring areas and to determine the conditions of the visit.           

5.    Bases, stations, shelters, buildings etc. which are unoccupied or           
uninhabited may be used only in cases of grave emergency in which the           
lives of tourists are endangered.           

6.    Tourists are specifically prohibited from:           

      Passing through areas which are dangerous or assumed to be dangerous to           
      their safety;           

      Moving away or becoming separated from the group to which they belong;           

      Entering specially protected areas (SPA) or sites of special scientific           
      interest (SSSI);           

      Introducing plants or animals, including domestic species;           

      Dumping in the water or abandoning on ice or on land any type of material,           
      chemical products, etc., or waste;           

      Using explosives or weapons, including sporting weapons, in the area;           

      Approaching or in any way disturbing, whether on foot or in vehicles,           
      colonies of birds and/or Pinnipedia;           

      Disturbing, destroying or causing any damage to indigenous plants           
      and animals;           

      Making any loud noise or report in the vicinity of colonies of animals           
      and nesting and breeding grounds;           



  



  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  



  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  





  
: Collecting or removing, for whatever purpose, specimens of animals, 
plants or minerals,  including birds'. eggs and fossils;

: Disturbing or interfering with any scientific or logistic work 
being carried out in the area;

: Damaging or impairing historical monuments;

: Damaging or impairing the installations of bases or stations, 
shelters, vehicles, scientific instruments and navigation aids;

: Removing items, even if abandoned, from bases or expeditions.  If for 
reasons of grave risk to human life any such items have to be used, the 
Leader of the expedition must take the appropriate steps to restore or 
replace them as found;

: Making inscriptions or leaving marks or drawings of any kind on any 
natural surface and base or expedition equipment.

7. In the event of doubt over the contents and scope of these regulations 
tourists must consult the leader of the expedition or persons authorized 
by the latter.

Draft of Annex B

Members of tourist expeditions to Antarctica may not disembark in 
or enter the specially protected areas or places of special scientific 
interest.  Places at which they may disembark must be carefully 
selected with a view to strict compliance with the provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty and accepted practices by the organizers of tourist 
expeditions and all their members.
