ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                  NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 6                                           ANT/IX/73
                                                         Date: 29 September 1977
                                                         Original:     English

DRAFT INTERIM VOLUNTARY MEASURES FOR THE CONSERVATION
OF ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

(Submitted by Norway and the United Kingdom)

The Representatives,

Recognizing their prime responsibility for Antarctic matters;

Recalling Article IX, paragraph 1(F) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling Recommendations VIII-10, VIII-13, IX- [encouragement
of scientific research] and IX- [future steps towards a definitive
conservation regime];

Bearing in mind that Antarctic whales and seals are the
subject of existing regulatory agreements;

Recognizing that the other living resources of the Antarctic
seas are of potential value and require a binding international
agreement for their effective conservation;

Recognizing that some demersal fish stocks have been exploited
and that little is known of their population dynamics;

Recognizing that in order to improve scientific knowledge
and so place exploitation on a rational basis, every effort should
be made to gain information from the statistics of future Antarctic
fishing operations;

Desiring to promote and achieve the objectives of conservation
and scientific study of these resources;

Recommend to their Government that each Government should
voluntarily take account of the following Interim Voluntary
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
until such time as a binding international agreement enters into
force:

/1.
1.     They should exercise restraint so that exploitation of 
Antarctic marine living resources, particularly of lower trophic 
levels, shall not jeopardise the Antarctic ecosystem as a whole.

2.     They should exercise greater restraint in relation to demersal 
fish stocks which have been exploited pending further scientific 
investigation.

3.     They should provide to FAO, to the SCAR/SCOR Group of 
Specialists on living resources of the Southern Ocean and make 
available on request catch and effort statistics in accordance 
with the Annex to this Recommendation.

4.     They should provide to the other consultative Parties 
information on any steps it has taken in accordance with these 
Interim Voluntary Measures.

5.     They should urge Governments which are not Consultative 
Parties and which engage in activities involving the exploitation 
of Antarctic marine living resources to take account of these 
Interim Voluntary Measures.

6.     When it appears to any Consultative Party that exploitation 
of Antarctic marine living resources is significantly disturbing 
the Antarctic ecosystem as a whole, or any part thereof, that 
Party may propose through diplomatic channels that a Special 
Consultative Meeting be convened under Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty.  If all Consultative Parties so agree, such a Meeting 
shall be convened as soon as possible to consider the situation 
and the steps it may be necessary to take.
