ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING               
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                    
девятое консультативное совещание        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                 
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           
TRATADO ANTARTICO                        
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA               


                                  LONDON                     


Provisional Agenda Item 6                ANT/IX/25                   
                                         Date: 20 September 1977     
                                         Original: English           


DRAFT                                    


CONVENTION  ON  CONSERVATION  OF  THE    
LIVING  RESOURCES  OF  THE  SOUTHERN    
OCEAN                                    


(Paper submitted by South Africa)        
DRAFT CONVENTION OF CONSERVATION
OF THE             LIVING RESOURCES             OF THE
SOUTHERN OCEAN

PREAMBLE

THE GOVERNMENTS OF ( Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties)

COGNISANT of the vastness of the resources of the Southern
Ocean and their potential as a source of food for human
consumption,

COGNISANT of the sensitivity of these resources due to
the existence of short food chains and the heavy dependence
of many species on krill,

CONSIDERING that the development of advanced techniques
for the exploitation of the living resources of the sea
may expose some of the living resources of the Southern
Ocean to the danger of bcing over-exploited,

CONSIDERING that it will serve the interests of mankind,
as well as the interests of the Contracting Parties, to
conserve and manage these living resources rationally and
according to scientific principles and to conduct the

/ 2..
- 2 -

exploitation of these resources on a scientific and organised
basis,

CONSIDERING that the nature of the problems involved in the
conservation of the living resources of the Southern Ocean
is such that it can only be solved on the basis of inter=
national co-operation, and

RECOGNIZING that in view of these considerations it is
highly desirable to establish an International Commission
to recommend, promote and co-ordinate the scientific measures
and studies necessary to ensure adequate protection of the
living resources of the Southern Ocean and to secure the
maximum sustained productivity of the fishery resources as
well as to provide for statistical information concerning
fishing efforts and the resulting catches and the regulation
of such efforts,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

ARTICLE I

1. The area to which this Convention                       Area to which
applies, hereinafter referred to as the                   the Convention
"Convention Area", shall be all waters                    applies.
south of 60° South Latitude.

2. Nothing in this Convention shall
be considered as affecting the rights,
claims or views of any Contracting Party

3./ ....
- 3 -

in regard to the limits of its territorial 
sea or to the extent of the jurisdiction of 
a coastal state over fisheries.

ARTICLE II

This Convention shall apply to all living           Resources
resources in the Convention Area except for      covered.
those species already subject to inter=
national regulation by way of specific 
conventions.

ARTICLE III

1. The Contracting Parties hereby agree        Establishment
to establish and maintain the International     of Commission.
Commission for the Southern Ocean (ICSO),
hereinafter referred to as the "Commission",
which shall carry out the functions entrusted
to it in this Convention.

2. The Commission shall be composed of
representatives of each of the Parties named
in the Preamble to this Agreement. Other
Contracting Parties shall be entitled to
appoint representatives to participate in the
meetings of the Commission during such time as
that Contracting Party is conducting substantial
scientific research concerning the living
resources, or is engaged in the economic
exploitation of any of the living resources
covered by this Convention.

4./ ....
- 4 -

ARTICLE IV

1. Each Contracting Party represented on the 
Voting
Commission shall have one vote in the Com=     Procedure.
mission.

2. Decisions of the Commission shall be taken
by unanimous vote of the Contracting Parties
present and voting.

3. Two thirds of the Contracting Parties
represented on the Commission and participating
in the meeting shall constitute a quorum.

ARTICLE V                                      Legal
                                                    Personality.

The Commission shall have the capacity to
enter into contracts, to acquire and dispose
of movable or immovable property and to
institute and defend legal actions.

ARTICLE VI

1. The Commission shall meet at least         Meetings of the
every (one)(two) years and at such other      Commission.
times as may be requested by a majority of
the Contracting Parties represented on the
Commission.

2. The date and place of the first meeting
shall be determined by agreement between the
Contracting Parties named in the Preamble.

3. The Contracting Parties named in the
Preamble shall decide on a place for the

5/ ...
- 5 -

establishment of the Commission's head=
quarters and unless otherwise decided by
the Commission, all meetings of the Com=
mission shall be held at the headquarters.

ARTICLE VII

1. At its first meeting the Commission 
shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman.
If a member of a delegation has been elected
Chairman he shall forthwith cease to act as
a member of that delegation and the State
concerned shall have the right to appoint
another person to serve in his place.

2. These officers shall remain in office
until the election of their successors at the
next (annual)(biennial) regular meeting and
shall be eligible for re-election.

ARTICLE VIII

1. The Commission shall appoint an Executive
Secretary on such conditions as it may deem
fit.

2. The staff of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Executive Secretary in accord=
ance with such rules and on such conditions as
may be determined by the Commission.

3. The Executive Secretary and his staff
shall perform all functions entrusted to it by

Election of
Officers.

Appointment of
Executive
Secretary.

6 / ...
- 6 -

the Commission, including inter alia:

(a) preparing budget estimates for review by 
the Commission;

(b) authorizing the disbursement of funds in 
accordance with the Commission's budget;

(c) accounting for the funds of the Commission;

(d) arranging for co-operation with the 
organizations referred to in Article XV 
of this Convention;

(e) preparing the collection and analysis of 
data necessary to accomplish the purposes 
of the Convention;

(f) preparing for approval by the Commission 
scientific, administrative and other 
reports of the Commission and its sub-
sidiary bodies.

                                  ARTICLE    IX

The Commission may establish subsidiary 
bodies and entrust such bodies with the 
execution of the functions allocated to 
them by the Commission.

                                  ARTICLE    X

The Commission shall adopt such rules of 
procedure and other internal administrative 
regulations as are necessary to carry out its 
functions.

                                  Rules of 
                                  Procedure.

7./
- 7 -

ARTICLE XI

The official languages of the Commission and
of any subsidiary body shall be English,
French, Russian and Spanish and proposals and
data may be submitted to the Commission or any
body thereof in any of these languages.

Official
Languages.

ARTICLE XII

1.      An annual budget of the expenses of the
Commission and its subsidiary bodies shall be
recommended by the Commission and submitted
to the Contracting Parties represented on the
Commission for their approval.

Budget of the
Commission.

2.      Subject to the approval of all Contracting
Parties represented on the Commission, the
Commission may, at any meeting, including a
meeting convened specifically for this purpose,
adopt a supplementary budget.

3.      One half of the total amount of the budget,
including any supplementary budget, shall be
contributed by the Contracting Parties represented
on the Commission in equal parts.

4.      The other half of the total amount of the
budget, including any supplementary budget, shall
be contributed by the Contracting Parties repre=
sented on the Commission in the proportion that
its nominal catch in the Convention Area bears to
the aggregate nominal catch of all Contracting
Parties represented on the Commission in that area.

8./ ....
- 8 -

In computing this catch, the Commission shall take
into account all living resources covered by this
Convention.  The catch shall be determined on the
basis of the average for the last two calendar years
for which statistics are available.

ARTICLE XIII

1. The Commission shall perform inter alia the        Functions
following functions:                                  of the
                                                      Commission.

    (a) take steps to prevent the over-
exploitation of any Antarctic marine
living resources covered by this Con=
vention.  Such steps may include inter
alia open and closed seasons for fishing,
size of mesh of fishing nets, size limits
of fish that may be retained on board
vessels or landed, quotas, effort limi=
tation, or any other measures deemed
necessary.

    (b) Ensure that the harvesting of specific
target species do not adversely affect
the health of dependent or related species.

    (c) Ensure that harvesting of target species
is conducted in accordance with mainten=
ance of the integrity of the Antarctic
marine ecosystem as a whole.

    (d) Acquire basic scientific data on the nature,
interrelationships and dynamics of the
Antarctic marine ecosystem.

9./ ....
- 9 -

(e)    Acquire quantitative data on the standing 
       stocks of Antarctic marine living resources 
       and detailed data on the levels of any 
       harvesting of such stocks and assess the 
       status of the stocks of Antarctic marine 
       living resources.

(f)    Identify the stocks to which conservation 
       methods should be applied.

(g)    Develop and implement specific conservation 
       measures to achieve the purposes of this 
       Agreement.

(h)    Study the environment of the Antarctic 
       marine living resources.

(i)    Analyse, publish and disseminate all 
       statistical, biological and other scientific 
       information on the Antarctic marine living 
       resources.

(j)    Furnish the Contracting Parties with 
       yearly reports on the information obtained.

(k)    Utilize all available services and informa=
       tion to supplement the research being done 
       by the Commission itself or by the Contracting 
       Parties.

2.     The Commission shall also perform all other functions 
       necessary for the realisation of the objectives of this 
       Convention.

10./
-  10  -

ARTICLE XIV

The Contracting Parties shall furnish the                 Commission may
Commission on its request with any available              request informa=
statistical, biological and other data and               tion.
information which the Commission may require
for the purposes of this Convention.

                                                         Agreements and
                                                         Co-operation
                                                         with other
                                                         Organizations
                                                         and Committees.

ARTICLE XV

1. The Contracting Parties agree that the               Co-operation
Commission should endeavour to establish a
working relationship between the Commission
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. To this end the Commission
shall enter into negotiations with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
with a view to concluding an agreement pursuant
to Article XIII of the Organization's Constitu=
tion. Such agreement should provide, inter alia,
for the Director-General of the Food and Agricul=
ture Organization to appoint a Representative who
would participate in all meetings of the Com=
mission and its subsidiary bodies without the
right to vote.

2. The Contracting Parties agree that there should
be co-operation between the Commission and other
fisheries commissions and scientific organizations
which might contribute to the work of the Commission.
The Commission may enter into agreements with such
commissions and organizations.

11./
- 11 -

3. The Commission may invite any appropriate 
international organization and any Government 
which is a member of the United Nations or of 
any Specialized Agency of the United Nations 
and which is not a member of. the Commission, to 
send observers to meetings of the Commission and 
its subsidiary bodies.

ARTIC    XVI

1. The Commission may make recommendations to 
the Contracting Parties concerning any matter 
which falls within the scope of this Agreement.

2. Any recommendations which the Commission may 
make with the aim to further the protection and 
regulate the exploitation of the Antarctic marine 
living resources shall have equal application 
to all Contracting Parties.

3. Each recommendation made under paragraph 1 
of this Article shall become effective for all 
Contracting Parties six months after the date of 
the notification from the Commission transmitting 
the recommendation to the Contracting Parties, except 
as provided in paragraph 4 of this Article.

4. The Contracting Parties undertake to give 
effect to any recommendation that has been adopted 
by the Commission provided that:

    (a) Any Contracting Party may, within 60 
    days of notification of a recommendation;

12./ ....
Recommendations 
by the Com= 
mission,
- 12 -

present an objection to it to the Commission
and in that event the objecting Contracting
Party shall not be under an obligation to
give effect to the recommendation and all
other Contracting Parties must be informed
of the objection without delay.

(b) If an objection is presented within the pre=
scribed period referred to in sub-paragraph
(a) above, any other Contracting Party may
present an objection to the recommendation
within 60 days after notification of such
objection.

(c) If an objection against a recommendation is
lodged by more than one third of the Con=
tracting States, all other Contracting
States shall be relieved of any obligation
to give effect to that recommendation but
may nevertheless do so.

ARTICLE XVII

1. Each Contracting Party undertakes to take    Measures for
appropriate measures in the Convention Area  Protection of
with respect to its nationals and vessels to   Marine Living
ensure the implementation of the provisions   Resources.
of this Convention and the recommendations of
the Commission which have been accepted by that
Contracting Party, and to apply sanctions for
the violation of such recommendations.

13./
- 13 -

2. The Contracting Parties undertake to collabo=
rate with each other with a view to the adoption of
effective measures to ensure the implementation of
this Convention and the achicvement of its objectives.

3. The Contracting Parties undertake to collabo=
rate with one another with a view to establishing
upon a recommendation by the Commission, a system of
international enforcement of such recommendations as
the Commission may select for inclusion under the said
system.  The adoption and implementation of such a
recommendation shall be governed by Article XVI
of this Convention and shall be subject to the pro=
visions of Article I(2).

4. The Contracting Parties shall transmit to the
Commission, at such times as may be required by the
Commission, a statement of the action that they have
taken pursuant to this Article.

ARTICLE XVIII

The provisions of this Convention shall not 
apply to fishing operations conducted solely
for the purpose of scientific investigations,
by vessels authorized by a Contracting Party
for that purpose, or to fish taken in the course
of such operations.  However, fish so taken shall
not be sold or exposed or offered for sale in
violation of a recommendation of the Commission,
and statistics of fish taken in the course of
operations shall be included, under a separate
heading, in the aggregate catch statistics.

                    Scientific 
                    Investigations.

14./ ....
-  14  -

ARTICLE XIX

1.   This Agreement may be modified or amended                  Amendments.
at any time by unanimous agreement of the Con=
tracting Parties represented on the Commission.
Any such modification or amendment shall enter
into force when the depositary Government has
received notice from all such Contracting
Parties that they have ratified it.

2.   Such modification or amendment shall there=
after enter into force as to any other Contracting
Party when notice of ratification by it has been
received by the depositary Government.  Any such
Contracting Party from which no notice of ratifica=
tion is received within a period of two years from
the date of entry into force of the modification
or amendment in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 1 of this Article shall be deemed to
have withdrawn from this Agreement on the date of
expiration of such period.

ARTICLE  XX

At any time after ....... from the date of entry      Withdrawal
into force of this Convention, any Contracting         from
Party may withdraw from the Convention by giving     Convention.
written notification to the Depositary.  With=
drawal shall take effect six months after notifica=
tion of withdrawal was received by the Depositary.
The Depositary shall inform all the Contracting
Parties of notification of withdrawal.

                     15 /
- 15 -

ARTICLE XXI

1.  If any dispute arises between two or more 
Dispute 
of the Contracting Parties concerning the inter=
Settlement.
pretation or application of the present Agreement,
those Contracting Parties shall consult among themselves 
with a view to having the dispute resolved by negotia=
tion, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement or other peaceful means of their 
own choice.

2.  Any dispute of this character not so resolved 
shall, with the consent, in each case, of all parties 
to the dispute, be referred to the International 
Court of Justice for settlement; but failure to reach 
agreement on reference to the International Court shall 
not absolve any parties to the dispute from the responsi=
bility of continuing to seek to resolve it by any of 
the various peaceful means referred to in paragraph 1 
of this Article.

ARTICLE XXII

1.  This Agreement shall be open for signature 
Entry into 
and ratification by all the Contracting Parties 
named in the Preamble.

2.  The Agreement shall enter into force on the 
date on which the Depositary has received the 
instruments of ratification of all the Contracting 
Parties named in the Preamble.

3.  The Depositary shall notify the Contracting 
Parties of the date of receipt of each instrument

16./ ....
- 16 -

of ratification and the date on which the Agreement 
shall enter into force.

4.  After this Agreement has entered into force it 
shall be open for accession to any State which is a 
Member of the United Nations or of any specialized 
agency of the United Nations.

5.  After the entry into force of this Convention, 
the Convention shall enter into force for each State 
accoding to the Convention on the date on which the 
Depositary receives the instrument of accession of 
that State.

6.  The Depositary shall inform all the Contracting 
Parties of each accession to the Agreement.

                                  ARTICLE XXIII

1.  The State in which the Commission shall have         Functions
its headquarters shall be the Depositary.               of the
2.  The original of this Convention shall be             Depositary.
deposited with the Depositary who shall furnish 
the Governments of the States eligible to become 
parties to the Convention with certified copies 
thereof.

3.  This Agreement shall be registered by the 
Depositary pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter 
of the United Nations.

DONE in triplicate, in the English, French, Russian and 
Spanish languages, all equally authentic, at ..................
this .................. day of ....................
