ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                               NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                         
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                        NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                           LONDON                          

Agenda Item 3                                            ANT/IX/69
                                                          Date:  19 September 1977

OPENING STATEMENT BY

H.E. MR A. STAREWICZ

HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF POLAND
Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Polish delegation may I join the earlier 
speakers in congratulating you on your unanimous election as 
Chairman of this important meeting.

Poland acceded to the Antarctic Treaty in June 1961.
We have come to this meeting as representatives of Poland which 
under the Treaty provisions has now become one of the 
Consultative parties to the Treaty, with the lucky number 13.
At this point may I thank most warmly all other consultative 
parties for their unanimous support of Poland to become a 
permanent member of this meeting.

In our presence here we see your acknowledgement,
distinguished representatives, that the Polish People's 
Republic has fulfilled the requirements established in Article 9,
Paragraph 2 of the Antarctic Treaty.

I would also like to thank all those distinguished 
delegates for their friendly words and greetings addressed to 
us on the occasion of my country's accession to the group of 
Consultative Members.  It is my and my colleagues' great 
honour to represent our country here for the first time at the 
Consultative Meeting.

Poland's substantial and independent research in Antarctica 
started in 1974/75 with an expedition of R.V. Prof. Siedlecki 
and M.P. Tazar organised jointly by the Polish Academy of 
Sciences and the Sea Fisheries Institute.  In 1976/77 a 
permanent scientific station named after Henryk Arctowski was 
set up on King George Island, South Shetlands Archipelago, and 
is in full operation at present.

At the same time another marine research expedition was 
sent on board R.V. Prof. Siedlecki and a number of other 
vessels.  The programme covers a wide scope of biological, 
oceanographic and meteorological long-term research work in 
Antarctica and southern sectors of the Indian and Pacific 
Oceans.
2)

The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 continues to demonstrate 
its remarkable utility and viability first of all as concerns 
the investigation and protection of the Antarctic environment.

I would like to assure you that Poland shall strictly 
abide by the decisions and recommendations adopted by the 
previous eight consultative meetings.

We are deeply convinced that both the Treaty and the 
work done so far by the consultative meetings serve not only 
the best interests of the member states but also those of 
mankind as well as the peaceful co-operation all over the 
world.

The Polish delegation hopes to contribute to the work 
of this Meeting to the best of their ability and experience.

May I finally express our great appreciation for the 
excellent organisation and hospitality offered us by the 
British Government during this Meeting.
