ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                   NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                  
девятое консультативное совещание         TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                   NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                   ANT/IX/22
Provisional Agenda Item 6                  19 September 1977
                                                   Original: English

Draft Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources
(Submitted by the Delegation of Australia)

The Contracting Parties,

Recognising the importance of the ecosystem of
the seas surrounding Antarctica;

Conscious that it is essential to increase
knowledge of the living organisms which form
part of that ecosystem;

Aware that the populations of living organisms
include important living resources
vulnerable to over-exploitation;

Judging that effective conservation measures
are necessary and require a high degree of
international co-operation including continuous
scientific assessment of the levels of
populations and their inter-relationships;

Desiring in the interest of all mankind to
preserve the seas around Antarctica from
becoming the scene or object of international
discord;
- 2 -

Recalling the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora,
adopted under the Antarctic Treaty 1959;

Recalling also the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals 1972;

Bearing  in mind recent developments in the
law of the sea,particularly those relating
to the conservation and management of the
living resources of exclusive economic zones
and of the high seas.

have agreed as follows
Article 1

This Convention applies to the conservation of the
living organisms of the seas south of 60° south
latitude and beyond that latitude to the living
organisms which form part of the ecosystem of those
seas.

Article 2

(1) The Contracting Parties hereby establish the Antarctic
Marine Conservation Commission (hereinafter referred
to as "the Commission").

(2) Each of the Contracting Parties shall be represented
on the Commission by one representative (or his
alternate) who may be accompanied by appropriate
advisers.

(3) Each representative shall have one vote. Resolutions,
including conservation measures, shall be adopted by
a two-thirds majority of the Commission

(4) The Commission shall meet annually or at such times as
requested by no less than four members of the Commission

(5) The Commission shall elect from its members at its
first meeting a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman, each
of whom shall serve for a term of two years and shall
be eligible for re-election but not to a succeeding
term.

(6) The Commission may decide upon and amend, as necessary,
rules for the conduct of its meetings.

(7) The Commission may appoint its own Secretary and staff.

(8) The Commission shall recommend to Contracting Parties
suitable location for its Secretariat.
(9) The Secretary shall prepare an annual budget for approval 
by the Commission. Each Contracting Party shall 
contribute to the budget in the form and proportion 
recommended by the Commission. and approved by the 
Contracting Parties.

(10) The expenses of each representative and 
his advisers shall be paid by his own 
Government.

Article 3

(1) The Commission may establish such committees as 
it considers necessary to advise on matters 
requiring special examination.

(2) The Commission shall establish a Scientific 
Advisory Committee and determine its terms of 
reference.

(3) Each Contracting Party may nominate members 
of the Scientific Advisory Committee and the 
Commission may invite other experts to 
participate.
Article 4

(1) The Commission shall, in accordance with such 
priorities as it may determine:

        (a)     be responsible for the collection of 
information and the compilation of 
statistics on populations of such living 
organisms as fall within the scope of 
this Convention, as well as the publication 
and dissemination of such information and 
statistics;

        (b)     assess the status of such populations in 
accordance with the best scientific 
evidence available to it;

        (c)     adopt measures to ensure the conservation 
of such populations.

(2) The conservation measures referred to in 
paragraph (1)(c) may deal with:

        (i)     overall quantity of any species which 
may be caught;

        (ii)    protected and unprotected species;

        (iii)   open and closed seasons;

        (iv)    open and closed areas, including special 
areas for the protection and scientific 
study of particular species;

        (v)     restrictions on the effort employed for 
and methods of harvesting;
(vi) the provision of catch returns and other 
statistical and biological records;

(vii) procedures for facilitating the review and 
assessment of scientific information;

(viii) an effective system of inspection;

(ix) such other aspects of conservation which 
the Commission considers necessary for the 
fulfilment of the objectives of this 
Convention;

(3) Conservation measures shall be binding and shall 
enter into force ninety days after the Commission 
notifies them to the Contracting Parties.

(4) In adopting measures, the Commission shall take 
into consideration any relevant regulations or 
measures established pursuant to the International 
Convention for Whaling 1946 or the Convention for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Seals1972, and shall ensure 
that there is no inconsistency between the obligations 
of a Contracting Party under such regulations and 
measures and the measures which may be adopted by 
the Commission.

(5) In adopting conservation measures which may apply 
within the areas of the territorial sea or exclusive 
economic zone of any State, the Commission shall bear 
in mind that such measures shall not prejudice the 
rights of coastal States in relation to the 
utilisation of the living resources of such areas.
Article 5

The Commission shall bear in mind the desirability of
co-operating and developing, where possible, working arrange-
ments with appropriate specialised agencies of the United
Nations and other bodies, intergovernmental, governmental or
non-governmental, having an interest in matters related to
the conservation of living organisms of significance in the
Antarctic marine ecosystem.

Article 6

(1)     Each Contracting Party shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that its nationals and vessels under its jurisdiction
comply with such measures as the Commission may adopt.

(2)     Each Contracting Party within whose territorial sea
or exclusive economic zone conservation measures adopted
pursuant to Article 4 (1) (c) are applicable shall
incorporate such measures as part of the law in force
in such waters.

(3)     In making any agreement relating to the utilization of
the living organisms to which this Convention applies,
the Contracting Parties shall ensure that the terms of
any such agreements are consistent with the conservation
measures adopted pursuant to this Convention.
(c) prejudicing the position of any Contracting Party 
as regards its recognition or non-recognition of any 
other State's sovereignty, sovereign rights or other 
rights, or basis of claim thereto, in the seas to which 
this Convention applies.

(2) No acts or activities taking place while this Convention 
is in force and in the seas to which it applies shall be 
invoked or treated by any Contracting Party as a factor 
relevant to the determination by any other Contracting 
Party of the terms and conditions upon which access may 
be given to the former by the latter to the resources of 
any part of its territorial sea or exclusive economic zone.

Article 9

Each of the Contracting Parties undertakes 
to exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the 
Charter of the United Nations, to the end that 
no one engages in any activity in the seas to which 
the present Convention applies contrary to the 
principles and purposes of the present Convention.
Article 10

(1)     Any dispute arising out of or in connection with this Convention, which is not otherwise settled, may be referred for settlement to the International Court of Justice or to arbitration.

(2)     If the party against whom one of such procedures is commenced prefers that the alternative procedure should be followed, it shall within four weeks of receipt of the notice of institution of proceedings so inform the party commencing the proceedings.  The latter shall thereupon withdraw the document instituting the proceedings and commence proceedings under the alternative procedure.

(3)     Subject to paragraph (5) below, where the Commission is a party to a dispute the dispute may be referred only to arbitration.

(4)     In cases where the dispute is referred to arbitration:

(i)     the arbitral tribunal shall be constituted as provided in Article 3 of Annex VI of the Informal Composite Negotiating Text of 15 July except that any appointment referred to in paragraph 5 of Article 3 shall be made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and without regard to the list of arbitrators there mentioned;
( ii)     The provisions of Articles 4 to 11 
inclusive and paragraph 1 of Article 12 
of Annex VI of the Informal Composite 
Negotiating Text shall apply.

(5)

If a Law of the Sea Convention containing 
provisions similar to those in Part XV and associated 
Annexes of the Informal Composite Negotiating Text of 
15 July 1977 enters into force:

(i)      any dispute thereafter arising out of or 
in connection with this Convention may, as 
a further alternative, be referred for settle-
ment to the Law of the Sea Tribunal in the 
manner provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) 
of this Article;  and

(iii)   the references to the Informal Composite 
Negotiating Text in paragraph (4) above shall 
be replaced by references to the comparable 
provisions of the Convention, which shall 
apply without qualification.
Article 11

(1) This Convention may be amended at any time.
The text of any amendment proposed by a Contracting
Party shall be submitted to the Depositary, which
shall transmit it to all the Contracting Parties.

(2) If one-third of the Contracting Parties
request a meeting to discuss the proposed amendment
the Depositary shall call such a meeting.

(3) An amendment shall enter into force when
the Depositary has received instruments of ratification
or acceptances thereof from all the Contracting Parties.
Article 12

This Convention shall be open for signature
at                  from               to
1978 by States participating in the Conference on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources held
at                  from               to               1978.

Article 13

This Convention is subject to ratification
or acceptance. Instruments of ratification or acceptance
shall be deposited with the Government of
hereby designated as the Depositary.

Article 14

This Convention shall be open for accession
by any other State which is engaged in research or
harvesting activities in relation to the living marine
organisms to which this Convention applies.
Article 15

(1) This Convention shall enter into force on 
the thirtieth day following the date of deposit of the 
instrument of ratification or acceptance.

(2) Thereafter this Convention shall enter into 
force for each ratifying, accepting or acceding State 
on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of 
its instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession.

Article 16

Any Contracting Party may withdraw from this 
Convention on 30 June of any year by giving notice on or 
before 1 January of the same year to the Depositary, 
which upon receipt of such a notice shall at once 
communicate it to the other Contracting Parties.  Any 
other Contracting Party may, in like manner, within one 
month of the receipt of a copy of such a notice from 
the Depositary, give notice of withdrawal, so that the 
Convention shall cease to be in force on 30 June of the 
same year with respect to the Contracting Party giving 
such notice.
Article 17

The Depositary shall notify all signatory and
acceding States of the following:

(a)  signatures of this Convention, the deposit
of instruments of ratification, acceptance
or accession and notices of withdrawal;

(b)  the date of entry into force of this
Convention and of any amendments to it.

Article 13

(1)  This Convention, done in the English, French,
Russian and Spanish languages, each version being equally
authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the -
Government which shall transmit duly certified copies
thereof to all signatory and acceding States.

(2)  This Convention shall be registered by the
Depositary pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned,duly authorised, have
signed this Convention.

Done at
