ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                      
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                      
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA                      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                      
девятое консультативное совещание                      


LONDON                                                

Provisional Agenda  Item 6                  ANT/IX/21
                                                 19 September 1977
                                                 Original: English

Commentary on the Draft Convention for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources

(Paper submitted by the Delegation of Australia)

1.      The present draft Convention for the Conserva-
tion of Antarctic Marine Living Resources has been prepared by 
the Australian Delegation in response to a suggestion made at 
the Extended Preparatory Meeting of the Antarctic Consultative 
Parties held in London towards the end of July 1977.  While the 
shortness of the period since that meeting has excluded the 
possibility of consultations between the Australian Delegation 
and other Consultative Parties, the present draft attempts to 
accommodate the various attitudes towards the subject so far 
as they are known to the Australian Delegation.  At the same 
time, even from the Australian point of view, the text has not 
been perfected.  Consequently, the Australian Delegation is 
obliged to describe the present draft as no more than a 
working text placed before the Consultative Meeting without 
commitment to its provisions.

2.      The present importance of an attempt to deal with 
the conservation of Antarctic living marine organisms hardly 
needs statement.  The waters south of 60° South latitude 
support living resources of considerable size which form a 
significant reserve of protein.  The activities of a number 
of States have demonstrated that it is now feasible to harvest 
these resources from a number of trophic levels of the 
ecosystem.  It is evident that these resources should be 
utilised in a manner which not only maintains and protects 
them from overexploitation but also reconciles their role in 
the ecosystem.
2.

3.      Whilst the problems arising from the utilisation 
of these resources are the most pressing and require immediate 
attention, it is important to bear in mind that the need for 
conservation extends also to living organisms whose significance 
is not immediately to be seen primarily in resource terms. 
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have in the past demonstrated 
their concern with the conservation of the fauna and flora 
which are components of the Antarctic terrestrial ecosystem. 
It seems appropriate that this wider concern should now find 
some place within the framework of a Convention dealing with 
the marine ecosystem.

4.      The scope of this approach is reflected in the present 
draft in at least three ways:

        (i)     it covers all the seas south of 60° South latitude, 
                including those within national jurisdiction as 
                well as the high seas;

        (ii)    it also covers all the organisms constituting part 
                of the ecosystem of the area, even beyond the 
                geographic area of the Convention;

        (iii)   it is open to participation by all States which 
                conduct research on or harvest the living organisms 
                of the area.

These elements necessarily suggest the advantage of tackling 
the problem of conservation by way of a specific Convention.
Title      The draft Convention is entitled: "Convention for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources".    In 
fact, this title is narrower than the scope of the Convention 
as contemplated in its first operative paragraph, which refers 
to living organisms forming part of the ecosystem in the 
Antarctic seas.  However, it seems important to emphasise 
that; even though the Convention is concerned with the con-
servation of all living organisms within the Antarctic marine 
ecosystem, in practice the primary activity under 
the Convention will necessarily be conservation of 
commercially exploitable living resources.

Preamble

1.      The Preamble presents in summary form the background 
and objectives of the Convention:  the importance of the 
Antarctic marine ecosystem; the requirement of greater know-
ledge of it;  the risk of over-exploitation of the system;  the 
need for conservation and co-operation.  The fifth paragraph 
recalls the language of the first preambular paragraph of the 
Antarctic Treaty, while the sixth and seventh paragraphs identi.
earlier steps taken by the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to 
promote conservation in the Antarctic area.

2.      The eighth paragraph notes the relevance of recent 
developments in the law of the sea - especially in relation to 
the conservation and management of the living resources of the 
exclusive economic zones and of the high seas.  It lends 
emphasis to the fact that this Convention is concerned with 
conservation and management, as contemplated in Article 61 of 
the Informal Composite Negotiating Text (ICNT) of the Law of 
the Sea Conference, and not with utilisation, as contemplated 
in Article 62 of that Text.
Article 1

1.  In stating the area of application of the Convention to be 
the seas south of 60o South latitude, the draft follows the 
approach of Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty.  Howcver, 
this northern limit does not coincide with either the 
Antarctic convergence or with the range of movement of 
living organisms which exist in the ecosystem of the 
Antarctic seas.  Nevertheless, the difficulty of estab-
lishing some precise gcographical limit other than the line 
of 60o South latitude has confirmed the view that the northern 
geographic limit should coincide with that of the Antarctic 
Treaty.  The actual implementation of the Convention 
depends, of course, upon the use which the Commission 
(established under Article 2) makes of its powers.  These 
are limited in Article 4(4) in order to avoid the problem 
of overlap between this Convention and any other agreements 
which may specifically affect species in the area.

2.  No distinction is drawn in the text between seas which are 
high seas and those which may form part of the territorial 
seas or economic zones of territories lying south of the 
limit.  The belief is that there is advantage in the 
adoption of a single unified conservation system throughout 
the area - especially when, as is the case at present, the 
principal element in an effective conservation scheme is 
the collection and assessment of information.  The position 
of all States which are or believe themselves entitled to 
economic zones in the area is safeguarded by the terms of 
Article 8 (see below), as is the position of any States which 
do not accept the validity or extent of any particular cconomic 
zone.
3. While the main thrust of this Convention is towards the conservation of fish and other edible ocean protein, the expressions "living organisms of the seas" and "living organisms which form part of the ecosystem of those seas" are intended to cover not only fish or other wholly marine species, but all species dependent on the sea, including birds.

Article 2

1. The Commission established by this Article is the body which gives the Convention life. Without activity by the Commission, the Convention is inoperative. Hence the requirements that the Commission shall meet annually (Article 2(4)), that it should have a Secretariat (Article 2(7)) and that the Commission should be able to establish committees to advise on matters requiring special examination (Article 3).

2. Although conventions such as the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Convention 1949, the Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean 1952 and the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Convention 1959 are not identical in function with the present Convention and cannot, therefore, serve as comprehensive precedents for it, the provisions of this Article reflect in simplified form the institutional features which are common to the Commissions established under those Conventions.

3. The draft does not deal with at least one important problem which may engage the attention of Delegations. This is whether the membership of the Commission should be co-extensive with participation in the Convention.
Delegations will recognise that if the text of paragraph 2 of this Article is adopted in its present form, and notwithstanding the terms of Article 14, the possibility will arise that binding decisions may be taken by a two-thirds majority of the Commission which could be contrary to the preferences of a third of the membership comprising, possibly those Parties who are most active or otherwise most interested in the area.

4.      One way of meeting this difficulty might be to permit Parties to enter objections to the whole or part of particular measures.  Provisions of comparable effect are contained in a number of fishery conventions.  But the Australian Delegation has felt it preferable at the present stage of discussion to omit such provisions, principally because the precedents in which these procedures are used relate to the exercise of economic rights rather than to conservation; and they may therefore be deemed inappropriate in the present context.

Article 3

1.      Paragraph 1.  In describing the functions of the committee as one of advice, the Australian Delegation has assumed that the Commission as a whole would be able in its meetings, whether annual or special, to deal with all relevant problems, and that therefore there would be no need to make provisions for the delegation by the Commission of any functions to any subordinate organ.  It is for consideration, however, whether the Commission should have the power to delegate any of its functions to its Chairman or Vice-Chairman for exercise between meetings.
2.      Paragraph 2.  While there is obviously room for debate 
as to the precise role of the Scientific Advisory Committee 
and its relationship to the Commission, there may well be 
convenience in postponing the detailed examination of that 
problem until the Commission is set up and has an 
opportunity to discuss the terms.of reference of the 
Scientific Advisory Committee.  So far as the present 
draft is concerned, the intention is only to indicate to 
the Commission the importance which the Parties attach to 
ensuring that all decisions of the Commission are taken on 
the basis of sound and objective technical advice.

Article 4

1.  This Article is the centre of the operation of the 
Convention.  It prescribes the duties of the Commission 
and, in so doing, indicates its functions and powers as 
well - by implication - as the more detailed purposes and 
objectives of the Convention.

2.  The principal emphasis is on the collection of information 
and statistics with a view to the assessment of the nature 
and extent of the populations of living organisms in the 
Area of the Convention.  At the present time, although a 
certain amount is known in general terms about the stocks 
of fish in the waters of the Antarctic region, there is 
relatively little detailed knowledge of the species 
available, their location, quantities etc.  A necessary 
first step, therefore, towards the adoption of specific 
conservation measures is the collection of appropriate 
information.
3. The use of the phrase "in accordance with such priorities as it may determine", which appears in the chapeau of paragraph 1, is intended to enable the Commission to proceed about its business in an orderly manner, having regard to the more immediate need for the conservation of some living organisms than for the conservation of others.

4. Paragraph 1(c) of the Article requires the Commission to adopt conservation measures.  Paragraph 2 identifies a number of matters with which these measures may deal, but the list is not exhaustive.  As regards items (i) and (v) the assumption underlying the proposed wording is that the Commission will do no more than fix overall limits in respect of quantities of any species to be caught and for restrictions on catch-effort, which will apply either to the whole or any designated part of the seas within the scope of the Convention.  The manner in which total allowable catch and total catch-effort would be distributed amongst interested Parties would be a matter for further agreement between them, consonant with the rights of relevant coastal States.  The same distinction between conservation measures and arrangements for utilisation also forms the basis of paragraph 5 of this Article.

5. Item (viii), which refers to the possibility of the establishment of an effective system of inspection, should be read together with Article 6(1).
6. Apart from the specific direction to the Commission in 
paragraph 4 to take into consideration and avoid conflict 
with the Conventions which deal with the conservation of 
whales and seals in the seas covered by this Convention, 
the Commission will no doubt as a matter of practice bear 
in mind the relevance to its activities of such other 
international instruments as the Convention on Internationa 
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 1973.

Article 6

1. This Article contains a statement of three specific 
obligations which the Convention places upon the Parties. 
Paragraph 1 places the basic responsibility for ensuring 
compliance with conservation measures upon the State  whos 
nationals and vessels are engaged in activities in the 
Convention area. Experience will show whether this is 
sufficient to secure adequate fulfilment of conservation 
requirements. If it is not, then the Commission will 
no doubt wish to consider whether the development of a 
system of inspection under Article 4(2)(viii) meets the 
needs of the situation or whether it is instead desirable 
to propose some amendment of the Convention under Article

2. In addition, paragraph 2 places upon coastal States within 
whose territorial sea or exclusive economic zone any 
conservation measures are applicable the obligation to mak 
those measures part of the law of the coastal State.
3. Paragraph 3 is based upon the distinction recognised in the
emergent Law of the Sea Convention (ICNT) between
conservation and utilisation.  While accepting the right
of the Partics to conclude arrangcments relating to the
utilisation of stock (subject, of course, to the rights
of coastal States) it provides expressly that such
utilisation agreements shall be consistent with
conservation measures adopted pursuant to the Convention.

Article 7

This Article contains a further, but separate,
obligation of the Farties - to provide information regarding
operations by their nationals and vessels under their
jurisdiction as well as about the steps taken to implement
conservation measures adopted by the Commission.  The
generality of the obligation is qualified by the requirement
that the information shall be provided only in such form and
at such intervals as the Commission may prescribe.

Article 8

1.  The differences of opinion regarding the extent of
rights in Antarctica which for the specific purposes of
the Antarctic Treaty were adequately dealt with by
Article IV of that Treaty still remain basically
unresolved.  This lack of resolution has some bearing
upon the present draft, for although the Convention does
not affect activity on land, it does deal with activities
in seas part of which, on one approach to the question
of rights in Antarctica, fall within the territorial
seas and exclusive economic zone (or lie over the
continental shelves) appurtenant to the Antarctic
coasts; and rights in those seas  and shelves are
dependent upon rights over the adjacent coasts.
2.  However, the Australian Delegation considers that nothing 
will be gained by seeking to resolve these difficulties,
one way or the other, in the present draft Convention.

For purposes of conservation this issue need not be 
specifically tackled, any more than it was in the 
Antarctic Treaty.  But the avoidance of the problem must 
be without disadvantage to either side in the controversy;
and if the coastal States should be prepared to forego in 
the present context an express acknowledgement of their 
rights, so equally it would be expected that those who 
do not accept coastal State claims or rights, would not 
insist on the latter being treated as non-existent.

3.  Approaching the matter in the way just suggested, the 
draft replaces the notion of "previously asserted rights 
of or claims to territorial sovereignty in Antarctica",
which appears in Article IV(1)(a) of the Antarctic Treaty,
with the concept of "sovereignty, sovereign rights or 
other rights in any part of the seas to which this 
Convention applies", which now appears in Article 8(1)(a) 
of the present draft.  The words "sovereignty, sovereign 
rights or other rights" are intended to refer to the 
totality of the rights of a coastal State in the adjacent 
territorial sea, exclusive economic zone and continental 
shelf.  Comparable substitutions appear in subparagraphs 
(b) and (c).

4.  It has not been thought necessary to repeat the reservation 
of position regarding sovereignty over the adjacent 
Antarctic land territory  because such a reservation is 
achieved on a continuing basis between the parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty by Article IV(1) of that agreement.
5. On turning to paragraph 2 of Article B of the present draft, it is not appropriate to attempt to follow the precedent set by  Article IV(2) of the Antarctic Treaty. 
The latter provision was necessary because otherwise it would in theory have been possible for States active in 
Antartica after entry into force of the Treaty to have gained territorial rights by virtue of such conduct. 
But this is not the case in the situation to which the present draft relates.  Since territorial sea, economic 
zone and continental shelf rights exist in favour of a State by reason only of its possession of the adjacent 
coast, there is no possibility of a State, which merely fishes in an area of sea without possessing sovereignty 
over the adjacent territory, thereby establishing a claim or basis of claim to the territorial sea or economic zone. 
The most that it could do would be to generate an interest of a kind which would, in accordance with Article 62(3) of 
the ICNT, need to be taken into consideration by the coastal State when ultimately disposing of any surplus 
of the annual yield.  Conversely, looking at the matter in terms of the prospective conduct of a coastal State, 
there is no basis on which it could be said that its acts or activities taking place while the Convention 
is in force could strengthen or weaken its rights in territorial seas, economic zones or continental shelves 
since these are a legal, rather than a factual, consequence of sovereignty over relevant areas of adjacent territory.

6. Accordingly, all that is called for is a provision which excludes the attribution of legal consequences to 
the one kind of activity in territorial seas or economic zones which could have such consequences;  and that - as
indicated in paragraph 1 above - is (in the language of ICNT, Article 62(3)) habitual fishing or substantial effort in research and identification of stocks.  Article 8(2) of the present draft is intended to serve that purpose.

7. Generally in this connection Delegations may wish to bear in mind that a reference to territorial seas, economic zone and Continental shelves in the sea area covered by the present draft does not necessarily refer exclusively to suc seas, zones or shelves lying adjacent to the disputed party of the Antarctic mainland. Apart from the high seas which also lie within the seas south of 60° South latitude, there are the territorial seas, exclusive economic zones and continental shelves of a number of islands sovercignty over which  is not, or may not be, exposcd to the samc kind of reservations as attach to existing rights or assertions of rights in Antarctica. Thus, south of 60° South latituc it is possible to identify, for example, part of the Contir ental shelf of Heard Island and part of the economic zone of the South Sandwich Islands, as well as the territorial sea, economic zones and contincental shclvcs of the Balleny Islands, Scott Island, Peter I Island, the South Shetland Islands and the South Orkney Islands. Accordingly, any acknowledgment that thcre may be territorial seas, economic zones or continental shelves south of 60° South latitude does not imply acceptance that they necessarily attach to Antarctic territory stricto sensu. They may equally attach to non-Antarctic territory south of that latitude.
Article 9

This Article reproduces the substance of 
Article 10 of the Antarctic Treaty, with the replacement 
of the word "Antarctica" by "the seas to which the present 
Convention applies". Since Article 6(1) imposes upon 
Parties an obligation to ensure compliance by their 
nationals and vessels with measures adopted by the 
Commission, it is understood that the main function of 
Article 9 is to require Parties to encourage compliance 
with the principles and purposes of the Convention by 
nationals and vessels of States not Parties to the Convention. 
This encouragement may best be achieved by strongly urging 
the non-Parties whose nationals and vessels become interested 
in the area to accede to the Convention pursuant to 

Article 14.

Article 10

1.    This Article contains provision for the obligatory settle 
      ment of disputes.  It takes its lead from the approach 
      to this question adopted in the Law of the Sea Conference 
      and reflected in the Informal Composite Negotiating Text 
      of 15 July 1977.  The ICNT provides for a choice of 
      settlement by the International Court of Justice, a new 
      tribunal to be established under the name of the Law of 
      the Sea Tribunal,arbitration or special arbitral procedu 
      Because the Law of the Sea Tribunal has not yet been 
      established, it seems sufficient to use here a simpler 
      approach and provide for a system which, though obligate 
      enables the defendant  to choose between settlement by 
      the ICJ and settlement by arbitration.  However, if and 
      when the Law of the Sea Tribunal is established under
an operative Law of the Sea Convention, recourse to the Law 
of the Sea Tribunal will be allowed as a further 
alternative.  (Article 288(2) of the ICNT clearly 
contemplates the possibility that treaties relating to 
activities in the sea, such as the present Convention, may 
prescribe the Law of the Sea Convention procedure for the 
settlement of disputes.)

2.  Where there is recourse to arbitration, the process will 
be governed by the arbitration annex of ICNT until such 
time as a Law of the Sea Convention with comparable 
provisions enters into force.  Thereafter the latter 
provisions will be controlling.

3.  Paragraph 3 provides that where the Commission is a party 
to a dispute, the dispute may be referred only to 
arbitration.  It appears necessary to refer expressly 
to the Commission because most of the activity under the 
Convention will be initiated by the Commission rather than 
by individual Parties.  As only States may be parties 
to disputes before the International Court, it follows that 
disputes in which the Commission is a party must be 
settled by arbitration.  After the Law of the Sea Tribunal 
is established, the Commission will be able to appear as 
a party in proceedings there.
Articles 11-18

1. These Articles contain the final clauses. They are 
(with one exception) identical in content with the 
final clauses of the Convention for the Protection of 
Antarctic Seals.

2. The one exception is in Article 14 (Accession) which 
permits accession by any State "which is engaged in 
research or harvesting activities in relation to the 
living marine organisms to which the Convention applies."
This limitation upon accession has been thought desirable 
because otherwise the Convention would be open to 
unconditional participation by any State;  and in view 
of the system of majority voting applicable to the 
adoption of measures by the Commission, the possibility 
of voting in the Commission without any real basis of 
involvement in the Convention appears unsatisfactory.
