ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
                                  NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO              
                                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA              


LONDON              

Agenda Item 6              

ANT/IX/82 (Rev. 1)              
Date: 7 October 1977              
Original: English              


DRAFT REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON MARINE LIVING RESOURCES              

The Working Group on Marine Living Resources held a number of              
meetings between 26 September and 6 October 1977. Its terms of              
reference, as contained in ANT/IX/39, were to examine the question              
of Marine Living Resources in all its aspects, scientific, legal,              
political, or other including:              

        (a) possible interim measures;              

        (b) measures for the further development of a marine              
        living resources regime.              

The mandate included the direction that the Group "shall              
consider all papers and proposals put before it, report, and make              
draft recommendations."              

The Working Group, which comprised representatives of all              
delegations to the IXth ATCM, elected Mr J G McArthur of New Zealand              
as its chairman. The chairman's opening statement to the Group is              
reproduced in ANT/IX/44.              

The documents before the Group during its deliberations were:              

UK              -       ANT/IX/6              
USA             -       ANT/IX/8              
USA             -       ANT/IX/9              
Australia       -       ANT/IX/21              
Australia       -       ANT/IX/22              
South Africa    -       ANT/IX/25              
Chile           -       ANT/IX/30              
Argentina       -       ANT/IX/34              
USSR            -       ANT/IX/37              
France          -       ANT/IX/38              
USA             -       ANT/IX/43              


/Chairman
Chairman        -   ANT/IX/45
France          -   ANT/IX/47
France          -   ANT/IX/48
UK              -   ANT/IX/54
France and UK   -   ANT/IX/54 (Rev 1)
UK              -   ANT/IX/54 (Annex)
Chile           -   ANT/IX/58
Norway and UK   -   ANT/IX/73
Chairman        -   ANT/IX/77
Australia       -   ANT/IX/77 (Amend. 1)

The Working Group established a Drafting Group under the chairmanship of Mr K G Brennan of Australia. Mr Brennan's group subsequently elaborated for the approval of the Working Group operative paragraphs for a recommendation on the scientific research relating to Antarctic marine living resources, which made particular reference to the BIOMASS programme. The Drafting Group also produced operative paragraphs for a recommendation on interim measures to cover the period between the Ninth Consultative Meeting and the entry into force of a definitive regime.

The full Working Group drafted operative paragraphs for a recommendation on the establishment of a definitive conservation regime. It was agreed that a draft definitive conservation regime should be elaborated by a Special Consultative Meeting. It was also agreed to record in the Working Group's report the understanding of the Group that the word "conservation" as used in the draft recommendation includes rational use, in the sense that harvesting would not be prohibited, but the regime would exclude catch allocation and other economic regulation of harvesting. It was similarly the understanding of the Group that the word "resources" was not limited to commercially exploitable species.

The Working Group agreed that the operative paragraphs drafted by it and those produced by Mr Brennan's group should be combined to form one recommendation. Preambular paragraphs for that document were subsequently devised by the Working Group.

The Working Group now submits for consideration by plenary the draft recommendation attached hereto. The Japanese delegation has reserved its position on the recommendation pending further instructions from its capital in regard to paragraph 3 (b) of Part III.
The Representatives,

Recalling the special responsibilities conferred upon the Consultative parties in respect of the preservation and conservation of living resources in the Antarctic by virtue of Article IX paragraph 1(f) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling further the history of action taken by Consultative Parties concerning conservation and protection of the Antarctic ecosystem including, in particular, Recommendations III-8, VIII-10, VIII-13 「and IX7

Noting that concentrations of marine living resources are found in the Antarctic Treaty area and adjacent waters;

Aware of the need to compile more information with a view to developing a good scientific foundation for appropriate conservation measures and rational management policies for all Antarctic marine living resources;

Recognising the urgency of ensuring that these resources are protected by the establishment of sound conservation measures which will prevent overfishing and protect the integrity of the Antarctic ecosystem;

Concerned that interim guidelines for the protection and conservation of Antarctic marine living resources are desirable until such time as a definitive regime enters into force;

Convinced that provision for effective measures to conserve Antarctic marine living resources as well as for collection and analysis of the data necessary to develop such measures will require the early conclusion of a definitive conservation regime.
I

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. to the greatest extent feasible, they cooperate broadly 
and comprehensively in scientific investigations,
and in the exchange of information thereon, relating to 
the Antarctic marine environment and that they intensify 
as far as possible scientific research related to Antarctic 
marine living resources;

2. in planning their marine activities in the Antarctic, they 
have regard to the advantages that will accrue from 
coordination by them of their scientific investigations 
contributing to the BIOMASS programme;

3. they give sympathetic consideration to the provision of 
practical measures (such as ships, ship time, personnel 
and finance) in support of the implementation of the BIOMASS 
programme or other similar programmes;

4. they examine the possibility of integrating, in so far as is 
practicable, research vessel programmes with the activities 
of other vessels, and make available on vessels operating in 
the Antarctic, other than research vessels contributing 
directly to the BIOMASS programme, time and facilities for 
routine observations aimed at extending the data base for 
the programme.

II

INTERIM GUIDELINES FOR THE CONSERVATION 
OF ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

1. They observe the following interim guidelines pending entry 
into force of the definitive regime for Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources:

     (a) they cooperate as broadly and comprehensively as 
possible in the mutual exchange of statistics relating 
to catch of Antarctic Marine Living Resources;
     /(b)
(b) they should show the greatest possible restraint,
concern and care in the harvesting of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources so that it does not result
in the depletion of stocks of Antarctic marine
species or jeopardizing the Antarctic marine
ecosystem as a whole;

(c) they urge those Governments which are not parties
to the Antarctic Treaty and which engage in activities
involving the use of living resources of Antarctica
to take account of these guidelines;

2. They review these interim guidelines as and when necessary
and in any event following the conclusion of the definitive
regime with a view to their future elaboration in the
light of the provisions of the definitive regime.

III

ESTABLISHMENT OF A DEFINITIVE CONSERVATION REGIME

1. A definitive regime for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources should be concluded before the end of 1978.

2. A Special Consultative Meeting be convened in order to
elaborate a draft definitive regime, and in particular:

(a) to determine the form of the definitive regime,
including the question as to whether an international
instrument such as a convention is necessary;

(b) to prepare, if necessary, draft rules of procedure
for a subsequent decisive meeting for the establishment
of the definitive regime;

(c) to decide on participation in such a meeting by States
other than Consultative Parties which are actively
engaged in research and exploitation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources and the participation, on an observer
basis, of appropriate international organisations;

(d) to finalise the date and place of the decisive meeting;

       /(e)
(e) to take any steps in order to facilitate the work of 
the decisive meeting referred to above.

3. The Special Consultative Meeting shall base its work on this 
recommendation and take account of the discussions at the 
Ninth Consultative Meeting, its report and the documents 
presented to it, and, in the elaboration of a draft definitive 
regime, shall take into account inter alia the following 
elements:

(a) the regime should explicitly recognise the prime 
responsibilities of the Consultative Parties in relation 
to the protection and conservation of the environment 
of the Antarctic Treaty area and the importance of the 
measures recommended by the Consultative Parties to 
this end;

(b) the provisions of Article 4 of the Antarctic Treaty 
shall not be affected by the regime. It should ensure 
that the principles embodied in Article 4 are safeguarded 
in application to the marine areas S.of 60o S latitude;

(c) the regime should provide for the effective conservation 
of the marine living resources of the Antarctic 
ecosystem as a whole;

(d) the regime should cover the area of specific competence 
of the Antarctic Treaty;

(e) the regime should, however, extend north of 60o 
south latitude where that is necessary for the effective 
conservation of species of the Antarctic ecosystem, 
without prejudice to coastal state jurisdiction in that 
area;

(f) the regime should not apply to species already regulated 
pursuant to existing international agreements but should 
take into account the relationship of such species to 
those species covered by the regime.
