ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                               NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                        NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         LONDON

Agenda Item 5

                                                         ANT/IX/57
Date: 27 Sep 77
Original: English

ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES
(Draft Recommendation Submitted by the U.S. Delegation)

The Representatives:

Recalling the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, which
establishes a regime for international cooperation in
Antarctica, with the objective of ensuring that Antarctica
should continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful
purposes and should not become the scene or object of
international discord.

Bearing in mind the provisions of Article IV of the Treaty.

Convinced that the framework established by the Antarctic
Treaty has proved effective in promoting international
harmony in furtherance of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, in ensuring the protection of the
Antarctic environment, and in promoting freedom of scientific
research in Antarctica.

Aware of the special responsibilities of Consultative
Parties to ensure that any activities in Antarctica,
including commercial exploration and exploitation in the
future, should they occur, should not become the cause of
international discord, of danger to the unique Antarctic
environment, of disruption to scientific investigation, or
be otherwise contrary to the principles or purposes of the
Antarctic Treaty.

Recommend to their Governments that:

1) They reaffirm the basic principles set forth in
Recommendation VIII-14 of the Eighth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting.

2) They continue to study the environmental implications
of mineral resource activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area
and other related matters, including joint studies, and that
they exchange the results of such studies.
3) The subject "Antarctic Resources - The Question 
of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be the subject 
of accelerated and intensified consultation among them and 
urge the host government for the Tenth Consultative Meeting 
to convene one or two meetings during 1978-1979, to 
consider various approaches to mineral resource issues; 
the meeting or meetings to report to the Tenth Consultative 
Meeting.

4) They resolve that any internationally agreed 
approach to mineral resource activities in Antarctica 
should be compatible with the principles and purposes of 
the Antarctic Treaty and should ensure availability of mineral 
resources on a non-discriminatory basis under reasonable 
terms and conditions.

5) The subject "Antarctic Resources - The Question of 
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be placed on the 
Agenda of the Tenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

2
ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 5                                      ANT/IX/57 Add 1
                                                    Date: 5 October 1977
                                                    Original: English

ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES

Draft operative paragraphs submitted by
the Delegation of the United Kingdom
for inclusion in the Draft Recommendation

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They reaffirm the basic principles set forth in
Recommendation VIII-14 of the Eighth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.

2. They endorse the following principles elaborated at the
Special Preparatory Meeting held in Paris from 28 June to 10 July
1976:-

    i) the Consultative Parties will continue to play
an active and responsible role in dealing with the
question of the mineral resources of Antarctica;

   ii) the Antarctic Treaty must be maintained in its
entirety;

  iii) protection of the unique Antarctic environment
and of its dependent ecosystems should be a basic
consideration;

   iv) the Consultative Parties, in dealing with the
question of mineral resources in Antarctica, should
not prejudice the interest of all mankind in
Antarctica.

3. They study the content of a future regime based on the
principles contained in paragraph 2 and such further principles,
rules and arrangements as may be agreed.

4. They continue to study the environmental implications
of mineral resource activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

/They ;
They study the Reports of the SCAR EAMREA Group and the Group of 
Experts.  They hold a meeting of ecological and technological 
experts, in accordance with Recommendation IV-24, with a view to 
developing scientific programmes aimed at improving predictions of 
the impact of possible technologies for mineral exploration and 
exploitation in the Antarctic, as outlined in section 5 of the 
SCAR EAMREA Group Report and section IIB of the Report of the 
Group of Experts.

5. The subject "Antarctic Resources - the Question of 
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be the subject of accelerated 
and intensified consultation among them and they urge the host 
Government of the Tenth Consultative Meeting to convene one or two 
meetings to consider legal and political aspects of mineral resource 
issues;  the meetings to report to the Tenth Consultative Meeting 
with a view to reaching early agreement on a regime for mineral 
resources.

6. The subject "Antarctic Resources - the Question of 
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be placed on the Agenda of 
the Tenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
