ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CÔNSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ               NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                 LONDON
Agenda Item No 6                                ANT/IX/56
                                                 Date: 27 September 1977
                                                 Original: Russian

  DECLARATION                                   
  OF PRINCIPLES CONCERNING EXPLORATION AND      
  EXPLOITATION OF ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES   

(Submitted by the Delegation of the Soviet Union)

Representatives,

Guided by the purposes and principles of the Antarctic
Treaty which imposes on its Parties the obligation to exert
efforts, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations,
to ensure that no one engages in any activity in Antarctica
contrary to the purposes or principles of the Treaty;

Noting a growing interest in the problems pertaining to
the exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources;

Recognizing that adequate scientific data concerning the
harmful environmental effects of activities related to the
exploration and exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources
are not yet available and that if some inadequately and
incompletely studied deposits especially of oil and gas are
prematurely involved in exploitation that may cause substantial
damage to the Antarctic subsoil and to the efforts to solve the
problem of organizing orderly exploitation of such resources
in accordance with appropriate rules;

Concerned that unregulated activities related to
exploration and exploitation of mineral resources could adversely
affect the unique environment of Antarctica and have a harmful
impact on the ecological balance of the Antarctic area, the
ecology of the South Ocean as well as of the World Ocean and
our entire planet;

Recalling the immense significance of Antarctica, in
particular that it is one of the most important areas
molding the climate and weather of our planet;

Conscious that the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty in carrying out scientific research in the area have
accumulated valuable experience and can substantially contribute
to the environmental protection and rational use of Antarctic
resources;
- 2 -

Proclaim the following principles which shall form the 
basis of an international regime of exploration and exploitation 
of Antarctic mineral resources corresponding to the interests 
of all States and mankind as a whole:

1. Exploration and exploitation of Antarctic mineral 
resources shall be carried out in conformity with the purposes 
and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and shall not impede 
the implementation of any of its provisions.

2. No activity related to exploration and exploitation of 
Antarctic mineral resources shall constitute a basis for asser-
ting, supporting or denying a claim to territorial sovereignty 
in Antarctica or create any rights of sovereignty in Antarctica.

3. Each State shall have the responsibility to ensure 
that exploration and exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources 
carried out by it or by persons natural or juridical under its 
jurisdiction shall be in conformity with international rules 
to be worked out by the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic 
Treaty.

4. No activity related to exploration and exploitation of 
Antarctic mineral resources shall cause damage to the environ-
ment or upset the ecological balance of Antarctica. In parti-
cular, recommendations of the Consultative Meetings concerning 
protection and conservation of the environment shall be complied 
with.

5. No activity related to exploration and exploitation of 
Antarctic mineral resources can be carried out in specially 
protected areas designated as such under Article 8 of the 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
Flora, on sites of special scientific interest or in any 
other areas to be subsequently designated in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of Article IX  of the Treaty.

6. Exploration and exploitation of Antarctic mineral 
resources shall not affect the freedom of scientific investi-
gation provided for in the Antarctic Treaty. This freedom of 
scientific investigation shall not apply in case of exploration 
of Antarctic mineral resources carried out for commercial 
purposes.
- 3 -

7. In carrying out exploration and exploitation of 
Antarctic mineral resources no damage or destruction should be 
inflicted  to installations or objects of historical value,
or installations or objects constructed in Antarctica for 
scientific research.

8. The right to inspection and aerial observation 
provided for in Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty shall 
apply to activities related to exploration and exploitation 
of Antarctic mineral resources.

9. Pending adoption of agreed international rules 
pertaining to exploration and exploitation of Antarctic mineral 
resources no activity shall be conducted to explore or exploit 
such resources. The Consultative Parties shall take appropriate 
measures to secure co-operation of States which are not Parties 
to the Antarctic Treaty in preventing such activities on their 
part or on the part of persons natural or juridical sponsored 
by them.

10. Any dispute relating to exploration or exploitation 
of mineral resources in the Antarctic Treaty Area shall be 
resolved in accordance with the procedure provided for in 
Article XI of the Antarctic Treaty.

11. International rules regulating exploration and 
exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources and applicable to 
the Antarctic Treaty Area will be worked out on the basis of 
the Antarctic Treaty and in accordance with the principles 
of the present Declaration and recommendations of the 
Consultative Meetings.

This Declaration shall form an integral part of the 
general regime of co-operation provided for in the Antarctic 
Treaty. It will enter into force in accordance with the terms 
of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
