ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ        
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  LONDON               

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA      

Agenda Item 7                   

ANT/IX/76 (Rev. 1)
Date:  6 October 1977
Original:  French

TELECOMIUNICATIONS:  DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

1.  In accordance with the mandate conferred upon it by the 
Ninth Consultative Meeting (document ANT/IX/11, Revision 1)
a Working Party met on 30th September, 1977, to consider the 
measures which should be taken in regard to telecommunications.
Two meetings were held under the chairmanship of M.S. Hessel 
(France) during which views were exchanged on the basis of 
information documents and proposals put forward by the 
Delegations of the United Kingdom (ANT/IX/INF. 16 and INF. 17),
Argentine (ANT/IX/36 and 36 Appendices A to F) and the USSR 
(ANT/IX/12 and 12 Appendix 1).

2.  In the course of the discussion it became clear that the 
present and foreseeable development in the requirements of both 
countries and international organizations, chiefly in regard to 
meteorological information but also for the rapid and regular 
transmission of scientific, administrative and operational data,
called for a thorough up-dating of the information operation,
working methods and equipment of the telecommunications network 
serving the Antarctic.  It was also apparent that the data supplied 
to the Ninth Consultative Meeting were not sufficient to enable 
this up-dating to be carried out.

3.  The Working Party discussed the most efficient means of 
speeding up the modernisation of the network, of improving the 
speed and value of the information transmitted and of arranging 
for the study of those scientific and technical developments in 
telecommunications which apply to the Antarctic.

4.  The Working Party noted with gratitude the offer of the 
United States delegation to collate the assembled data and prepare 
a draft plan which it would make available to the other Consultative 
Parties.

/The
The Representatives,

Considering that requirements in the field of telecommunica-
tions as regards collection and dissemination of meteorological 
data and the need for, scientific, administrative and operational 
traffic have developed substantially since the second telecommunica-
tions meeting of experts of the Consultative Parties held in 
Buenos Aires in 1969;

Considering that the implementation of Recommendation 
VI.26 and VII.7, and participation in the programmes of the 
World Meteorological Organisation, particularly the World Weather 
Watch, require a thorough updating and posssible improvement of 
the network operating in the Antarctic;

Recommend to their Governments that they:

1. Compile comprehensive data, each for its own part, on the 
types of traffic, modes of transmission, timing, frequencies 
of their telecommunications schedules and current equipment 
of their telecommunications programmes in the Antarctic, as well 
as on projects in the process of implementation and proposed 
improvements, in particular by designating, where appropriate, 
stations capable of replacing others in the event of breakdown.

2. Forward all such data to each of the other Consultative 
Parties by direct despatch to the departments concerned, and 
include the addresses concerned in the Final Report.

3. Arrange for a short meeting of telecommunications experts 
to be held, on the initiative of the Government of the host 
country, before the Tenth Consultative Meeting, to analyse the 
data thus compiled, suggest desirable measures of harmonisation 
and put forward recommendations on improvements to be made in the 
operation of the telecommunications network in the Antarctic;

4. Request the SCAR group of specialists to undertake, at the 
earliest opportunity, a study of the most recent applications of 
science and technology to the specific problems of the Antarctic 
in the field of propagation of radio waves, and to pass on its 
conclusions to the Consultative Parties with a view to their 
Tenth Meeting or, if necessary, to the next Consultative Meeting.
APPENDIX 1

Addresses of departments to whom the information referred to in 
paragraph 1 of the Recommendation is to be sent direct :

ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
CHILE
FRANCE
JAPAN
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
POLAND
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
U.S.S.R.
