ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 8                                      ANT/IX/31

                                                   Date: 21 September 1977

GUIDANCE FOR ANTARCTIC TOURISTS
(Paper submitted by UK delegation)

Antarctica and its surrounding islands are one of the few places in the
world which are still relatively unchanged by man's activities.  Scientists
still know very little about the ecological situation in the Antarctic.  At
the present early stage in research on these matters, some provisional
restrictions and precautions may seem unnecessarily harsh, but preliminary
studies indicate the need for great caution.  Once unique environments or
wildlife species have been exterminated, nothing can bring them back.

By following a few very simple rules, you can help preserve this region
for future generations to enjoy.

1. Avoid disturbing wildlife any more than is necessary; especially do not:-
   Walk on vegetation;
   Touch or handle birds or seals.  (They will lose their remarkable
   tameness if thus treated by human invaders);
   Startle or chase any bird from its nest;
   Approach individual birds within less than about 2 metres.  (If eggs or
   chicks are leftunguarded even for very short periods they will
   probably be eaten by Skuas, Giant Petrels or Sheathbills.  Eggs
   knocked from nests by startled penguins are not recovered by the
   adults);
   Wander indiscriminately through penguin or other bird colonies.
   (Restrict observation and photography to the margin of a colony).

2. Litter of all types must be kept to a minimum.  Retain all litter
   (film wrappers, tissue, food scraps, tins, lotion bottles, etc.) in
   a bag or pocket to be disposed of on board your ship.  Do not throw
   tin cans and other trash off the ship near land.  Seals will pick a
   tin can off the bottom and play with it, cutting their mouths;
   they may also eat plastics and die in consequence.  Any garbage which
   collects on the shoreline may cause destruction of life.

3. Do not paint names or grafitti on rocks.

4. Do not hesitate to show your conservational attitude.  Discuss and
   explain these rules and help to ensure that they are observed.
