ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                        NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         LONDON

Provisional Agenda Item 6                                ANT/IX/10
                                                          Date: 14 September 1977
                                                          Previously: ANT/EPM2/4
                                                          Date: 1977
                                                          Original: English

BIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF MARINE

ANTARCTIC  SYSTEMS  AND  STOCKS  (BIOMASS)

                                                          
Summary of objectives and programmes
BIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF MARINE 
ANTARCTIC SYSTEMS AND STOCKS (BIOMASS)

Summary of objectives and programmes

PREPARED BY

- SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH (SCAR)
- SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON OCEANIC RESEARCH (SCOR)--
SCAR/SCOR  GROUP OF SPECIALISTS ON THE LIVING
RESOURCES OF THE SOUTHERN OCEAN
(SCOR WORKING GROUP 54 )

1977
1.

Preface

Within recent years, scientific and economical interest in the Antarctic waters is steadily growing. Therefore the need was felt amongst those concerned with the study and conservation of the Antarctic Ocean to develop a coordinated international programme for the study of the marine living resources of the Southern Ocean.  A SCAR/SCOR Group of Specialists (SCOR Working Group 54) reviewed in 1975-1977 the present knowledge of the marine living resources of the Antarctic and developed a proposal for future cooperative studies in this area named "Biological Investigations of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks 'BIOMASS'".  A detailed document was prepared by the Group of Specialists, containing the BIOMASS proposal together with background information on the living resources, their physical, chemical and biological interactions, as well as on the existing international organizations in the field of Antarctic research. It is being published by SCAR.  The present brief document was prepared on the request of SCOR in response to the need by IOC for adequate information on the major scientific objectives of the BIOMASS proposal and its practical implementation.
1. General objectives

The need for a comprehensive international and interdisciplinary research
programme in the Southern Ocean rests in science as well as in global food
resources management.  It stems from the fact that the circular current
system of the Southern Ocean houses a food web which is very different
from those of other parts of the World Ocean, individual weights of its
key members being several orders of magnitude larger than comparable
ones in other parts of the World Ocean.  This gives an incentive to a
unique mass exploitation of the Southern Ocean's key herbivores, the
krill.

The principal objective of the BIOMASS programe is to gain a deeper
understanding of the structure and dynamic functioning of the antarctic
marine ecosystem as a basis for the future management of potential living
resources. Thus, we are primarily concerned with: a) contributions to man's
understanding of the World Ocean and b) developing a sound ecological
strategy for the exploitation of the living resources and for the
conservation of the Southern Ocean's ecosystem. To achieve these goals
of basic marine science and wise ecosystem management we need to consider
several objectives. The list given below emphasizes krill as the major
potential food resource of the antarctic waters and as a key element of
the marine food web. On the other hand it is recognised that there are
other important fields of marine studies in the Antarctic which warrant
the attention of the scientific community. BIOMASS will evolve while it
proceeds and will hopefully attract new scientists with new ideas in the
course of its development into a comprehensive study of the antarctic
ecosystem, its exploitation and conservation.

1. study of the physico-chemical environment, influencing krill and its
food base, namely:

    a) study of vertical advective and diffusive processes, as driving
force of primary production.

    b) study of micro- and meso-scale horizontal processes in relation
to swarming of krill and patchiness of phyto-plankton.

    c) study of the large scale meridional and zonal water transport at
various depths in relation to the life cycle of krill.

2. Study of the variability between years and regions in the quantity and
composition of phyto-plankton.

3. Autecological studies of key organisms of the antarctic ecosystem such
as whales, seals, penguins, fishes, squids, krill, some other crustaceans,
salps; assessment of their standing stocks/biomass and production in
selected areas of the Southern Ocean.

4. Description of the major food chains in antarctic waters with emphasis
on the flux of energy and material between the various trophic levels
in selected small areas.

5. Development of models to improve our understanding of the quantitative
interaction between different elements of the ecosystem and the effects
of climate, whaling and krill fishing on the structure and efficiency
of the food chain.

6. Compilation and analysis of data from exploratory and commercial fishing.

7. Provision of scientific information on the Antarctic ecosystem to the 
scientific community, governments, industries, and other concerned bodies.
4.

2. The research programme

The objectives of BIOMASS require actions along three lines:

a) Seagoing operations of research vessels, these include detailed multi-
disciplinary studies in limited areas of special interest (cooperative
'experiments') as well as some large scale surveys, building on the
experience of the former survey work done by research vessels including
Discovery, OB and Eltanin and of recent exploratory cruises.

b) Other operations at sea. Exploratory and commercial fishing and whaling
vessels, supply vessels and others are expected to be operating in the
Antarctic during the BIOMASS period. Observations from these vessels will be
used to supplement the work of the research vessels especially in relation to
the harvestable resources. The seagoing operations should be supported by
remote sensing work.

c) Shore-based studies. Investigations on feeding, growth and reproduction
of krill and other key organisms at the established coastal stations should
complement and add year round continuity to the offshore ship-based studies.

d) Data analysis. Arrangements will be made to ensure proper compilation,
storage, dissemination and analysis of information arising from all relevant
activities in the Antarctic.

e) Modelling. Stepwise development of models making immediate use of
information of published and unpublished sources but augmenting it
progressively with field and experimental data as they come in from a),
b) and c).

2.1 Seagoing activities of research vessels

In the first operational stage culminating in the First International BIOMASS
Experiment (FIBEX), 1980/81, these investigations would be concentrated in a
suitable area such as the Scotia Sea or the Atlantic sector in general. It
is in this sector where the resources appear most abundant and most likely
to be harvested. Studies of other sectors must follow.

2.1.1 Macroscale studies of krill in relation to hydrography

The drift of krill during its 2-3 years life time is of the order of 103 km.
It is mainly governed by surface and deep currents. The assumed "development
ascent" may include the upper 2,000 m of the water column and together with
the larval development it takes 101 - 102 days. The proposed Weddell Sea
Gyre project, and the International Southern Ocean Studies (ISOS) of water
circulation as well as remote sensing of the variability in oceanic fronts
and ice movements are of the right scale to provide information on the
transport mechanisms. The near surface distribution of krill in summer has
been described in considerable detail by earlier expeditions. However, the
transport of the various life history stages and the links between the various
populations are not sufficiently known in space and time. Quantitative
sampling of krill in the various depths should be carried out in various
areas and seasons. The sampling programme should be guided by oceanographic
observations and supported by echosurveys, at least two research vessels are 
needed for the physical and biological work in each of the selected large 
areas. There is a very urgent need for extending the life history studies 
of krill into autumn and winter and into the pack ice zone.

2.1.2 Microscale studies on the ecology of krill swarms

The interaction between phytoplankton composition and biomass and the swarming 
of the krill under the influence of oceanographic factors can be studied at 
scales of the order of 10 km and 10 days. Two to three ships are needed in 
a complete experiment of this type.

Measurements to provide information on vertical transport and stability and 
on advection. Sampling the spatial distribution and densities of swarms of 
krill in relation to the abundance and size spectra of phytoplankton, in 
order to understand the reactions of a krill swarm to its food base and the 
effects of grazing on the phytoplankton. Quantitative recordings and sampling 
for analyses of phytoplankton distribution and zooplankton abundance and 
composition in different depth layers and at different times of day and night 
will provide additional information on the spatial structure of the biotic 
environment of krill.

Echo-sounding and sonar observations should provide three-dimensional picture 
of the changes in the zooplankton concentrations in time.

Those studies should be carried out at several selected places, mainly in 
different areas of high krill concentrations of the ice edge, in the neritic 
zone of the Antarctic Peninsula and of the antarctic islands as well as in 
the open ocean of the west wind drift, the east wind drift and the upwelling 
zones. If possible they should be repeated at different seasons.

2.1.3 Microscale studies of food chain structures and functions

In order to learn more about possible future effects of krill fishing on the 
structure of the first and second trophic level, composition of phytoplankton 
and its productivity should be studied in places and seasons which differ in 
relative abundance of krill, salps or other herbivores. Those studies have 
to be based on quantitative plankton sampling in various depth layers and 
areas and seasons where alternative grazing and predation strategies lead to 
changes in the quantitative composition of the herbivore level.

2.1.4 Macroscale studies of zooplankton, nekton and benthos

There is still a need for further quantitative sampling of zooplankton, 
pelagic squids and fish in various regions of the Southern Ocean. The 
benthos of the Antarctic is very poorly known.

Beyond such faunistic surveying of the area, quantitative data are needed 
on the abundance of the dominant elements of plankton and benthos in the 
different regions. The position of the dominant species within the food 
chains should be ascertained by studies of stomach contents and feeding 
apparatus.

Benthos studies may be combined with observations on sedimentation and 
decomposition of fecal pellets, dead zooplankton, particularly krill, and 
diatoms.
6.

The biological and sedimentological surveys are very time consuming. More 
than one research vessel is needed, even if one wants to cover one of the 
Ocean sectors within one summer.

2.2  Sea-going activities of other vessels

The seagoing research tasks require the cooperation of number of oceanographic 
and other vessels in the Southern Ocean.  The majority of the seagoing studies 
need fully equipped research vessels. This is particularly the case in the 
multidisciplinary studies on the relationship between krill and the environment 
The success of the biological programmes would largely depend on a well designe 
coupling with observations on horizontal transport and vertical mixing. It 
would not be sufficient nor economical to add small biological programmes to 
physical expeditions and vice versa but rather to combine full scale programmes 
of both disciplines in large process-oriented exercises. (On the other har 
one should avoid to try to measure and sample "everything".) Internationai 
cooperation is essential in view of the large support needed for a multi-
disciplinary study which includes several vessels and a considerable number 
of specialists.

The work of the research vessels can be greatly assisted by coordinated survey 
efforts of exploratory and commercial trawlers, a few whaling vessels which 
are still in existence as well as by supply ships and icebreakers. A brief 
summary of the advantages and limitations of the different types of vessels 
with regard to the research objectives of BIOMASS is given in table 1. Given 
the ambitious objectives of BIOMASS, its success will depend on making the 
best use of all types of vessel.

In view of the importance given to resource management, special emphasis will 
be given to obtaining information from those vessels most directly concerned 
with the harvestable stocks, i.e. exploratory and commercial vessels, particuls 
those directed at krill. Information from them will include details of the 
catch, the distribution and, as far as possible, the relative abundance of 
the stock, and size, maturity, food etc of the animals caught. All of the 
are important in studying the population dynamics of the exploited stock. 
In addition, where opportunity offers, other biological observations using 
simple equipment eg plankton nets, will be made from these and other non-
research vessels.

Information from fishing vessels is however no substitute for observations 
from research vessels. Indeed, to the extent that the number of the former 
increases ie exploitation intensifies, there will be a greater urgency for 
timely scientific advice on management. This will increase the need for 
some information only obtainable with well-equipped research vessels.

In view of the importance of the large area under the pack ice, there is an 
urgent need for icebreakers capable of conducting deep biological sampling 
under the pack ice.

An increasingly useful method of studying large areas is remote sensing by 
aircraft or satellite. Since remote sensing is only suitable for observations 
of surface or near-surface conditions, and the extent of cloud cover make 
even some of these observations difficult, the application of remote sensing 
to BIOMASS may be limited. Nevertheless, attention will be paid to making 
the best use of available facilities, especially the NIMBUS-G satellite, for 
those observations that may help the BIOMASS programme of variations in ice 
cover.
2.3 Shore-based studies

So far only few experiments were successful on krill and other antarctic 
plankton organisms in captivity on board research vessels and in shore 
stations.  Basic data on productivity - respiration, growth, and reproduction 
- should be obtained together with data on rates of filtration, feeding, 
digestion and on metabolism under different controlled environmental 
conditions in tanks and aquaria. Attempts to culture krill experimentally 
should provide further information on the duration of various life history 
stages and on biochemistry and histology of moulting and sexual maturation. 
Pressure tanks might be needed for the eggs and early larvae. Research on 
enzyme kinetics and microbial activity is needed in parallel with studies 
on the energy budget and decomposition processes in large containers.

Recently considerable experience has been gathered on plankton experiments 
in various types of inshore and land-based enclosures. Studies in feeding and 
predation of krill under semi-natural and semi-controlled conditions might 
bridge the gap between the physiological laboratory studies and field 
observations. Experiments on shoaling, vertical migration and sonar target 
responses of marine organisms such as krill in enclosures would be complementary 
to field studies.

Year-round studies of the antarctic fauna and flora are essential because 
most species have marked seasonal cycles. The shore stations bases - although 
limited in their seagoing facilities - provide opportunities for continuous 
year-round observations of near shore communities in plankton and benthos as 
well as in magnitude and seasonal variation in predation by fishes, sea birds 
and seals. The great number of experimental studies and their methodological 
diversity require considerable international and interdisciplinary collaboration 
in more than one well equipped shore station with easy access to krill stocks.

Further information is required on the programmes, technical facilities and 
man-power of the various stations, in order to launch new internationally 
coordinated programmes as outlined above.

2.4 Data analysis

Much of the information arising from, or relevant to, BIOMASS requires some 
form of central compilation, storage, analysis and dissemination. The types 
of information include oceanographic data; catalogues of biological data; 
biological samples for sorting and identification; statistics of harvest; 
and bibliographic information.

Different types of data will require different arrangements. Some can be 
handled by existing facilities. For example, oceanographic data by National 
and World Data Centres, and fishery statistics (at least in the first instance) 
by FAO. In other cases new arrangements may have to be set up, or existing 
facilities strengthened, for example, if a large volume of detailed biological 
and statistical data becomes available from large-scale krill exploitation.

2.5 Biological modelling for the Antarctic Ocean

Expertise on the best form of biological models applicable to the Antarctic 
ecosystem should be sought from scientists in the field as well as from 
SCOR WG 59.
8.

It may be useful initially to divide the problems of modelling the antarctic 
ecosystem into two parts.

a) In the first model one might consider physical/chemical parameters, such 
as the depth of mixing, the rate of upwelling, the input of radiation, nutrient 
levels etc, as forcing functions in generating different levels of primary 
production. If possible the model should not be confined to an output in 
terms of the quantity of photosynthetic carbon, but should include also at 
least two outputs showing the relative quantity of photosynthetic carbon fixed 
separately by nano-plankton and net-plankton. Ideally the computed primary 
production might be considered in a broader size spectrum, including a dozen 
or more different size categories of primary producers.

b) Using known extremes in seasonal and regional variations in primary 
production, a second model should be developed in which primary productivity 
is used as a forcing function on the growth and mortality of herbivore populations 
(particularly krill). Such a model should help to elucidate competitive grazing, 
life cycle and growth strategies of all major species of herbivores so as to 
create a scenario of factors affecting the relative abundance of the major 
filter feeding zooplankton in the antarctic ecosystem including krill, 
salps, copepods and amphipods. Various predatory strategies of whales, 
seals, penguins and fish should be included in order to examine seasonal 
and regional differences in krill abundance, in as much as this abundance 
may be due to purely biological effects. A first step in this model should 
deal with the interaction between krill, whales, seals and penguins in order 
to provide a rationale for management decisions.

These two models on primary production and on filter feeders may be developed 
simultaneously. It is even possible to start with the filter feeders model 
by taking published figures on primary production. Although the final goal 
of both models is a description of the antarctic waters in general, regional 
submodels may provide a useful starting point.
9.

3. Time-table and coordination of BIOMASS (fig. 1)

The three major types of activities under BIOMASS (seagoing experiments 
and surveys; shore-based experiments and year round observations; data 
analysis and modelling), have to be adjusted to each other. Observations 
on krill swarms and on the ecological physiology of key organisms of the 
antarctic ecosystem should be started immediately resp. continued both at 
sea and shore stations.  Systems of data reporting and handling should 
be developed as soon as possible.  The programme by FAO as discussed and 
approved by its Committee on Fisheries includes the development of a 
statistical data base and of a collection of scientific reviews on the living 
resources and their present and potential exploitation. Some standardization 
with regard to sampling and sorting of plankton and nekton in the Southern 
Ocean are also required at an early stage of the BIOMASS programme.

The major implementation phase consists of at least two major international 
multiship experiments as well as of a number of loosely connected experiments 
at sea and ashore and of national macro-scale surveys.

A time-table for large scale seagoing operations has to take into account other 
large scale oceanographic activities such as FGGE but also the need for suffi-
cient time for scientific planning, logistic preparation, and development of 
instrumentation. Austral summer 1980/81 was chosen for the "First International 
BIOMASS Experiment" (FIBEX) as a major multidisciplinary process-oriented study 
which should involve several vessels in microscale experiments and macroscale 
investigations of transport mechanisms and of ecosystem variability in space 
and time.  It should concentrate on the Atlantic sector but include Drake 
Passage and its western approaches. On-going marine research activities - 
both sea going and landbased - in the Antarctic should be used as far as 
possible to prepare the ground for the international BIOMASS experiment 1980/81.

Data analysis will go parallel to the field work, laboratory studies and modelling 
There will be a need for meetings of small groups of specialists for the planning 
of seagoing and shore-based experiments, for the development of methodology, 
data handling and concepts of modelling. An interim synthesis of data and 
results should be aimed at specialized workshops from 1979 onwards and 
presented at a small symposium in 1982 and a major, concluding one about 1986.

Preparatory and coordinating arrangements for the implementation of BIOMASS 
will be needed at the scientific and administrative, non-governmental and 
governmental levels. The Group felt that those tasks should largely be 
entrusted to the existing bodies of SCAR/SCOR and of IOC which should also 
be the principal sponsors of BIOMASS.

The group of specialists proposed the following system of coordination.

a) SCAR/SCOR scientific planning group. A group of scientists selected 
according to their individual expertise, who would recommend methods and 
techniques and draw up scientific programmes for cooperative field work 
and land based studies and for the analysis of data. Subgroups may be 
established for special technical tasks. The existing group of specialists 
on the Living Resources of the Southern Ocean (SCOR WG 54) could (with 
perhaps enlarged membership) undertake this task with its new terms of 
reference.

b) BIOMASS Coordinating Group as a subgroup of the existing IOC International 
Coordinating Group for the Southern Ocean (ICG/SOC) with the responsibility
10.

of implementation of the BIOMASS programme acting on the scientific advice
of the SCOR/SCAR scientific planning group.  Consideration might be given
to the appointment of an International Coordinator.  SCOR, SCAR and IABO
should be invited to participate in the work of the BIOMASS coordinating
groups.  It is expected that FAO and the International Whaling Commission
(IWC) will contribute to the efforts of the BIOMASS coordinating group.

The proposals on the coordination of BIOMASS and on exchange of information
and data are summarised in the following recommendations.

































 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1977  | 1978  | 1979  | 1980  | 1981  | 1982  | 1983  | 1984  | 1985  | 1986
Scientific planning
Technical preparation
Seagoing experiments
and surveys                                 FIBEX                     SIBEX
Other seagoing activities
Shore based studies
Data analysis
Synthesis and advice,
(workshops and symposia)
Figure 1
TABLE                                  SUMMARY OF RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS FROM PLATFORMS
                                        AVAILABLE FOR SOUTHERN OCEAN STUDIES

                                      
                                       RESEARCH VESSEL          |         SHORE BASES         |      EXPLORATORY TRAWLERS    |COMMERCIAL TRAWLERS   |SUPPLY SHIPS AND  |         SATELLITES       
                                                           |                             |   AND WHALING SHIPS         |                     |ICE-BREAKERS        |                      
                                                                                               |                             |                             |                     |                    |                      
CONSTRAINTS                    o Limited (large-scale)    |       o Poor (large-scale)  |o Limited spectrum of       |o Uncontrolled       |o Few station      |o Lack of "Ground Truth"   
                               trawling capacity         |       trawling capacity     |oceanographic opportunities |operational area     |opportunities       |o Ice cover           
                               o Limited access to      |                             |                             |o Fishing bias       |o Lack of trawling  |o Cloud cover         
                                open ocean              |                             |                             |                     |capability          |o Turbulent sea surface
                               o Limited geographic     |                             |                             |                     |                    |                      
                                coverage                 |                             |                             |                     |                    |                      

OPPORTUNITIES                  o Flexibility           |       o Stable platforms    |o Acoustic survey for krill |o Acoustic survey   |o "Ground Truth"   |o Remote sensing of   
                               o Multiple sampling      |       o Experimental studies|and fish                     |for krill           |for satellite      |surface temperature,  
                                capability              |       o Year-round coverage |o Efficient sampling for    |o "Ground Truth"    |survey of          |chlorophyll, krill    
                               o Interdisciplinary     |       o Inshore benthic     |krill                        |for acoustic survey |chlorophyll        |swarms                
                                research                |        sampling             |o "Ground Truth" for remote |of krill            |o Deployment of    |o Year-round coverage 
                               o Water column studies  |       o Larval surveys      |sensing of krill             |o "Ground Truth"    |drifting sensors   |o Remote sensing for  
                               o Acoustic surveys for  |       o Sampling predators  |o Acoustic survey for squid |for remote sensing  |in communica-      |filamental macroalgae 
                                krill, squid, and fish  |        of krill, fish, and  |and fish                     |of krill swarms     |tion with satellites|o Communication with   
                               o Benthic sampling      |        squid (seals,        |                             |                    |o Occasional       |unmanned buoys and    
                               o Underwater photography|        penguins, etc.)      |                             |                    |opportunities for  |sensors               
                                                       |       o "Ground Truth" for  |                             |                    |time series obser- |o Observations on occur-
                                                       |        remote sensing of    |                             |                    |vations near coast |rence of seals and    
                                                       |        intertidal macroalgae|                             |                    |and at edge of ice |penguins              
                                                       |                             |                             |Squid and fish      |pack                |                      
                                                       |                             |                             |sampling from sperm|                    |                      
                                                       |                             |                             |whaling operations  |                    |                      

                                       |                             |                             |                     |                    |                      
                                       |                             |                             |                     |                    |                      
