ANTARCTIC TREATY                                        TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                       NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 9                                              ANT/IX/41
                                                         Previously: ANT/EPM2/3
                                                         Date: 26 September 1977
                                                         Original: English

SCAR  REPORT  ON
D I S C U S S I O N S  AT  XIV  SCAR

A Cooperative air transport system
for the Antarctic
Appendix 1

SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC RESEARCH

Working Group on Logistics

Report on discussions at XIV SCAR, October 1976 on

A COOPERATIVE AIR TRANSPORT SYSTEM FOR THE ANTARCTIC

In response to Antarctic Treaty Recommendation VIII-7, the SCAR Working Group 
on Logistics has reviewed on behalf of SCAR the present and potential resources 
available for a cooperative air transport system, and the additional requirements, 
for its : implementation. The Working Group also reviewed the information 
available to the members concerning the ways a Cooperative Air Transport 
System for the Antarctic (CATSA) might benefit the scientific programmes 
of the varicus countries.

This review is presented under three headings: Benefits, where it is noted 
that logistic support and operational as well as scientific programmes would 
benefit from CATSA; Resources, in which the existing assets plus all those in 
a firm stage of planning or devclopment are summarized; and Requirements, where 
are listed the additional facilities and coordination that are needed in order 
for cooperative air transport to be effective.

In the course of this review, it became clear that the expected benefits of 
CATSA to the scientific progrrammes were inadequately documented. This report, 
therefore, reflects the collective views of the members supplementing to the 
written reports on the subject, and it is considered that specific benefits 
of CATSA to particular projects will become apparent to various national groups 
as their planning develops in relation to CATSA.

The Subcommittee on CATSA considered that, in terms of both benefits and 
requirements, there are two general stages of development in cooperation in air 
transport. The ultimate stage (defined here as stage 2) is the use of inter-
continental trunks to three well spaced Antarctic terminals from which feeder 
routes would serve many, if not all, of the Antarctic stations and field sites. 
Thus, stage 2 is the Air-bus first proposed in 1968. However, it is clear that 
the aviation assets and facilities presently in use in Antarctica, and those 
already being developed, could be more effectively used now for cccrdinatedair 
support projects without additional major construction or investment. Thus 
stage 1 would not require construction of a major wheeled runway airfield with 
fuel depot, while stage 2 would probably be possible to 
support selected projects tailored to fit specific routes, schedules and pay-loads 
based on a one to two year planning cycle. When stage 2 is achieved it would 
be possible to support air movement of many projects within the scope of the 
established CATSA based on much shorter planninr.

In view of the foregoing, the sections of the report on both benefits and 
requirements are distinguished to some degree as applicable to stage 1 and 
stage 2.

BENEFITS

The potential benefits of CATSA to the scientific programmes of SCAR countries 
cannot be enumerated in detail because such information has not been presented
to the Working Group. However, the benefits in general with a few specific 
examples, were discussed and are summarized below. It is also noted that 
operational and logistic support projects, as well as scientific programmes, 
would benefit from CATSA.

The Antarctic continent is the only one on earth which is isolated from contact 
by ship for 8 to 9 months of the year. Even when the pack ice is open, voyages 
are long and arduous. Most of the Antarctic scientific research stations are 
separated by many hundreds of miles and thus isolated from each other.

The main logistic problems to be solved are therefore: easy access to the 
Antarctic throughout the summer; transportation between scientific research 
stations; and access to remote areas such as the plateau of East Antarctica 
and to mountain areas. Air transport offers the only reasonable prospect for 
alleviating these problems and the consequential problems that might require 
evacuation of personnel.

CATSA would expand opportunities in all the Antarctic scientific disciplines 
both for intensive local investigations and for widely dispersed but closely 
integrated observations and measurements. Advanced techniques of environmental 
data acquisition are rapidly becoming available. Deployment of automated 
data acquisition platforms, probes and buoys and their maintenance, relocation 
and recovery would be greatly aided by such a system. Indeed, for effective 
continent-wide integrated studies such a system is virtually essential.

Other benefits to scientific and operational activities afforded by a 
cooperative air transport system would include:

a. The attraction of more senior scientists, many of whom are burdened by 
academic responsibilities and schedules, by providing for short term visits.

b. Movement of personnel earlier and later in the season, thus extending their 
effective work period, and providing also for short term visits.

c. More frequent and wider exchange of personnel between stations and national 
programmes, resulting in improved international cooperation and liaison.

d. The possibility of conducting summer season research projects at the best 
located station, and moving interested scientists there from other stations 
to participate.

e. The dramatic increase in the cost of chartering support ships could be offset 
in some cases if, for example, a programme of two ship round trips could be 
reduced to one for cargo only during the period of the most favourable pack 
ice to avoid delay. Ice strengthened cargo ships are more readily available 
than the specialized multipurpose ice strengthened ships.

f. The improved opportunity to provide assistance when necessary to field 
parties and to rescue or evacuate personnel in an emergency.

In considering the general benefits due to the easy access that is afforded by 
air transport, there is a notable example in comparing the programmes of New 
Zealand, France and Australia, which have otherwise similarly limited resources. 
New Zealand can send many investigators and projects to the Antarctic on a 
variable schedule through the summer via McMurdo. For Australian and France, all 
access is limited to a fixed ship schedule. (A similar situation exists for 
other national programmes).
3.

In discussing specific examples of benefit by CATSA to various research projects,
the Group noted that there are Stage 1 possibilities such as those in the
following paragraphs, that deserve further study in addition to the obvious
benefits if Stage 2 of CATSA was implemented.

Airborne remote sensing in the form of radio echo sounding of the ice cap and
its underlying earth topography could be extended to additional areas by the
provision of one or more landing and refuelling sites. For example, several
stations on the coast of East Antarctica have potential adjacent sites for
skiways for the operation of large aircraft.

The arrangements for fuel and possibly stop-over services by use of helicopter
or surface transport would benefit science projects, including IAGP. This
would be a CATSA Stage 1 development, requiring significant effort and
coordination, but well within reach.

Other remote sensing studies and direct atmospheric sensing projects using
aircraft could similarly benefit. The use of airborne and air delivered buoy
type sensing and data collection methods in the Weddell Sea area would benefit
at Stage 1 by the facility, at Rothera Point for example, for landing and
refuelling.

In terms of benefits to field operations the increased use of the medium sized
fixed wing ski aircraft, particularly the Twin Otter, is noted. The Twin Otter
can best be delivered to coastal stations in East Antarctica by ferrying from
South America and via the Antarctic Peninsula. Coordinated arrangements under
CATSA Stage 1, would be within current capabilities and would allow the safe
ferry of Twin Otters to virtually any station.

RESOURCES

Because it is lengthy and complex background material, the section on resources
is attached as the Annex. Attention is particularly drawn to the new developments
in air transport resources reported by several countries and to the new
developments at various stages of planning.

REQUIREMENTS

Stage 1: Cooperative Use of Existing Facilities

Although the existing air transport facilities provided by individual countries
are in general fully extended and utilized during summer operations, it is
considered that greater coordination of some operations, together with the
provision of at least limited facilities for aircraft refuelling and some
additional staff at selected points, would offer increased flexibility and
geographical coverage.

It is noted in the review of resources in the Annex that there are already a number
of improvements in both facilities and aircraft. It is in the projected
coordination and combined use of such resources that Stage 1 of CATSA has
great potential.

Thus, for example, it might be desirable to establish aviation fuel depots of at least
about 10,000 gallons each at Halley Bay and Molodezhnaya and maintain them with
means for replacement and adequate quality control. Then by increasing, if 
necessary, the strength of aircrews operating C-130 aircraft from McMurdo 
and supporting them as necessary with extra ground staff at the other two 
stations, it would be feasible to extend airborne programmes, such as ice 
sensing, into East Antarctica and to support that and other programmes in 
the 0     to 90    West sector of West Antarctica.

A similar plan could be formed to use Rothera Point to stage both LC-130 and 
Twin Otter flight operations in the Peninsula area. A skiway at Leningradskaya 
or one near Dumont d'Urville could be made available to support a planned 
project. The same could be said for Sanae, Syowa, Mawson and Casey.

There is a common requirement in this concept, and in the discussion of Stage 1 
feeder route possibilities in the next section, for the development of a 
doctrine, or a set of standard criteria, in the preparation and maintenance 
of skiways and compacted snow or ice runways. As seen in the Annex there are 
already several types of such facility  in use or in planning. They are 
intended for various aircraft, such as Twin Otter, Cessna 185, AN-2, IL-14, C-141, 
IL-18 and LC-130, but there has been little effort to standardize the criteria 
for the use of given sites by different aircraft. There are many questions that 
arise ranging from equipment and method of surface preparation to marking 
standards, required dimensions, smoothness standards, maintenance, and so 
forth. This requirement must be the subject of further study, site testing, 
and exchainge of information.

Stage 1: Feeder Route Possibilities

The spacing of permanent stations around the perimeter of the Antarctic continent 
is now close enough to allow inter-station air links to be used for special 
projects without the need for major capital investment.

In most cases projects requiring air transport between stations would need 
careful planning and close cooperation between the operating agencies to provide 
timely weather observations and forecasts, air traffic control, fuel of the 
correct quality and quantity at the landing area, safe tie-down and other ground 
servicing arrangements for the aircraft. None of these would be out of reach 
of present capabilities.

It is considered that light fixed-wing ski-wheeled aircraft such as the Twin 
Otter now used by Argentina, UK and USA could be at least ferried between most 
stations in steps not exceeding 850 nautical miles. A recent comphrehensive 
survey of available aircraft confirms the preference for this particular aircraft. 
It is reasonable to identify a series of circum-antarctic links, fig. 1, none 
discussed was from Marambio to Rothera Point, to Siple, to Byrd, to McMurdo, 
to Dome C, to Casey, to Mirny, to Mawson, to Molodezhnaya, to Syowa, to 
Novolazarevskaya, to Sanae, to Halley Bay, to Druzhnaya and return to the 
Peninsula area. Links to Leningradskaya and Dumont d'Urville from McMurdo and 
from Casey are also possible. Helicopters could be used at Davis to provide 
access to the system at Mawson, and also to provide links from Rothera Point 
and Marambio to other stations in the Peninsula area. There are also the 
existing links between McMurdo, South Pole, and Vostok.

The use of LC-130 or IL-14 is, of course, also suitable for some of these links. 
In most cases operations are limited to the summer season when the facilities 
are occupied.
5.

Such links would form a basic feeder route system which could be used if a 
full-scale cooperative air transport system were introduced at a later stage 
of development.

Stage 2 The Airbus System

General It is considered that the major components of a full scale cooperative 
air transport system in Antarctica would comprise:

i) long range aircraft with a payload of about 20 tons
ii) three intercontinental trunk air terminals in Antarctica capable of 
handling such long range aircraft.
iii) a system of feeder routes with appropriate ski-wheeled aircraft and helicopters 
in Antarctica.

This would allow passengers and special items of equipment to be flown to Antarctica 
from other continents and distributed to the requisite points of interest on a 
firm basis of planned operations. It would also allow intercontinental aircraft 
to fly between the trunk terminals in Antarctica for such purposes as airborne 
atmospheric and remote sensing surveys.

Long Range Aircraft
As mentioned in the Annex suitable long-range aircraft are already available; 
they are the ski-wheeled LC-130 and various wheeled aircraft such as the C-141, 
IL-18, and C-160. The activation of interstation links for special projects 
as described in Stage 1 above would establish the nucleus  of the feeder route 
network.

Therefore the additional items required to establish the Stage 2 cooperative 
air transport system would be those described below.

Trunk Terminals

The most important requirement is an intercontinental terminal in East 
Antarctica between 0o and 140o E.

The USSR plans to complete development of a compacted snow runway at Molodezhnaya. 
As described in the Annex, this would accept long range wheeled aircraft from 
Africa, but only during the spring and fall seasons, not during mid-summer.

There remains the need for a full season, hard surface, rock based runway. It 
should be readily accessible from the sea for the delivery of fuel. Available 
information indicates that the site near Davis in the Vestfold Hills at 77o E 
has the greatest potential for construction of such a runway of more than 1850 
met res. It is noted that long range STOL aircraft are expected to be developed 
and proven in the near future and would allow shorter runways to be used at 
either Davis or Molodezhnaya, if the operating agencies agreed to rely on such 
aircraft and exclude others.

In order to extend the operating season for wheeled aircraft it is desirable to 
move the intercontinental air terminal at McMurdo from the sea ice and the ice 
shelf across the Sound to rock at Marble Point.

Marambio is being developed as an intercontinental terminal. It is only 857 
nautical miles from Rio Gallegos. The present 1200 metre runway is expected to 
be extended to 2200 metres in the near future with a surface of aluminium 
matting. The air facility being developed at Rothera Point on Adelaide Island
will provide an alternate landing point suitable for use by long range ski-
equipped aircraft. It is therefore desirable to continue the development at
both stations in order to provide a solid access point to West Antarctica.  A
major requirement is for ship-delivered fuel at Marambio.

Feeder Routes - Aircraft

It would be desirable to have two Twin Otters normally operating from each
trunk terminal to distribute and recover passengers on a scheduled basis on
the feeder routes. Provision should also be made for additional Twin Otter
or other suitable aircraft at various locations in the system to back up the
feeder route operations.

Feeder Routes - Airstrips

The existing airstrips identified in Stage 1 will meet the requirements for
regular feeder routes radiating from trunk terminals in Stage 2; and additional
links could be added as required for specific tasks. However, as stated earlier
for Stage 1 and in order to ensure an acceptable level of availability for
operations on a scheduled basis, it would be desirable to lay down and adopt
uniform standards and practices for surface preparation of the strips and to
provide adequate information for flight planning.

        (i) Strip Preparation

Preparation would include primarily the accurate measurement of transient
conditions, such as height, orientation and spacing of sastrugi, in order to
determine what techniques and equipment (the use of a snow plane, for
example) might be required.

       (ii) Flight Planning

It would be necessary to identify those strips where katabatic winds, fogs,
meltwater, lamination of the weight-bearing layer or other local factors
commonly present a hazard so that those hazards may be checked and taken
into account in flight planning.

Ancillary Requirements

In order to complete the system and provide for an adequate standard of safe
operation it would also be necessary to provide for the system:

1.  En route and terminal aviation weather forecasting facilities at the three
intercontinental trunk terminals.

2.  Standardized air navigation and approach aids appropriate for use in the
Antarctic.

3.  Improved air navigation charts and published visual and instrument approach
procedures.

4.  Air to ground radic communication, with compatibility between air borne
and ground equipment.

5.  Coordinated air traffic control and search and rescue procedures.

6.  Standardized fuel arrangements, including storage and handling equipment,
such as plumbing fixtures, pumping and filtering equipment.

7.  Basic ground facilities such as protection for aircraft, workshops,
accommodation, etc.

8.  Crash and fire fighting equipment at the trunk terminals.
CONCLUSIONS

a) Air transport to and in the Antarctic will, with or without CATSA, expand 
rapidly in the next decade.

b) The Antarctic environment causes unique problems. For example the 
frequency band of MF radio beacons (~ 400 khz) used on world air routes is 
not efficient on snow and ice surfaces due to absorption. Coordination 
among operators is essential for compatibility of ground and airborne 
equipment in order to assure safety and efficiency.

c) Existing international organizations involved in air operations, such as 
ICAO and WMO, cannot be expected to take the lead in preparing for expanded 
and internationally coordinated air operations in the Antarctic. It is 
essential therefore, that the Treaty nations, with SCAR, and its Working 
Group on Logistics, as forum and source of technical advice, continue the 
effort to provide for coordinated air transport measures.

d) To this end the Subcommittee on CATSA of the SCAR Working Group on 
Logistics should continue its work, on the detailed requirements at the 
stage 1 level. The members of the Subcommittee must avail themselves 
of the necessary expertise and sources of information in order to 
formulate standards and criteria in the several areas of Antarctic 
air operations.
ANTARCTIC STATIONS
AND DISTANCES
(Nautical Miles)

                 Page - 1276
Annex to Appendix 1 to
XIV-SCAR-32 (Revised)

Air Transport Resources in Antarctica

The Subcommittee on Cooperative Air Transport, of the SCAR Working Group on
Logistics has reviewed the reports from the members and makes the following
summary report on air transport resources available in Antarctic support
operations. The information is arranged by country and where appropriate
a paragraph is added to describe planned or potential new developments.

1. Argentina

The airfield at Marambio Station (Seymour Is.) is already an intercontinental
terminal for C-130 aircraft operated by the Argentine Air Force. Air missions
from Argentina are flown approximately once a month, winter and summer. Each
mission could be several, usually six, individual sorties. Each sortie from
Rio Gallegos can normally deliver 20 tons.

The Marambio Base possesses the following at present:

    1,200 m airstrip
    1 VOR and 1 NDB
    VHF and HF communications (SSB in higher and lower bands and AM)
    Plotting and weather forecast station
    APT for reception from meteorological satellites
    Fuel in drums to service the permanently stationed Twin Otter and the
        helicopters operating in summer.

On account of the comparatively short distance separating Marambio from Rio Gallegos
(857 nautical miles), the C-130 planes operate easily with all their available
payload, without any need of refuelling in Antarctica, not even in the case of
having to overfly for up to a four-hour period, waiting for favourable landing
conditions.

Marambio has a power station of about 200 KW, and a hangar to shelter both a
helicopter and a Twin Otter. There are emergency quarters and a fuel tank with
a storage capacity of 100,000 litres Arctic gasoil.

Flights by ski equipped Argentine Air Force Twin Otter aircraft, one of which
is permanently stationed at Marambio, relay personnel and light cargo to other
locations in the Peninsula area.

The ski/wheel Twin Otter normally makes trips during the colder months to the
stations at Brown, Esperanza, San Martin, Matienzo and Petrel. But when the
circumstances warrant, such as in an emergency or on special request from another
station, the Argentine Air Force Twin Otter will visit other locations such as
Palmer or Adelaide if the conditions of the snow surface and weather permit.

At Marambio the airfield is being developed.  By 1977 it is planned to have
completed an aluminium matting runway 1200 x 30 meters. There is no refuelling
for the C-130 at the present time. Twin Otter refuelling is by drummed fuel
delivered by helicopter from the ice breaker. All aviation fuel at Marambio
is JP-1.

The Antarctic air transport capabilities of Argentina also include two helicopters
of the Bell or Sikorsky S-61 R Type that operate from the ice breaker. These
helicopters are based on shore at Marambio during the summer to support science
and logistics projects from the station.
2.

Future developments at Marambio include completion of the aluminium matting 
runway to 2200 x 45 meters by 1981, and hydrographic surveys in the surrounding 
water to select a site for ship delivery of bulk fuel.

With regard to future plans, it is estimated that within about 5 years the 
following facilities will also be available:

Aeronautical Ground Facilities:

Aluminium matting landing strip, 2,200 m long, 41.26 m wide, with runway and hard 
standing of approximately 10,000 sq. m.
Medium intensity lighting and Calvert approach lighting.
Fog dispersers.
Hangar for Twin Otters.
Loading and passenger terminal.
Jet fuel type JP-1,1,5 million litre fuel deposits. At a later stage 5 million 
could be provided.

General Facilities

16 bed hospital
Lodgings for from 80 to 100 men.

Radio Service and Aidsto Navigation

1 VOR
1 NDB
1 Plessey type surveillance radar
Support to communication and meteorology
ICAO Central Station for forecasts and broadcasting.
Service in VHF and HF, in AM and SSB depending on Comodoro Rivadavia FIR and 
Ezeiza UIR.

Other Facilities

Search and Rescue subcentre
Snowploughs for runway and hard standing area maintenance
High power broadcasting with fixed-time emission
First-rate maintenance service for Twin Otters.

2. Australia

Air operations by Australia are limited at present to ship based helicopters 
and fixed wing aircraft transported south each summer season aboard the M.V. 
Nella Dan and the M.V. Thala Dan. Because of the ships schedule, the aircraft 
are available for operations in Antarctica only at best from mid-December to 
mid February. The six aircraft involved are one fixed wing (Pilatus Porter) 
and three single jet turbine engine helicopters (Hughes 500 M) aboard the 
M.V. Nella Dan and two single jet turbine engine helicopters (Bell 206 A) 
aboard the M.V. Thala Dan. The Bell 206 A has a range of about 380 km with 
an internal load of 280 kilograms. The Hughes 500 M has a maximum range of 
about 320 km with an internal load of 220 kilograms. The Pilatus Porter is 
a single jet turbine engine with a range of 660 km with a pay load of up to 
360 kilograms.
3.

In the western area between Davis and Molodezhnaya three helicopters coordinate 
with the fixed wing aircraft to support a more extensive field programe. The 
Pilatus Porter conducts aerial mapping and radar ice sounding as well as ferrying 
men and cargo.

For adequate search and rescue, the radius of operation is restricted to the 
range of helicopters to position drummed fuel beyond the main depots. Some of 
the main depots are placed by tractor traverse during the autumn and spring each 
year.  This provides the fuel that allows the light aircraft to operate as far as 
930 km from one of the stations where the terrain is suitable.

In the Australian areas of activity there are no permanent marked landing 
strips except for helicopter pads at each of the continental stations. However, 
ther are several suitable areas on plateau ice near Mawson Station, on the ice 
cap near Casey Station, and on the sea ice in winter at Mawson and Davis. These 
areas are suitable for landing aircraft if they are marked and manned temporarily 
for that purpose.

For possible support of air operations at the Australian Antarctic Stations the 
specific features are summarised as follows:

a. MAWSON  One possible landing area is on the ice plateau 13 km  south by west 
of Mawson; suitable for ski operations at all times or for light aircraft on wheels 
after condition of surface has been checked by base personnel. Length is 2500 meters. 
A second possible landing area is on the ice plateau 16 km  south by west of 
the station suitable for light aircraft wheel landings. Length 2400 meters.  For 
both of these areas the approaches from south through west and north to northeast 
are completely unobstructed. Prevailing winds are from the southeast sector.  The 
aviation fuel available is Avtur - DEF (Aust) 240 with antiicing additive (similar 
to JP-1).

b. CASEY  There is an unprepared snow surface in the ice plateau 12 km  east 
southeast of the station suitable for ski operations after the surface has been 
checked by base personnel. Length is 2400 meters.  All approaches are unobstructed. 
Prevailing winds are from the eastern sector.

c. DAVIS  The only suitable landing area near Davis is on the sea ice in winter.

All three stations have non directional medium frequency beacons, and are the 
site of regular upper air soundings and surface observations.  All three have 
medical doctors in residence, and have published communications facilities.  At 
Casey and Davis there is no aviation fuel normally available.

Possibilities for future developments focus on the need for a hard surface air 
terminal suitable for intercontinental operations.  The relatively level 700 
square km of ice-free rock terrain in the Vestfold Hills area where Davis is 
located, offer a possible site.

3. Chile

Antarctic air support operations by Chile are at present limited to the two 
Bell helicopters that fly from the ship Piloto Pardo.  There is a possibility of 
constructing either a 600 metres hard surface runway on rock for wheeled aircraft 
or a two to three thousand metre skiwáy near O'Higgins Base at King George
Island. In addition facilities for the staging of intercontinental air 
operations are available at Punta Arenas.

4. France

The present air support operations in Antarctica by France are limited to the 
use of one Alouette II helicopter that operates from the ship and from the station 
through the summer period until being taken out at the second ship visit.

Fixed wing operations are not now possible at Dumont D'Urville, and in particular 
there is no skiway area near the station.

At Dumont D'Urville there is the potential for building a 1450 x 60 metres hard 
surface runway above sea level by cutting and moving rock material from two small 
islands adjacent to the station and filling the intervening shallow ocean segments. 
A movement of 450,000 M  of material by truck would be involved. The planning 
for the project is in its early stages. If the plan was implemented the first 
900 metres of the runway could be complete after three years. There is no longer 
any interest in the obsolete Breguet 941 aircraft. Instead, France is interested 
in possible Antarctic operations of the Transall C-160 Twin Turboprop Transport. 
It operates at 51 tons maximum gross weight at which it requires 900 metres for 
take off or 600 metres for landing. The C-160 is capable of airlifting a 6 ton 
payload from Hobart to Dumont D'Urville and returning after one hour of holding 
overhead and no landing.

5. Japan

The only aircraft presently operated in Antarctica by Japan is one Cessna 185 
fitted with skis. It remains at Syowa Station and is flown to a radius of 300 km 
during October to end of March. In 1978/79 there will be two Cessna 185's at Syowa.

There is a suitable skiway on the ice plateau 20 km east of Syowa at an altitude 
of 500 metres. It is 3000 metres long, and the surface must be checked before 
use. Approaches from the west, southwest to east northeast are unobstructed. 
Prevailing winds are generally from the east. A runway on sea ice is also 
available through January each year. It is 500 metres northwest of Syowa and 
is 1000 metres long. Radio navigational aids are a non directional beacon and 
UHF-DF. Aviation fuel at Syowa is limited to 10 kiloliters of aviation gasoline 
in drums and about 5 kiloliters of JP-4. Meteorological facilities include upper 
air soundings and surface observations. There is accommodation for up to twenty 
flight crew and passengers at Syowa. Over snow and wheeled vehicles are available 
for surface transportation.

For the future there is a possibility of a hard surface runway that might be built 
on a snow-free area on East Ongul Island located 300 metres above sea level. In 
addition, for optimum use of the present ice runway and skiway capability, Japan 
might be able to provide ship delivered aviation fuel in quantities up to 50 
kilolitres (13,000 gal.) plus the addition of a Bell 204 B helicopter and a 
Twin Otter.

6. New Zealand

Intercontinental air operations by the Royal New Zealand Air Force continue in the 
form of wheeld LC-130 flights to the ice runway at McMurdo. The pay load is 
restricted to 17,000 pounds because of the lack of a alternate runway.
7. South Africa

a. The new RSA II will, in all probability, be delivered to Cape Town during
January 1978. The maiden voyage to SANAE (Antarctica) will be undertaken in
January 1979.

The ship will carry on board 2 SA330G PUMA helicopters with a lifting capacity of
3 metric tons or alternately carry 2 pilots and 20 passengers. The helicopters
will be fitted with 2 TURBOMECA TURMO IVC engines with a maximum emergency power
of 1160 kw (1558 HP) and a maximum continuous power of 940 kw (1262 HP). Flying
at a fast cruising speed of 274 km/hr with an economical cruising speed of 265
km/hr. Maximum range without reserve at economical cruising speed will be 610 km.
Additional fuel tanks can be fitted giving a longer range up to 1300 km. The
normal operating radius will therefore be about 250 km., or 500 km with extra
tanks.

b. The helicopters will be ship-based and therefore, could be flown from any
point in East Antarctica within the ranges mentioned above. This facility will
cover that particular part of East Antarctica where at present no permanent
facility exists for the landing of LC-130 type of aircraft. There is an area
on the ice shelf 17 km from Sanae Station that is suitable for skiway operations.
The presence of the helicopters would enhance the capability to support a ski
aircraft transiting this location. Arrangements for fuel and aids to navigation
are yet to be made.

c. The ship will also carry 400 tons of bulk fuel oil that could be delivered
at any given point along the coast of East Antarctica. A provisional programme
for the ship will be to leave Cape Town early or middle November and to return
to Cape Town in March.

d. A fully equipped emergency base to accommodate 16 men is available 5 km from
the main base. Oversnow transport is available including 4 caterpillers, two
fitted with dozer blades. A new base is planned for 1978/79 to facilitate 40
men and will replace the present base.

8. United Kingdom

Air operations by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) in the Antarctic continue
to feature two Twin Otter aircraft that are flown to the Peninsula area each
summer season. At Adelaide Island, where the aircraft have principally
operated, the existing station is now being replaced by construction of a
new base at Rothera Point. This location was selected, after long and careful
consideration, because it is at the southern-most limit of ice-free sea access. The new
Rothera Point base (located at 67°40'30" S, 67°05'15" W) is under construction
this year and will have facilities for 40 men by the end of the 1976/77 season.
All construction will be complete by the addition of laboratories and workshops
in 1977/78. It will replace the present Adelaide Base, which will be closed
at the end of the 1976/77 season. Two to three miles north west of the new
Rothera Point base is located an extensive (2 miles by ten miles) area suitable
for skiway operations. Very little if any preparation of the snow surface
would be required for LC-130 ski operations. The approach, into the prevailing
northerly wind, is relatively unobstructed. A low rock ridge aligned approximately
east-west rises from Rothera Point, to the south of the skiway, and mountains
to 4000 ft. altitude are about 4 miles to the West of the skiway. To the East
is open water and the ice piedmont stretches about 15 miles to the North. Rothera
Point is readily accessible from the sea with deep water close inshore. BAS deliver
6.

and storage of aviation fuel at Rothera Point will continue to be in drums 
(100,000 gallons in 1975/76), but it would be possible to deliver bulk fuel 
in tanks ashore which could then be moved, by tractor in sled mounted tanks, 
to the skiway.

There is a high proportion of good flying weather at Rothera Point, typically 
better than at other locations in the Peninsula area. But there are occasional 
periods of low cloud lasting a week or more. A directional radio beacon of 100 
mile range is in use, but a more powerful non-directional beacon or more 
sophisticated approach aid could be installed. Investment in an instrument 
landing system (ILS) would not be justified because there is insufficient terrain 
clearance under the glide path for safe instrument landings.

Except for the months of November and March, when BAS field personnel are in 
transit, there is ample crew/passenger stopover accommodation. Even in November 
and March a stopover with less comfortable conditions could be accepted.

There is no future likelihood of wheeled aircraft operations at any of the BAS 
sites. Halley Bay offers an opportunity for ship delivered fuel at a good skiway 
site.

A small marked skiway for Twin Otters is available at Damay Point, Weincke 
Island and is used by BAS. A comfortable refuge hut with ten bunks and limited 
supplies has been constructed and there is a very small fuel depot.

9. USSR

At Molodezhnaya there is now one landing place for ski aircraft only, about 3000 
metres long, located very close to the station. Beginning in 1978/79 it is 
planned to prepare a runway for wheeled aircraft at a site 12 km east from 
Molodezhnaya at an altitude of about 400 metres. This position is at approximately 
67°40' S, 46°55" E. This runway will be of compacted snow in an area of hard neve, 
not on blue ice. The runway is prepared by use of a tractor - towed drag that 
is locally constructed and heavily weighted. The runway will be 2500 by 100 
metres in size and suitable for use by the long range four engine turboprop 
AN-12 or IL 18 aircraft.

It is planned that jet fuel and aviation gasoline will be hauled to the runway 
in sled mounted tanks of about 20 cubic metre capacity.

There are the usual katabatic winds from the south east, but mostly in winter. 
The periodic cyclonic winds are from the east. The runway will be oriented east 
southeast. Because of the nature of the compacted snow and the effect of higher 
temperatures it is intended to use the runway only in spring and fall not 
during the mid-summer season. All appropriate navigation aids and air-ground 
communications will be provided at this site.

At Mirny there are very poor possibilities for aircraft landing. There is only a 
very short skiway area of less than 1000 metres, with crevasses at one end and the 
ice front at the other. The snow cover is heavy and there is typical katabatic 
wind. Ship delivered fuel is available.

At Novolazarevskaya there is a blue ice landing area about 10 km from the station 
or 100 km from the sea. The size of the area varies from year to year. It is 
possible that it would be suitable for occasional use by wheeled aircraft, for 
example as an alternate landing site for long range aircraft using the Molodezhnaya 
runway.
7.

At Vostok there is a good skiway of about 2500 by 60 metres. It is at 3,480 
metres altitude. There is no storage of aviation fuel, but it otherwise offers 
a good facility for all ski aircraft.

It is hoped that the potential for use of the Vostok runway by wheeled aircraft 
be tested by an appropriate aircraft with ski-wheel configuration. The US might 
test the runway by use of the LC.130.

At Leningradskaya there is a ski landing area of about 200 metres suitable for AN-2 
or Twin Otter type aircraft. The cyclonic winds tend to be a problem. In the 
future if there is a need for the IL-14 to visit Leningradskaya a longer skiway 
could be located and prepared. In this case the IL-14 could reach the station 
by refuelling at McMurdo.

Bellinghausen has no landing place available for fixed wing aircraft, and the 
site at Ruiskaya is not occupied.

Druzhnaya will be occupied during the summer (mid-December through February) for 
a few years only. It is situated on shelf ice with a good area for ski landing 
only. The snow is very soft but a skiway 2000 metres long is prepared by 
compacting with a weighted sled towed by tractor. During the 1976/77 season it 
is planned to operate two IL-14 and two AN-2 aircraft and two MI-8 helicopters 
brought by ship. Drummed aviation fuel is off loaded by ship.

The part of the Filchner Ice Shelf in the area of the Druzhnaya Base is devoid 
of crevasses. However, 3-4 kilometers westward from the Base, there is a newly 
formed system of meridional cracks, going inland from the coast about 5-6 km. 
The air strip can be built practically at any place within the safe zone. The 
only problem may be soft snow-firn layer 6 meters deep. This layer is attributed 
to the absence of strong winds and large snow accumulation which is caused by 
northern and northeastern cyclonic winds. The snow crust starts to form in 
January, when the number of days with sunshine and cold south winds increases. 
To maintain the air strip in good shape, it must be rolled every day.

The aircraft used by the USSR in Antarctica are: AN-2, a small single internal 
combustion engine fixed wing plane with only a fixed ski landing gear. IL-14, a medium 
ized twin engine (internal combustion) fixed wing aircraft fitted with 
retractable skis, capable of about 1300 km radius with one ton payload (such 
as Mirny to Vostok and return). MI-8 is a large twin turbine helicopter 
capable of 3000 kg lift. IL-18 and AN-12 are large four engine turboprop 
intercontinental aircraft equipped with wheels only.

All of the ships in the Soviet Antarctic Expedition can support aviation 
activities by transporting fixed wing (IL-14 and AN-2) aircraft and helicopters 
to various coastal locations. The aircraft and helicopter are deck loaded 
and hoisted on to the ice. None of the ships have helicopters landing platforms. 
It is planned that the new ship, M/V Mikhail Somov, will in the future be fitted 
with a helicopter platform.

10. USA

McMurdo Station (77°53' S, 166°48' E). The McMurdo Station complex supports 
intercontinental and intracontinental flights. With the range of aircraft 
presently used for transoceanic flights, it could possibly serve as a link with 
all southern hemisphere continents. Approximate distances, in nautical miles, 
of outer terminals from McMurdo are New Zealand 2100, Australia 2500, South 
America 2700, and Africa 4100.
8.

McMurdo Station has both ice and snow airfields. A runway is prepared on the 
annual sea ice for wheeled aircraft operations from early October to mid or 
late December when ice strength and surface conditions become marginal. 
Operations are then moved to the skiway facility on the Ross Ice Shelf, and only 
ski-equipped aircraft are used. This latter facility is also available for ski-
equipped aircraft during the October-December period while the ice runway is in 
use. The ice runway is laid out in the direction of the prevailing winds. 070 
True end has clear approaches from either direction. Its dimensions are 10,000 
feet long and 250 feet wide. Williams Field has two skiways, one into the 
prevailing wind with dimensions of 10,000 feet by 300 feet, and a crosswind 
skiway with dimensions of 8,000 feet by 250 feet. The attached figure shows 
the location of the facilities relative to McMurdo Station proper. Although the 
Williams Field skiways are operational only during the summer operating period, 
they could be used on a year-round basis. For special purposes, flights have 
been made to the skiway during the dark austral winter. Gasoline lanterns placed 
every 500 feet were used to mark the skiway.

McMurdo Station has substantial facilities to support helicopter operations. 
Several helicopter launch pads are available plus hangars to enable complete 
maintenance on the aircraft.

Both the skiway and ice runway facilities have a full range of navigational aids. 
These include radar for air search and approach control, TACAN, and both LF and 
UHF homers.

Approved instrument approaches are published in aeronautical publications for 
radar and TACAN approaches to both facilities, plus ADF approaches to the "skiways. 
Approaches to the McMurdo heliport are governed by visual flight rules under 
radio advisory control. A control tower supports operations at the skiway and 
ice runway facilities.

Meteorological support for flight operations includes enroute and terminal fore-
casting. Facilities include upper air soundings, surface observations and 
receivers for weather satellites.

Air/ground communication is provided via three functional areas: Williams Field 
Tower(VHF and UHF) for local and ground control of fixed wing aircraft, Williams 
Field Radar (VHF and UHF) for radar controlled approaches and departures, and 
McMurdo Center (HF SSB and AM, VHF and UHF) for flight following and helicopter 
advisory control. All three terminals guard the VHF and UHF emergency frequencies.

McMurdo Station has bulk storage facilities for over 5 million gallons of 
aviation fuels, which are replenished annually by tanker. This exceeds normal 
requirements; therefore, additional flights generated by an international air 
transport system could be supported. At present, only JP-4 jet fuel is stored, 
but a portion of this storage capacity could possibly with some modification, 
be used for other types of aviation fuel should it be necessary, All three air 
facilities, ice runway, skiway and heliport, have holding tanks or bladders 
for direct aircraft refuelling.

Limited aircraft maintenance capabilities exist at the McMurdo facilities. Spare 
components are limited to those required for LC-130 and UH-lN aircraft. 
Electronic repair shops with common test equipment are available.

McMurdo Station is capable of providing berthing and dining accommodation for 
reasonable numbers of flight crew and passengers. In addition, emergency 
facilities are available at the Williams Field skiway, should weather restrict 
surface transportation to McMurdo Station.
9.

McMurdo Station has a fully equipped dispensary manned by a doctor and naval
medical corpsmen. During the summer operating season, a dentist is also
available for emergency treatment. Williams Field has a small dispensary
manned by a doctor and corpsmen when the Williams Field skiways are in use.

Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station (90°s) During the austral summer operating
season the station at South Pole has a limited capability to support flight
operations of ski-equipped aircraft. A single 10,000 foot skiway, laid out
in the direction of the prevailing wind parallel to the 020° meridian, is
maintained from approximately November 1 to February 15. The skiway could be
operational for longer periods should it be required.

On a normal basis, surface observations and upper air soundings are taken.
Aviation weather is reported during periods of flight activity at the station.
The station does not provide forecasting services but this is provided by the
McMurdo Weather Center.

South Pole Station guards the HF (SSB and AM) communications flight following
frequencies and selected UHF channels. It also guards the VHF and UHF emergency
frequencies. A radar is operated for radar controlled approaches and for
departure control. In addition, South Pole Station has TACAN and a non-direct-
ional UHF beacon. Normally, this station does not stock aviation fuels. During
the summer JP-4 in 10,000 gallon bladder storage with pump and filter can be
positioned at South Pole through the normal LC-130 resupply flights. Diesel
fuel is stockedfor station use in adequate amounts. No aircraft maintenance
facilities are available. Limited berthing and dining facilities for up to 25
men, if necessary, are available. A small dispensary manned by a doctor is
maintained at the station.

Siple Station (75°55' S, 83°55' W) This station has a limited capability to support
flight operations of ski-equipped aircraft. No prepared landing area is maintained.
However, adjacent to the station in the northwest quadrant the flat snow field is
unobstructed and suitable for the landing of ski-equipped aircraft. Surface
weather observations are taken at Siple Station plus aviation weather when flights
are scheduled to the station. Forecasting services can be provided by radio
from McMurdo Weather Center.

Siple Station guards the HF (SSB and AM) flight-following frequencies when
flights are scheduled to the station. A non-directional HF beacon is available
during the operating season, normally from late November to the end of
January. Normally this station does not stock aviation fuels. By special
arrangements JP-4 can be positioned at Siple Station through the normal LC-130
resupply flights. Diesel fuel is stocked for station use in limited amounts. No
aircraft maintenance facilities are available. Except for 2 or 3 men, or in an
emergency, this station cannot provide berthing and dining facilities for additional
personnel. Only a paramedic is assigned to this station.

Palmer Station  Palmer Station maintains no aviation facilities. Ski-equipped
light aircraft (Twin Otter size) have landed and taken off from a glacier near
the station; however, surface conditions are unpredictable and this station
should not be used for normal flight operations. A major limitation is the lack
of vehicles by which the station crew could traverse to the top of the glacier
where the surface might be used more extensively for ski aircraft operations.
As a result, the positioning of fuel and the handling of cargo and passengers from
the station is most difficult.

Aircraft  At present the United States operates four LC-130 aircraft in support
of its Antarctic Research Programme. One of these is an older LC-130 F model,
10.

while the other three are the longer range LC-130 R models. Commencing with the 1977/78 austral operating season, two additional LC-130 R models will be available to the programme plus one other LC-130 F model, which is in a damaged condition at Dome C on the East Antarctic Plateau at present. Repair and recovery of this stranded aircraft is planned during the 1976/77 season.

When the cooperative air transportation system was originally discussed, the United States operated the LC-130 F model only. The subsequent addition of the LC-130 R model has substantially improved the characteristics of the LC-130s. The attached table gives the pertinent characteristics of both models. With its increased range, the LC-130 could effectively contribute to an Antarctic intracontinental feeder route transport system between virtually all parts of the continent.

The LC-130 aircraft can also provide intercontinental flight support for Antarctica. At present they are routinely used for flights between Christchurch, N.Z. and McMurdo Station. During the early months of the operating season when the McMurdo ice runway is usable, most long-range wheeled aircraft could be used to provide entry to the continent. At present, US Air Force C-141 jet transport aircraft are used to supplement the LC-130 aircraft between Christchurch and McMurdo. These long-range four engine aircraft carry 94 passengers or 20 tons of cargo on this 2100 nautical mile flight.

In addition to the LC-130s, the United States maintains and operates five UH-lN helicopters from McMurdo Station. They are used to support scientific field investigations within 150 miles of McMurdo Station. By the use of fuel caches, this range can be extended. With minor disassembly, this aircraft can be transported in an LC-130 to a field camp and reassembled in the field. Aboard each of the two icebreakers that annually support the US porgramme in the Ross Sea and the Antarctic Peninsula regions are two HH-52 helicopters. These are used for ice reconnaissance purposes and for ship to shore logistics flights.
LC-130 PERFORMANCE DATA

                      LC-130F         LC-130R

Cruise Speed          270 Kts         270 Kts
Maximum Weight, Wheel takeoff    135,000        155,000
Maximum Weight, Ski takeoff      135,000        147,000
Maximum range, wheel takeoff     2,200 NM       2,900 NM
  Payload at maximum range       5,000 lbs      5,000 lbs
Maximum range, Ski takeoff       2,200 NM       2,700 NM
  Payload at maximum range       5,000 lbs          0
Range with 10-ton load, wheel takeoff  1,400 NM  2,400 NM
Range with 10-ton load, ski takeoff    1,400 NM  2,000 NM

Cargo Compartment                     
Length                          40 feet         40 feet
Height                           9 feet          9 feet
Width                           10 feet          9 feet

Note:  Load data are approximates only and will vary with individual
aircraft and operating conditions.
