ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
девятое консультативное совещание

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON                          ANT/IX/16
                                Date: 19 September 1977
                                Previously:
                                Date:
                                Original: French

Provisional Agenda Item 7)

BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE SEDIMENTARY LAND AND SEA AREAS OF THE ANTARCTI
(paper submitted by the delegation of France)

The constitution and geological history of the Antarctic as we now know
them enable us to divide this continent into two large provinces which are
roughly demarcated by a line connecting the Ross and Weddell Seas: to the east
of this line, the eastern or Gondwana province represents the oldest cratonised
(Lower Proterozoic) and tectonically most stable zone; to the west, the western
or Andean province is the zone resulting from the lateral accretion of the
craton, i.e. a very subsident active margin which has been subjected to succcessive
orogenic phases until fairly recent times.  In order to understand better the
problem of the sedimentary basins with which we are concerned, we shall quickly
describe the structural, sedimentologic and stratigraphic evolution of each
province since the end of the Pre-Cambrian, i.e. as regards the overlying beds
only; we shall then determine the likely zones for geophysical surveys.

LAND AREA                                  EASTERN PROVINCE

On the western edge of this province (or more exactly in the Transantarctic
Chain, which correspond to the very first basins established on the active margin
of the craton) the sedimentary overburden of the bed rock consists of a series of
varied deposits in which two sedimentary groups may be distinguished:
  - A group representing the Cambrian, the lower part of which consists of
terrigenous marine sediments of the turbidite type, and the upper part of which
consists of terrigenous carbonated ones.  This series, which is about 13 km
thick, has been folded, more or less metamorphised and affected by granitic
intrusions between the Middle Cambrian and the Ordovician (Ross orogenic phase).
  - A group (currently limited to the eastern flank of the Transantarctic
Chain) extending in time from the Lower Devonian to the (probably Lower) Jurassic,
formed at the bottom of terrigenous marine deposits up to 6 km in thickness (Lower
Devonian) and at the top of terrigenous and carbonated limnic sediments about
4 km in thickness (Carboniferous - Jurassic) containing in particular vegetable
matter, coal and sometime shows of bitumen. This is the Beacon series, and both from
the structural and sedimentary standpoints has the characteristics of a platform
deposit; it is unaflected by orogeny.
To these two groups one should at least add some Upper Crataceous and 
Paleocene (marine) formations, hitherto known only in the form of erratic boulders.

In the other sectors of the eastern province where outcrops are visible, the 
overburden of the bed rock never appears in situ (pebbles, erratic boulders), except 
between 67° and 70° East where only the Permian is represented; it is of the same 
type as that of the Transantarctic Chain.

There are two possible assumptions as regards the problem of the overburden 
under the ice cap:
- the assumption that the first and second groups described earlier cover 
the whole of the craton;
- the assumption that the first group is strictly limited to the active 
margin and that the overburden of the craton proper consists solely of 
deposits of the second group, i.e. the Beacon series.

In the light of current data on the tectonic evolution of the Antarctic, 
the second hypothesis would be most probable, and we thus think that (provided 
it has not been totally eroded during tectonic displacement) the overburden of 
the bed rock under the ice cap should be confined to Beacon series deposits, with 
the possible addition of certain deposits of the Upper Mesozoic and/or Cenozoic. 
Be that as it may, all we know at present, thanks to some geophysical profiles obtained 
in the Wilkes Basin (Plate I), is the thickness of this overburden, which appears 
to be some 3,000 m. On the edge of the basin, it appears to rest directly on 
granite. It will be recalled that the best-demarcated intracratonic basins under 
the ice cap are the Wilkes Basin and the Polar Basin (plate I), which together 
represent about 250,000 km².

SEA AREA (CONTINENTAL SHELF)

The pericratonic zone, submerged to an average depth of between 400 and 
500 m, constitutes the continental shelf and has a maximum width of 200 km. It 
lies between 30° West and 150° East, with an area of some 2 million km². Its 
morphology, fashioned in particular by the different eustatic phases and by the 
erosive action of the glaciers, appears to be very complicated; there is generally 
a succession of valleys and ridges. Although we are unaware of the nature or 
thickness of the sediments which cover the bed rock, it is nevertheless believed 
that a sedimentary overburden exists, that it should be locally thicker than on 
the craton, and that it should be formed of various deposits. Since the geological 
history of the Antarctic is closely linked to that of the other continents which 
sprang from the great land of Gondwana, it seems reasonable to suppose that the 
margin of the Antarctic craton with which we are concerned has evolved during 
both the pre-rift and post-rift periods in a similar manner to the southern margins 
of the cratons of Australia, India, Africa or South America. This being the case,

ew                                     -2-
the different sectors of the margin of the Antarctic craton facing these 
continents should have, in addition to the Beacon series (pre-rift) a sedimentary 
overburden (post-rift) varying in time;* according to sector Mesozoic to Recent.

This overburden would thus be relatively thick and (like that of the 
Gippsland Basin in Australia  or that existing in the different basins on the 
east coast of India and of South-East Africa, where shows have been observed) might 
contain hydrocarbons.

                                  WESTERN PROVINCE

LAND AREA

The sedimentary overburden of the bed rock, well known in Ellsworth Land 
and the Antarctic Peninsula, starts from Middle Cambrian with carbonates and 
continues from Upper Cambrian to Devonian with fine and coarse terrigenous 
deposits alternating with carbonates;  this series is about 10 km thick.  The 
Carboniferous - Permian period is marked by an essentially terrigenous, limnic 
sedimentation, between 1.5 and 13 km thick.  The Trias and Lower Jurassic are 
absent, but the Middle Jurassic - Upper Cretaceous period, although imperfectly 
known, is represented by a sedimentary series which begins with conglomerates 
(400 m), continues with a vulcano-sedimentary deposit (2 - 13 km) and ends with 
terrigenous deposits (1.5 km).  Knowledge of Tertiary sedimentation is very 
fragmentary; in those sectors where it is represented the deposits are essentially 
terrigenous and shallow (~ 150 m).

This huge overburden represents the sedimentation which occurred on the active 
margin of the highly subsident craton which, during geological times and according 
to the process of accretion, has migrated from the east to the west, widening 
considerably.  Between the Middle Cambrian and Lower Cenozoic it has been subjected 
to the successive action of four orogenic phases (Ross, Borchgrevink, Ellsworth 
and Andean) and during the Upper Cenozoic to intense vulcanism and to vertical and 
horizontal displacements. This overburden has thus been considerably deformed and 
locally affected by regional metamorphism, in particular between the Middle Cambrian 
and Lower Jurassic (Ross, Borchgrevink and Ellsworth phases).  The part of the 
overburden appertaining to the post-Lower Jurassic period is the least deformed, 
since the last (Andean) orogenic phase occurred mainly in the form of granitic 
intrusions.

*   The separation of Antarctica and Australia dates from the Eocene 
(~ 55- 45 10^(6) years); that of Antarctica and Africa, America, India and New 
Zealand from the Middle to Upper Cretaceous (~ 100 - 65  10^(6) years).

ew                                              -3-
Like the eastern province, the western province is almost entirely covered 
by ice, and most of the bed rock and its overburden are now below sea level.  The 
most important of its various basins is probably the Byrd Basin (~ 200,000 km2, 
plate I).  The sedimentary series is doubtless best preserved in these basins.

SEA AREA (continental shelf)

From the Ross to the Weddell Sea, the area of the continental shelf, which 
is as wide as that of the eastern province (up to 200 km) is probably some 
1.8 million km2.  The sector belonging to the Ross Sea (the whole of the Ross 
Sea corresponds in fact to the continental shelf) is geologically the best known 
as a result of geophysical work carried out for the establishment of JOIDES 
boreholes. Situated at an average depth of 500 m, its morphology is undulating and 
consists of a succession of major valleys and ridges which generally follow a 
N - S direction.  This particular morphology (which might be found in other sectors, 
particularly the Weddell Sea) is most certainly attributable in part to the erosive 
action of glaciers and/or floating ice platforms.

The sedimentary series is only partly known, and has been traversed to a 
distance of 400 m by JOIDES boreholes. It comprises fine terrigenous sediments 
of Eocene - Recent Age in which shows of gas (methane and ethane) have been 
encountered.  The oldest overburden is unknown, but may reasonably be assumed to 
be of the same type and at least the same thickness as that described on land, 
in those sectors at least where it has been preserved from erosion.

Generally speaking, the geological history of the continental shelf of the 
western province should be comparable to that of the shelves of the margins of 
South and South-East Africa and South-West America.  More exactly, the margin of 
the Bellingshausen Sea would probably be comparable to the Pacific margin of Chile 
(Valdivia area) where there is gas, and the margin of the Weddell Sea would probably 
be comparable to the southern margins of America and Africa where some deposits 
have been discovered.  The Ross Sea would probably be comparable to the southern 
margin of Australia (Tasmania, Gippsland Basin) and to the margin of New 
Zealand.

ew                                              -4-
