RCTIC TREATY
):SULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                             NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                            TRATADO ANTARTICO
(консультативное совещание)                                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Item 6 of the Agenda                                         ANT/IX/55
                                                             27th September, 1977
                                                             Original: Spanish

ITEM 6: THE LIVING MARINE RESOURCES OF THE ANTARCTIC
DECLARATION OF THE DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA

Following an initial discussion by the full meeting and as the Working 
Party begins to consider the important question of the living marine resources of 
the tarctic, the Argentina Delegation considers that it should make clear its 
views concerning both matters of substance and procedural issues relating to the 
later handling of this subject. In doing so, its intention is not merely to 
explain its attitude to the current status of the problem, but also to contribute 
to the greater effectiveness of the efforts being made within the framework provided 
by the Treaty to achieve a solution which will be jointly acceptable to the 
Consultative Parties.

1. The importance attaching to the conservation of the living resources of 
the sea, apart from whales and seals which are regulated by their own particular 
system, is beyond dispute, as is also the need to take really effective measures 
to achieve this conservation.

2. This matter has acquired even greater urgency than in the past as some 
countries which are Consultative Parties to the Treaty, and some which are not, 
have recently begun fishing operations in the area.

3. The Consultative Parties have a very clear policy line deriving from the 
interest shown in the conservation of living resources in general, and they have 
experience in the adoption of the measures needed to achieve this conservation, 
even if, at the present moment, the basic information necessary to the adoption 
of regulations is lacking in regard to some aspects of fishing.

4. There is, moreover, a present consensus among the representatives that 
the necessary steps must be taken on this occasion for the adoption in the near 
future of an agreement between the Consultative Parties relating to the living 
resources of the sea.

In examining this question, account needs to be taken of the following main
guidelines:

a) Full Implementation of the Antarctic Treaty

It is the view of my delegation that this issue cannot be stressed too much.
Despite the conscientious attitude of the Consultative Parties, when we approach
so many fundamental and procedural issues relating to the future standardization
of the rational use of the living resources of the sea, we must keep in the
forefront of our minds the spirit and provisions of the Treaty, so as to avoid
the adoption of measures which might end up by nullifying the effectiveness
of the instrument which regulates the activities currently in progress in
Antarctica. For instance, given the fact that the Treaty area is that lying
to the south of latitude 60o and that it is in the interests of conservation
and the Consultative Parties that the norms regulating the living resources
of the sea should cover a more extensive area, it is necessary to adopt an
ad hoc procedure for achieving both objectives.

b) There is no doubt whatsoever that the Consultative Parties must take
the initiative in regularizing the conservation and rational use of the living
marine resources of the Southern Oceans, where a legal vacuum exists at the moment.
They are in a better position than anybody else to do this, though they may act
in conjunction with other countries engaged in fishing in the area once they have
reached an understanding concerning the basic aspects of the agreement to be
adopted. It follows from what has been said that the Consultative Parties
must continue to play a serious, responsible and active role both in working
out the relevant rules and in securing their proper and effective future application.

c) At the same time, sight must never be lost of the objective which has
throughout been a fundamental concern of the Consultative Parties, that is to say
the conservation of living resources and the protection of the antarctic ecosystem
and of the other ecosystems dependent on it. This means, in other words, that
the conservation and protection referred to above must be foremost among the
co?cerm?[?][?]f the Consultative Parties, so as to ensure that the norms applied
do not merely serve to facilitate the continuous and worrying decrease in
numbers, if not the extinction, of species, as has most unfortunately been the
case with the whale. It is our belief, Mr. Chairman, that the alarm must be
sounded now, at the outset of our deliberations, so that carried forward by
the impetus towards arriving at an early agreement we do not fail to take due
account of the basic objective which, up till now, has always guided the efforts
of the Consultative Parties. It is certain that the best of agreements, the
- 3 -

agreement drafted with the greatest care, can be nullified in practice if the
Parties lack the firm will to adjust themselves to the implementation of its
aims and provisions.  But it is essential that the conservation issue, through
the rational use of resources, should be the criterion which governs and guides
the drafting of the rules.

d) It is understandable, and thoroughly justifiable, that countries like
Argentina, Chile, Australia and New Zealand, whose geographical situation is
closer to the coasts of Antarctica, have a profound interest in conserving the
living resources of the Southern Oceans.  It is not by chance, therefore, that
the four countries whose position on sovereignty is well-known wish to play a
full part in the efforts directed towards achieving this conservation.  It
is also clear that this interest must be taken into account in the agreement
to be drafted so as to assist in achieving its overall objective.

The point has already been made at this Consultative Meeting that the
necessary precautions should be taken to avoid a repetition of the extermination
of the seal in the nineteenth, and of the whale in the present century.  It
should be said that, in both cases, most of the hunting took place in the
South Atlantic sector, where the concentration of krill is the highest of any
of the Southern Oceans.  It is for this reason that Argentina has a fundamental
and profound interest in arriving at a really effective agreement on the rational
utilization of the living resources of the sea and is called upon to play an
active part in the relevant negotiations in due recognition of this interest
and its particular geographical location.  Additional factors are the closeness
of Argentina's Atlantic seaboard and its harbour facilities.  All the factors
mentioned can represent a valuable contribution by Argentina towards arriving
at an acceptable agreement.

But we are still at the first stage of our work on the adoption of measures
aimed at bringing about this result.  The debates which have taken place during
the plenary session of this Consultative Meeting, the documents presented by a
number of delegations, including our own, and the mandate given to the Working
Party confirm us in our opinion that progress should be made by stages along the
lines already initiated. In order that the task assigned to the Working Party
may be discharged with the maximum effectiveness, our delegation takes the
liberty of suggesting that, without prejudice to the debate which must take
place here, consideration should be given to the possibility of adopting two
recommendations:
- 4 -

One relating to the provisional measures to be adopted, to take effect 
immediately following approval by the Governments, as an operative recommendation.
With this in view, my delegation has presented document ANT/IX/34.

The other providing for the submission for consideration to the Governments 
of the Consultative Parties of the documents dealing with this subject presented 
to the Ninth Consultative Meeting and providing also for the convocation of an 
Extraordinary Consultative Meeting, which might be held towards the middle of 
the coming year, to deal with the drawing up of a draft agreement relating to 
the conservation of living marine resources, excluding whales and seals.      
On the foundation of a basic understanding between the Consultative Parties 
to be reached on that occasion a conference could then be called, to which 
would be invited those nations currently engaged in research and fishing in the 
Southern Oceans.

The continuation of the BIOMASS programme should be encouraged.  In order 
that the Consultative Parties should not merely maintain the initiative but 
should play an active role in the conservation of the living resources of the 
Southern Oceans, and without prejudice to collaboration with the FAO in the 
areas where this is necessary, the Argentine delegation is authorized to 
offer the present facilities at the disposal of the National Institute for the 
Research and Development of the Mar de la Plata Fishing Industry which cover 
both the staff and material resources, which could be increased as required, 
needed to gather and issue statistical data relating to marine harvesting and 
fishing of the living resources of the antarctic ocean, in a way similar to 
that practised by the Committee on Whaling Statistics.

With regard to the documents which have been presented containing concrete 
proposals for an agreement, my delegation wishes it to be known that it appreciates 
the effort made and will consider the documents in a constructive spirit, but 
that it must consider the debates held during the present Consultative Meeting 
to be of a preliminary character only, since these proposals have not yet been 
submitted to Governments for their official reaction.  It is understood that 
the views and suggestions referred to must be considered in this light.

London, 26th September, 1977
