ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
девятое консультативное совещание
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                  LONDON

Agenda Item 3                   ANT/IX/61
                                Date: 19 September 1977

OPENING STATEMENT BY MR J C BELTRAMINO
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF ARGENTINA
Mr Chairman,

May I first of all express the Argentine Delegation's 
satisfaction that the Ninth Antarctic Consultative Meeting should 
be taking place in a country having close and traditional ties 
with ours; and we trust that from it a final settlement will, 
as recommended by the United Nations, be reached to the sole 
outstanding issue between us.  At the same time we should like 
to welcome Poland, which is taking part in this Consultative 
Meeting for the first time, and to congratulate the Chairman on 
his election.

This further meeting brings us together at a time when there 
have been substantial developments in scientific co-operation 
and when the future deployment of economic activities presents a 
challenge to the ongoing efforts to arrive at mutually acceptable 
solutions within the provisions and principles of the Antarctic 
Treaty.  My country's Delegation, whose position on sovereignty 
in Antarctica - which I take this opportunity of reaffirming - is 
well-known, considers that when the complex task of preparing the 
rules which will have to govern such activities is put in hand, 
on the basis of the relevant studies and information meeting held 
on the matter, it is absolutely essential that the existing 
political realities in Antarctica, and the continuing interest 
taken and activities pursued by certain Consultative Parties prior 
to the International Geophysical Year, be accepted as a fact, 
while at the same time keeping the said rules compatible with 
legislation in the various countries concerned.  There is a right 
time for attempting such action, according to the nature of the 
subject at issue, and it would be unrealistic not to take this 
into account.  The search for the necessary understanding will not 
be easy, but we feel sure that the spirit of co-operation which has 
hitherto presided over implementation of the Antarctic Treaty 
will ultimately prevail.

The greater nearness of Argentina's lands in Antarctica and 
South America clearly accounts for our enduring interest in the 
conservation of the ecosystem and other dependent ecosystems, and 
the living resources of the whole area.  We therefore feel genuine 
concern over the growth of activities involving exploitation of marine 
/living
living resources as well as others which may have an impact on
these ecosystems and resources.  That effective conservation
measures, ie measures conducive to rational utilisation of such
resources, should be adopted seems to us to be glaringly obvious,
and, as in the past, it is the Consultative Parties who should
take the initiative in this respect.  We maintained at the time
that scientific research should continue to be boosted and
promoted so as to ensure the best results in terms of both pure
and applied science.  We note with satisfaction that over the
years co-operation among the Consultative Parties in this field
has proceeded without a hitch and in accordance with the provisions 
of the Antarctic Treaty and the Recommendations adopted.  We feel,
however, that the time has come to examine ways and means of ensuring
a better geographical distribution of scientific bases by promoting
the establishment of new ones so as to give a better and more
comprehensive coverage of Antarctica as a whole.

This Consultative Meeting is confronted by problems whose
difficulties and complexities cannot be ignored, besides others
probably more easily capable of solution.  We cherish the hope
that in every instance the Antarctic Treaty, by which we are all
united, will rise to the occasion, and that we shall be able to
contend with the political realities that face us in the
co-operative, sensible and intelligent spirit that has always
distinguished these Consultative Meetings.
