ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание               NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                            ANT/IX/23
                                                            19 September 1977
                                                            Original: Spanish

Provisional Agenda Item 5
COMMENTARIES ON DOCUMENT  ANT/IX/13
(Previously ANT/EPM/2)

Effects of Tourists and non-governmental expeditions in the Treaty Area
(Submitted by the Delegation of Chile)

1. The compilation made by the Delegation of the United Kingdom as a reply to the mandate of the Eight Consultati
Meeting in regard to the effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the area of the Treaty is
very useful.

2. The first section thereof, on the principles and objective of the Treaty, is not indispensable in this context and
would perhaps be more appropriate within the framework of a more general Declaration that could eventually be
debated when examining the subject of the Impact of Man.
It is worth noting that under the title "Principles and Objectives" regulations are included which are, in fact,
mechanisms for the compliance of said principles. On the other hand, the fundamental normative principle contained
in article IV has been ommited. And the principle of protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent
ecosystems, which stems from a dynamic development by the Consultative Parties of article IX of the Treaty is also
absent from the British draft. For these reasons, it is suggested that it be replaced by the text of the Antarctic
Treaty, which could be attached thereto as Annex n° 1.

3. Other observations intended to complete the work done by the UK:
- 2.2.2. The norm adjusts itself strictly to the approved Recommendations. Nevertheless, it should not be considered
that the list approved by the Seventh Consultative Meeting excludes the protection og other historical remains or
commemorative monuments that may be erected, and therefore the wording could be made mora comprehensive.
- 2.3.2. This could ne preceded by a reference to ???????
-2-

dation VIII-12 that requests Governments to continue in their 
efforts to prevent the dumping of nuclear waste material in 
the area of the Treaty.

    At the same time, the following additions could be sugges
ted:

    -Even though it deals with hypothetic cases, it would be 
worthwhile remembering that Recommendation VI-II urged the 
Governments to make efforts to prevent the access of tourists 
to whatever new islands may be formed by geological processes 
taking place in the Antarctic.

    -With reference to non-governmental expeditions it would 
be convienient for these to be informed of the traditional 
principle of mutual assistance in case of emergency in the 
Antarctic, which principle is reaffirmed by Recommendation I-

- It might also be convenient to inform them of the norms 
applicable to the use of non-occupied shelters, contained in 
Recommendation III-11.

4. The mandate of this Consultative Meeting also covers the 
preparation of Annex B that should include a list of those 
places which are considered to be of special tourist interest 
The document of the United Kingdom was not intended as a com-
pilation of this nature which would require previous prepara-
tion of National lists from the different Governments. Chile 
is carefully studying the places in which it could be recomme
ded to authorize or channel to flow of Antarctic tourism and 
has prepared its own tentative list:

    - Elephants Islands
    - Nelson Strait
    - Fildes Bay (Base Frei)
    - Bransfield Strait
-3-

- O'Higgins Base
- Luis Felipe and Danco Coast
- Orleans Strait
- Gerlache Strait
- Le Maire Channel
- Paradise Bay
- Bismarck Strait
- Smith, Snow and Low Islands
- Decepcion Island
- English Strait
