ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
девятое консультативное совещание
                                  Agenda Item 3

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
LONDON
19 September 1977

OPENING STATEMENT BY MR K G BRENNAN
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA
Thank you Mr Chairman

Might I first express my Delegation's pleasure at seeing 
you in the Chair and congratulate you on your election, and 
indeed congratulate the Meeting on the wisdom of its choice. 
We would be grateful also if you would convey our thanks and 
compliments to the Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office who was here to open our meeting.  Like our distinguished 
colleagues from Argentina, I would also like, on behalf of the 
Australian Delegation, to express pleasure at the presence here 
of Poland, which is participating in our discussions for the 
first time.

Now, Sir, this is one of the most important and historic 
of the consultative meetings in which we regularly participate. 
In addition to the normal agenda in which we review the scientific 
work that has been carried out to further the plans for scientific 
cooperation under the Treaty, we have of course issues of enormous 
importance affecting resources in the Antarctic, both living 
resources and mineral resources.

The Minister of State posed a question to us today; I hope 
it was a rhetorical question not asking for an answer.  He said: 
"Are we wiser than our forefathers"?  Well, there is an old saying 
that if we can see further than our forefathers it is because we 
are able to stand on their shoulders.  I think that we must all 
be very sure that we do stand on the shoulders of our forefathers 
and that we do profit from the experience of others in moulding 
the future.

It is common ground amongst us that the Treaty partners have 
a serious obligation to ensure that the delicate ecological balance 
in this unique part of the world is not damaged by the unwise 
activities of men, particularly in the exploitation of the 
resources whether those resources be living resources or 
mineral resources.  One of our most urgent tasks in the next few 
days will be to further the activities which have already begun 
to lay down careful principles by which we will all be guided and 
which will ensure that the delicate ecology of that area is not 
adversely affected by what we do.  It is to be hoped that decisive 
steps will be taken at the present meeting for the development of 
a Convention in regard to the conservation of the living resources

/of
of the Antarctic Area.  Certainly the Australian delegation is
looking forward to very active participation in discussion with
colleagues on this question.

    So far as the mineral resources are concerned, it would
be my delegation's hope that, there again, energy will activate
our discussions and that we will push forward in the development
of agreed principles to govern the exploitation.  Perhaps I might
here mention that my own Delegation will be urging very strongly
that the parties here should agree to a moratorium on the exploit-
ation of the non-living resources of Antarctica until the various
environmental and other studies which we have under way have been
completed.

    The Minister of State referred to the differing positions
that the participants in this meeting have on the question of
sovereignty in regard to the resources of the Antarctic.  Of course
it is well known that my own country adheres very strongly to a
position of sovereignty over the Australian Antarctic Territory and
could not accept any arrangements which did not respect our position
there.  This of course will not inhibit Australia from the very
active pursuit, to which our Argentine colleague referred, of an
acceptable solution.  And in the same way that we faced this issue
when the Antarctic Treaty was drawn up, and found a resolution
of the difficulties, my own Delegation has every confidence that
we will again succeed in this task.

    Thank you very much Mr Chairman.
