ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING    NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         TRATADO ANTARTICO
девятое консультативное совещание      NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                               LONDON
Agenda Item 3                  ANT/IX/72
                               Date: 19 September 1977


OPENING STATEMENT BY PROFESSOR O N KHLESTOV
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE USSR
Mr Chairman

Permit me to congratulate you on your election to your high office. As we are aware of the breadth of your experience and knowledge, we are convinced that your election will guarantee the successful outcome of the whole Meeting. On behalf of our entire Delegation I should also like to congratulate your colleagues of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office on their election to posts of responsibility connected with the Meeting.

I also wish to express the deep satisfaction of the Soviet Delegation at the presence in our midst of the Delegation of the Polish People's Republic headed by Ambassador Starewicz of the PPR. Poland has made a substantial contribution to scientific research in the Antarctic and we are convinced that it will play a significant role in the work of our Meeting and will contribute to the formulation of constructive resolutions.

The development of international relations confirms beyond argument that the solution of complex international problems can be arrived at only by agreement between the interested countries.

A clear example of this is provided by the Antarctic Treaty which guarantees that this region will be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and ensures both the freedom of scientific research and a wide measure of international collaboration between the countries which have signed the Treaty in the investigation and opening up of the Antarctic.

It is agreeable to note that in the Antarctic - that coldest region of our planet - the relationships formed between scientists of different nationalities have invariably been warm. The wide-spread exchange of the results of investigations and observations, the close contact between expeditions, the help and mutual assistance unselfishly given in overcoming difficulties - all these are characteristic of the spirit of cooperation which has become established in the Antarctic since the signing of the Treaty in 1959.

/During
During the time which has elapsed since the Antarctic Treaty 
came into force, the Consultative Meetings have done much to ensure 
the implementation of the aims and principles of the Treaty.  The 
entire work of the Meeting bears witness to the fact that the 
measures devised by the members, covering a whole range of 
activities in the Antarctic, contribute both to the more profound 
study of the region and to the conservation of its environment in 
the interests not only of those countries participating in the 
Consultative Meetings but of all the nations of the world and the 
whole of mankind. Among the important recommendations adopted by 
the Consultative Meetings we may mention the agreed measures for 
the conservation of antarctic fauna and flora, those relating to 
the effects of man on the antarctic environment, the consequences 
of tourism and unofficial expeditions and others.

It is clear that scientific investigations in the Antarctic 
are indispensable and important to the study of many natural 
phenomena occurring over the whole earth.  For instance, Antarctica's 
mighty ice-cap represents an enormous source of cold which exerts 
a powerful influence on climatic conditions and on the general 
circulation of the atmosphere.  Antarctica - that enormous area 
of our planet - has still not revealed many of her secrets.

Once these have been understood, man will gain a better 
insight into many phenomena occurring in other parts of the 
world.  The investigation of Antarctica, which requires colossal 
effort and the application of substantial material resources, thus 
acquires the character of a noble mission bringing benefits to 
all the peoples of the earth.

During recent years considerable attention has begun to be 
given to questions of the possible exploitation of the living and 
mineral resources of Antarctica.  However, before adopting any 
resolutions whatsoever relating to the possibility of establishing 
in the Antarctic an industry based on the exploitation of its 
mineral resources, it is essential to weigh carefully all the 
possible consequences of this for the antarctic continent and the 
surrounding regions.  In the whole world there is no territory 
more sensitive and vulnerable than Antarctica in its natural 
conditions and ecological balance.  Let us make every effort to 

/ensure
ensure that man's activity in the Antarctic does not lead to a 
violation of the natural balance of this particular landmass 
and, perhaps, of the entire planet.

The Soviet Delegation hopes that the Ninth Consultative 
Meeting will successfully deal with the tasks confronting it 
and that the resolutions adopted by it will promote the 
development of peaceful international cooperation in the area 
on the basis of the principles and aims of the 1959 Antarctic 
Treaty.

For its part, the Soviet Delegation will make every effort 
to contribute to the success of the Meeting.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
