ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                            NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
                                                         
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                       NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                         
                                                          LONDON
Provisional Agenda Item 6                                
                                                          ANT/IX/9
                                                          Date: 14 September 1977
                                                          Previously: ANT/EPM2/7
                                                          Date: 26 July 1977
                                                          Original: English

ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES
(Informal Paper Submitted by the U.S. Delegation)
DRAFT ELEMENTS OF A CONSERVATION ARRANGEMENT

Species Covered

1.      The conservation arrangement would apply to 
all Antarctic marine living resources, except for 
species already subject to international efforts at 
regulation (whales and seals).

Purposes

2.      The purpose of the conservation arrangement 
would be to ensure that harvesting of Antarctic marine 
living resources takes place in accordance with sound 
conservation principles and practices, specifically:

     a. to prevent overexploitation of any Antarctic 
        marine living resources;

     b. to ensure that harvesting of specific 
        target species does not adversely affect the 
        health of dependent or related species 
        (including whales and seals);

     c. to ensure that harvesting of target species
/is
is conducted in accordance with maintenance 
of the integrity of the Antarctic marine 
ecosystem as a whole.

 Functions

3.      In order to accomplish its purposes, the 
conservation arrangement would have to provide for:

a. Acquisition of basic scientific data on 
the nature, interrelationships and dynamics 
of the Antarctic marine ecosystem;

b. Acquisition of quantitative data on the 
standing stocks of Antarctic marine living 
resources and detailed data on the levels 
of any harvesting of such stocks;

c. Assessment of the status of the stocks 
of Antarctic marine living resources;

d. Identification of stocks to which 
conservation measures should be applied;

e. Development and implementation of specific 
conservation measures to achieve the purposes 
of the arrangement.

Mechanism

4.      The functions of the conservation arrangement 
would be of a regular and continuing nature.  Their 
performance would require an organization which would 
/provide
provide for periodic meetings of the parties to 
the conservation arrangement to consider and develop 
conservation measures. The organization would need to 
include standing bodies:

a. to collect; collate and distribute necessary 
basic scientific data (in cooperation with SCAR);
b. to collect, collate and distribute quantitative 
data on standing stocks and catch data (in cooperation 
with FAO)

c. to assess and review the status of stocks 
of Antarctic marine living resources (in cooperation 
with SCAR and FAO);

d. to prepare for the periodic meetings of the 
parties to the conservation arrangement;

e. to monitor the effectiveness of conservation 
measures;

f. to coordinate the activities of the conservation 
arrangement with the activities of the International 
Whaling Commission and with activities pursuant to 
the Convention for the conservation of Antarctic 
seals (once in force).
