ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                               NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                     
девятое консультативное совещание         TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                               NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                               ANT/IX/34
Provisional Agenda Item 6                  19 September 1977
(Submitted by the Delegation of           Original: Spanish
Argentina)                                 
                                           
Draft provisional guide for voluntary control of the
use of marine living resources.

The Representatives,

Recognizing that the living resources of the sea in the area of the
Antarctic Treaty have a potential value which may require the
future adoption of effective measures for their control and
preservation,

Recognizing that the conservation of such resources and of other living
resources in this area has been the constant concern of the consultative
parties to the Antarctic Treaty, on the basis of the provisions of
Article IX, para. 1, sub-para F,

Recognizing therefore the need to ensure that such resources are not
reduced and exhausted by excessive exploitation, and that fishing for
all or any individual species must be kept below the level of maximum
sustainable yield,

Bearing in mind that agreements currently exist on whaling and the
conservation of Antarctic Seals, but that the use of other marine
resources is not controlled,

Bearing in mind that studies on the biology, distribution, biomass,
population dynamics and ecology of the living resources of the
Antarctic Ocean are in progress,

Bearing in mind the need to compile more information and increase the
depth of these studies,

Bearing in mind that certain countries have already begun to fish for
certain species, particularly krill, within and outside the area of
the Antarctic Treaty,

Wishing to promote and to fulfil the aims of scientific study, protection,
conversation and rational use of the living resources of the sea,

The Representatives recommend that their Governments voluntarily take account
of the following provisional guide for the use of the living resources of
the sea in the area of the Antarctic Treaty, whilst reaffirming Article
IV of that Treaty:

1. The consultative parties will co-operate as broadly and comprehensively
as possible in the exchange of information, carrying out of studies and
scientific programmes relating to the living resources of the sea.
2. The consultative parties will provide reciprocal information on the quality, quantity and other characteristics of any species they extract from such areas, and on any phenomenon or factor which may make it possible to determine established or foreseeable variations by reason of such extraction, in particularly any which suggest a reduction in numbers or extinction of the species concerned or an impact on the ecological balance.

3. Each consultative party shall voluntarily restrict his activity so that it does not affect the maintenance of maximum sustainable yield.

4. The consultative parties will exchange information on all measures they may adopt in furtherance of this provisional guide.

5. The consultative parties will keep the matter permanently under review, on the basis of the information and data received, and will consult through diplomatic channels and at consultative meetings, advised by such experts as they deem necessary, in order to adopt such recommendations as they consider appropriate.

The Representatives recommend that their Governments urge those Governments which are not parties to the Antarctic Treaty and which engage in activities involving the use of living resources of the Antarctic Ocean likewise to take account on a voluntary basis of the provisions of this provisional Guide.
