ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING     NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ    NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                  LONDON
Provisional Agenda Item 6

ANT/IX/8
Date: 14 September 1977
Previously: ANT/EPM/6
Date: 15 March 1977
Original: English

ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

(Informal outline of questions submitted by the US Delegation)

There are clear indications that large-scale
harvesting of Antarctic marine living resources, par-
ticularly krill, may be initiated in the near future.
This prospect raises the question of how to ensure that
such activity takes place in accordance with sound
management and conservation practices.

There are many information gaps in our knowledge of
Antarctic marine living resources, and their inter-
relationships. It is known, however, that the Antarctic
marine environment is characterized by simple food
chains, making it one of those systems which can be quickly
affected by large-scale harvesting. Thus early considera-
tion is required of the need to provide for effective con-
servation measures to be applied to any large-scale exploi-
tation of Antarctic marine living resources.

This paper proceeds on the assumption that the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties should take the
initiative to develop means for ensuring that harvesting
of marine living resources is conducted in accordance with
the special character of the Antarctic environment and
sound conservation and management practices. The paper
outlines the questions which would have to be answered in
developing an international regime to accom? ish these
objectives. The outline of questions is not intended to
be exhaustive, but to establish an initial basis for discus-
sion and mutual examination of the principles involved.

1. What geographic area should be covered by a
conservation regime?

    (a) Should it apply only to marine areas south
60° South latitude?

    (b) Should it apply to marine areas north of
60° South latitude, as well as marine areas south of
60° South latitude, in order to cover the full range of
certain Antarctic marine living resources?
-2-

2. What living resources should be covered by a 
conservation regime?

    (a) Should a conservation regime apply to identi-
fied target species only?

    (b) Should a conservation regime apply to identi-
fied target species plus dependent or otherwise related
species?

    (c) Should a conservation regime apply to the
Antarctic marine ecosystem as a whole?

    (d) What would be the relationship of a conser-
vation regime to other international arrangements applying
to living resources in Antarctic waters -for instance,
the International Whaling Commission or the Convention for
the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, when in force?

3. Who should take part in the creation of a
conservation regime?

    (a) Should a regime be developed by the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties only?

    (b) Should a regime be developed by Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties plus other states with harvest-
ing interests?

    (c) Should a regime be developed by the inter-
national community at large?
-3-

4. What form should a conservation regime take?

Any conservation regime involves three functions:
first, the collection, analysis and monitoring of data,
including catch data, on the living resources and their
environment; second, determination of the conservation
goals to be achieved; and third, the development of effec-
tive conservation measures to achieve those goals. There
are a number of forms in which these functions could be
performed.

    (a) Should a conservation regime be initially
limited to collection, analysis and monitoring of data
with a general commitment to conserve living resources and
to develop international conservation measures and goals at
an appropriate time?

    (b) Should a conservation regime include provi-
sions on the collection, analysis and monitoring of data
and on conservation goals coupled with a specific procedure
to develop international conservation measures once certain
objective criteria have been met?

    (c) Should a conservation regime include provi-
sions on the collection, analysi: and monitoring of data,
and on conservation goals coupled with provisions on
international conservation measures which would become
effective upon fulfillment of certain criteria?
-4-

(d) Shou'd a conservation regime include, from
the start, provisions on bot: collection, analysis and
moni.toring of data and on specific conservation goals and
internat:ional conscr:ation measures?

5. What institutional arrangemonts are necessa?y
in a conservation regime?

(a) Is coordination of action by the st tes
participating in a conservation regime sufficient insti-
tutional basis for the regime?

(b) Should there be a standing body to perform
the information functions associated with a regime?

(c) Should there be a standing body not only to
perform international functions but to initiate conserva-
tion goals and measures, or to revise existing ones?

(d) If a standing body is required, should it
be established upon creation of a conservation regime or
at some later point?

6. Who may participate in a conservation regime?

(a) Should eligibility to participate in a
regime be limited to a specific group of states?

(b) How can observance of conservation measures
by all states engaged in harvesting be ensured?

(c) Who should participate in any institutional
body created pursuant to a conservation regime?
-5-

(d) How should decisions      be made in any such 
institutional bodies?

7. What kinds of conservation measures would 
be appropriate?

At some point, the specific conservation measures 
needed for an international conservation regime should be 
discussed. Such conservation measures could include closed 
areas and closed seasons, gear regulations, effort limitations 
and allocations.

8. How should conservation measures be enforced?
        (a) What kind of enforcement techniques should 
be applied to ensure compliance with conservation measures?

        (b) Who should be empowered to take enforcement 
measures?

        (c) Should a conservation regime address the 
question of penalties for non-compliance with conservation 
measures?

        (d) What sort of dispute settlement procedures, 
if any, should be established?
