ANTARCTIC TREATY                
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
девятое консультативное совещание                
                                  LONDON                 
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA                
                                  ANT/IX/ 37
                                  Date: 22 September 1977
                                  Original: Russian

Agenda Item 6

(Paper submitted by the Delegation 
of the Soviet Union)

MAIN OUTLINES
OF THE STRUCTURE OF AN INTERNATIONAL AGENCY
CONCERNED WITH THE BALANCED USE OF ANTARCTIC
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

The Contracting Parties,

Recognizing that there are in Antarctica marine living
organisms whose effective conservation stands in need of
international statutory control;

Being aware of the lack of information concerning Antarctic
marine living resources and of the necessity of establishing a
firm scientific basis for appropriate measures of conservation
of these resources;

Recalling Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty;

In an endeavour to establish cooperation for the conservation
and balanced use of Antarctic marine living resources;

Have agreed the following:

I. Measures for the conservation and balanced use of
Antarctic marine living resources.

II. The area in which the measures for the conservation and
balanced use of Antarctic marine living resources shall operate.

III. The living species covered by the measures for the
conservation and balanced use of Antarctic marine living resources.

IV. The establishment under the Antarctic Treaty of an agency
for achieving the conservation and balanced use of Antarctic
marine living resources.
Initially the members of this Agency shall be the participants 
of the Consultative Meetings and all other states parties to 
the Treaty interested in harvesting the seas in this area.

V. Structure of the Agency.
      - Commission - all members of the Agency
      - Scientific Council - all members of the Agency
      - Secretariat

VI. Functions of the Commission.

1. To further the study of Antarctic marine living resources.

2. To examine data submitted by the Scientific Council 
concerned with the status of stocks of the different species of 
Antarctic marine living resources.

3. To accept, on the basis of data submitted by the Scientific 
Council and of its own data, recommendations for measures 
necessary to maintain and reinstate the populations of harvested 
species.

4. To make, on the basis of data submitted by the Scientific 
Council and of its own data, recommendations for maximum 
admissible levels for the harvesting of each species of Antarctic 
marine living resources, having due regard to the relevant 
ecological factors.

5. The Commission may draw the attention of any non-member 
government to any matter concerned with the fishing effort of its 
nationals and vessels in areas governed by Article II above.

6. The Commission shall prepare and adopt the yearly budget 
of the Agency. It shall determine the procedure for payment 
of budgetary contributions and approve the annual budget for each 
of the agency's activities. The agency's finances shall be 
subject to annual audit by external auditors, nominated by the 
Commission.

VII. The Commission shall hold regular sessions at its 
headquarters, which shall be located at ............
VIII. The Commission shall adopt recommendations by a two-thirds majority, including dual votes of contracting Parties representatives at Consultative meetings under the Antarctic Treaty.

IX. On recommendations by the Commission, total harvesting quotas for each species shall be allocated to contracting Parties of the Agency harvesting a definite species of marine living resources or about to commence such harvesting.

The distribution of harvesting quotas for each species, shall take into account the harvesting level reached in previous years by the State interested in a particular species, together with the State's contribution to scientific research on Antarctic marine living resources and the interests of countries bearing the costs of providing sundry services in connection with such research, and the conservation and balanced use of marine living resources in a specified area.

X. Functions of the Scientific Council

1. It shall collect, summarize and analyze information about Antarctic marine living resources, and distribute  it among the Contracting Parties to the Agency.

2. It shall recommend scientific research programmes and lists of desirable statistical and biological data to be collected on Antarctic marine living resources, and shall coordinate the activities of the Contracting Parties to the Agency in connection with such programmes.

3. It shall cooperate with SCAR in the collection and evaluatio of information on Antarctic marine living resources and the development of scientific research programmes, and shall, where appropriate, seek the technical advice of other competent organisations (United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, UNESCO, etc.)
4. It shall submit to the Commission data on the status 
of stocks of the different species of Antarctic marine 
living resources.

5. It shall, on the basis of the available data, notify 
the Commission of any cases  in which the harvesting of a 
species has reached a level at which its reproduction may 
be seriously at risk.

XI. Each member of the Agency shall appoint its own 
representatives to the Scientific Council.

XII. Secretariat

1. The Secretariat shall consist of a secretary and such 
staff members as the Agency may require. The Secretary shall 
be appointed by the Commission. He shall be the Agency's 
chief executive officer.

2. The Secretariat shall supply the Commission and the 
Agency with services for the exercise of their functions. 
The Secretary shall submit an annual report on the Agency's 
activities.

XIII  Any government not a party to the Antarctic Treaty, 
but conducting fishing operations in the area subject to  the 
Agency's activity, may become a member of the Agency.
