ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                  ANT/IX/30
                                                  Date: 21 September 1977
                                                  Original: Spanish

LONDON

Item 6 of the Agenda

ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

Paper submitted by the Chilean Delegation

1. The Eighth Consultative Meeting approved Resolution VIII-10
on this topic, which recognized the need to promote and
achieve within the scope of the Antarctic Treaty the goals
of protection, scientific study and rational use of Antarctic
marine living resources.

To this end a study was assigned to SCAR, which has been
distributed at this meeting as a working paper in the frame-
work of the BIOMASS programme.

It was also agreed to place the topic on the agenda of the
Ninth Consultative Meeting.

2. This meeting accordingly has a remit to prepare recommendations
under the Treaty concerning the conservation and rational use
of Antarctic marine living resources, arising from the SCAR
study.

At the Preparatory Meeting in March three papers on the subject
were tabled by the United Kingdom, Australian and United States
Delegations, and are distributed now as documents ANT/IX/6, 7
and 8.

These cover the range of possible options for preparation of a
system applicable to Antarctic marine resources.

3. The options state the alternatives for developing a system
covering all or part of Antarctic marine resources; applicable
only to the Treaty area or also extending beyond its boundaries;
relating to the conservation of species or also their rational
use;  in the form of an extension to the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (Recommendation III-VIII), or of a Convention, confined in such case to the Consultative Parties only or open to accession by other States.

4.  The magnitude of the task and complexity of the problems to be resolved would commend a stepwise approach.
The Consensus of all the papers presented, the SCAR study and the points made in the debates by the Special Preparatory Meeting of March and the current Consultative Meeting, accordingly appears to be the urgent necessity of adopting or recommending conservation measures.

There also seems to have been agreement on the obvious advisability of a concrete result being reached at this meeting, having regard to certain activities actually proceeding in the area, and to international pressure.

5.  The Consultative Parties have repeatedly asserted their jurisdiction over ecological matters throughout the Treaty area, as recognised indeed by international bodies, prominent among these being FAO (FAO Conference of November 1975).

It should be remembered in this respect that Article 9 of the Treaty requires the Consultative Parties to prepare measures regarding the preservation and conservation of living resources in Antarctica; that the "Agreed Measures" designate the Treaty area as a Specially Protected Area;  that Resolution VIII-10 clearly lays on the Consultative Parties responsibility for preparing specific measures regarding marine resources;  and that the very character of the Treaty and its implementing arrangements have a very direct bearing on establishing the continent of Antarctica as an ecological reserve for the benefit of all mankind.

6.  Whilst there is agreement on the urgent need to arrive at tangible results at this meeting concerning marine living resources;  whilst there also appears to be agreement on the priority to be given to conservation regulations and the Treaty and its implementing arrangements determine the necessary
instruments to be adopted or conservation measures to be 
recommended; and whilst finally, studies and precedents 
are relied upon as if for adopting a recommendation, 
everything would counsel at this stage pressing ahead with 
the preparation of conservation measures within the scope 
of the Treaty.

7.  The ideal form for such measures would be an extension of 
or supplement to, the Agreed Measures for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, which would be quite feasible 
in the light of the precedents referred to at paragraph 5 of 
this memorandum, and hence under the responsibility assumed 
by the Consultative Parties at Oslo in 1975 and the terms of 
reference consequently given at this Ninth Consultative 
Meeting.

8.  At a second stage the Consultative Parties would have to 
scrutinize all the options and problems set forth in the 
papers tabled and reference documents in respect of a system 
governing Antarctic living resources.

A special consultative meeting should therefore be convened 
for the purpose with the sole remit of studying Antarctic 
marine living resources.  Such a meeting should be held in 
mid-1978.
