ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                              TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTATIVA

                        LONDON

Agenda Item 3                                      ANT/IX/60
                                                   Date: 19 September 1977

Opening Speech by Mr Ted Rowlands M.P.
Minister of State
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen

Just over 200 years ago Captain Cook confidently
forecast that the Antarctic was useless to man.  But twice
since then man has over-exploited Antarctic waters and
virtually wiped out first the population of fur seals and then
the stocks of Antarctic baleen whales.  Are those sad
stories to be repeated or can we be wiser than our
forefathers?

The gigantic Antarctic ice mass has been a regulating
feature of the world's weather for some 10 to 15 million
years longer than man has been on this planet. Is it
possible that what man may do over the next century or
two will unbalance this climatic regulator?  Or is the
Antarctic so vast as to be virtually untouchable by man's
activities?

- 1 -
.../....
The two questions I have posed - those of resources 
and environment - come together in this conference.  We 
are meeting here under the aegis of the Antarctic Treaty.

That Treaty was framed eighteen years ago to enable the 
scientists of the signatory nations to pool their knowledge 
and resources to deal with scientific problems which none 
had the capacity to tackle in isolation.

The results of the scientific co-operation achieved 
within the Treaty have quietly revolutionized the way 
scientists all over the world look at, and think about, 
the planet we live on.  These achievements are now taken 
for granted but they were only made possible by a politi-
cally far-sighted act that replaced discord with 
co-operation.

We now know that the Antarctic influences the whole 
world through the atmosphere and the oceans.  The Antarctic 
is not a place the world can afford to neglect or to 
abuse - neglect its resources or abuse its environment.
- 2 -
.../...
There is now a world wide revolt against the misuse of the
environment: a revolt not only in the industrialized
nations but also in the vast new urban complexes of the
developing world and in the rural areas faced with the
tragic results of unwise agricultural exploitation. All
over the world peoples and nations are being forced to
recognise that they must limit what they do to their
environment. Where these limits have been exceeded the
environment has changed, sometimes irreversibly, posing
enormous problems for the communities involved - problems
such as:

    desertification;
    destruction of rain forests;
    wastage of water; and
    over exploitation of fish resources.

Are we really going to allow problems like this to arise
in the Antarctic?

The Antarctic is at present a virgin continent - and
this virginity is one of its most valuable assets. This
- 3 -    .../...
is a laboratory in which, because of its purity, we can 
monitor all the effects of man on the world in which he 
lives. Exploitation of resources will inevitably have its 
effects on the Antarctic and the sure lesson from our mis-
takes in the rest of the world is that these effects will 
be harmful unless they are foreseen and guarded against.

I do not mean to imply that Antarctic resources should 
not be exploited - the world need for them is probably too 
great for such an argument to be tenable. What I do mean 
is this. In 1959 the challenges then posed by the need to 
know more about the Antarctic induced a farsighted response -
the Antarctic Treaty - from which all of us here, as well as 
the world community, have benefitted enormously. The 
resources of the Antarctic present us with new challenges, 
calling for equally farsighted and courageous responses.

The idea that we should devote so much attention and importance 
to the Antarctic may seem almost anciful. Not to us perhaps -
not to the scientists and politicians deeply concerned with

- 4 -    .../...
```
the issues - but to the general public. It is up to us to get 
the message across. We must seek to show to our peoples the 
relevance of the Antarctic to their daily lives. If this is 
not done it may not in the end be possible for governments, 
however enlightened, to carry out policies based on wider, 
longer term considerations. We must alert our peoples to the 
real issues if we are to carry them with us 

Elsewhere in the world we usually find ourselves trying 
to catch up with the consequences of our past mistakes. In 
the Antarctic the case is different. We have the opportunity, 
the obligation, and much of the knowledge we need to foresee 
the results of exploitation and to regulate them in such a 
way as to keep to the minimum the harmful effect such exploita-
tion will have. And above all, we have a chance to do this 
while the problems are still ours to solve.

But on what basis can exploitation of resources be 
regulated? Some delegations here start from the position that

- 5 - 
.../..
regulation should be based on clains to territorial

sovereignty and jurisdiction over continental shelves and

fish zones. Other delegations start from the position that

they do not recognise such claims.

We need to recognise:

    Firstly, that there is a measure of justification

        for both these positions;

    secondly, that neither position is likely to provide

        the sole basis for an agreement;

    and

    thirdly, that without an agreement the Antarctic

        environment may be despoiled and Antarctic

        resources decimated once again.

Here is a challenge that requires the courageous responses

of which I spoke before.

- 6 - 
.../..
If we do not face up to this challenge a vacuum will 
be created and that vacuum would be filled, if not by us 
then by others. The countries represented in this hall are 
pre-eminent amongst the family of nations in the knowledge 
that they have acquired of the Antarctic by long years of 
effort. That knowledge gives all of us here the responsibility 
to reach decisions about the future of Antarctica and the 
opportunity to ensure that such decisions are wiser than 
those which could be reached by others. But that opportunity 
will last only so long as the responsibility is clearly being 
accepted. Whether we like it or not, one of the tests of the 
obligation imposed on us by our possession of knowledge is 
whether the decisions we reach are acceptable to the wider 
world community. The test of that acceptability will largely 
depend on the clarity with which we are seen, as we were in 
1959,to be serving the long term interests of the Antarctic 
and the world community rather than short term illusions of 
national advantage. The world will not give us long to see 
if we can pass these tests. If we fail them, the obligation

- 7 -        .../....
to come up with answers to Antarctic problems will inevitably
devolve on the wider community where the knowledge which we
possess about the Antarctic could be dangerously diluted or
even swamped.

The British Government is confident that we can pass these
tests and meet these challenges, instead of leaving behind a
moribund Treaty as a monument to what might have been.  We can
construct new models of agreement on the firm basis of all that
we have so far achieved.

Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, it gives me
great pleasure to declare open this, the Ninth in the series
of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.

- 8 -
