ANTARCTIC TREATY              
N.NTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                 NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
девятое консультативное совещание     TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                 NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                       LONDON
                                       ANT/IX/76
                                       Date : 3rd October,1977
                                       Original : French.

Item 7 of the Agenda.

DRAFT REPORT OF THE WORKING PARTY ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS
(drafted by the Chairman of the Working Party)

1.      In accordance with the mandate conferred upon it by the
Ninth Consultative Meeting ( document ANT/IX/11, Revision 1)
a Working Party met on 30th September, 1977, to consider the
measures which should be taken in regard to telecommunications.
Two meetings were held under the chairmanship of M.S. Hessel
( France) during which views were exchanged on the basis of
information documents and proposals put forward by the Delegations
of the United Kingdom ( ANT/IX/INF. 16 and INF. 17), Argentina
( ANT/IX/36 and 36 Appendices A to F) and the USSR ( ANT/IX/12
and 12 Appendix 1).

2.      In the course of the discussion it became clear that the
present and foreseeable development in the requirements of both
countries and international organizations, chiefly in regard to
meteorological information but also for the rapid and regular
transmission of scientific, administrative and operational data,
called for a thorough up-dating of the operation, working methods
and equipment of the telecommunications network serving the
Antarctic . It was also apparent that the data supplied to the
Ninth Consultative Meeting were not sufficiently complete to
enable this up-dating to be carried out.

3.      The Working Party discussed the most efficient means of
speeding up the modernisation of the network, of improving the
speed and value of the information transmitted and of arranging
for the study of those scientific and technical developments in
telecommunications which apply to the Antarctic.

4.      The Working Party noted with gratitude the offer of the
United States delegation to collate the assembled data and
- 2 -

prepare a draft plan which it would make available to the other 
Consultative Parties.

5. On completion of its deliberations, the Working Group submits 
the following draft recommendation to the IXth Consultative Meeting:

Improvement of telecommunications in the Antarctic,

The Representatives,

Considering that requirements in the field of telecommunications 
as regards collection and dissemination of meteorological, scienti-
fic, administrative and operational data have developed substantially 
since the second telecommunications meeting of experts of the 
Consultative Parties held in Buenos Aires in 1969;

Considering that the implementation of Recommendation VI.26 and 
VII.7, and participation in the programmes of the World Meteorolo -
gical Organisation, particularly the World Weather Watch, require a 
thorough updating and possible modernisation of the network operating 
in the Antarctic;

Recommend that their Governments :

1. Compile comprehensive data, each for its own part, on the 
composition, characteristics, timing, frequencies, and current 
equipment of their telecommunications programmes in the Antarctic, 
as well as on projects in the process of implementation and 
proposed improvements, in particular by designating, where appropriate 
stations capable of replacing others in the event of breakdown.

2. Forward all such data to each of the other Consultative 
Parties by the quickest means, via diplomatic channels on the one 
hand and on the other by direct despatch to the addresses of the 
departments concerned as listed in the Appendix.

3. Arrange for a short meeting of telecommunications experts to 
be held, on the initiative of the Government of the host country, 
before the Tenth Consultative Meeting, to analyse the data thus 
compiled, suggest desirable measures of harmonisation and put forward 
recommendations on improvements to be made in the operation of the 
telecommunications network in the Antarctic;
- 3 -

4.  Request the SCAR group of specialists to undertake, at the 
earliest opportunity, a study of the most recent applications of 
science and technology to the specific problems of the Antarctic 
in the field of propagation of radio waves, and to pass on its 
conclusions to the Consultative Parties with a view to their 
Tenth Meeting.
- 4 -

APPENDIX 1

Addresses of departments to whom the information referred to in 
paragraph 1 of the Recommendation is to be sent direct :

ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
CHILE
FRANCE
JAPAN
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
POLAND
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
U.S.S.R.
