ANTARCTIC TREATY           
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

TRATADO ANTARTICO           
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA           

Provisional Agenda Item 10           
(Submitted by the Delegation of Argentina)           

ANT/IX/36           
19 September 1977           
Original: Spanish           

ITEM 10. Improved methods for the collection and distribution of           
meteorological data           

Information provided by the Argentine Delegation           

1. In furtherance of proposal 2 in the final report on the second           
Antarctic Treaty Telecommunications Meeting held in Buenos Aires in           
1969 and of Recommendation VI-I, the Argentine Republic undertook to           
operate a station for the collection, relaying and processing of           
Antarctic meteorological data, which responsibility devolved upon the           
Orcadas Station.           

2. This station compiled and broadcast meteorological data from all           
Argentine stations, on the basis of a programme drawn up in accordance           
with Annexes I and III to Proposal 2 made at the Telecommunications           
Meeting.           

3. Subsequently, in view of the creation of the Vicecomodoro Marambio           
Air Base in 1969, and its increasing importance in the following years,           
it was decided that the functions assigned to Orcadas should be trans-           
ferred to Marambio on the basis of a programme which would be under-           
taken progressively, alongside the former, until the installations           
scheduled for Marambio were completed.           

4. The Meteorological Satellite Receiving Station (APT) was thus in-           
stalled at Marambio, and the forecasting office was then transferred           
from Orcadas to Marambio, where both are now operating. At the same time           
work was begun on the installation of the necessary radio equipment and           
infrastructure to provide for the transmission of all the meteorological           
information which is compiled and processed at the Marambio Station.           

5. Finally, in August 1975, when a fire at the Orcadas Base destroyed           
its radio equipment, halting of meteorological information from           
that station was halted.           

6. At present the Vicecomodoro Marambio Air Base is responsible for           
centralising meteorological data from all Argentina's meteorological           
stations; the information is then transmitted to Buenos Aires (National           
Meteorological Service), whence it is exchanged with Santiago by direct           
line and by satellite to the World Meteorological Centre in Washington.           

7. Since the Orcadas fire, the National Meteorological Service has           
been broadcasting daily from Buenos Aires, every three hours, the           
"Argentine Antarctic Report" (basic meteorological data from the           
Argentine weather stations) on the following frequencies: 5,185 MHz           
(5 kW), 10,720 MHz (5 kW), 12,160 (10 kW) and 18,093 (5 kW), thus becoming           
responsible for the work formerly done by Orcadas and partly taking over           
its weather broadcasting programme to Argentina.          
2.

8. At Marambio the work of installation of aerials, communications 
equipment and infrastructure is being completed prior to inauguration of 
the programme of meteorological information broadcasts, and scheduled 
frequency performance tests. It is anticipated that Marambio will be 
ready early in 1978 to broadcast meteorological information using the 
radio equipment listed in Annexes A, B and C corresponding to Proposal 
6, Annex 1, pages 1, 2 and 3 of the Second Antarctic Treaty Telecommuni-
cations Meeting and Recommendation VI-2, pages 1, 2 and 3.

9. Later in the same year it is anticipated that the installation of 
radio equipment for the relaying of meteorological data compiled by 
amateur radio operators will be completed, thus supplementing the weather 
broadcasting programme to be undertaken by Marambio in its capacity as 
station for the collection, transmission and processing of Antarctic 
meteorological data, Annex D.

10. It must be emphasized that the new broadcasting programme from 
Marambio is scheduled to include, in addition to the services previously 
provided by Orcadas, new support services for air traffic in Antarctica 
(forecasting for air navigation purposes), as well as facsimile radio 
transmission of cloud cover analyses on the basis of information received 
at the Marambio APT Station from the weather satellites.

11. In accordance with the provisions of para. 2, the provision of 
Recommendation VII-7 reads: "National bodies responsible for managing 
Antarctic programmes should be encouraged to exchange information on 
projected changes in types of equipment or methods of communication, so 
as to improve, wherever feasible, compatibility between Antarctic systems", 
Appendix E shows Vicecomodoro Marambio Station and its links with Argentine 
bases, greater in number than in 1969, and Annex F gives the links 
between Vicecomodoro Marambio Station and other stations both in and 
outside Antarctica.
