ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ        
девятое консультативное совещание


                                  LONDON                          

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE   

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA      

Agenda Item 3                  

ANT/IX/71                       
Date:  19 September 1977        

OPENING STATEMENT BY MR R C BREWSTER

HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF THE 

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Mr Chairman, I extend to you my congratulations and those 
of my Delegation on your selection to preside over these 
important proceedings.  It is indeed a pleasure to see you again 
in the Chair.  We are confident that you will bring the same 
energy and wisdom to guiding these discussions that you did to 
our sessions in July.  May I convey through you, Mr Chairman, 
the appreciation of my Delegation to the Government of the United 
Kingdom for the quality of the facilities and the warmth of the 
welcome extended to us.  In coming to Church House today, I had 
occasion to pass H.M.S. Discovery moored a short distance down 
river on the Thames.  That valiant vessel affords a visible 
reminder of the key role the United Kingdom has played in 
Antartica from the first voyages of discovery to today's complex 
scientific expeditions.  It makes it particularly fitting that 
this important Consultative Meeting be held in this historic and 
hospitable capital.

Mr Chairman, my Delegation wishes to join with others in 
welcoming the Delegation of the Peoples Republic of Poland to 
this Consultative Meeting.  We are confident that they will make 
a significant contribution to our deliberations.

During its first sixteen years, the Antarctic Treaty has 
been the vehicle for constructive cooperative efforts in 
investigating the last great scientific frontier of this planet. 
The success of these efforts in which we have all shared has 
confirmed anew that nations with varying interests can work 
together for a common goal which serves all mankind.  Our combined 
scientific activity in Antarctica has made immeasurable contribu-
tins to man's knowledge of glaciology, cartography, geophysics, 
geology, biology, oceanography, and meteorology, as well as to 
many other scientific disciplines.  We are confident that this 
joint effort will endure and expand as new needs and new techniques 
emerge.  The BIOMASS Program is just one example.  From our 
scientific cooperation under the Treaty has come a realization 
of the unique opportunity offered by Antarctica first to witness 
and then to begin to understand the basic processes at work on 
our planet.  We have come to appreciate even more the importance 
of Antarctica and Antarctic systems to the global environment.
Our understanding of the global significance of Antarctica 
forms the basis of our shared commitment to the protection of 
the unique Antarctic environment.  This commitment has increasingly 
spurred U.S. activities relating to Antarctica in the period since 
the Eighth Consultative Meeting.  The United States last year 
ratified the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals. 
On May 23 President Carter, in his environmental message to the 
Congress, stressed the importance of Antarctica to the earth's 
oceans and atmosphere and the need for preservation of its 
environment.  The President also forwarded to the Congress on 
that date the draft legislation which will enable the U.S. to 
formally implement the Agreed Measures for the Protection of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora.  I had the pleasure of opening the 
Administration's testimony before two Committees of the Congress 
on that draft legislation last week.  Although the U.S. has been 
observing the Agreed Measures since their adoption in 1964, the 
proposed legislation will strengthen our ability to do so and 
reemphasize our commitment to the Antarctic Treaty and our concern 
for the protection of the Antarctic eco-system.

The health and integrity of the Antarctic environment is 
a common thread that runs through and joins most if not all of 
the issues facing us.  It is a basic element in most of the items 
on the agenda of this meeting: Man's Impact on the Antarctic 
Environment, Improved Procedures for Gathering and Distributing 
Hydrometeorological Information, The Effect of Tourists and non-
Governmental Expeditions in the Antarctic area, etc.  But its 
sharpest focus now unquestionably centers upon the two Agenda 
items dealing with Antarctic resource matters.  The possibility 
of activities directed toward Antarctic living and non-living 
resources are the key issues.  The challenge such activities 
could pose to our common commitment to the preservation of the 
Antarctic environment and to the Treaty itself is, in the view 
of my Delegation, the prime issue facing this Consultative 
Meeting.

In the case of living resources found within the Treaty 
area, the question is not so much whether harvesting will occur,
but how it can be ensured that utilization of living resources will take place in accord with our commitment to the Antarctic environment. My Delegation believes that development of a conservation arrangement covering Antarctic marine living resources is required, and urgently.  The discussions at the July preparatory meeting suggest that we are substantially agreed on this. My Delegation believes that a conservation regime should incorporate the following elements:

- First, it should be directed to fishery resources and not directly apply to species already regulated pursuant to existing international agreements (whales and seals), provided that it take account of the relationship of target species to such other species and to the Antarctic eco-system as a whole.

- Second, it should provide for effective conservation of the species covered throughout their entire range.

- Third, it should provide for and encourage participation by all interested states.

- Fourth, it should provide for a separate institutional mechanism to perform two basic functions: 1) the development and implementation of conservation measures themselves;  2) the collection and analysis of the data necessary for the development of effective conservation enforcement.

- Fifth, it should provide for effective enforcement arrangements to ensure compliance with conservation measures.

In our view, these principles provide a sound basis for an initiative by the Consultative Parties on living resources in Antarctic waters, an initiative which would not only reflect the vitality of the Antarctic treaty system but also accommodate the legitimate interests of the international community at large.

The commitment we all share to the preservation of the Antarctic environment is a touchstone of our approach to the equally important issue of possible mineral resource development in the Treaty area.  Unlike living resources, Antarctic mineral resources have not yet been the object of commercial exploration
or exploitation activities.  Nonetheless, we believe it essential 
that there be an agreed arrangement to determine whether mineral 
resource activities would be compatible with the objective of 
preserving the Antarctic environment and to ensure the effective 
management of such activities, if undertaken.  An important 
contribution to understanding the mineral resource issues can 
be made by the work of the technical experts included on our 
delegations.  We hope that the nations participating in this 
meeting will bring their extensive knowledge and experience to 
bear in elaborating a workable and open arrangement for dealing 
with Antarctic mineral resources which can be in place prior to 
whatever mineral resource activities may occur.

    Mr Chairman, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties 
have in the past sixteen years established an impressive record 
of cooperation in scientific activity and in environmental 
preservation and conservation.  It is a solid record of success, 
one of which we are justifiably proud.  But we cannot rest upon 
this record, admirable though it is.  The resource issues now 
before us will require our concentration, imagination, 
accommodation, and good will if we are to find satisfactory 
solutions.  The future of Antarctica and of the Treaty system 
may well depend upon our doing so -- and doing so in time.

    Mr Chairman, the United States Delegation looks forward to 
the days ahead, confident that we can act together to meet the 
challenges of today as we have the problems of yesterday.
