ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING     NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          TRATADO ANTARTICO
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                  LONDON
                                  ANT/IX/79
                                  Date: 4 October 1977
                                  Original: French

Agenda Item 7

REPORT OF THE WORKING PARTY ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS

1.      In accordance with the mandate conferred upon it by the Ninth
Consultative Meeting (document ANT/IX/11, Revision 1) a Working
Party met on 30 September 1977 to consider the measures which should
be taken in regard to telecommunications.  Two meetings were held
under the chairmanship of M S Hessel (France) during which views
were exchanged on the basis of information documents and proposals
put forward by the Delegations of the United Kingdom (ANT/IX/INF. 16
and INF. 17), Argentina (ANT/IX/36 and 36 Appendices A to F) and
the USSR (ANT/IX/12 and 12 Appendix 1).

2.      In the course of the discussion it became clear that the present
and foreseeable development in the requirements of both countries
and international organizations, chiefly in regard to meteorological
information but also for the rapid and regular transmission of
scientific, administrative and operational data, called for a
thorough up-dating of the informations concerning operation, working
methods and equipment of the telecommunications network serving the
Antarctic.  It was also apparent that the data supplied to the
Ninth Consultative Meeting were not sufficiently complete to enable
this up-dating to be carried out.

3.      The Working Party discussed the most efficient means of adapting
the network to current needs for improving the speed and value of
the information transmitted and of arranging for the study of those
scientific and technical developments in telecommunications which
apply to the Antarctic.

4.      On completion of its deliberations, the Working Group submits
the following draft recommendation to the IXth Consultative Meeting:

      /Improvement
Improvement of telecommunications in the Antarctic

The Representatives,

Considering that requirements in the field of telecommunications as regards collection and dissemination of meteorological, 
scientific, administrative and operational data have developed 
substantially since the second telecommunications meeting of experts 
of the Consultative Parties held in Buenos Aires in 1969;

Considering that the implementation of Recommendation VI.1 and 
VII.7, and participation in the programmes of the World 
Meteorological Organisation, particularly the World Weather Watch, 
require a thorough review and possible modernisation of the network 
operating in the Antarctic;

Recommend that their Governments:

1. Compile comprehensive data, each for its own part, on the 
composition, characteristics, timing, frequencies, and current 
equipment of their telecommunications operations in the Antarctic, 
as well as on projects in the process of implementation and 
proposed improvements, and to designate, where appropriate, stations 
capable of replacing others in the event of breakdown.

2. Forward all such data to each of the other Consultative 
Parties, via diplomatic channels on the one hand and on the other 
by direct despatch to the addresses of the departments concerned 
as listed in the Appendix.

3. Arrange for a meeting of telecommunications experts to 
be held, on the initiative of the Government of the host country, 
before the Tenth Consultative Meeting, to analyse the data thus 
compiled, suggest desirable measures of harmonisation and put forward 
recommendations on improvements to be made in the operation of the 
telecommunications network in the Antarctic;

4. Request SCAR through their National Antarctic Committees 
to undertake, at the earliest opportunity, a study of the most recent 
applications of science and technology to the specific problems of 
the Antarctic in the field of propagation of radio waves, and to pass 
on its conclusions to the Consultative Parties prior to their Tenth 
Meeting and  if necessary to their successive meetings also.
APPENDIX 1

Addresses of departments to whom the information referred to in 
paragraph 1 of the Recommendation is to be sent direct :

ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM
CHILE
FRANCE
JAPAN
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
POLAND
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
U.S.S.R.
