ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE  

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ        
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRATADO ANTARTICO            
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA      

                  LONDON               
ANT/IX/82        
Date: 6 October 1977  
Original: English      

Agenda Item 6  

DRAFT REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON  
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES  

The Working Group on Marine Living Resources held a number of  
meetings between 26 September and 6 October 1977.  Its terms of  
reference, as contained in ANT/IX/39, were to examine the question  
of Marine Living Resources in all its aspects, scientific, legal,  
political, or other including:  

    (a) possible interim measures;  
    (b) measures for the further development of a marine  
        living resources regime.  

The mandate included the direction that the Group "shall  
consider all papers and proposals put before it, report, and make  
draft recommendations."  

The Working Group, which comprised representatives of all  
delegations to the IXth ATCM, elected Mr J G McArthur of New Zealand  
as its Chairman.  The Chairman's opening statement to the Group is  
reproduced in ANT/IX/44.  

The documents before the Group when it began its work are those  
listed in the Chairman's opening statement.  During the course of  
its deliberations, the Group received the following further  
documents:  

USA                     - ANT/IX/43  
Chairman                - ANT/IX/45  
France                  - ANT/IX/47  
France                  - ANT/IX/48  
UK                      - ANT/IX/54  
France and UK           - ANT/IX/54 (Rev 1)  
UK                      - ANT/IX/54 (Annex)  
Chile                   - ANT/IX/58  
Norway and UK           - ANT/IX/73  
Chairman                - ANT/IX/77  
Australia               - ANT/IX/77 (Amend 1)  

/The
The Working Group established a Drafting Group under the chairmanship of Mr K G Brennan of Australia.  Mr Brennan's group subsequently elaborated for the approval of the Working Group operative paragraphs for a recommendation on scientific research relating to Antarctic marine living resources, which included an expression of support for the BIOMASS programme. The Drafting Group also produced operative paragraphs for a recommendation on interim measures to cover the period between the Ninth Consultative Meeting and the creation of a definitive regime.

The full Working Group drafted operative paragraphs for a recommendation on the establishment of a definitive conservation regime.  It was agreed that a draft definitive conservation regime should be elaborated by a Special Consultative Meeting. It was also agreed to record in the Working Group's report the understanding of the Group that the word "conservation" as used in the draft recommendation includes rational use, in the sense that harvesting would not be prohibited, but excludes catch allocation.  It was similarly the understanding of the Group that the word "resources" was not limited to commercially exploitable species.

The Working Group agreed that the operative paragraphs drafted by it and those produced by Mr Brennan's group should be combined to form one recommendation.  Preambulatory paragraphs for that document were subsequently devised by the Working Group.

The Working Group now submits for consideration by plenary the draft recommendation attached hereto.  The Japanese delegation has reserved its position on the recommendation pending further instructions from its capital in regard to paragraph 3 (b) of Part III.
The Representatives,

Recalling the special responsibilities conferred upon the Consultative parties in respect of the preservation and conservation of living resources in the Antarctic by virtue of Article IX paragraph 2 (f) of the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that major concentrations of marine living resources are found in the Antarctic Treaty area and adjacent waters;

Recognising the urgency of ensuring that these resources are protected by the establishment of sound conservation measures which will prevent overfishing and protect the health of the Antarctic ecosystem;

Adopt the following recommendations to their Governments

/1
I


SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH


The Representatives.


Recalling Recommendation VIII-10;


Noting with appreciation the response of the Scientific 
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Recommendation 
VIII-10 and the preparation by the SCAR/SCOR Group of Specialists 
on Living Resources of the Southern Ocean (Scientific Committee 
on Oceanic Research (SCOR) Working Group 54) of the Biological 
Investigation of Marine Antarctic Systems and Stocks (BIOMASS) 
programme;


Aware of the need to compile more information with a 
view to developing a good scientific foundation for appropriate 
conservation measures and rational management policies for all 
Antarctic marine living resources;


Recommend to their Governments that:



1. That, to the greatest extent feasible, they co-operate 
broadly and comprehensively in scientific investigations, 
and in the exchange of information thereon, relating to 
the Antarctic marine environment and that they intensify 
as far as possible scientific research related to Antarctic 
marine living resources;

2. That, in planning their marine activities in the Antarctic, 
they have regard to the advantages that will accrue from 
coordination by them of their scientific investigations 
contributing to the BIOMASS programme;

3. That they give sympathetic consideration to the provision 
of practical measures (such as ships, ship time, personnel 
and finance) in support of the implementation of the BIOMASS 
programme and other similar programmes;

4. That they integrate, in so far as is practicable, research 
vessel programmes with the activities of other vessels,

/and
and make available on vessels operating in the Antarctic,
other than research vessels contributing directly to
the BIOMASS programme, time and facilities for routine
observations aimed at extending the data base for the
programme.
II

INTERIM AGREED MEASURES FOR THE CONSERVATION
OF ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

Recognising that some resources have already been the object
of commercial investigation and exploitation;

Concerned that interim measures for the protection of
conservation of Antarctic marine living resources are desirable
until such time as a definitive regime enters into force;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They observe the following interim guidelines pending
entry into force of the definitive regime for Antarctic
Marine Living Resources:

      (a) they cooperate as broadly and comprehensively as
possible in the mutual exchange of statistics
relating to catch of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources;

      (b) they should show the greatest possible restraint,
concern and care in the harvesting of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources so that it does not result
in the depletion of stocks of Antarctic marine
species or jeopardizing the Antarctic marine
ecosystem as a whole;

      (c) they urge those Governments which are not parties
to the Antarctic Treaty and which engage in activities
involving the use of living resources of Antarctica
to take account of these guidelines;

2. They review these interim guidelines as and when necessary
and in any event following the conclusion of the definitive
regime with a view to their future elaboration in the
light of the provisions of the definitive regime.
III

ESTABLISHMENT OF A DEFINITIVE CONSERVATION REGIME

Convinced that provision for effective measures to conserve
Antarctic marine living resources as well as for collection and
analysis of the data necessary to develop such measures will
require the early conclusion of a definitive conservation regime

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. A definitive regime for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources should be concluded before the end of
1978.

2. A Special Consultative Meeting be convened in order to
elaborate a draft definitive regime, and in particular:

      (a) to determine the form of the definitive regime,
including the question as to whether an international instrument
such as a convention is necessary;

      (b) to prepare, if necessary, draft rules of procedure
for a subsequent decisive meeting for the establishment of the
definitive regime;

      (c) to decide on participation in such a meeting by States
other than Consultative Parties which are actively engaged in
research and exploitation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
and the participation, on an observer basis, of appropriate
international organisations;

      (d) to finalise the date and place of the decisive meeting;

      (e) to take any steps in order to facilitate the work of
the decisive meeting referred to above.

3. The Special Consultative Meeting shall base its work on
this recommendation and take account of the discussions at the
Ninth Consultative Meeting, its report and the documents
presented to it, and, in the elaboration of a draft definitive
regime, shall take into account inter alia the following elements:

      (a) the regime should explicitly recognise the prime
responsibilities of the Consultative Parties in relation to the
protection and conservation of the environment of the Antarctic
Treaty area and the importance of the measures recommended by
the Consultative Parties to this end;
(b) the provisions of Article 4 of the Antarctic Treaty 
shall not be affected by the regime. It should ensure that 
the principles embodied in Article 4 are safeguarded in 
application to the marine areas S of 60° S latitude;

(c) the regime should provide for the effective 
conservation of the marine living resources of the Antarctic 
ecosystem as a whole;

(d) the regime should cover the area of specific 
competence of the Antarctic Treaty;

(e) the regime should, however, extend north of 60° 
south latitude where that is necessary for the effective 
conservation of species of the Antarctic ecosystem, without 
prejudice to coastal state jurisdiction in that area;

(f) the regime should not apply to species already 
regulated pursuant to existing international agreements but 
should take into account the relationship of such species to 
those species covered by the regime.
