ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[R]CTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

LONDON

Agenda Item 10
ANT/IX/19
19 September 1977
Original: English

SUMMARY OF THE GESAMP REPORT - IMPACT OF OIL ON THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT

1. Knowledge concerning the likely impact of man-made perturbations on the
marine system is obviously important. The perturbations may be a result of
physical, chemical or biological alterations to the system. Whatever these
alterations are, it is often apparent that inadequate information is available
on a whole range of important factors which must be considered if a meaningful
impact assessment is to be made. This reflects the complexity of the marine
environment in general, and more specifically, our ignorance concerning many
of the processes taking place within the system.

2. To assess the impact of oil on the marine environment is not easy. In
many vital areas of knowledge, data is either non-existent or present research
is inadequate or poorly conceived to fill these gaps.

3. There is a need to define internationally-understood categories of crude
oil and refined oil; then to indicate the major environmental hazards, and then
to attempt to rank the relative impacts of various oils. Prevention and control
measures should then be directed primarily at those oil categories which pose
the greatest hazards.

Methods of sampling and analysis

4. Before any conclusions can be made on the inputs, fate or effects of
petroleum compounds in any environment, the methods of collection, storage
and analysis of samples used must be reliable. This has not been the case for
much published work. Representative, uncontaminated samples must be deep-
frozen prior to analysis. Where possible, the use of computerised GC-MS is
encouraged and intercalibration of the various work-up and analytical
methods is necessary. For a better understanding of degradative and other 
processes involving oil in the marine system, the development of good reliable 
analytical techniques are essential for both the starting hydrocarbons and 
those compounds formed from oil by these processes.

Inputs and fluxes

5. Budgets of non-natural and natural inputs of oil to the sea are the subject 
of a range of estimates. There is a scant data on many of the important 
hydrocarbon fluxes. For example, the air-sea flux of hydrocarbons and their 
photochemically-transformed products is the subject of much ignorance. 
Similarly, attempts to assess the fate and effects of oil are hampered by 
the lack of much vital data. Little is known of the qualitative and quantitative 
mechanisms and rates involved in the adsorption of the various oil fractions 
on particles, the subsequent sedimentary flux of these particles, and the 
biological uptake of oil from these particles during passage through the 
digestive systems of midwater or benthic organisms. Lastly, the uptake of 
hydrocarbons by marine organisms from solution or fine dispersion is subject 
to speculation with much conflicting data.

Fate

6. The fate of spilt oil in the marine system will be controlled by many 
factors. The spreading of oil at the sea surface will involve surface tension/ 
viscosity relationships, natural hydrostatic and surface forces. The quantity 
and nature of the surface active oil components are important in determining 
both the extent of spreading and the balance between spreading and emulsification. 
Evaporation is most important during the first few hours after a spill and is 
a function of the vapour pressure of each oil component, its concentration 
and the film thickness. The lower boiling point and often most toxic components 
are selectively depleted causing the residual oil to become much denser and 
            
2
hence more likely to sink. Evaporation thus prevents many of the more toxic 
oil compounds from entering the marine ecosystem, although as these compounds 
are also fairly water soluble there is some competition between evaporation 
and solution. Solution is important, both in the short term - direct solution 
of the low molecular weight compounds - and in the long term - production in 
the atmosphere and oceans of soluble polar compounds (acids, alcohols) from oil 
hydrocarbons by oxidative processes. The major portion of such reactions 
will occur at the sea surface and are accelerated by light and catalytic action 
of metals.

7. Once in solution, hydrocarbons can apparently persist in the marine water 
column for relatively long periods.  Spray or bursting bubbles will act to 
remove oil from the surface waters, the flux depending mainly upon wind strength 
and sea state.  This is, however, largely a temporary removal, ejection to 
the atmosphere being normally followed by redeposition into another part of 
the ocean either as the original compound or its photochemically degraded product

8. Emulsification generally promotes the solution of the more soluble oil 
components. Water in oil emulsions may be very stable (>100 days) and form 
naturally with violent mixing at the sea surface.  The tendency of an oil to 
form this type of emulsion is related to its content of non-volatiles.  Oil 
in water emulsions occur with lighter oils and after the use of dispersants. 
The stability of the emulsion is determined by the size of oil droplet and 
hence the efficiency of the dispersant. Many of the effective dispersants are 
not highly toxic themselves, but the toxicity of the dispersed oil is of concern.
Oil in the dispersed phase is more available to marine organisms. The smaller 
the oil droplets (ie, well dispersed) the more susceptible the oil is to 
microbial degradation. Although dispersion may alter the rate of bacterial 
degradation, the extent of this degradation does not appear to be changed.
                                                                               3
Furthermore, dispersants will inhibit microbial activity by damaging cell 
structure or interfering in biochemical processes.

9. Once oil has been incorporated into marine sediments, there is evidence 
of a very slow rate of degradation.  The processes of resuspension, transport 
and resedimentation are not well understood, but are likely to depend upon 
bottom currents and pressure waves.  Biogenic re-working by epifaunal and 
infaunal benthic organisms should lead to both resuspension of sedimented oil 
and its downward penetration into sediments.  It is clear, however, that of 
all the potential reservoirs for oil in the marine system, its fate in bottom 
sediments is least understood.

10. Once distributed within the marine environment, indigenous microflora 
(bacteria, yeasts, fungi) have a dominant role in altering and removing the 
petroleum compounds.  The rates of degradation can be very slow - it has been 
suggested that some components of Second World War oil are still present in 
the system.  Certainly, observed degradation rates for aromatic and resin 
components of oil are very slow.  Some important questions need to be answered.  
First, will sinking oil reach deep-water environments, and if so, what is the 
effectiveness of bacterial degradation at depth?  Second, is there a threshold 
level above and/or below which degradation will not take place?  At the heart 
of these questions is the concern that the marine environment does not have an 
infinite capability for degradation.  Many species of marine micro-organisms 
are known to be able to degrade oil, the extent and rate of degradation depending 
on mainly temperature, pressure, nutrient limitation, type and abundance of 
natural bacterial population, salinity and extent of oil dispersion in the water 
column.  Some oil components are bacteriocides and the molecular configuration 
of the petroleum compounds is very important in determining biodegradability.

4
Alkanes are generally far more susceptible than aromatics - normal alkanes 
more than branched alkanes; short chain alkanes more than longer chain alkanes.

In an area of regular oil pollution there will be a natural selection within 
the microflora community for oil-degrading organisms and thus polluted and 
non-polluted areas will tend to have different microbial populations.  In 
polluted areas, the rates of oil degradation will therefore be higher than in 
non-polluted areas, although the degradation will not necessarily be more 
complete. Unpolluted, geographically separated areas may have unique microbial 
flora each corresponding in a particular way to oil pollution, ie estuarine, 
neritic and deep water communities.  The separate and interacting roles of 
marine bacteria, fungi and yeasts in oil degradation has yet to be elucidated.

Preliminary data suggests that a sequence of degradation occurs.  Bacteria 
initiates degradation utilising mainly alkanes and some cyclo-alkanes, then 
yeasts and fungi take over the major role degrading cyclo-alkanes and the 
aromatic fractions.  In open ocean waters the populations of yeasts and fungi 
are sparse and hence the fate and extent of microbial degradation of petroleum 
in the deep ocean may be less than in coastal or estuarine areas.

11. Water temperature will be a major factor influencing the composition of 
microbial populations.  For example, in Arctic and Antarctic areas hydrocarbon 
degradation will involve the indigenous psychrotrophic and psychrophilic micro-
organisms and will be slower than in temperate zones.  Similarly, present data 
suggests that microbial degradation of oil in deep water by the barophilic or 
baro-tolerant micro-organisms is very slow.

12. The components of oil remaining in the environment after microbial 
degradation may either be only very slowly degraded, not degraded at all or 
metabolic products of microbial degradation.  Much more work is required on 
these possibly toxic, refractory compounds as at present there are many limitatio 
in applying laboratory batch culture work to the natural ecosystem.

            5
13. Obviously many considerations must be involved in any decision relating 
to oil spill treatment based on microbial degradation. Any microbial seeding 
of oil spills must involve many precautions (eg supplements to any limiting 
nutrient) and use of a mixed population. The most serious danger is likely to 
be the introduction of a new species which might affect the natural ecosystem's 
population.

Uptake by organisms

14. Data suggests that oil mainly enters the higher levels of the marine food 
web by two processes. First, by ingestion of oil adsorbed onto or incorporated 
into particles (living or dead). Second, by active uptake of dissolved or 
finely dispersed oil by filter-feeding or respiration across gills. Tarballs 
are not thought to be an important pathway into the marine ecosystem.

15. The biota is not a major reservoir for oil, but may act as a temporary 
storage site or transfer point. Ingested oil may be excreted unchanged, 
stored or metabolised. Oil excreted in faeces would sink and provide a 
mechanism by which oil is made available throughout the water column and 
ultimately the sediments. Faecal pellets are known to be ingested by marine 
organisms and this may be a mechanism for the passage and/or concentration of 
petroleum compounds in the marine food web. Long term storage of some of the 
ingested oil is reported in several species, the areas of high lipid (liver 
or hepatopancreas) or lipoprotein (cell and organelle membranes) being likely 
storage sites. Metabolism or detoxification of some of the components of 
ingested oil has been shown to occur in certain species, followed by incorporatio 
into body tissues or excretion. Generally, the metabolism of petroleum compounds 
by marine organisms (other than bacteria) is not well understood. Until the 
metabolic fate of the various oil components in the food web is understood, it 
is impossible to evaluate either the potential effects on the biota or the fate 
of persistent low level oil pollution in the marine environment. An indication 
of turnover time of these compounds once they are in the lipid pool is required.

6
Water temperature will affect metabolic activity and will be important in 
determining which enzyme systems are operative. It must also be ascertained 
whether a threshold level exists above which excretory and metabolic capacity 
of an organism for a particular compound is exceeded leading to bioaccumulation 
and possibly biomagnification. At present, there is no convincing evidence 
that food chain magnification of petroleum compounds is taking place.

Environmental effects

(i) Chemical and physical effects

16. The presence of oil at the air-sea interface has led to some speculation 
on possible chemical or physical environmental effects. No areas have yet 
been identified where changes in O_(2) or CO_(2) fluxes across the interface have 
occurred as a result of an oil slick, although mangrove swamps and intertidal 
zones require more study. The possibility of elevated temperatures in the 
upper layers of the sea due to increased adsorption of solar radiation by oil 
films may well be a problem in areas of coral reefs. At present it is difficult 
to separate the effects of a direct smothering, acute toxicity and temperature 
changes in these areas.

17. Oil may also act as a means of concentrating other lipophilic pollutants. 
Pesticides are certainly concentrated from sea water into an oil slick and 
preliminary work suggests that a mechanism exists for the conversion of 
inorganic Hg to a hydrocarbon-soluble form. Much more work is required in 
order to establish the importance of such processes.

(ii) Biological effects

18. Laboratory bioassay toxicity tests are widely used to assess the effects 
of oil compounds on marine organisms. However, these tests seldom permit a 
meaningful evaluation of field toxicity. One of their major shortcomings is

                                                               7
that it is virtually impossible to correlate the results of different workers using different methods and different organisms. Not surprisingly, reported ranges of toxicity often differ by several orders of magnitude since many factors (eg, degree of agitation, static/flow through system, aeration, temperature, pH, salinity, health of organism, including environmental stress) play a part in determining the effect of a pollutant on an organism. It is very difficult to extrapolate laboratory experiments on single species to natural ecosystems where many interacting species are involved; also the use of 'standard animals' from laboratory-bred populations means that the cultured animals are so adapted to life in the laboratory that they can hardly be compared with a natural wild population. Thus, although a properly designed bioassay provides information on relative toxicities, it generally does not provide any information on long term sub-lethal effects that may influence the survival of species in an ecosystem. Definite answers on such effects within a reasonable time scale will require controlled experiments on organisms with short growth cycles (eg, some zooplankton crustacean species). Such experiments on fish may take many years before even a cautious prognosis could be made. In the immediate future, however, despite their many shortcomings, there is no ready alternative to the existing bioassays.

19. Many factors will determine the possible effects of oil on marine organisms 
- type, "freshness" and concentration of oil; species involved, its maturity 
and therefore stage in the reproductive cycle; effect of competing biota; 
natural environmental stresses; type of sea area involved (coastal, estuarine, 
open sea, breeding or migrating area). The toxicity of dispersed or emulsified 
oil to organisms is generally much higher than 'natural' non-dispersed oil, 
and the light refined oils considerably more toxic than crude and heavy oils. 
Generally, damage from oil pollution is much more severe in coastal or estuarine 
areas as these contain a far greater variety and number of species as well as 

8
the sensitive juvenile stages of many oceanic species. Oil can produce lethal 
or sub-lethal toxic effects on organisms, either as a result of an acute 
exposure (ie, single oil spill) or chronic exposure (recurrent pollution with 
limited recovery periods). Organisms vary in their response. What kills one 
species may have little or no effect on another: similarly, individuals within 
a species will have a differing response depending on lifestage. Thus it is 
difficult, if not impossible, to predict the impact of any particular oil spill 
on marine life and it is not at all surprising that very different effects 
have been observed in different instances.

20. Of major concern is the possibility of sub-lethal interference by even 
very low levels of petroleum hydrocarbons with vital mechanisms of chemical 
communication. Only 10% of the dissolved organic matter (DOM) present in sea 
water has even been characterised, and the effect of raising the levels of 
dissolved hydrocarbons cannot be predicted. The biochemical and physiological 
roles of some of the natural DOM components may involve chemoreception and 
information transfer. Chemical signals are thought to control many important 
biological processes such as food detection, feeding impulses, escape reactions 
from predators, territorial definition, moulting and homing of migratory species. 
The chemicals responsible for this information transfer (eg, pheromones) may 
be masked or mimicked by the presence of low levels of hydrocarbons, especially 
aromatic and olefinic hydrocarbons. Inhibition of food sensing by hydrocarbon 
concentrations down to ppb levels have been reported in some marine species.

(iii) Effects on specific groups of marine organisms

21. Probably seabirds are the only group of marine organisms to be so far 
affected by oil pollution to the extent that whole species or sub-species are 
threatened with extinction. Death may result from severe oiling (loss of 
waterproofing and buoyancy) or oil ingestion (disruption of intestinal absorptive

9
mechanisms). In the absence of efficient mechanical recovery systems, it is 
generally thought that the immediate use of chemical dispersants to remove 
oil from the sea surface as quickly as possible is the only satisfactory 
approach to seabird conservation.

22. Little information is available concerning the effects of oil pollution 
on marine mammals, and there are few recorded instances of high mortality 
resulting from oil spills. The severity of the problem is, however, unlikely 
to be reflected by the existing data and more extensive monitoring is necessary.

23. Lethal effects of oil pollution on fish are normally only seen in the 
vicinity of major oil spills and there are no reports of large mortalities 
of pelagic fish. In open sea areas these mortalities would probably not often be 
seen even if they occurred, but in coastal areas they should have been observed. 
The conclusion is that adult fish avoid heavily polluted areas. Less obvious 
and perhaps more significant are the sub-lethal effects of oil pollution 
resulting in changes in feeding, migration, reproduction of species or loss of 
equilibrium in individuals. The eggs and larvae of many pelagic fish species 
inhabit the upper layers of the sea and are unable to avoid a contaminated 
area. They are very vulnerable to the effects of oil spills and oil dispersing 
operations. Death of developing eggs or non-viability of larvae have been 
seen down to 0.01 ppm levels of oil. Damage to fisheries may not show up for 
years, nor necessarily at the location of the spill, but the effects of oil 
pollution may lead to a gradual reduction in productivity over a large area 
and on a long term basis. Furthermore, a gradual, widespread reduction in 
fisheries would be more likely to result from chronic pollution than from a 
single acute incident. Statistical records of fisheries are often used to 
guage pollution effects. Unfortunately, the size of fish catches are related 
not only to abundance but to the method of detection, the fishing effort, and 
type and efficiency of catching equipment. Thus caution is necessary as the 
fish landings may not relate in the short term to abundance.

10
24. The greatest amount of data is available on the effects of oil on benthic 
and intertidal organisms. Molluscs frequently suffer heavy mortalities from 
oil spills and some work suggests that low (ppm) levels of oil cause a 
significant reduction in the net carbon balance of mussels and might preclude 
gametes development. Certainly crude oil, oil derivatives and oil-dispersant 
emulsions have all been found to be harmful at ppm levels to the larvae of 
some species of marine molluscs. Bottom-grazing organisms (echinoderms etc) 
are considered to be extremely sensitive to oil pollution and there are several 
reports of oil spills causing a large decrease in their population with a 
subsequent change in the community balance.

25. Toxic effects on zooplankton have been observed at low levels (10-100 ppm) 
of oil pollution. At ppm levels, sub-lethal effects involving inhibition of 
food sensing, appetite, swimming ability, moulting, copulation, production of 
larvae, or growth have been observed in a number of marine crustacean species. 
In the intertidal zone sessile crustaceans frequently suffer extensive mortalities 
in the event of oil spills, although populations affected by single spills 
normally recover within a few years.

26. Although natural phytoplankton communities are adversely affected by oil 
pollution, it is generally thought that these organisms are so prolific that 
single spills will have only short term effects on the overall population. 
Phytoplankton are, however, largely responsible for the fixation of energy 
subsequently utilised by the whole marine ecosystem. This is especially the case 
in Arctic and Antarctic regions. It is thus vital to understand the effects of oil 
in the water column on phytoplankton both as a result of spills and continuous 
discharge to coastal, estuarine and oceanic environments.  Changes in species 
abundance or population composition are very difficult to detect in the field

11
as they are subject to very large natural variations. Lethal effects 
of oil on algal species are reported down to the 0.1 ppm level, while sub-lethal 
effects (absence or retardation of cell division, reduction in carbon fixation) 
occur down to 0.01 ppm concentrations. These levels are normally considerably 
higher than those usually found in most polluted sea areas, but this does not 
mean that ecological damage is not occuring in these areas. Some studies 
indicate that very low levels of oil pollution actually cause an increase in 
the growth of microscopic algae but how useful such a 'stimulation' is for 
the species or plankton community as a whole is hard to determine.

27. Macroalgae are usually much more resistant to coastal oil pollution than 
intertidal animals (red algae appearing to be least resistant), although some 
morphological modifications have been observed especially in juvenile forms. 
Single oil spills do not appear to cause long term damage to salt marsh 
vegetation, indeed there are a number of incidents where oil has actually 
stimulated growth. However, chronic pollution over an extended period results 
in a rapid decline in vegetation, the major effects being damage to cell 
membranes and a reduction in transpiration and photosynthesis. Cleaning methods 
involving emulsifier treatment, burning or cutting appear not to decrease the 
damage and may even increase it. Generally, it is thought better to leave an 
oiled salt marsh to recover naturally.

28. Oil has been found to limit the growth of some ecologically important 
bacteria (proteolytic, lipolytic and chitinolytic) both in the water column 
and sediments, although the growth of oil-degrading bacteria may be promoted. 
The number of oil-degrading bacteria will depend upon the history of oil 
pollution in the area, while the presence of proteolytic, lipolytic and chitinoly
bacteria may be critical for maintaining the ecosystem balance. Of special

                                                                                  12
concern is the possible interference of petroclcum compounds in microbial 
chemotaxis with subsequent effects on the biodegradation and turnover of 
organic matter in the sea and the activity of film-forming bacteria in coastal 
areas in 'preparing' surfaces for the attachment of higher organisms.

Human health hazard

29. Interest on the human health hazards from oil-derived carcinogens has 
tended to focus on poly nuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PNAH).  There is little 
good data on the concentration of known or suspected PNAH in crude or refined 
oils and it is still not clear whether the global input of PNAH from mineral 
oils as a result of man's activities is any more than a minor proportion of 
the total input.  On a local scale, however, these inputs may be very important.

30. The few reported PNAH levels in marine organisms vary greatly, due no 
doubt to differences in sampling and analytical methodology.  In non-polluted 
areas the PNAH levels in marine produce appear to be of the same order of 
magnitude as in other non-smoked food, and only in molluscs are levels as high 
or higher than in smoked foods.  High levels of PNAH are frequently, but not 
necessarily, associated with oil pollution, although it is normally difficult 
to positively blame these levels on oil pollution, even in local situations.

32. There has been considerable interest in the possibility of persistence 
and biomagnification of PNAH in the marine food chain.  Although metabolism 
of ingested hydrocarbons has been shown to occur in marine organisms followed 
by incorporation in body tissues or excretion, the metabolic pathways are not 
well understood.  Also the results of many feeding experiments with labelled 
compounds must be treated with caution due to many uncertainties over losses 
of these compounds during the course of the experiment.  There have been 
suggestions that as for mammalian systems, the metabolic pathways of PNAH in

                                                               13
marine organisms can be predicted from data on the lower molecular weight 
aromatics. The mode of presentation, uptake, physiological effects and 
metabolic pathways are, however, likely to be very different for the higher 
molecular weight compounds. The conclusion is that knowledge of rejection/
metabolism/storage of PNAH in marine organisms cannot be derived from results 
for other hydrocarbon classes. This rules out much of the published work on 
alkanes. One additional problem is that the tumorigenic potential of an oil 
fraction may be greater or less than the sum of its known constituents.

32. In spite of much work in the field there is still no specific evidence 
for or against the accumulation of aromatic compounds up the food chain.  The 
variation in patterns of uptake and tissue distribution of PNAH observed for 
several marine species is perhaps to be expected as a result of varying lipid 
composition and rates of lipid turnover and storage.  In general, a greater 
storage and/or persistence of aromatic hydrocarbons is to be expected in lipid-
rich species and more specifically in lipid-rich body organs.  Recent work on 
fish neutral tissue suggests that a differentiation in binding sites exists 
for paraffinic and aromatic hydrocarbons.  The latter appear to interact at 
the rigid, structural regions of the cell-membrane surfaces whilst the former 
associate with the molecular fluid portions of membrane fatty acids.  Efficient 
detoxification mechanisms for PNAH are thought to exist in some fish and 
indications are that fish may have much the same metabolic pathways as mammals. 
Bivalves appear to have a much lower capacity for hydrocarbon metabolism than 
fish, that capacity differing from one species to another. It has been suggested 
that some species have a multi-compartment system for handling hydrocarbons, 
accumulation in 'stable' lipid compartments not occurring until other tissue 
compartments are 'saturated'. Loss of hydrocarbons from these stable compartments 
would, however, be a very protracted process.  The capacity of crustacean zoo-
plankton to metabolise PNAH and excrete the water-soluble hydroxylation products 
remains clear. This is an important factor as zooplankton provide the first 
link in many food chains leading to man.

                    34
33. Biomagnification of PNAH in the food chain might be controlled by the 
existence of threshold limits for particular organisms. Below this level the 
rates of excretion or metabolism of PNAH are a function of the rate of uptake 
and no concentration occurs. Above this level tissue accumulation of PNAH 
occurs. Once rates of intake fall below the threshold level then depuration 
of the accumulated PNAH will occur. The compartment model theory may be 
correct. The primary process of uptake and elimination might be akin to a 
simple portioning between body fluids and the external medium. Once levels 
in the body fluid rise beyond a certain level, secondary processes will involve 
the metabolism of PNAH, principally by hydroxylation, in the liver or 
hepatopancreas. Those PNAH levels beyond the capacity of these metabolic 
processes pass to body tissues for inter-celluldr storage. These stored 
hydrocarbons are then only released for metabolism or excretion when the contents 
of these cells are turned over or used as energy sources.

34. In order to properly rate the hazard to man from elevated PNAH levels in 
marine produce, a competent medical evaluation of the reported levels is 
necessary in the light of a likely threshold limit for man. However, figures 
derived from existing data should only be regarded as a possible first step 
in any determination of acceptable exposure levels.

35. Tainting may be a reason for the rejection of marine produce, but its 
presence or absence is not necessarily an indication of PNAH levels which must 
be determined by direct analysis. Indeed, tainting may not be due to oil 
pollution, quite natural reactions or other pollutants may be responsible. 
The chemical verification of tainting can be difficult as the identify of the 
odorous components of oil have not yet been fully established. Thus 'tasting' 
of produce suspected of being tainted by oil pollution needs to be correlated 
with good chemical analysis.

15
36. Under certain conditions, oil pollution may cause carcinomas in marine 
organisms themselves. However, in the absence of a consensus of qualifiod 
medical opinion it is impossible to say whether ingestion of such cancerous 
tissue would present a hazard to man.

DR R J MORRIS

Central Unit on Environmental Pollution
Department of the Environment

26 August 1977

                                                                             16F
