ANTARCTIC TREATY              
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING               TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                 NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                 NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                              LONDON

                                                 ANT/IX/15
                                                 Original: English
                                                 19 September 1977

Provisional Agenda Item 7

EFFECTS OF MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION
(Submitted by UK for consideration by the group
of experts on technical aspects)

Explanatory Note

The UK has submitted an annotated draft agenda for
the group of experts meeting (ANT/IX/14).  The following
is an attempt to provide the framework for a summary as
suggested under item 3 of that Agenda.

Exploration

1. On land.  The overall impact of exploration activities
on the Antarctic environment is likely to be of similar
type and magnitude as current scientific research activity.
The local impact involved in proving ore bodies by rock
drilling is likely to be more severe.

2. At sea.  The overall impact of exploration using
remote sensing techniques is likely to be no more than
current scientific research activities using similar
methods.  The impact of exploratory drilling will be
more severe but will be closely localized unless a systems
failure leads to a blow out.

Exploitation

3. Probable Areas.  SCAR EAMREA (p.15, l6 and 18) has
indicated the areas most likely to be the scene of exploitation
activity both on land and at sea.

4. Types of exploitation activity.  Both SCAR EAMREA and Elliot
foresee the following types of exploitation activity:

/a.
a. Mining sites on land
b. Drilling sites at sea
c. Transport facilities on land
d. Storage and transshipment facilities on land
e. Transport at sea.

5. Types of impact.     Unavoidable impacts are summarized
by Elliot (Section 6) as follows:

On land;     a. terrain modification;
             b. alteration to the sub-surface
                 environment resulting from
                 terrain modification;
             c. addition of liquid wastes including
                 hydrocarbon spills;
             d. changing drainage and perma frost
                 patterns;
             e. alterations to soils;
             f. discharge of tailings on land or into
                 the sea;
             g. stack emissions into the atmosphere.

At sea      h. alteration to benthos communities
                 close to drilling operations;
             i. accidental losses of small amounts of
                 hydrocarbons during routine operations.

Certain avoidable impacts are foreseen - principally in the marine environment involving throw outs or the loss of tankers.  Both SCAR EAMREA and Elliot suggest that although such impacts are in principle unavoidable, the severity of the Antarctic environment makes occurrences inevitable.

6. Assessment of impacts

a. Widespread effects due to airborne pollutants are likely
   to be small;

b. at sea, effects on the benthos will be
   localised.  The same is true of effects from
/development
- 2 -
development on land, even though they may 
cause a major impact where they occur;

c.	oceanic krill and other species are unlikely to be 
at general risk;	even a major oil spill could affect 
only a small part of the total stock;

d.	sea birds and fur seals would be locally at risk 
from oil spills but there is unlikely to be a threat 
to species as a whole;

e.	persistent (chronic) effects are less easy to predict 
but no obvious major hazard is evident.

- 3 -
