ANTARCTIC TREATY
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                  LONDON          TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTIVA

Agenda Item 3                                           ANT/IX/63
Date:  19 September 1977


OPENING STATEMENT BY H.E. MR O. BUCHER-JOHANNESSEN
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF NORWAY
Mr. Chairman,

Eighteen years have passed since the Antarctic 
Treaty was signed in Washington and developments during 
the period it has been in force have shown that it has 
been a good treaty which has served its parties well.
I think we are all of the opinion that the Treaty and the 
cooperation under it can serve as an example to other 
parts of the world.

Since the signing of the Treaty the development 
in technological capability has increased to a considerable 
extent opening up new areas to human endeavour. Although 
Antarctica proper most probably will not be open to profit-
able exploitation in the immediate future, we nevertheless 
assume that the technological capability for developing 
possible Antarctic mineral resources, in a longer term 
perspective, will be within our grasp. We also know 
that within some quarters there is at the same time a clearly 
felt need - when the time is right - for the extraction of 
these resources.

Furthermore, the establishment of national economic 
zones in areas that used to be open to all nations engaged 
in fishing, within a short period of time, might lead to 
increased pressure for exploitation of these resources in 
Antarctic waters, making measures for their protection an 
important goal. At the same time certain countries and 
organizations have proposed that the marine living resources 
in the Antarctic area should be utilized for the benefit of 
the developing countries.

The questions posed by the possibility of utilizing 
both the living and non-living resources in the Antarctic 
have political and legal implications which call for our
immediate attention. It goes without saying,

Mr. Chairman, that due to the development we now can foresee 
in the Antarctic, we are entering a period of crucial 
importance to the Treaty Powers. It is the belief of the 
Norwegian Government that if the Treaty shall continue to 
remain a useful instrument we must be able to meet this 
challenge. In this connection, Mr. Chairman, I would like 
to underline that we must take into account that pressures 
from certain developing countries aiming at transforming 
the authority over Antarctic to the international community 
as such, must be expected to increase in the years to come.

The initiative for the solution of these problems 
lies and should lie with the consultative parties. Therefore 
it is our hope that this meeting will make a positive con-
tribution to their solution and that we eventually will be 
arriving at arrangements which will be accepted by the 
Parties as well as by the World Community.

At this meeting we are confronted with very complex 
problems. The Norwegian Delegation comes to the meeting 
with an open mind and is prepared to discuss all proposals 
put before us and to work towards constructive solutions. 
In this way we hope to be able to give a useful contribution 
to our common effort.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman
