TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                          ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XI СОВЕЩАТЕЛЬНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                        BUENOS AIRES

                        23 de Junio al
                        7 de Julio de 1981                        ANT/XI/18
                                                                  Original: English


OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION
OF SOUTH AFRICA, MR P. D. OELOFSEN
ANT/XI/18

Mr. Chairman, allow me first of all to extend to you my warmest congratulations and those of my delegation on your election as Chairman of this meeting. Those of us who have been attending Antarctic Treaty meetings are well aware of your excellent qualities and your dedication to the principles and spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and we are therefore more than confident that you will guide this meeting to a very successful conclusion.

Allow me also through you to thank on behalf of my Government the Government of Argentina for inviting us to meet in Buenos Aires for the XIth Consultative meeting as well as for hosting the Preparatory meeting which took place here earlier this year.

Mr. Chairman, this, the XIth Consultative meeting is indeed an historic occasion. It is of great significance, because we commemorate this year the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty twenty years ago. For this reason, it is indeed most fitting that this meeting should take place in the capital of Argentina, one of the nations with a long and proud association with the Antarctic.

This meeting is, however, also of particular significance because the Federal Republic of Germany is participating for the first time in the activities of this forum. It gives my delegation great pleasure, Mr. Chairman, to join other delegations in welcoming the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative group. Mr. Chairman, the fact that the membership of this meeting has increased twice during the past few years is not without significance.  I believe it is undisputable proof of the high regard the international community have for the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and for the achievements of the Consultative Parties.
ANT/XI/18                                  - 2 -

There is a third reason for the historic significance of 
this meeting.  Mr. Chairman, we can today for the first time 
officially take note of the successful conclusion and signature 
of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources which were signed in Canberra early last year. One 
cannot help but to recall that the successful conclusion and 
signature of that Convention was due entirely to the efforts 
of the Consultative Parties.

The success and achievements of the past should however, 
not lead to complacency on the part of the Consultative Parties. 
It should be accepted that the coming years will be more 
challenging than the past 20 years.  International interest 
in the Treaty area is increasing and time will bring increased 
pressure from within as well as from outside to bear on the 
Antarctic Treaty system. Our tasks would therefore become 
more difficult and the challenges greater in the coming years. 
The question of mineral exploration and exploitation in An-
tarctica is but one such challenge. At the same time we can 
certainly take encouragement from the way in which the Consul-
tative Parties have dealt with the question of the Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources. The signature of the Convention on 
the Conservation of Anta[?]ctic Marine Living Resources has again 
demonstrated the willingness and ability of the Consultative 
Parties to accommo[?]date diverse national interest in order to 
achieve a common goal of a higher order. If the same spirit 
and attitude is to prevail in the future, especially as regards 
the question of mineral exploration and exploitation we believe 
success must be achieved.

In conclusion, may I state that my delegation is prepared 
to add our efforts in the immediate future to those of other 
delegations to develop a regime for mineral resources in 
Antarctica.  In doing so one of the basic objectives of my 
delegation will be to ensure that environmentally acceptable 
solutions should prevail. Negotiations on this issue are not 
going to be easy, but we believe that the spirit of co-operation 
and compromise which underly the Antarctic Treaty and every-
thing that has been done in this forum during the past 20 years 
will prevail and lead to a successful solution of that problem.
