TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                       ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                              XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

                            BUENOS AIRES
                            23 de Junio al
                            7 de Julio de 1981                    ANT/XI/11
                                                                  Original: French


OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE FRENCH DELEGATION
HIS EXCELLENCY M. REMY TEISSIER DU CROS
MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY
ANT/XI/11

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of my delegation, I should like to congratulate
you on your appointment I have no doubt that, under your
authority and thanks to your competence, your experience,
this Eleventh Meeting will enable us to achieve further
progress in our co-operation. Through you I should like
to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Argentine
authorities for having organized this meeting and for the
welcome extended to us. I would also congratulate the
Secretary General.

I extend our welcome to the delegation of the Federal
Republic of Germany, which is participating for the first
time in a Consultative Meeting. The Federal Republic of
Germany has shown its interest in the Antarctic continent,
and I am sure that its contribution to our work will be
important and positive.

Our meeting coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty. This
permits us, on measuring the progress made during these twenty
years, to congratulate ourselves on what has been accomplished
and on the spirit in which our membership has developed, to
twelve, then to thirteen, and now to fourteen members, and
on our co-operation.

But it is, certainly, towards the future that we must
direct our eyes. The future is, first and foremost, continuing
the task in which we are engaged, our disinterested enterprise
of a scientific nature defined by the Treaty. It is also something
altogether different, something more ambitious and more complex,
which the negotiators of the Treaty did not anticipate.

I want to speak of the interest we have for several years
felt in activities of an economic nature. At the beginning,
those activities were connected with the conservation of marine
fauna and flora, consequently, with the exploitation of
renewable resources. Today, in a second stage, we propose to go
further, to take an interest in non-renewable resources of the
planet, which affect the essential interests of mankind: mineral
reserves.

The context of our reflections and of our ambitions has thus
notably altered. The new responsibilities we propose to assume
are, compared to our present responsibilities, of a different
nature and much heavier. We have been led to go beyond the
scope of the Treaty, to re-invent a legal system of co-operation
concerning programmes on which we find ourselves, in other parts
of the world, engaged in ardent competition among ourselves, and
ANT/XI/11                                  - 2 -

which, furthermore, will be rapidly exposed to present-day fire.
We shall also have to provide ourselves with the means of
guaranteeing the protection of an original and vulnerable environ-.
ment. My delegation is all the more conscious of the importance
of our project under its different aspects since France exercises
its sovereignty over a part of the Antarctic continent.

In brief, history repeats itself, but in different terms.
Like our predecessors twenty years ago, we have before us a
set of problems and we have to find the solutions, without
which we shall not have succeeded in meeting the demands of
our day.

In this search, the Antarctic Treaty can, furthermore, be
our model in its spirit far more than in its letter. But it is
above all our determination to win through that will enable us,
I hope, to reach an agreement.

Our predecessors twenty years ago showed us the way as
pionners, as innovators. The same is required of us today.
I want to believe that, thanks to the combination of the
competent men gathered around you, Mr. Chairman, thanks also
to the spirit that has inspired our meetings up to now, we
shall be able to renew the success of 1961.
