TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                    ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                    XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                    XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981

                                    ANT/XI/34
                                    Date: 6 July 1981
                                    Original: Spanish

DRAFT REPORT OF THE ELEVENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ANT/XI/34

DRAFT REPORT OF THE ELEVENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

I - DRAFT FINAL REPORT

II - STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF
      THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

III - RECOMMENDATIONS ADOPTED BY THE ELEVENTH CONSULTATIVE
      MEETING

IV - ANNEXES

      1 - Opening address by H.E. the Minister of Foreign Affairs
          and Wcrship of Argentina, and Opening Statements by the
          Heads of Delegation of States that are Consultative
          Parties of the Antarctic Treaty.

      2 - List of Participants.

      3 - Message from the Eleventh Consultative Meeting to the
          scientific bases in Antarctica.

*************
- 3 -                                                 ANT/XI/34

DRAFT FINAL REPORT OF THE ELEVENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY 
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1.  In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty, Representatives of the Consultative Parties 
(Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japen, New 
Zealand, Norway, Poland, the Republic of South Africa, the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States 
of America) met in Buenos Aires from 23 June to 7 July, 
1981, for the purpose of consulting together and considering 
measures that might be adopted to further the principles 
and purposes of the Treaty and, where appropriate, make 
recommendations to their Governments.

2.  Ambassador Angel María Oliveri López of Argentina acted as 
Chairman pro tem of the Meeting, pending the election of 
the Chairman.

3.  The Meeting was formally opened by H.E. the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and Worship of Argentina, Dr. Oscar Cami-
lion (address Annex 1).

4.  H.E. Ambassador Angel María Oliveri López was then elected 
Chairman of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, and H.E. Minister Carlos Rubio Reyna and Embassy 
Secretary Joaquín Daniel Otero (Jr.), both of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and Worship, were appointed Secretary-
General and Assistant Secretary-General of the Meeting, 
respectively.

5.  The Opening Session was held in public.  Opening statements 
were delivered by the Heads of Delegation. (Annex 1)

6.  After amending item 5, to which a second part was added, 
the Meeting adopted the following agenda:

    1.  Opening of the Meeting
    2.  Election of Officers
    3.  Opening addresses
    4.  Adoption of the Agenda
    5.  Twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the 
        Antarctic Treaty and examination of the operation of 
        the Antarctic Treaty syster
ANT/XI/34                  - 4 -

6. Antarctic resources: the question of mineral exploration 
   and exploitation

7. Review of Recommendation X-2,par.1, relating to Antarctic 
   marine living resources

8. Improvement of telecommunications in Antarctica and 
   collection and distribution of meteorological data

9. Man's impact on the Antarctic environment, including 
   the question of oil contamination of the Antarctic 
   marine environment

10. Specially protected areas

11. Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of Special 
    Scientific Interest (SSSI)

12. Effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in 
    the Antarctic Treaty area

13. Exchange of information in accordance with the Antarctic 
    Treaty

14. Public availability of the documents of the Consultative 
    Meetings

15. Matters relating to the appointment of observers to the 
    Consultative Meetings

16. Date and place of the next Consultative Meeting

17. Any other business

18. Adoption of Final Report

19. Closing of the Meeting

7. The Meeting considered in Plenary Session all the items on 
   the Agenda and appointed two Working Groups, comprising 
   members of all delegations wishing to participate, to 
   facilitate a fuller debate and a detailed study of 
   various items on the Agenda. These working groups were:-

   a) A Working Group on the exchange of information in 
      accordance with the Antarctic Treaty, public availability 
      of the documents of the Consultative Meetings, matters 
      relating to the appointment of observers to the 
      Consultative Meetings, and effects of tourism and 
      non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic area 
      (items 13, 14, 15 and 12, respectively, on the Agenda), 
      was chaired by Dr. John Heap, of the Delegation of the 
      United Kingdom.
- 5 -                 ANT/XI/34

b)     A Working Group on the twentieth anniversary of the 
entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty (first part 
of item 5) and concerned with the draft recommendation 
on the use of Antarctic Toponymy (item 17 of the 
Agenda, on other business) presented by Argentina in 
document ANT/XI/24, was chaired by H.E. Minister Ricar-
do Pedro Quadri of the Argentine Delegation.

8.     The Chairman of the Consultative Meeting appointed 
Counsellor Luis Goycolea Grez, of the Delegation of Chile, 
to conduct the informal consultations on the operation of 
the Antarctic Treaty system (connected with the second part 
of item 5 on the Agenda), and Mr. Jorge F. Schwarz, of the 
Delegation of Argentina, to conduct those on the treatment 
of the question of oil contamination of the Antarctic 
marine enviroment (item 9 of the Agenda).

9.     The Meeting unanimously adopted the recommendations 
detailed below:

       XI-1
       XI-2
       XI-3

(TO BE COMPLETED)
- 7 -                                   ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 5

10. TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE ANTARCTIC
TREATY

On the occasion of commemorating the twentieth anniversary of
the entry into force of this important international legal
instrument, concurrently with the opening of the Eleventh Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting on 23rd June last, the opening address
by H.E. the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Worship of Argentina,
as well as the opening statements by the Heads of participating
delegations stressed the enormous importance of this event and of
the positive achievements thereunder as an edifying example of
multilateral international co-operation, which, as stated in the
Argentine Foreign Minister's address, shows the "foresight and
pragmatism" of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

Attention is also drawn to the address by H.E. Ambassador En-
rique Gajardo Villarroel, of the Delegation of Chile, who was one
of the original signers of the Antarctic Treaty, on 1st December,
1959.

A draft recommendation on this subject was presented to the
Plenary by the Delegation of Argentina (Doc. ANT/XI/4); the draft
was routed to the appropriate Working Group and discussed during
informal consultations. It was decided to draw up a Statement
on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the entry into
force of the Antarctic Treaty but addressed primarily to the
outside world, to be incorporated as part of the final press
release of the Consultative Meeting.

The text is attached as an annex.

11. EXAMINATION OF THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

The Delegation of Chile presented a document (ANT/XI/5) on
the operation of the Antarctic System, proposing that items 13,
14 and 15 should be dealt with together.

An important debate on this matter took place, during which
different views were expressed. Therefore, to make possible a
more detailed analysis, the document was routed to the Working
Group on the exchange of information, availability of documentation
to the public and the appointment of observers to the Consultative
Meetings and informal consultations concerning the operation of
the Antarctic Treaty System.

The Delegations of Argentina, Chile and the United Kingdom
presented Doc. ANT/XI/32 which refers to the financial cost of
the Antarctic meetings, their prospects and the need to study
possible solutions to this problem.
- 9 -                                   ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 6

12. THE QUESTION OF MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION IN 
    ANTARCTICA

The Plenery decided that this topic should be subject to 
informal consultations between the Chairman and Heads of 
Delegation.  In this respect, it was decided/agreed ...

(TO BE COMPLETED)
- 11 -                                  ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 7

13. MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

This item, related to the revision of Recommendation X-2.1
which refers to the early entry into force of the Convention
on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, was
presented Doc. ANT/XI/31 with a Draft Recommendation which was
approved with some corrections, essentially of form, as
Recommendation XI-2.
- 13 -                                     ANT/XI/34

Agende item 8

14. IMPROVEMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND METEOROLOGICAL DATA

These matters were debated in the Plenary and Mr. R.B. Thompson,
of the Delegation of New Zealand, was asked to co-ordinate the
information on new bases established in Antarctica that had been
incorporated in the existing circuit, so that an updated version
of the diagram (or illustration) of the stations and the supply
of meteorological data could be prepared. In view of the
impossibility of completing this task, since several of the
delegations present had failed to provide information on the
subject, the meeting preferred to leave in the hands of the SCAR
Group on Logistics the task of drawing up a report and updating
the corresponding diagram which would be submitted to the Twelfth
Consultative Meeting.

It should be noted also that the delegations received with
interest three information documents, one of which was presented
by the Delegation of Argentina and two by the Delegation of Chile.

The first was Document ANT/XI/Inf. 2, entitled "Report on
the activities of Marambio Station in the Reception and broad-
casting of meteorological information in Antarctica".

The two Chilean documents, ANT/XI/Inf. 3 and ANT/XI/Inf. 4
were entitled, respectively, "Improvement of telecommunication
systems in Antarctica and collection and distribution of
meteorological data" and "Antarctic Station 'Teniente Rodolfo
Marsh'".
- 15 -                 ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 9

15. OIL CONTAMINATION OF THE ANTARCTIC MARINE ENVIRONMENT

Recommendation X-7 and some other suggestions were considered 
by the Plenary and by an informal working group.

With respect to recommendation X-7, the work of SCAR was 
noted; in response to part I of X-7 it was agreed that SCAR should 
be encouraged, through its appropriate Working Groups and Groups 
of Specialists, to develop guidelines for a program of hydro-
carbon baseline measurements, and in response to part II, to 
consider operating techniques and other pertinent information 
as part of a Logistics Symposium which will take place in Lenin-
grad (USSR) in 1982.

With respect to part II of X-7, the working group exchanged 
views concerning applicable existing international conventions 
for prevention of pollution of the sea by oil, and concerning 
remedial measures which might be taken in the event of a major 
oil spill in Antarctica.

The group concluded that:

1.  In view of the nature of present ship operations in the 
Treaty area, the application of the provisions contained 
in existing International Conventions for prevention of 
oil pollution of the sea provide for the time being an 
adequate and sufficient basis for minimizing risks of 
pollution.

2.  Ship operations, especially those of tankers, always creates 
some risk of pollution and this question should remain 
under continuing review to insure the adoption of the most 
appropriate preventive measures.

3.  Prevention of pollution of Antarctic waters by oil, and 
the best remedial measures if oil spills should occur, 
would be facilitated by future studies in the Antarctic 
and by the results of studies and experience available 
from elsewhere.

4.  The suggestion of setting up protective walls around oil 
storage tanks where practical was considered, and viewed 
as appropriate for some areas on a voluntary basis.

Regarding topic 9, it should be mentioned, further, that 
the Argentine delegation submitted document ANT/XI/Inf. 5, 
entitled:
ANT/XI/34                  - 16 -

"Determination of Water Contamination of the Scotia Sea, Drake
Passage, Weddell Sea and Bellingshausen Sea in the Antarctic
through Oil".
- 17 -                                                   ANT/XI/34

Agenda items 10 and 11

16. SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS AND PLACES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC
INTEREST

In discussing these items in the Plenary, documents ANT/XI/28
and 28 bis, presented by the Delegation of Chile, were taken into
account, containing a draft recommendation proposing the
creation of a site of special scientific interest in Bahía Chile
(Discovery Bay) in Greenwich Island, in the Southern Shetland
Islands. The discussion on this item gave rise to several
informal consultations, seeking to overcome some objections
made to the proposal; a second document on the subject was
produced (ANT/XI/28/Rev.1), which was also the subject of
further consultations and which ...

(TO BE COMPLETED)
- 19 -                                                     ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 12

17. TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS

Plenary heard with sadness the statement of the delegation 
of New Zealand about the air disaster on Mount Erebus on 28
November 1979 in which two hundred and fifty-seven people of 
several nationalities lost their lives. Wishing to express 
their deep sympathy with the relatives of those who died and 
with the people and Government of New Zealand, the Meeting 
welcomed the Chairman's recommendation that steps should be 
taken to ensure that the area where the accident took place 
should be declared a monument to the dead, whose peace should 
not be disturbed. The Meeting adopted Recommendation XI... 
(TO BE COMPLETED)

    In Plenary discussion of the Agenda Item attention was 
drawn to the need to consider whether steps should be taken 
to designate Areas of Special Tourist Interest provided for 
in Recommendation VIII-9 and to the increasing number of non-
governmental expeditions seeking help from some Consultative 
Parties.

    Regarding Areas of Special Tourist Interest, work was 
begun on the principles that might be adopted if such Areas 
were to be designated but discussion indicated a measure of 
doubt as to whether it would be prudent to proceed further with 
the designation of such Areas. It was agreed that there should 
be further study of the issues raised in discussion with a view 
to further consideration of the topic at the Twelfth 
Consultative Meeting.

    Regarding non-governmental expeditions the value was 
recognized of adopting a common response in circumstances 
where a Consultative Party was approached with a request for 
assistance from such an expedition organized in or proceeding 
from the territory of another Consultative Party. It was 
agreed that this matter should be taken up again at the next 
Consultative Meeting.
- 21 -                                      ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 13

18. EXCHANGES OF INFORMATION

There was a detailed exchange of views covering all 
aspects of exchanges of information under the Antarctic 
Treaty.  It was recognized that this was a complex subject 
of fundamental importance to the operation of the Treaty 
system requiring, inter alia, the provisions of more than 
twenty previous recommendations to be borne in mind.  The 
considerable interest in this item and the broad scope of 
suggestions made regarding additions to it, the timeliness 
of exchanges and the obligation on those providing the 
information engendered a view that it would not be prudent 
to make recommendations without further study.  It was 
agreed that this subject should be considered further at 
the Twelfth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
- 23 -                                   ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 14

19. PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF THE DOCUMENTS OF THE CONSULTATIVE 
    MEETINGS

There was a full and detailed examination of the issues 
raised concerning the publication, dissemination and 
availability of such documents which, inter alia, indicated 
differing obligations, based on constitutional practices 
regarding them.

It was concluded that existing practices should be 
maintained for the time being pending the outcome of further 
consultations.
- 25 -                                   ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 15

20. OBSERVERS AT CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS

There was a vigorous debate on this issue in which all
delegations participated. There was a common recognition
that the issues raised carried with them far-reaching
implications, some beneficial and some not. Representatives
saw the need for reflection before consultations could be
carried further, which there was a common readiness to pursue.
- 27 -                                                 ANT/XI/34


Agenda item 16

21. DATE AND PLACE OF THE NEXT CONSULTATIVE MEETING

The delegations engaged in a series of informal
consultations on the topic of the date and place of the
twelfth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. The repre-
sentatives of the Consultative Parties accepted with pleasure
the invitation of the Government of ...

(TO BE COMPLETED)
- 29 -                                   ANT/XI/34

Agenda item 17

22. OTHER BUSINESS

Under this agenda topic the plenary considered Doc.
ANT/XI/24, in which the Argentine delegation submitted a
draft recommendation on the use of Antarctic toponyms. The
matter was referred to the corresponding working group, where
it gave rise to a full and interesting discussion. Various
points of view were set forth, as also the advantages
and disedvantages of the various proposals made to overcome
the present difficulties arising from the existence of 35.000
toponyms in several languages for 8.000 geographic features.
Although no consensus was reached on the subject, it was
agreed that it woulc be further studied in the future.

The Eleventh Consultative Meeting agreed to transmit
to all the Antarctic scientific bases of the Consultative
Parties special greetings from the Representatives attending
the meeting on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary
of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, which co-
incided with the opening date of the meeting. The text of the
message transmitted appears in annex ...

(TO BE COMPLETED)
