TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVT


                                                                   ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                   XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                   XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ


BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981                                                  ANT/XI/16
                                                                   Original: English

 
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM

SIR DONALD LOGAN

 

 
  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  



  




ANT/XI/16

OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM

SIR DONALD LOGAN


It is a particular pleasure to be working with colleagues
on Antarctic questions here in Buenos Aires for the third time
in four years. On this anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty,
it is appropriate that we should celebrate here in this city,
since it was ratification by Argentina which brought it into
force twenty years ago. The occasion is enhanced by the
presence among us for the first time of the delegation of the
Federal Republic of Germany, whom we welcome warmly.


One of the purposes of the Treaty is to widen man's
understanding of Antarctica by facilitating scientific research
and at the same time to conserve its unique environment.
Scientific cooperation of course pre-dates the Treaty.  The
United Kingdom, Mr. Chairman, has a long history of cooperation
with your country in Antarctica going back to W. S. Bruce, leader
of the Scottish Antarctic Expedition at the beginning of the
century, and to Ernest Shackleton, who carried further the
work of the German explorer Filchner. In the 1950s, one of
your stations was only 400 metres from one of ours and
cooperation was soundly based on the exchange of beef for
scotch whisky.


As we review the operation of the Treaty system, we shall
remember the vital contribution of those who endure the
Antarctic climate, those who pass a long dark winter there,
those many who have returned to the Antarctic many times to
devote a lifetime to its discovery, and those who went there
and never returned.


During the twenty years of the operation of the Treaty,
we have moved gradually towards dealing with resource questions.
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs has just
reminded us that as we do so increasing interest in our work
is shown by the rest of the world.  The world has come to
reali e that Antarctica exists and our work is subject to
observation and scrutiny.  We must explain our purposes and
achievements, recognise the interest of others and avoid
unnecessary secrecy.
ANT/XI/16                                  - 2 -

There is much to be done at this meeting. We are to
try to find an acceptable basis on which to proceed to
negotiate an agreement on a minerals regime, in the course
of which an accommodation will have to be found between
states exercising sovereignty in Antarctica and those that
do not, an accommodation which will take due account of the
national interests of all the parties.  I hope we shall
succeed in this, and that we shall be able to take up the
invitation of the New Zealand Government to begin
negotiations there in the early part of next year, an
invitation which is most welcome.

At this present meeting too we must make progress on
all those other less dramatic subjects which provide the
cement which holds together the Treaty system.

We thank the Argentine Government for the excellent
facilities they have provided and for this inaugural ceremony
which is most favourable to our work.
