TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                         XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

                        BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio el
7 de Julio de 1981                                       ANT/XI/13/Rev.1
                                                         Original: English

OPENING STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF NORWAY,
KARIN BRUZELIUS
A"T/XI/13/Rev.1

Mr. Chairman,

First of all I would like, on behalf of the Norwegian 
delegation to express our congratulations on your election as 
Chairman. We are looking forward to working under your 
guidance. The Norwegian delegation would also like to thank 
the Argentine Government for its warm welcome and the thorough 
preparations made for this meeting.

This year we are commemorating the twentieth anniversary 
of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty. In these 
twenty years the Treaty has served the international 
community well by eliminating political conflict from the 
Treaty area. It has proved to be a well-suited framework for 
practical and peaceful co-operation in the scientific field. 
However, the next twenty years will provide far more challenges 
for the Antarctic Treaty than the years put behind us. New 
problems are being raised due to the increasing global 
resource scarcity and technological advances. The Treaty makes 
no provisions regarding resources. However, we have proved to 
outside world that the consultative system established under 
the Treaty can handle these new problems. The Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources Convention is an encouraging proof of our 
ability to find practical accommodating solutions to new 
problems while having diverse interest. We do not think any 
other international body, present or proposed, are better suited 
to handle the complex legal and political problems of the 
Antarctic area than the Consultative meetings.

The perhaps most pressing and difficult issue now before 
us concerns mineral resources and finding solutions on the 
bases which have successively been worked out in the previous 
meeting. The implications for the Antarctic Treaty if we do 
not succeed in this task have to be seriously considered by all 
governments here represented. I would here like to underline 
the necessity of accommodating the views and interests of the
ANT/XI/13/Rev.1             - 2 -

States claiming sovereignty in the Antarctic and those States
neither claiming sovereignty nor recognizing the claims of
other States.

The task at this meeting is to establish a firm basic
framework for our negotiations. We must find a format for
these pegotitations which is both efficient and flexible, and
which permits us to come to grips with all the real issues:
political, legal, economic, environmental and practical.

In the draft agenda before us is also included a number
of other items of utmost importance for the practical co-
operation both in the treaty area and in this forum. We are
convinced that these items are dealt with in the same serious
manner as the more complex and political issues.

The Norwegian delegation comes to the Eleventh Consultative
meeting with an open mind and is prepared to discuss all
proposals put before us. We also intend to work towards
constructive solutions, and we hope to be able to give a
useful contribution to our common efforts.
