TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE

                                                        


ANTARCTIC TREATY
XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ


BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981
                                                        
ANT/XI/21


REPORT OF THE REGULAR PREPARATORY MEETING
OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE PARTIES
ANT/XI/21

1. The Regular Preparatory Meeting for the Eleventh Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties was held in the city of Buenos Aires from 23 February to 2 March, 1981.

2. The Head of the Argentine delegation, Ambassador ANGEL MARIA OLIVERI LOPEZ, was elected chairman of the Regular Preparatory Meeting and appointed Minister C. RUBIO REYNA (Argentina) as Secretary General.

3. The Meeting adopted the following Agenda:

    1. Organization (election of chairman).

    2. Adoption of the Agenda for the Meeting.

    3. Preparation of a draft agenda for the Eleventh Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

    4. Antarctic Resources: the question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation.

    5. Consideration of the organization of the work of the Eleventh Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

    6. Adoption of the report to the Eleventh Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

4. Item 3 of the Agenda for this Meeting was considered at plenary sessions and after an exhaustive exchange of views, the Meeting adopted document ANT(81)RP.RPO/3 (Rev.1), which lists the points for inclusion in the Agenda of the Eleventh Meeting of Consultative Parties, and figures as Annex 1 to this report.

    Several delegations proposed that the following items be included in the draft agenda for the Eleventh Consultative Meeting:

    (i) The question of financing Consultative and/or other meetings held within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty;

    (ii) The question of a Secretariat for the Antarctic Treaty.

    There was no consensus on the inclusion of these items but it was made clear by the delegations concerned that proposals for their inclusion would be made under item 4 of the Agenda of the XI Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting when a final decision would be taken.
ANT/XI/21                                  - 2 -

5.  In considering item 4 of the Agenda for the Preparatory
Meeting, the representatives concentrated on the future steps
to be taken in connection with the elaboration of an agreed
regime regarding the question of exploration and exploitation
of Antarctic mineral resources.  The matter was closely examined
at different levels and, as a result of these discussions,
certain elements were identified that could be subject of
further consideration in the XI Consultative Meeting.  These
elements are contained in a paper as Annex II which does not
bind any delegation.  Certain delegations expressed reservations
on specific parts and specific words of the text.

6.  In dealing with item 5 of the Agenda relating to the
organization of the work of the Eleventh Consultative Meeting
of the Antarctic Treaty, it was agreed that the Eleventh
Consultative Meeting should take place from 23 June through
7 July this year, and that efforts should be made to study
the Agenda exhaustively, a task that would be facilitated
by the availability of two rooms with full secretariat services.
- 3 -                                 ANT/XI/21

ANNEX I

PROVISIONAL AGENDA FOR THE ELEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1.  Opening of the Meeting

2.  Election of Officers

3.  Inaugural addresses

4.  Approval of the Agenda

5.  Twentieth Anniversary of the entry into force of the
    Antarctic Treaty

6.  Antarctic resources: the question of mineral exploration
    and exploitation

7.  Review of Recommendation X-2, p.1, relating to Antarctic
    Marine Living Resources

8.  Improvement of telecommunications in Antarctica and
    collection and distribution of meteorological data

9.  Effects of man's activities in the Antarctic environ-
    ment, including the question of oil contamination of
    the Antarctic Marine Environment

10. Specially Protected Areas

11. Facilitation of Scientific Research: Sites of Special
    Scientific Interest (SSSI)

12. Effects of Tourism and Non-governmental Expeditions in
    the Antarctic Treaty Area

13. Exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty

14. Public Availability of the Documents of the Consultative
    Meeting

15. Question relating to the appointment of observers to
    the Consultative Meeting

16. Date and place of the next Consultative Meeting

17. Other business

18. Adoption of the Final Report

19. Closing of the Meeting
- 5 -                 ANT/XI/21

ANNEX II

The Representatives

1.  RECALLING the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, which 
    established a regime for international cooperation in 
    Antarctica, with the objective of ensuring that Antarcti-
    ca should continue forever to be used exclusively for 
    peaceful purposes and should not become the scene or 
    object of international discord;

2.  CONVINCED that the framework established by the Antarc-
    tica Treaty has proved effective in promoting international 
    harmony in furtherance of the purposes and principles of 
    the United Nations Charter, in prohibiting inter alia 
    any measures of a military nature, in ensuring the pro-
    tection of the Antarctic environment, in preventing any 
    nuclear explosions and the disposal of any radioactive 
    waste material in Antarctica, and in promoting freedom 
    of scientific research in Antarctica, to the benefit of 
    all mankind;

3.  CONVINCED further of the necessity of maintaining the 
    Antarctic Treaty in its entirety and believing that the 
    early conclusion of a regime for Antarctic mineral re-
    sources would further strengthen the Antarctic Treaty 
    framework;

4.  DESIRING without prejudice to Article IV of the Antarctic 
    Treaty to negotiate with the full participation of all 
    the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty an ap-
    propriate set of rules for the exploration and exploitation 
    of Antarctic mineral resources;

5.  NOTING the unity between the continent of Antarctica and 
    its adjacent offshore areas;

6.  MINDFUL of the negotiations that are taking place in the 
    IIIrd United Nations Conference of the Law of the Sea;

7.  REAFFIRMING their commitment to the early conclusion of 
    a regime for Antarctic mineral resources which would take 
    due account of the respective national interests of the 
    Consultative Parties as regards the form and content of 
    the regime, including decision-making procedures, as well 
    as the special characteristics of the Antarctic area;

8.  RECALLING Recommendations VII-6, VIII-14, IX-1 and X-1;

9.  RECALLING Further Recommendations VI-4, VII-1, VIII-11, 
    VIII-13, IX-5, IX-6 and X-7.
ANT/XI/21                                  - 6 -

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They take note of the progress made toward the timely 
adoption of a regime for Antarctic mineral resources at 
the Eleventh Consultative Meeting and related meetings 
and the importance of this progress.

2. A regime on Antarctic mineral resources should be con-
cluded as a matter of urgency.

3. A Special Consultative Meeting should be convened in 
order:

    a) to elaborate a regime;

    b) to determine the form of the regime including 
       the question as to whether an international 
       instrument such as a convention is necessary;

    c) to establish a schedule for negotiations, 
       using informal meetings and sessions of the 
       Special Consultative Meeting as appropriate;

    d) to take any other steps that may be necessary 
       to facilitate the conclusions of the regime, 
       including a decision as to the procedure for 
       its adoption.

4. The Special Consultative Meeting should base its work 
on this recommendation and the relevant recommendations 
and reports of the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meetings.

5. The regime should be based on the following principles:

    a) the Consultative Parties should continue to 
       play an active and responsible role in dealing 
       with the question of Antarctic mineral re-
       sources;

    b) the Antarctic Treaty must be maintained in its 
       entirety;

    c) protection of the unique Antarctic environment 
       and of its dependent ecosystems should be a 
       basic consideration;

    d) the Consultative Parties, in dealing with the 
       question of mineral resources in Antarctica, 
       should not prejudice the interests of all 
       mankind in Antarctica;
- 7 -                                   ANT/XI/21

e) the provisions of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty 
should not be affected by the regime. It should 
ensure that the principles embodied in Article IV 
are safeguarded in application to the area covered 
by the Antarctic Treaty;

6.  The regime should inter alia:

I. Include means for:

     a. assessing the possible impact of mineral resource 
        activities on the Antarctic environment in order 
        to provide for informed decision-making^

     b. determining whether mineral resource activities 
        will be acceptable;

     c. governing the ecological, technological, political, 
        legal and economic aspects of those activities in 
        cases where they would be determined acceptable, 
        including:
        - the establishment, as an important part of the 
          regime, of rules relating to the protection of 
          the Antarctic environment; and
        - the requirement that mineral resource activities 
          undertaken pursuant to the regime be under-
          taken in compliance with such rules.

II. Include procedures for adherence by States other than 
    the Consultative Parties, either through the Antarc-
    tic Treaty or otherwise, which would:

     a. ensure that the adhering State is bound by the 
        basic provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, in par-
        ticular Articles I, IV and VI, and by the relevant 
        Recommendations adopted by the Consultative Par-
        ties; and

     b. make entities of that State eligible to participate 
        in mineral resource activities under the regime.

III. Include provisions for cooperative arrangements between 
     the regime and other relevant international organizations.

IV. Apply to mineral resource activities taking place on 
    the Antarctic continent and its adjacent offshore areas 
    to limits to be determined in the elaboration of the 
    regime, recognizing that activities relating to hydro-
    carbon resources appear to require the earliest and 
    most detailed attention.
ANT/XI/21                                  - 8 -

V. Include provisions to ensure that the special res-
ponsibilities of the Consultative Parties in res-
pect of the environment in the Antarctic Treaty
area are protected, taking into account responsi-
bilities which may be exercised in the area by other
international organizations.

VI. Cover commercial exploration (activities related
to minerals involving, in general, retention of
proprietary data and/or non-scientific exploratory
drilling) and exploitation (commercial develop-
ment and production).

7. In elaborating the regime, they take account of the
provisions of Recommendation IX-1, paragraph 8.
