ANT/XI/33/Rev.2

The coincidence between the date on which the Antarctic 
Treaty entered into force and the date, twenty years later on 
which this Consultative Meeting opened in Buenos Aires gave 
rise to reflections on the evolving system of obligations that 
had been undertaken by the Consultative Parties.

Prior to the Antarctic Treaty the Antarctic had been more 
the subject of international competition than co-operation.
The International Geophysical Year, 1957-58 had shown the 
benefits of co-operation and the Treaty sought to establish a 
firm foundation for the continuation and development of such 
co-operation on the basis of freedom of scientific investigation 
in Antarctica.

  The Antarctic Treaty prohibited activities of a military 
  nature, nuclear explosions and the disposal of radioactive 
  waste material; it aimed to promote international scientific 
  co-operation, provided for periodic consultations on matters 
  of common concern and ensured the observance of its provisions 
  by establishing the right of Consultative Parties to inspect 
  activities in all areas of Antarctica.

  Before the International Geophysical Year the Antarctic 
  had been generally looked upon as having little effect on the 
  rest of the world. The encouragement provided by the Treaty 
  for cooperation between scientists has enabled them to increase 
  knowledge of Antarctica at a much faster rate than would 
  otherwise have been possible. The importance of Antarctica 
  as, for example, a major global climatic regulator, has become 
  ever more apparent.

  The Antarctic Treaty System of continually evolving 
  consultative procedures has produced recommendations covering 
  a wide variety of subjects which benefit from international 
  co-operation. Where these recommendations touch upon 
  scientific matters the Consultative Parties have sought the 
  advice of Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) 
  through their National Antarctic Committees.

  Among the system's achievements have been a unique and 
  all embracing set of conservation measures comprising the 
  Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
  Flora, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
  and the recently concluded Convention on the Conservation of 
  Antarctic Marine Living Resources. In exercising their 
  responsibility for the protection of the Antarctic environment, 
  the Consultative Parties have taken a number of additional 
  steps to prevent harmful human impact upon that environment.
ANT/XI/33/Rev.2              - 2 -

The Antarctic Treaty System of arrangements dealing with 
the practical requirements for international action is the 
only widly accepted arrangement which exists in the area.
There are now twenty-five contracting states and it was a 
welcome event that at the Third Special Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting earlier this year the Consultative Parties 
had acknowledged that the Federal Republic of Germany had 
fulfilled the requirements for Consultative status under the 
Antarctic Treaty and thus participated in the Eleventh 
Consultative Meeting in Buenos Aires.
