TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE


                        ANTARCTIC TREATY
                        XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                        XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio el
7 de Julio de 1981                         ANT/XI/12
                                               Original: English

 
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF JAPAN, PROFESSOR TAKESHI NAGATA

 
  



(Illustration not extracted as per instructions)
ANT/XI/12

Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:

On behalf of the Japanese Delegation, I should like to 
join the distinguished representatives who preceded me in 
congratulating you on being unanimously elected as Chairman 
of our Meeting.

I should also like to express my Delegation's deep 
appreciation to the Government of Argentina for the outstanding 
preparations it has made in hosting the preparatory meeting and 
also this Consultative Meeting. It is a great pleasure for 
my Delegation to come to this beautiful country with which my 
country has always enjoyed the traditional bond of friendship.

I should like to make use of this opportunity to welcome 
the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany to this 
Consultative Meeting. I am confident that the membership of 
the Federal Republic of Germany will contribute a great deal 
in strengthening our efforts to further the objectives and 
principles of the Antarctic Treaty.

It is also my pleasure to inform you of the Japanese 
acceptance of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources. We deposited to the Australian 
Government an instrument of acceptance of this Convention on 
the 26th of May.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

We are proud of the achievements the Antarctic Treaty 
Regime has made so far. We have closely cooperated together 
and successfully worked for the lofty cause of the promotion 
of international cooperation in scientific research and the 
maintenance of natural environment of the region by securing 
peaceful use of the Antarctic and the freedom of the scientific 
research.
- 2 -

ANT/XI/12

However, I should point out that we have at hand probably
a most serious issue which we face since the establishment of
the Antarctic Treaty Regime. This is the question of the
mineral exploration and exploitation. I believe that the true
value of our Regime will hinge upon how successfully we could
cope with this issue.

I believe that it is time we stop the futile and time-
consuming exercise of simply asserting and reiterating
positions of us each; but it is time when the Consultative
Parties, who possess the knowledge, expertise and experience
on Antarctic, should endeavour together to formulate a new
regime on this issue by transcending the differing interests
and positions of each Party.

On this festive occasion of the twentieth anniversary
of the coming into force of the Antarctic Treaty, the
greatest task for us, who have gathered in the capital of
Argentina, is to succeed in obtaining the basic consensus
on the framework to be formulated on the question of the
mineral exploration and exploitation by demonstratirg
understanding of each other's position and by overcoming the
difficult hurdles on the basis of the friendship which the
Consultative Parties fostered over the past twenty years.

My Delegation intends to sweat out together with all
our friends here and work towards this objective.

Although our task is not easy, I am sure that we shall
succeed in our endeavour through our cooperation, and I
wish to assure you of the fullest cooperation of my
Delegation in tackling this common task.

Thank you.
