TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                         XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
                                                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                         XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio el
7 de Julio de 1981                                       ANT/XI/8
                                                         Original: French

OPENING STATEMENT
BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF BELGIUM,
AMBASSADOR GEORGES TILKIN
ANT/XI/8

Mr. Chairman:

One of the reasons that bring the Belgien delegation to particularly enjoy this meeting in Buenos Aires is the existence of long-standing bonds between Argentina and Belgium in the field of activities in Antarctica.

May I be allowed, on this occasion, to recall the good will shown by Argentina toward the First Belgian Antarctic Expedition under the leadership of Adrien de Gerlache de Gomery at the end of the past century.

When the ship "Belgica" sailed southward, its last port of call was in Argentina.

The welcome extended by the Argentine Government was remarkable. It generously invited the Belgian expedition to draw from the coal depot of the Argentine navy at the bottom of Lapataia bay, near Ushuaia, the capital of the Argentine Tierra del Fuego. And it was from that port that the "Belgica" departed in December 1897 for the Antarctic, which it was to reach after a brief stop at San Juan del Salvamento on the Island of the States.

It is well and fitting to recall here that international co-operation of old, and the assistance given to the expedition which was the first to winter beyond the Antarctic polar circle.

Mr. Chairman, the present meeting is important from all standpoints.

It is important because it commemorates the twentieth eniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, which was an innovator, inasmuch as it was the first in affirming the non-military nature of a region of the world, the prohibition of nuclear explosions there and the complete freedom for scientific research that may be carried out there.

This meeting is equally important because its provisional agenda includes the discussion of problems linked with the elaboration of a system for prospecting and exploiting the mineral resources of the Antarctic.
ANT/XI/8                                  - 2 -

It cannot be denied that these are the most difficult pro-
blems the consultative meetings ever had to face. They may,
by their very nature, destroy the so-called "spirit of the
Antarctic Treaty" which has been transmitted to diplomats
and jurists by scientists and explorers from the participating
countries, convinced by the obstacles peculiar to the polar
region of the imperious need of close co-operation.

The mineral resources in the Antarctic should not lead to
the destruction of this spirit. They should enhance and for-
tify it by expanding co-operation to new areas.

It has been undeniably established in consultative meetings
that the difficult problems could always be solved.  A formula
acceptable to all parties has always been found.

This should continue to be so.

The importance assigned at present to mineral natural
resources in the Antarctic compels us to establish a suitable
system of exploitation of these resources for our common good.

This task devolves upon the consultative parties because
only they, through their experience and the specific responsi-
bility they have borne for the last twenty years, are able to
carry it to a successful conclusion.

It is our duty to make every effort to carry out this
task in spite of the serious legal, political and psychological
obstacles that confront us.

In 1959, the representative of my country to the Washington
Conference, Viscount Obert de Thieusies, stated that "those who
had to overcome the same obstacles were always ready to reach
an understanding".

The optimism of this aim cannot be denied.

Mr. Chairman, before I conclude I wish to congratulate you
on your unanimous election and to assure you of the best in-
tentions of the Belgian delegation.
