TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                           ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                  XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
                                                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                  XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ


BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981                                                ANT/XI/22
                                                                  Original: Spanish

Presented by the Delegation of Chile

Item 5: Twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the 
       Antarctic Treaty and examination of the operation of 
       the Antarctic Treaty System.

STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF CHILE
AMBASSADOR ENRIQUE GAJARDO VILLARROEL
SIGNER OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
ANT/XI/22

Twenty years ago, the Antarctic Treaty entered into force, 
on June 23rd., 1961, having been signed in Washington on December 
1st., 1959.

Thus was born a new international system, to be applied in a 
continent that was inhospitable due to its natural conditions, 
unpopulated, but attractive to men of science for many reasons, 
and dangerous to peace if ill used.

Since ancient times, it had been the object of numerous 
explorations, from the days when on the maps of the geographer 
Mercator it appeared linked to the South American Continent, 
forming a single mass with the lands of the Kingdom of Chile, 
belonging to the Spanish Crown, down to the voyages of Cook, 
Palmer, Bellinghausen, Weddell, Gauss, Ross, Wilkes, Gerlach, 
Dumont d'Urville, Scott, Amundsen the last two in their 
dramatic race towards the South Pole  and the more modern 
explorers, like Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd.

Many sealers and whalers penetrated into the the Antarctic 
seas in different periods, and the majority of them soon fled, 
chased away by storms at sea and hurricane gales, polar cold 
and icebergs.

The new regime crected by the Treaty entrusted the 
implementation of the system to the twelve countries named in 
the preamble, and which had shown special interest in Antarctica, 
in particular by estatlishing bases for scientific research 
during International Geophysical Year, which was held in 
1957-1958.

On entering into force, the Antarctic Treaty solved a 
political problem that was creating serious concern at the time, 
by freezing in its article IV all territorial claims as they 
then stood, while recognizing their existence and protecting 
them.

Furthermore, and this is important, it was agreed among the 
Contracting Parties that there would be no further claims of 
sovereignty rights and that no act or activity carried out while 
the Treaty was in force would constitute grounds for enforcing, 
supporting or denying a claim of sovereignty rights in Antarctica, 
nor for creating any sovereignty rights in that region.

The idea of "interest" in Antarctica and in scientific 
research is essential, since it determines the capacity of 
"consultative party" or "acceding party".

The Antarctic Treaty is not exclusive. It is open to all 
countries for accession, but to acquire the status of 
"consultative party", that is, to take part in the administration 
of the system, it is necessary to show a real interest in the 
Antarctic.
ANT/XI/22                                  - 2 -

This is established in paragraph 2 of article IX, which 
states that each country that has become a party to the Treaty 
by accession shall be entitled to appoint representatives to 
participate in the consultative meetings during such time as 
that Contracting Party demonstrates its interest in Antarctica 
by conducting substantial scientific research activity there, 
such as the establishment of a scientific station or the despatch 
of a scientific expedition.

But what the Antarctic Treaty really created, on entering 
into force, was a state of permanent peace when it stipulated in 
its article I that Antarctica shall be used for peaceful purposes 
only; and prohibited any measures of a military nature, such as 
the establishment of military bases and fortifications, the 
carrying out of military manoeuvres, as well as the testing of 
any type of weapons.

In this same spirit, it prohibited any nuclear explosions 
and the disposal of radioactive waste material in the area, and, 
likewise, to ensure the observance of these provisions for the 
peaceful system to be effective, it created the procedure for 
inspection.

Perhaps the greatest benefit the Antarctic Treaty has given 
to the advancement of science and to all humanity, is the 
creation of a spirit of solidarity and co-operation among the 
Consultative Parties to carry out scientific tasks successfully. 
The Treaty converted Antarctica into a scientific laboratory, 
which has received the collaboration of eminent men of science 
and scientific agencies such as "SCAR".

The Antarctic Treaty is a living instrument, which has not 
slipped into oblivion on being deposited in the Archives of the 
United States. It serves the cause of peace and of scientific 
research, and we all nourish the hope that it will also serve 
as the framework for drawing up other international instruments, 
not only for the conservation of its flora, its fauna, sites of 
historic and scientific interest, the fishing wealth of its 
seas, the Antarctic environment, and to prevent its pollution, 
but also to utilize all its resources to meet the needs of all 
mankind.

The time seems to have come, and our delegation is of this 
opinion, to update the Antarctic system and endow it with means 
in keeping with actual present-day conditions.

The debates that led to the conclusion of the Antarctic 
Treaty were not easy. Both the discussions in the preparatory 
committee that met in Washington in the months of August and 
September, 1958 and those in the conference itself, in October
- 3 -                                   ANT/XI/22

and November, 1959, were heated. But, in the end, common sense 
and healthy spirit of co-operation prevailed, and the Treaty 
was signed in the midst of general optimism and satisfaction.

I am reminded at this moment of scenes and of the names of 
those who were the leading actors in those events. But there 
is one name above all that I wish to recall: that of Paul Daniels,
Ambassador of the United States, who was in charge of the 
negotiations concerning the Treaty. Without his patiencec his 
skill, his talent and his tenacity, there would have been no 
Treaty.

Five years ago, while talking with my friend Ambassador 
Daniels in Washington, I asked him how he had managed to overcome 
the final resistance and to make the signature of the Treaty a 
fact. He replied that everything was arranged at a luncheon 
given at the Soviet Embassy in Washington. But what the did not 
tell me was the extent to which vodka, caviar, Scotch wisky and 
Alaska salmon influenced the result of that working luncheon!

Since then I have often thought of the advisability of 
repeating that luncheon for the solution of present problems...

I also remembur at that first Consultative Meeting at 
Canberra in the Parliament Room where we held our sessions, a 
young Japanese expert on his country's delegation. He is here 
today in this room, and is now the head of the Delegation of 
Japan.

On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the entry 
into force of the Antarctic Treaty, the Government of Chile, 
through me reiterates its faith in the principles rroclaimed by 
this international instrument and hopes it will continue to serve 
the cause of peace and scientific research. Thank you.
