TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                            ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                   XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                   XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio el
7 de Julio de 1981                                                 ANT/XI/3
                                                                   Original: Spanish

ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND WORSHIP,
DR. OSCAR H. CAMILION,
AT THE OPENING CEREMONY OF
THE ELEVENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ANT/XI/3

On behalf of the Argentine government, I have great 
pleasure in welcoming the delegates to the city of Buenos 
Aires, and trust that their stay in my country will be 
particularly pleasant.

The Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is 
specially significant because we are commemorating today the 
twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of this 
instrument, the cornerstone of the system that, throughout 
the last twenty years, the consultative parties have sought 
to apply faithfully and to consolidate, in keeping with their 
terms of reference concerning matters relating to Antarctica. 
Today, the membership of consultative parties has increased 
to fourteen countries, with the incorporation of the Federal 
Republic of Germany, which I congratulate most particularly 
on this occasion.

During the twenty years of its application, the Antarctic 
Treaty has shown a soundness that is the result of the 
foresight and pragmatism that guided those who, on drawing 
it up, overcame difficulties in the way to the achievement of 
the delicate balance implied therein.

This has permitted the development of the system we know 
today, which is following the road opened by the work of the 
International Geophysical Year, celebrated in 1957-1958, and 
applies its guiding principles, synthesized in freedom and 
cooperation in scientific research, non-militarization, 
prohibition of nuclear tests, and the elimination of 
radioactive debris, conservation of the special Antarctic 
ecosystem, its flora and fauna, and the firm undertaking 
to preserve the natural laboratory which Antarctica is, 
exclusively for peaceful purposes.

The common concerns and goals that bind together the 
efforts of all the states represented here are certainly 
reflected in the complex and vast normative activity carried 
out during the ten previous consultative meetings. In this 
respect, I consider this to be a suitable occasion to com-
municate to the delegates that my government will proceed in 
the next few days to approve the recommendations adopted 
during the Tenth Consultative Meeting held in Washington in 
1979, whereby Argentina will once again manifest its special 
interest, the importance it attributes to, and its respect for, 
the Antarctic question, and the measures unanimously accorded 
within the Treaty.
ANT/XI/3                                  - 2 -

On this particular subject, it should be unnecessary to stress yet again, were it not that these words are spoken on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, that, on the basis of the spirit and letter of the Treaty, Argentina has maintained throughout the existence of this instrument ties of close cooperation with all the member states, and that it proposes to continue doing so. We have shared the spirit and knowledge of our researchers, we have made known the results obtained, and in all cases, we have met with an adequate response to this open disposition. Furthermore, and favoured by the closer proximity of Argentina continental territory to Antarctica, we have given our humanitarian cooperation whenever necessary to give assistance and to save lives.

Our active participation in everything concerning Antarctica must compute the considerable quantity of human resources and financial investments annually effected by Argentina in its sector. This makes the Antarctic question of the utmost importance within our national planning.

Questions like the conservation of the Antarctic environment and its flora and fauna have been the subject of constant concern for the consultative parties, which have approved numerous decisions in this respect. Later, it was the protection of seals and Antarctic living marine resources that attracted preferential attention among the member states, which adopted novel treatments that in both cases led to the adoption of specifical conventions as legal instruments appropriate to the purposes of conservation of these renewable resources.

The latest manifestation of this cooperation was the adoption in 1980 of the convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Living Marine Resources.

But today we are faced by new challenges, which in some aspects go beyond the original scope of the Treaty, and to which we must find imaginative solutions, based on its vast framework. Indeed, we cannot say that in the last twenty years there has been any change in the attitude of the original consultative parties regarding the utilization of the natural resources of Antarctica. The idea was not new in 1959, but it was then deemed that the moment was not opportune for its consideration, as it might affect the effort made to conclude the Treaty.

But during the last few years, this new trial by fire, which is the utilization of Antarctic mineral resources, has begun to be faced by the consultative parties. There is a long way still to go, but it is evident that if the same spirit of cooperation and understanding that has reigned up to now among the member parties continues to flourish, we can expect the final result to be satisfactory for all.
- 3 -                                   ANT/XI/3


In this context we want to be clear. In view of the 
possibility of the eventual utilization of the mineral 
resources of Antarctica arousing ambitions on the part of 
those who up to now have shown no genuine interest in 
Antarctica, we want to state once again that such was not 
the purpose of the Treaty, nor the goal pursued by its 
original members; nor can we now or in the future -- at 
least, as far as Argentina is concerned -- allow an unbridled 
commercial competition to start in the region.

As a country that exercises sovereignty in a sector of 
Antarctica, Argentina has an interest in the region that shows 
itself as much in this political aspect as in the implications 
relating to its environment, conservation of resources, economic 
aspects, and, in brief, in all the activities that take place 
there.

    In this respect, the most important and delicate question 
in the Agenda for the Eleventh Consultative Meeting is that 
of mineral exploration and exploitation in Antarctica. For 
years, and particularly in the last three consultative 
meetings, interest and concern regarding this item have 
increased since the priority accorded at the time to 
negotiations on the conservation of living resources has 
ceased to require the preferential attention of the consultative 
parties. The centre of interest has now turned to the study 
of the mineral regime, which I am ppersuaded should be provided 
with a sure and firm foundation in the eyes of the international 
community, in view of the growing interest in Antarctica, and 
as the point of departure for subsequent development. The 
fruitful labour of the last twenty years, which serves to 
inspire us at these consultative meetings, illustrates how, 
on each new occasion, our countries have raised their sights 
higher towards targets that have been set in view of the 
growing requirements of the system that stems from the Treaty. 
There has thus been a supplement to the latter, through 
specific regimes implemented autonomously when needed, but 
always within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty, and which 
show clearly the dynamic nature, vitality and pragmatism of 
the system, which must be constantly adapted to the concrete 
reality of each moment.

Undoubtedly, the question of minerals will be the greatest 
challenge faced up to now by the consultative parties. The 
attempts to draw up a regime on the matter should bring 
solutions to particularly critical questions, without which 
it will not be possible to attain the goal sought. This will 
demand the utmost effort and imagination and creativity of 
the delegates, as solutions in this respect, although complex, 
are becoming more peremptory. In the first place, we are 
urgently required to comply perfectly with the collective 
undertaking assumed when the Antarctic Treaty entered into 
force, in the sense of fully ensuring the protection of the 
continent's ecological system.
ANT/XI/3                                 - 4 -

To this end, I consider that the future regine must be
as detailed and precise as possible, conditioning and
regulating all kinds of procedures and activities, in such a
way as to permit an effective control of all the consultative
parties at all stages of development of the operations, both
before and after the activities are carried out, and in view
of their eventual effects. This question is of particular
interest to countries like Argentina, with ecosystems that
arc extremely dependent on that of Antarctica owing to their
proximity to the region.

Another question that will undoubtedly affect the
viability of the regime is its political acceptance by both
the consultative parties to the Antarctic Treaty and the
international community. The occurrence of already existing
situations and the pragmatism of those who in 1959 negotiated
this legal instrument, led them to state unequivocally in
its article IV concerning the reality of Antarctic policy,
that there are some states that exercise sovereign rights
over it. The aforesaid article likewise contemplates the
existence of bases and grounds for claiming soverignty rights
for other consultative parties. This specific fact makes it
advisable, in undertaking future negociations for an eventual
mineral regime, to incorporate therein a provision that
states not only the principles of article IV of the Treaty
but also reflects clearly that concrete reality deriving
from the various positions recognized by said article and
offers clear juridical and political grounds for their own
existence, through such clains and grounds for claims
recognized by the Treaty. The foregoing entails the clear
understanding that the reservation of existing rights in
article IV, which is recognized by all the consultative parties,
can and must become the most powerful legal basis of a regime
on minerals, with its full import for the international
community.

I am sure that delegates will pay special attention to these
matters, on which, to my mind, will depend the viability of
the structures to be set up. Argentina is confident that these
negotiating excercises will be fruitful and, to prove this, it
hereby offers to host the definitive diplomatic conference
at which the regime in question is adopted.

There is no doubt as to the importance of the undertaking
before you during the next fifteen days. The agenda for this
meeting is sufficiently explicit. Apart from the aforementioned
items, many other problems requiring decisions are surely
awaiting you. The facets of the problem posed by the Antarctic
ecosystem in the atmosphere, on land, and in the oceans is
extremely vast. Questions effecting meteorology, telecom-
munications, the impact of man's activities, environmental
- 5 -                                   ANT/XI/3

pollution, scientific facilities, expeditions, and also 
tourism in Antarctica, constitute examples of the magnitude of 
the work of this meeting which falls on the auspicious 
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the entry into 
force of the Treaty.

    In declaring the sessions of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting open, I wish you the greatest success.

•
•
