TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                         XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

                        BUENOS AIRES
                        23 de Junio al
                        7 de Julio de 1981

                                                         ANT/XI/6
                                                         Original: Spanish

OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE ARGENTINE DELEGATION,
AMBASSADOR CARLOS LUCAS BLANCO
ANT/XI/6                                  - 2 -

In this role as a territorially-minded country, interested
in Antarctica, Argentina is today imbued with the crucial
importance of the question that concerns us here: the possible
exploration for and exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources.
The document we shall have before us, as the only one produced
during the discussions of the Preparatory Meeting for this
Consultative meeting, is merely a "non paper" which did not
obtain a consensus because it did not satisfy the expectations
aroused. It does not please our delegation because, as was
stated during the February Preparatory meeting -- and I know
that other delegations felt the same -- it is not well balanced.
It does not satisfy us, on account of what it does not say,
rather than for what it says. That is, we consider it is not
balanced inasmuch as it does not give the idea of "internal
accommodation" which is a sine qua non for this process towards
a possible and eventual regime governing minerals to be able
to go ahead. The "accommodation" between countries that, like
Argentina, exercise sovereignty and those that neither
exercise nor recognize it, can at the same time be of special
importance in giving said regime a solid foundation in the
eyes of the international community, as the Foreign Minister
said in his opening address.

We believe it is necessary for this accommodation to be
stated as a substantial element in any one of the recommendations
adopted by this meeting, very clearly stated and in the right
place, that is, in the operative part of the document. It is
up to us as representatives to make the necessary effort to
find a formula to this end. And my delegation is quite ready
to cooperate in order that the document produced by this meeting
will incorporate ideas we consider necessary for the afore-
mentioned accommodation to materialize; and this, I want to say
beforehand, is an essential element for my delegation to give
its approval to any draft recommendation on the matter.
ANT/XI/4

Mr. Chairman,

The words of my country's Foreign Minister, who opened the 
sessions of this Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 
are still ringing in our ears.

I want to echo his words to the delegates of welcome to 
Argentina and, in particular, to greet and extend a warm welcome 
to those of the Federal Republic of Germany, who are attending 
our consultative debates for the first time.

We are likewise pleased to have with us a delegate who was 
present, with his knowledge and diplomatic wisdom, at the happy 
conclusion of the Treaty under which we are meeting today. We 
are referring to Ambassador Gajardo V[?]illarroel, of the Chilean 
Delegation, whom I am honoured to congratulate on behalf of my 
delegation, while at the same time wishing him every success 
and thanking him for having participated in drawing up the Treaty 
that governs us.

I also want to congratulate you, Mr Chairman, on your 
election, which places us under an expert guide during our debates 
as was the case during the course of the Special Preparatory 
meeting and the Third Special Consultative Meeting.

We have a full agenda before us, as we have had at all the 
Consultative Meetings, with pending items and other new ones. Of 
then all, I think all of us present here will agree that the most 
interesting and, at the same time, the most difficult item, is 
the one on Antarctic mineral resources.

I must once again reaffirm that Argentina Exercises sovereignty 
in Antarctica. Its rights are well rooted on a permanent 
occupation, which goes back 77 years, and on an outstanding, 
sustained and scientif[?]ically fruitful Antarctic activity, based 
on its privileged geographic situation as the country nearest 
Antarctica. This is not the time to enumerate juridical, 
geological, historic, or geographic titles, which have been stated 
at length previously on numerous occasions. Needless to mention 
the interest with which we Argentines examine all Antarctic 
activities that might affect the ecosystem of the region and our 
own.
- 3 -                                 ANT/XI/6

On opening our meeting, Dr. Camilion, my country's Mi-
nister of Foreign Affairs and Worship, referred to the signi-
ficance of the date of this conference, which happily coin-
cides with that of the twentieth anniversary of the entry in-
to force of the Treaty.  To honour this pleasing event, my de-
legation will present a draft recommendation.  Such a coinci-
dence encourages us to meditate on the manner in which this
Antarctic Treaty that unites us was concluded,
and has functioned for 20 years, and on how very difficult
circumstances were overcome thanks to the understanding and
co-operation always shown by the Contracting Parties.  To deal
wi:h this new trial now afflicting this instrument, I take the
liberty of appealing to the traditional spirit that has always
presided over our debates to guide us once again and to enable
us to find solutions in the most essential items that con-
template everyone's interest, thereby preserving the mechanism
and philosophy of the 1959 Treaty.  I think we ought to recall
here that six years ago, on discussing formally for the first
time in Oslo the question of Antarctic mineral resources, the
Argentine Delegation in its opening address said, and I want
to repeat it here" "My delegation trusts that when we come to
discuss this item we shall show the same outstanding capacity
for mutual agreement with, and tolerance for, the opinions of
others, which has always been an essential feature of these
meetings.  Calm, dispassionate and deliberate study will cer-
tainly help us to reach solutions to this difficult problem,
solutions that will, to some extent, satisfy the interests
of all the states meeting on this occasion.

I offer my delegation's most sincere co-operation to these
ends and, within a framework of mutual co-operation, I am sure
that this meeting will be crowned with success, as already
occurred during the process that ended successfully in Canberra,
in May 1980, with the adoption of the Convention for the Con-
servation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, a laborious
achievement, the conclusion of which must give us great sa-
tisfaction.  Thank you very much.
