1 7 8 1 0 8 - 1 4

E L E V E N T H   C O N S U L T A T I V E   M E E T I N G

CONTENTS

I - FINAL REPORT

II - STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF
THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

III - RECOMMENDATIONS ADOPTED BY THE ELEVENTH CONSULTATIVE
MEETING

IV - ANNEXES

1 - Opening address by H.E. the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Worship of Argentina.

2 - Opening Statements by the Heads of Delegation of
States that are Consultative Parties of the
Antarctic Treaty.

3 - Address by Ambassador Enrique Gajardo Villarroel.

4 - List of Participants.

5 - Message from the Eleventh Consultative Meeting to
the scientific stations in Antarctica.

6 - Approval of Consultative Meeting Recommendations
(as of 23 June 1981).

7 - Document presented by the Delegation of Argentina
on Agenda item 9.

***********
- 3 -


ANTIVERIARY MEETING


CONVOCATORY MEETING


1. In accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty representatives of the Consultative 
Parties, (namely, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, 
Poland, Federal Republic of Germany, New Zealand, Norway, 
Republic of South Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, and the United States of America) met in Buenos 
Aires from 26 June to 7 July, 1981, for the purpose of 
consulting together and considering measures that might be 
adopted to further the principles and purposes of the 
Treaty and, where appropriate, make recommendations to 
their Governments.

2. Ambassador Angel María Oliveri López of Argentina acted 
as Chairman pro tem of the Meeting, pending the election 
of the Chairman.

3. The Meeting was formally opened by H.E. the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs and Worship of Argentina, Dr. Oscar 
Camilión (Annex 1).

4. Ambassador Angel María Oliveri López was then elected 
Chairman of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting, and Minister Carlos Rubio Reyna and Embassy 
Secretary Joaquín Daniel Otero (Jr.), both of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs and Worship, were appointed Secretary-
General and Assistant Secretary-General of the Meeting, 
respectively.

5. The Opening Session was held in public. Opening 
statements were delivered by the Heads of Delegation. 
(Annex 2)

6. The Meeting adopted the following agenda:

      1. Opening of the Meeting

      2. Election of Officers

      3. Opening addresses

      4. Adoption of the Agenda

      5. Twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the 
         Antarctic Treaty and examination of the operation 
         of the Antarctic Treaty system
ANT/XI/31/107.4                  - 4 -

6. Antarctic resources: the question of mineral
       exploration and exploitation

7. Review of Recommendation VII-6, and relating to
       Antarctic marine living resources

8. Improvement of telecommunications in Antarctica and
       collection and distribution of technological data

9. The impact on the Antarctic environment, including
       the question of oil contamination of the Antarctic
       marine environment

10. Specifically protected areas

11. Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of
       Special Scientific Interest (SOSI)

12. Effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions
       in the Antarctic Treaty area

13. Exchange of information in accordance with the
       Antarctic Treaty

14. Public availability of the documents of the
       Consultative Meetings

15. Matters relating to the appointment of observers
       to the Consultative Meetings

16. Date and place of the next Consultative Meeting

17. Any other business

18. Adoption of Final Report

19. Closing of the Meeting

7. The Meeting considered in Plenary Session all the items
       on the Agenda and appointed two Working Groups, comprising
       members of all delegations wishing to participate, to
       facilitate a fuller debate and a detailed study of the
       items on the Agenda referred to them. These working
       groups were:

       a) A Working Group on the effects of tourism and non-
          governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty
          area, exchange of information in accordance with
          the Antarctic Treaty, public availability of the
          documents of the Consultative Meetings and matters
          relating to the appointment of observers to the
          Consultative Meetings (items 12, 13, 14 and 15,
          respectively, on the Agenda), was chaired by
          Dr. John Heap, of the Delegation of the United
          Kingdom.
- 5 -                                      12/12/79/nn.1




of the Consultative Parties to the recommendations
adopted by the Tenth Consultative Meeting in Accordance
with Article IX, 1(c) of the Antarctic
other business) the which by Minister
of Foreign Affairs of the Argentine
8. A table showing the approval given by the Governments
of the Consultative Parties to the recommendations
adopted at previous Antarctic Consultative
Meetings is attached to this Report as Annex F.

9. The Meeting unanimously adopted the following
recommendations which are set forth in this report:

    XI-1    Antarctic Mineral Resources
    XI-2    Antarctic marine living resources
    XI-3    Air disaster on Mount Erebus
10.  on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, the ceremony took place in the presence of the representatives of the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and of some countries which are not Consultative Parties. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and former Argentine Ambassadors as well as the opening statements by the Heads of participating delegations stressed the importance of this event and of the positive achievements thereunder as an example of multilateral international co-operation, which, as stated in the Argentine Foreign Minister's address, shows the "foresight and pragmatism" of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

An address was also given by Ambassador Enrique Gajardo Villarreal, of the Delegation of Chile, who was one of those who signed the Antarctic Treaty on 1st December 1959 (Annex 3).

Following discussion of the anniversary in Plenary, further consideration was referred to a Working Group. It was decided to draw up a Statement on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, which appears as Part II of this Report. It was also decided to include it in the Press Release following the Meeting.

11. THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

A Delegation proposed that discussion of the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System should be considered together with matters relating to Agenda items 13, 14 and 15, which was approved by the Delegations present. These matters were referred to a Working Group and the discussions are reflected in paragraphs 17 to 19 of this Report. The financial cost of the meetings was also considered, as well as the possible arrangements regarding this matter.
Agenda Item 6

22. THE QUESTION OF PRIMARY INFORMATION AND DIFFUSION IN

EDUCATION.

After a full discussion of the subject at different levels,
the Primary Adopt Resolution No-1, which is attached at
Section III of this Report.

The Delegation of New Zealand conveyed an invitation by
its Government to hold a first session of the Consultative
Consultative Meeting mentioned in operative paragraph 3 of the
above Resolution in Wellington during the first part of
1982. This invitation was welcomed by other delegations.
ADVISORY GROUP   - 3 - 

WORKING GROUP 3 
13.  SUMMARY BY THE U.S. DELEGATION 

In considering this item, which deals specifically to 
the extent to which the force of the Coalition in the 
conservation of natural resources Environmental 
pollution with plastics and its been brief on this subject at 
the ninth session and the contacts or her contacts their 
satisfaction with the contacts or her contacts and 
onesd for instance on August 1, 1992. They called for its 
early entry into force and they emphasized the need to take 
all possible steps to facilitate the early operation of the 
bodies to be established under the Convention. A draft 
recommendation reflecting these points was introduced and 
adopted by the Plenary. It is the Recommendation XI-2.
Annex III ? 
- 3 -
AUG/XII/31/MON.4

to. EXAMINATION OF DATA AND PRELIMINARY DATA

         detailed information on [?] which received
this subject to consideration, for [?] and the kind
of [?] Meeting, which has been
established in instructions to [?] control in had
implications for procedures in its interrelation with systems
and to what [?] of procedures and the [?] Field
Telecomunications Group of the World Meteorological
Organization. It was also noted that the SCAR Working
Group on Logistics was preparing a manual on Telecommu-
nications which would be available at the XIIIth Consultative
Meeting. There was considerable discussion on the need
to update the diagrams attached to Recommendation X-3 and
it was noted that an updated version would be made by the
SCAR Working Group on Logistics for the review of this
subject at the XIIIth Consultative Meeting.
- 30 -

by the fact that the core question and conclusion were considered 
noted: it was felt that it would be useful to have a 
be considered later in the form of a note and during 
of discussi[?]ns and for information to partici-
cants in [?]blication, and therefore to put it in to 
consider operations, techniques and other pertinent information 
as part of a Logistics Symposium which will take place in Lenin-
grad (USSR) in 1962.

With respect to part II of X-T, there was an exchange of 
views concerning applicable existing international conventions 
for prevention of pollution of the sea by oil, and concerning 
remedial measures which might be taken in the event of a major 
oil spill in Antarctica.

The following conclusions were drawn:

a. In view of the nature of present ship operations in the 
Treaty area, the application of the provisions contained 
in existing International Conventions for prevention of 
oil pollution of the sea provide for the time being an 
adequate and sufficient basis for minimizing risks of 
pollution.

b. Ship operations, especially those of tankers, always create 
some risk of pollution and this question should remain 
under continuing review by the Consultative Parties to 
ensure the adoption of the most appropriate preventive 
measures.

c. Prevention of pollution of Antarctic waters by oil, and 
the best remedial measures if oil spills should occur, 
would be facilitated by future studies in the Antarctic 
and by the results of studies and experience available 
from elsewhere.

d. The setting up of protective walls around oil storage 
tanks where practical was appropriate for some areas on 
a voluntary basis.

It should be mentioned, further, that the Argentine 
Delegation submitted a document, which is attached as Annex 7.
- 16. COOPERATION WITH NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS.





In further discussion on this funds from attention was
drawn to the need to consider whether steps should be taken
to designate Areas of Special Tourist Interest provided for
in Recommendation VIII-9 and to the increasing number of non-
governmental expeditions seeking help from some Consultative
Parties.


Regarding Areas of Special Tourist Interest, work was
begun on the principles that might be adopted if such Areas
were to be designated but discussion indicated a measure of
doubt as to whether it would be prudent to proceed further
with the designation of such Areas. It was agreed that
there should be further study of the issues raised in discussion
with a view to further consideration of the topic at the
Twelfth Consultative Meeting.


Regarding non-governmental expeditions the value was
recognized of adopting a common response to inquiries when
a Consultative Party was approached with a request for
assistance from such an expedition. It was agreed that
this matter should be taken up again at the next Consultative
Meeting.
2/XI/84/Rev.4          - 18 -

ANNEX IV

37.  EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

        Proposals for the exchange of information were reviewed.  It
was noted that this was a considerable step in the development
of cooperation in the Antarctic Treaty system
involving, inter alia, the provision of one or more of
none of which the Working Group recommended.  In view of the
considerable interest in this item and the broad scope of
suggestions made regarding additions to it, the timeliness
of exchanges and the obligations on those providing the
information, it was agreed that this subject should be
considered further at the XII Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
- 13 -                  AUG/11/34/Part.1

and Action

10. NOTING AND ADOPTION OF THE CONCLUSIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE

There was full and detailed examination of the diverse
views expressed concerning the production, distribution and availability
of the documents produced by the various special consultative
headings.

The impression was received of moving in a direction on
the work of the consultative meetings and it was concluded that
further consideration should be held on this matter at the
Twelfth consultative Meeting.
- 15 -


and the reactions raise 
difficult questions as to 
how far it should be 
allowed to go.


The authorities saw 
themselves faced with a 
form of urban warfare 
which demanded drastic 
action and the imposition of 
a with the public acting as 


•


 
•


[illegible text sections remain as is due to uncertainty]
xx/2/34/xxr.b

 
22.  AIR OPERATIONS

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxx xxxx xxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx 
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxx 
xxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx 

Message to be read to the [?] in [?].

The Eleventh Consultative Meeting passed a request to 
all the Antarctic scientific stations of the Consultative 
Parties special greetings from the Representatives attending 
the meeting on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of 
the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, which coincided 
with the opening date of the meeting. The text of the message 
transmitted appears in Annex 5.
