TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE




BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

ANT/XI/7
Original: English


OPENING ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY MR K.G. BRENNAN,
LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO THE
XIth ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING,
GIVEN ON 23 JUNE 1981
ANT/XI/7

Mr. Chairman,

May I first offer my congratulations to you on your election to the position of Chairman of this, the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty C.nsultative Meeting. My delegation is very happy to be once again in the beautiful and vibrant city of Buenos Aires and to ask you to convey to His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Argentina the thanks of my delegation for having attended this meeting to declare it open and for the gracious words which he spoke. My delegation is delighted to be meeting again with delegations of the other Consultative Parties, under your experienced Chairmanship which recently so successfully guided the work of the Preparatory Meeting. I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome warmly the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany which has recently become the fourteenth Consultative Party. My delegation and I look forward to co-operating with that delegation at this and future Consultative meetings.

Mr Chairman, at the Tenth Consultative Meeting, we commemorated the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty. At this meeting, we recall that it is 20 years since that Treaty entered into force. For 20 years the activities of explorers, scientists and tourists in Antarctica have been governed by the Treaty which enshrines the spirit of co-operation and mutual assistance of the nations that participated in the International Geophysical Year of 1957-58.

Since the Treaty entered into force Consultative Parties have met regularly to discuss Antarctic issues. This is the Eleventh such Consultative Meeting and I am sure Mr Chairman, that we all agree that they have proved to be an effective mechanism capable of dealing with the needs and issues which have arisen since 1961, many of which were not foreseen at the time of the negotiation of the Treaty. Whereas during the early years of the Treaty, the principal concerns of the Consultative Parties were essentially scientific, there is now a broad range of issues and activities to be considered, of which the most outstanding is, of course, the question of resources, and the implications of resource activities for the environment. Consultative Parties have managed to deal with these concerns as they have arisen in an innovative and co-operative manner and I am confident that they will continue to do so in the future.

An important issue which has arisen recently is the increasing interest in Antarctica from a number of quarters including non Treaty nations, and private environmental and commercial organisations. This development has been largely
ANT/XI/7                                  - 2 -

stimulated by a greater interest in Antarctica's resource :
potential and by current world economic conditions which tend
to encourage the search for new resources. Consequently,
Antarctic waters have attracted increased fishing activity and
there are moves to assess more closely the extent of Antarctica's
mineral resources.

The Consultative Parties, conscious of the implications
this interest has for the Antarctic environment, have been
concerned to extend the measures for its protection. Together
with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic flora
and fauna, and the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
Seals, we have concluded the Convention on the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources. Three countries have already
ratified the latter Convention and Australia, as Depositary, is
hopeful that a sufficient number of countries will have completed
their ratification procedures to enable the Convention to enter
into force by the end of the year. We also look forward to co-
operating with other signatory states at the Preparatory Meeting
in Hobart in September to facilitate the establishment of the
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Commission.

For some years Consultative Parties have also been
considering the complex legal, political and environmental
questions raised by the possible exploitation of minerals in
Antarctica. We have agreed to observe a moratorium on the
exploration and exploitation of minerals in Antarctica pending
the adoption of agreed solutions. Unregulated activity could
damage the Antarctic environment and perhaps threaten the
viability of the Antarctic Treaty system.

We are committed to seeking agreed solutions to this issue
that will ensure proper protection of the environment as well
as providing the essential protection for those states
exercising sovereignty in Antarctica and those states which
neither exercise sovereignty themselves nor recognise the
exercise of sovereignty by others. Australia, as a state
exercising sovereignty over its Antarctic Territory, will be
seeking solutions that take account of its national interests.

My delegation hopes Mr Chairman, that this meeting will
be able to agree on a Recommendation that will launch the
negotiation of a regime for the exploration and exploitation
of minerals. Australia believes that it is in the interests
of both the Consultative Parties and the international
community as a whole that the negotiations commence as soon as
possible.
- 3 -
ANT/XI/7

Mr Chairman, there is no doubt in my mind that the Antarctic 
Treaty is as relevant today as it was 20 years ago. In spite of 
our at times divergent interests the Consultative Parties continue 
to share the common objective of ensuring the preservation of the 
Treaty and all that it stands for. We are uniquely equipped by 
virtue of our long experience to deal with Antarctic questions. 
The growing acceptance of the Treaty Framework as a viable 
mechanism for dealing with new concerns and issues in Antarctica 
demonstrates that a sufficient number of States have an interest 
in the continuance of the Treaty, and the development of new 
regimes based upon it, to ensure that it will continue to play 
a central role in future international developments relating to 
Antarctica.
