TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio el 
7 de Julio de 1981

ANTARCTIC TREATY
XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

ANT/XI/10
Original: English


OPENING STATEMENT
BY THE HEAD OF THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION,
MR. R. TUCKER SCULLY
ANT/XI/10

Mr. Chairman,

My delegation would like to join in extending congratulations 
to you on your election to preside over the Eleventh Consultative 
Meeting. We are indeed fortunate to have your wisdom and 
experience to guide us.

Let me extend through you, Mr. Chairman, the appreciation 
of the United States Delegation to the Distinguished Foreign 
Minister of Argentina, Dr. Camilion for his words of welcome.

Let me also express our appreciation to the Government 
of Argentina for the quality of the arrangements and facilities 
which have been made available to us, as well as for organizing 
the preparatory work for this Consultative Meeting. It is a 
great pleasure to be back in Buenos Aires and to experience 
the warmth and hospitality of the people of Argentina.

Today -- June 23, 1981 -- as has been emphasized, marks 
the Twentieth Anniversary of the entry into force of the 
Antarctic Treaty. Over the twenty years of its operation, the 
Antarctic Treaty System stands out as a uniquely successful 
example of international cooperation. It has ensured the use of 
Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes and that it has 
not become the scene of international conflict or discord. 
The Treaty's provisions for freedom of scientific research 
and for cooperation in scientific undertakings, its provisions 
for demilitarization and denuclearization are not only 
expressions of high principle but also practical guides for 
the actual conduct of activities in Antarctica. These provisions 
are as important today as they were in 1961.

The strength of the Antarctic Treaty rests upon the 
continuing validity of its principles and purposes. It also 
rests upon the ability of the Treaty System -- through its 
Consultative Meetings -- to adapt itself to new circumstances 
and situations.

An example of the dynamism of the Treaty System is the 
evolution of its ability to deal with matters relating to the 
Antarctic environment. Over the past twenty years, the 
Consultative Parties have elaborated an extensive and practical 
set of measures for the protection of the Antarctic environ-
ment. These measures are designed to keep pace with the level 
of human activity in Antarctica and to ensure that it does 
not result in harmful impacts upon the Antarctic environment.
ANT/XI/10                                  - 2 -

Another example of the resilience of the Treaty System
is its capacity to grow. The Treaty itself provides that
acceding parties that demonstrate their interest in Antarctica
by the conduct of substantial scientific research there can
become Consultative Parties. In this regard, I would like
to warmly welcome the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany which is participating for the first time in the
consultative process. I would further like to compliment the
Federal Republic of Germany for the excellent quality of its
scientific work in Antarctica.

A further example of the Antarctic Treaty System to meet
new challenges is the Convention on the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources. This Convention which was
concluded in May 1980 and signed last September, resulted from
an initiative within the consultative system. It elaborates
a mechanism for ensuring the conservation of living resources
prior to the emergence of large-scale activities relating
to marine resources. This stands in welcome contrast to
experience in other areas in the world where, all too often,
regines have been developed only after overharvesting and
depletion of species has taken place.

The successful conclusion of the Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources is a good
omen as we address new issues. I am confident that the
creativity and will which characterized the negotiation of
that Convention will remain with us and will be applied to
the matters before us at this Eleventh Consultative Meeting.

Prominent among these issues is the question of the
development of a regime for Antarctic Mineral Resources.
By regime, we mean an international system which will have
as basic purposes determination of the acceptability of
mineral resource activities in Antarctica and governing any
such activities determined to be acceptable. In developing
our position on the regime we have been guided by three
main interests: our interest in protecting the Antarctic
environnment; our interest in participating in mineral
resource activities should they prove feasible; and our
interest in maintaining the Antarctic Treaty System.  I would
like at this time to reconfirm the commitment of the United
States to the development of a mineral resource regime within
the context of the Antarctic Treaty consultative process.

Development of a regime for Antarctic mineral resources
will not be easy. Difficult issues will need to be resolved
and necessary international acceptance obtained. However, we
do not begin work on a blank slate. We first have the Antarctic
Treaty itself, including the provisions of Article IV, which
must be reflected in the regime. There is also a considerable
body of creative work developed at the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth
Consultative Meetings, at special meetings in Paris in 1976
and in Washington last year, and at the preparatory meetings
for this Eleventh Consultative Meeting. The most recent addition
to this foundation were the helpful paragraphs drafted during
the February-March preparatory meeting.
- 3 -                                                     ANT/XI/10

On this basis we look forward to working with all 
delegations here in Buenos Aires to develop an agreed 
recommendation which will set forth:

- the commitment of the Consultative Parties to negotiate 
a regime;

- the principles and elements upon which the regime should 
be elaborated;

- the general procedures for the negotiation of the regime.

Such a recommendation would constitute a good start toward 
development of the regime and offer a good foundation for the 
negotiations.

In addition to the mineral resource issue, there are a 
number of important items upon our agenda -- some new, some 
herdy perennials. These matters should not be slighted but 
should also receive our concerted and close attention.

In closing, I wculd like to again thank our hosts for their 
welcome and for the great effort they have put forth 
in organizing our meeting. We have new and complex questions 
facing us. We also have twenty years of shared experience in 
resolving common problems. If we apply the spirit of the Antarctic 
Treaty  System -- its vitality and imagination -- to our 
new challenges, I believe that twenty years from now we will 
be celebrating the fourtieth anniversary of the Antarctic 
Treaty.
