TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                                               ANTARCTIC TREATY
XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING


BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981

                                                               ANT/XI/17
                                                               Original: English


•

.
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION
OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
AMBASSADOR HANS GUENTER SULINIMA

•
ANT/XI/17
Original: English

INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF THE
DELEGATE OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Mr. Chairman,

The Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany would like to join the other delegations in extending warm congratulations to you on your unanimous election to the chair of this important meeting.

Your experience, Mr. Chairman, and your diplomatic record are guarantees that this meeting will be chaired and guided excellently and efficiently.

I would be glad, Mr. Chairman, if you would extend the thanks of my delegation to H.E. the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Argentina for his important statement and for the hospitality offered to my delegation on the occasion of this meeting.

It is indeed a great pleasure for us to be in the capital of Argentina, a country with which the Federal Republic of Germany has traditionally enjoyed excellent relations of friendship.

Mr. Chairman, my delegation would like to express its gratefulness for the very warm welcome it has received by all delegations. The way in which my delegation has been welcomed in this distinguished round is a strong encouragement for an even more intensive co-operation of the Federal Republic of Germany in all fields of Antarctic activities.

Mr. Chairman, this Consultative Meeting is the first in which a delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany is taking part. On March 3rd 1981 the III Special Antarctic Consultative Meeting under your able chairmanship acknowledged the right of my country to appoint representatives to participate in Consultative Meetings. Allow me on this occasion to thank once more all states represented here for this decision taken by the III Special Antarctic Consultative Meeting.
ANT/XI/17                                 - 2 -

I also should like to use this opportunity, Mr. Chairman,
to renew our commitment to the goals and principles of the
Antarctic Treaty, the 20th Anniversary of its entry into force
we are celebrating this year.

The Antarctic Treaty, to which the Federal Republic of
Germany acceded in 1959, is the first demilitarisation treaty
after World War II and the first denuclearisation treaty and
as such an important instrument for ensuring peace. The prohi-
bition by the Antarctic Treaty of military activities of any
kind provides the basis for the exclusively peaceful use of
Antarctica, guaranteeing at the same time freedom of scientific
research and the development of international co-operation.

Scientific research has been the guiding motivation of
the German interest in Antarctica shown for more than 100
years. From the discovery of Palmerland by Dallmann in 1873
there'is a tradition of German Antarctic Research leading to
the establishment of the permanent research station "Georg-
von-Neumayer" at Atke-Bay in February of this year. Almost
all research activities were -in one way or the other- also
manifestations of international co-operation. Against this
background and in this sense-and not only in view of the legal
obligation imposed on us by the Treaty- my government is fully
committed to the principle of free scientific research, of
international co-operation to this end, and to the measures
provided for by the Treaty for the promotion of this co-operation.

Next to the principles of peaceful use, free scientific
research, and international co-operation I should like to draw
attention to a further principle -a very central one- to which
the Federal Republic of Germany feels specially attached. I
am referring to our obligation to preserve the integrity of
the ecological system of Antarctica. Ours is a time in which
the planet is threatened by overpopulation and excessive use
of raw materials. It seems of overriding importance to us
to safeguard the unique Ecosystem of Antarctica. The Federal
Republic of Germany will continue to pay special attention to
this goal.

In this context we view with satisfaction the conclusion
of the convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources last year in which we had the privilege to
take part. We hope that the Conference scheduled for September
of this year in Hobart will yield results which will allow for
an early implementation of the Convention.
- 3 -                                   ANT/XI/17

Mr. Chairman, the central topic of this meeting will 
be the question of a regime of mineral resources of 
Anterctica. I do not at this moment want to embark on a 
elaboration of details of this issue which has cccupied 
the forefront of interest of Consultative Parties since 
1972. I would like to assure you, however, that our 
participation in the deliberations ahead of us will be 
guided by our special responsibility for the preservation 
of the primuples and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty, 
responsibility which we have accepted when becoming a 
consultative party.

Allow me to mention, nevertheless, that it is the 
feeling of my government that the draft resolution pre-
pared for this meeting is a good basis for our delit?rations.

The Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany 
wants to express its sincere wishes for the success of 
this Consultative Meeting and is willing to participate 
actively in its work.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
