TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                         ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                                XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al 
7 de Julio de 1981                                              ANT/XI/15
                                                                Original: Spanish


OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION
OF POLAND, AMBASSADOR CZESLAW LIMONT
ANT/XI/15

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary-General,

Please accept my congratulations on the honour accorded you in electing you to such distinguished posts, and at the same time allow me to thank you for agreeing to preside over our meeting. I also welcome the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany; but, above all, Mr. Chairman, I would like to express the thanks of the Polish Delegation to the Government of Argentina for having organized the Eleventh Consultative Meeting of the States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty which has been inaugurated today in this hospitable land.

The deliberations which have started today coincide with the twentieth anniversary of the ratification of the Antarctic Treaty in Washington. This anniversary affords us the opportunity to reflect on the practical operation of that Treaty.

In the view of this delegation, the evaluation is positive, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

Various points of the agreement set a precedent in the search for other solutions of international law and in the negotiations, particularly in connection with the law of the sea, cosmic space, and disarmament problems.

Since Poland belongs to the group of countries of the so-called Antarctic Club, it participates and will continue to participate in the consultative meetings, and has approved all the recommendations of the Ninth and Tenth Consultative Meetings.

Notwithstanding the well-known difficulties Poland is experiencing at this time, it assigns great importance to, and shows a live interest in co-operation regarding Antarctica.

Our country permenently carries out activities at the Areitewski scientific station, and has also participated actively in the Biomas-Fibak Antarctic marine programme. This programme forms part of a national plan of the Polish Academy of Science, which refers to the knowledge and conservation of the natural environment of Antarctica, as well as to the marine and land research in this area, the preservation of natural resources, and the rational utilization of those resources.

The provisions of the Treaty, together with the recommendations and resolutions of the Consultative Meetings, are the only system on a historical and global scale which regulate the activities and co-operation in this vast continent of our planet. Although the parties to this Treaty have different socio-economic systems, since its inception until today it has been characterized by a large unanimity, which once more confirms the equitable principle of peaceful co-existence of countries having different systems.
ANT/XI/15                                 - 2 -

The Polish Delegation considers that over almost twenty
years of application of the Treaty the Consultative meetings
have discussed important problems of international co-operation
in this continent and contributed toward finding valuable agree-
ments referring to Antarctica.

We might mention here, as an example, the exchange of
data and information, the meetings of experts, the personal
exchanges, the joint activities, and the like.

An important factor of the activities in this respect is
the system of control of the implementation of the definitions
and recommendations of the Treaty.

The Treaty obligates the contracting parties with parti-
cular responsibility to ensure that none of the participants
will perform any activities in Antarctica that are contrary
to the United Nations and to the principles and definitions
of the Treaty.

At this Consultative Meeting we shall continue to discuss
the subject of minerals, which includes several pertinent
problems. The main topic in past Consultative Meetings was
limited to general preventive measures to limit the exploit-
ation of minerals, for peaceful purposes, for the preservation
of the natural environment, for organization of the system
for exchanging information and supervision.

We are now entering a period of deliberation and deeper
study of the subject. The Polish Delegation believes that
our debates take place in accordance with the meaning and the
practice of the Antarctic Treaty, taking into account the in-
terests of all the consultative parties. One of the important
topics, in the view of the Polish Delegation, connected with
the exploration and exploitation of minerals must be the pre-
servation of the unique Antarctic environment and of its eco-
system.

The Antarctic Treaty is an important factor of the world
system for the preservation of peace and security. Its defi-
nitions permit the use of the continent exclusively for peace-
ful purposes which assure the freedom of scientific research
and facilitate full international co-operation among its par-
ticipants. The Treaty has undergone the test of time and has
shown that it is a positive instrument for the solution of
several difficult problems and various other matters.
- 3 -                                 ANT/XI/15

The Polish Delegation is convinced that this important 
instrument of international co-operation which has passed 
the test during the last two decedes will function effective-
ly in the future for the cause of peace, security, and the 
prosperous development of mankind.

•
                                                
•
