ANNEXURE  1

ANT/XI/5/Rev.1
Original: Spanish

OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC SYSTEM
(Submitted by the Delegation of Chile)

The close relationship existing between item 13, "Exchange of Information under the Antarctic Treaty", item 14, "Public availability of the documents of the Consultative Meetings", and item 15, "Matter relating to the appointment of observers at Consultative Meetings", seem to indicate the advisability of studying them jointly, from the broader perspective of the Antarctic System.

All the countries that have an interest in the area are parties to the Antarctic Treaty, and all member states of the United Nations may accede to it.

The Antarctic Treaty shares the purposes and principles of the Charter and, for that reason, promotes the utilization of the Continent for peaceful purposes and scientific research based on international co-operation.

This utilization has been carried into effect for two decades, having given rise to a sub-system that forms part of the overall international system, which is characterized by a series of administrative measures peculiar to that Continent.

This Antarctic system has evolved, covering all activities that can be carried out in the territory. Through its regulation, it has developed a knowledge of Antarctica and the protection of its environment; the study and care of the flora and fauna; the guarding of Antarctica as a peace, disarmament and denuclearisation zone; the study of its meteorology, of its communications, the exploration and improvement of Antarctic mapping; tourism, and, finally, the protection of the renewable and non-renewable resources of the continent with a view to their exploitation.

With regard to resources, two Conventions have been signed: one for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the other for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.  A regime for the exploration and exploitation of mineral resources is at present under study.
ANT/XI/5/Rev.1                  - 2 -


It will be noted that the legal regime established governs various 
fields of inter-related action, but without proper institutional 
co-ordination. The Consultative Meetings afford continuity to, and 
development of this system, but, except for special meetings, they are 
only held every two years. It would therefore seem advisable to consider 
the establishment of mechanisms of action of the system itself which would 
give it a better internal co-ordination by integrating the parties to the 
Treaty in a more efficient manner and binding it to the other members of 
the international community, be they international organisations or academic 
institutions. This partial institutionalisation would adapt it to others 
taking part in Antarctic activities. In turn, it appears important to link 
the members of the Treaty that are not Consultative Parties more effectively, 
through suitable forms of participation.


In general, it would be necessary to study and discuss the operation 
of the Antarctic Treaty - its methods of action - on the occasion of the 
20th anniversary of the Treaty.


Exchange of Information


Article III.1 of the Antarctic Treaty, with a view to promoting inter-
national co-operation in scientific research, provides that information 
regarding plans for scientific programs and scientific observations and 
results shall be exchanged and "made freely available".


Notwithstanding the fact that the Consultative Parties meet periodically 
every two years and, consequently, have occasion to keep abreast with the 
activities carried out in Antarctica, this exchange of information and 
observations among them has not been entirely satisfactory. There has been 
no regularity in their transmission, in some cases they are delivered 
incomplete and not in a general manner even between the Consultative 
Parties themselves. They do not contain a full and timely report of the 
activities of private scientific and intellectual centres existing in 
different countries and carrying out some work in Antarctic territory.


Paragraph 2 of the aforementioned article provides that "every 
encouragement shall be given to the establishment of co-operative working 
relations with those Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and other 
international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in 
Antarctica." We may mention a number of international (IMCO, FAO, IOC-UNESCO, 
UNEP), regional (EEC) and sub-regional (CPPS) agencies that are closely 
linked with the sea in general, and in particular with species, and with 
the Antarctic territory, each in its sphere of competence, all of which are 
equipped with a sound administrative structure.
- 3 -                                 ANT/XI/5/Rev.1

Likewise, at present, legal regimes for universal application related 
to Antarctica are being created. We refer to the Convention for the 
regulation of Whaling, the Convention on Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 
and the new Law of the Sea which is coming into being. These conventions 
also contemplate organs such as commissions or central authorities that 
perform their work through secretariats.

It would therefore be worthwhile to consider the establishment of a 
communication centre which would provide a better liaison between the 
parties to the Treaty, with other States with the international organizations, 
and with the organs established by the aforementioned conventions.

Public availability of the documents 
of the Consultative Meetings

The spirit of the Antarctic Treaty is to promote freedom of scientific 
research in a peaceful territory based on international co-operation. 
Hence, it follows that the documents issued by the Antarctic System should 
be, in the main, of a public nature and should be disseminated to all 
interested countries. This reasoning is supported by Article III, which 
provides that the exchange of information and scientific observations and 
results "shall be made freely available".

An exception to this principle might be any negotiations under way and 
matters of a political nature which the Consultative Parties shall determine 
are restricted, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure for the meetings.

The dissemination or publicity of the documents could be entrusted to 
the centre mentioned in the preceding point, always under the instructions 
of the Consultative Parties.

Designation of Observers at Consultative Meetings

The problem of the participation of Observers at Consultative Meetings 
has arisen in regard to the countries that have acceded to the Treaty but 
are not Consultative Parties, and in regard to international organizations.

Acceding countries do not at present participate in the Antarctic 
System, and are practically in the same position as third countries that 
have not acceded to the Antarctic Treaty.

Consequently, it would be advisable to create a mechanism that would 
incorporate them to the Antarctic System, through their individual 
participation and to the extent of their interest, in Special or Consultative 
Meetings, as determined by the Consultative Parties. Such participation 
might consist of the right to attend public sessions of a given meeting and 
of consulting with the Consultative Parties, for which purpose a special 
session might be organised.
ANT/XI/5/Rev.1                  - 4 -

As regards the international organizations, these could be of
great assistance in those specialised subjects in which the Consultative
Parties deemed it desirable to obtain advice or consult with them, within
their sphere of competence.

The possible creation of a co-ordinating centre might link the inter-
national agencies to the Antarctic System, affording  them the opportunity
of making a scientific and technical contribution, without prejudice to
the Consultative Parties consulting them in the Consultative Meetings when
the nature of the subject makes it necessary.  This centre could also
interest third countries in the work performed by the Antarctic System.

Organ of co-ordination and dissemination

At the Seventh Consultative Meeting it was proposed that continuity
be given to the work of the Secretariat, transmitting all the documentation
of one Consultative Meeting to another, this was approved by all the
Consultative Parties.

At the Eighth Consultative Meeting, the United States promoted the
creation of an information centre and the organization of a filing office
that would keep the documents and date produced by the Antarctic System.

The foregoing leads to the advisability of seeking a method that will
make it possible to implement these initiatives and to meet the
requirements of the Antarctic System.

The Delegation of Chile feels that the setting up of a Centre for
Co-ordination and Dissemination of Information, to be operated by the
Consultative Parties, might fill the gap that appears to exist in this
respect.

The Centre's responsibilities might be, inter alia, the following:
- To store the information issued by the Antarctic System;
- To keep and catalogue the public documentation of the
Preparatory Consultative Meetings;
- To disseminate the information and documentation in its
possession;
- To act as a liaison agency with international organizations
associated with the Antarctic System;
- To establish relations with Centres of government and private
organisations that are carrying out scientific and tourist
activities in Antarctica;
- To co-ordinate the participation of the countries belonging
to the Antarctic System, and
- To act as a liaison secretariat between two successive
Consultative Meetings.
- 5 -                                  ANT/XI/5/Rev.1

Conclusion

On the occasion of this decisive anniversary of the Treaty, there seems 
to be an urgent need for general discussion of the operating methods of the 
Antarctic System so as to adopt it to the changing conditions of the world 
and to tackle the new problems that this poses, but without altering the 
instrument itself. For this purpose, it might be helpful to discuss, among 
others, the ideas put forward in this document.
