TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                         ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                   XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                   ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                   XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al 
7 de Julio de 1981

ANT/XI/9
Original: Spanish

 
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF
THE DELEGATION OF CHILE,
AMBASSADOR FERNANDO ZEGERS SANTA CRUZ

 
9
ANT/XI/9

Mr. Chairman:

Allow me to express the pleasure of my delegation in
finding ourselves in this country, our neighbour and sister,
and to thank the Government of Argentina for the hospitality
it has extended to this meeting.

The Eleventh Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty
will be held on a solemn occasion, since it coincides with the
twentieth anniversary of the entry into force of this Treaty.

During those 20 years, the Consultative Parties have applied
the farsighted instrument adopted in Washington in 1959, they
have administrated the Antarctic for the good of mankind,
preserved it as an area of peace and an ecological reservation,
added to the knowledge of the frozen continent, established a
system of communications with that continent and within it,
and employed their talents and perseverance to improve co-operation
among nations in different latitudes and with a great variety of
systems. All the above form a legal and administrative system
that has met at least with the tacit approval of the international
community. Thus, the Antarctic system is constantly enhanced by
the scientific, legal and political efforts of its members and by
their activities in this far end of the globe.

The Antarctic system has become integrated as a sub-system
of the general international system. The Antarctic Treaty,
drafted in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
with its principles, which established the first denuclearized and
peaceful zone, is open for accession by third states. Its
principles have been developed and applied by the Consultative
Parties, resulting in their progressive evolution.

During the two decades since the Treaty entered into force
new challenges have appeared, finding expression mainly in a
growing interest in the Antarctic resources and in Antactica in
general. Agreements have been generated by the Treaty, such as
the conventions on the Conservation of Seals, on the conservation
of the marine living resources and other related conventions
such as the new Law of the Sea. At the same time, interest in
Antarctica has been shown by the growing participation of new
nations in the Treaty and the increase in the number of
Consultative Parties. In this connection, and on behalf of the
Government of Chile, I wish to extend a cordial welcome to the
Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany and to welcome
the recent accession to the Treaty by Uruguay, Peru, Italy and
Papua New Guinea.

World evolution since the birth of the Treaty, the
conclusion of new conventions with their respective organs,
the need to contemplate the utilization of resources without
ANT/XI/9                                 - 2 -

detriment to the ecology, the interest of States, international
associations and organizations, make it advisable to update the
Antarctic System and provide it with effective instruments and
practices to face the new reality. The operativeness of the
system should be examined as a whole and in particular at the
present Consultative Meeting, without thereby modifying or
affecting the Treaty itself. We have made a specific proposal in
this respect and circulated a working document giving shape to
the aforesaid suggestions.

We view with satisfaction what has been done during these two
decades, and with optimism the future of our system, which can be
said to operate more effectively than the general international
system.  In Chile we have endeavoured to commemorate this
anniversary appropriatly, appointing to our delegation one of
the originators and signers of the Treaty, Ambassador Enrique
Gajardo Villarroel, and preparing also a collection of commemorative
stamps which will be distributed among the participating delegations.

It will also be the task of this Eleventh Consultative
Meeting to give concrete steps toward the establishment of a
regime for the utilization of Antarctic mineral resources within
the framework of the Treaty, to follow the successful conclusion
of the Convention on Marine Living Resources, which should enter
into force as soon as possible and which we will ratify shortly.

As in the case of living resources, ecological considerations
should be preeminent in the regime for mineral resources. The
economic exploration and exploitation of the latter should not
be authorised except under strict respect for the ecology of
Antarctica and of the systems dependent on, or related to it, as
is the case of Chilean continental territory.

The Antarctic Treaty and the System to which it has given
rise should also be preserved, with all the characteristics and
expressions described earlier. The political and legal
equilibrium achieved in this instrument and in its application
should not be affected. In this regard, it is essential that the
sovereignty rights contemplated and protected by Article IV of the
Antarctic Treaty be respected and held valid, considering the
accommodation that may be necessary of its interests and those
of mankind.

On this solemn occasion, it is fitting for me to reiterate
the determined support of Chile to the Antarctic Treaty, to the
System stemming from it, and of which my country actively forms
part, as well as the confidence of my Government that this Meet-
ing will perfect its adaptation to the changing conditions of
the contemporary world.
- 3 -                                 ANT/XI/9

Chile, a sovereign country in Antarctica, whose mainland is 
only a few miles from the frozen continent, and to which it is 
indissolubly bound by geography, geology, history, by law, and 
by the now secular activity of its men, once again expresses its 
good will and its firm purpose of co-operating in the search 
for formulas to solve the problems posed by present conditions, 
within the fruitful framework of the Antarctic System.
Thank you.
