TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                         XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

                        BUENOS AIRES
                        23 de Junio al
                        7 de Julio de 1981

                                                         ANT/XI/32
                                                         Date: 4 July 1981
                                                         Original: English

AGENDA ITEM 5

THE FUNCTIONING OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM
(Discussion paper submitted by the delegations
of Chile, Argentina and the United Kingdom)
ANT/XI/32                  - 2 -

(i) all language services?
(ii) interpretation services only?

f. be subject to periodic review and confirmation?
g. involve a periodic subscription to a fund?
h. involve payment of actual costs incurred?

6. Not ourselves being in a position to express definitive 
views in these questions, we recognize that other 
delegations are likely to be in a similar position.
We therefore hope that delegations will take this 
paper with them to their capitals and prepare for a 
further discussion of this matter at some convenient 
time in the future, preferably at the planned Special 
Consultative Meeting, in Wellington, New Zealand, 
next year.

7.  Argentina, Australia, the United States and the United 
Kingdom have agreed to inform their Antarctic Treaty 
partners of the costs each deems relevant to this 
study based on their recent experience of acting 
as hosts to Consultative Meetings.
ANT/XI/32

1. Meetings connected with the functioning of the 
Antarctic Treaty system are becoming more frequent.
In the ten years after the Treaty was signed seven 
meetings were held. In the four years ending in 
1980 ten meetings were held.

2. The expense of acting as host to an international 
conference may be partly offset by any advantages 
that government receives from doing so. But 
Consultative Meetings are becoming more expensive. 
At the last three Consultative Meetings there 
has been a requirement that two groups may be 
able to meet at the same time with simultaneous 
interpretation. At the Preparatory Meetings for 
the last two Consultative Meetings full services 
in four languages have been provided.

3. More than half of the twenty three meetings since 
1959 have been hosted by only three governments.

4. The view is commonly expressed that the frequency 
of Meetings over the next few years is likely to 
increase. We therefore believe that consideration 
should be given to whether there would be advantage 
in sharing in some way part of the financial burden 
of Consultative Meetings. 
The delegations submitting this paper have come to 
no firm conclusions as to how this might be done 
and submit the following questions for the purpose 
of stimulating debate:

5. Should any scheme:

    a.  cover all Consultative Meetings?
    b.  be restricted to Special Consultative Meetings?
    c.  cover all cost?
    d.  cover part of the cost?
    e.  cover cost related to:
