TRATADO ANTARTICO
XI REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XI REUNION CONSULTATIVE


                                                               ANTARCTIC TREATY
                                                               XI CONSULTATIVE MEETING

                                                               договор об антарктике
                                                               XI КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОГО СОВЕЩАНИЯ

BUENOS AIRES
23 de Junio al
7 de Julio de 1981

                                                               ANT/XI/19
                                                               Original: Russian


 
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATION OF THE
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

 
                                                               *
ANT/XI/19

Mr. Chairman,

Allow me, on behalf of my Delegation, to congratulate you 
on your election as Chairman of this XI Consultative Meeting.
Also, I want to express our satisfaction at the presence of a 
new member, the Federal Republic of Germany, the fourteenth 
member to join us at our meetings. The Federal Republic of 
Germany is carrying out an important scientific activity in the 
Antarctic and we hope it will make a constructive contribution 
in the search for, and definition of, decisions adopted by the 
Consultative Meetings. The XI Meeting opens at a solemn moment 
for us all: the twentieth anniversary of the entry into force 
of the Antarctic Treaty. That document served as the cornerstone 
for peaceful co-operation among different countries within the 
framework of an entire continent situated in the most inaccessible 
and inhospitable part of our planet. The principle of a peaceful 
utilization of Antarctica, which constitutes the basis of the 
Treaty of 1961, contributed, within its sphere, to the successful 
development of a fruitful scientific co-operation, crowned by 
the considerable enrichment of our knowledge of the principal 
laws of nature. In the eyes of all humanity, the Antarctic Treaty 
is a clear demonstration of the possibilities of solving 
complicated international problems based on a constructive 
criterion in search of mutually acceptable agreements.

The Soviet Union assigns great importance to the Antarctic 
Treaty and to the work being carried out within its framework, 
above all in protecting the environment. As a result of that 
work, during the last twenty years, a wide range of measures 
were drawn up for the preservation of the exceptional Antarctic 
environment. Those measures were reflected in a series of 
recommendations accepted at the Consultative Meetings and applied 
directly to the prevention of man's harmful activities in the 
Antarctic environment; the determination of sites of special 
scientific interest and specially protected areas; the 
prevention of pollution of the Antarctic marine environment 
caused by oil. Within the framework of the Treaty, measures 
were agreed on for the conservation of the Antarctic flora and 
fauna; the statement on the protection of the Antarctic 
environment was accepted; and the corresponding guide-books 
for tourists were prepared for persons visiting Antarctica. An 
important place among the documents prepared under the aegis of 
the Treaty belongs to the Convention for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Seals, which was signed in the year 1972. We are 
particularly satisfied with the successful conclusion in May 1980 
of the work on the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources, which was signed by all the participants 
at the Consultative Meeting held in September that same year. In 
this respect, we can report that the Soviet Government approved 
the aforementioned convention: the corresponding note was sent 
by us, as was that of Japan, to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
on May 26, 1981.
ANT/XI/19                                 - 2 -

The high value accorded by our government to the Antarctic
Treaty, to its principles, and to the activity developed within
its framework, is a consequence of the general line pursued
by the Soviet Union towards the expansion of international
co-operation for peaceful purposes. This noble idea found its
clear interpretation in the reports of the XXVI Congress of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Secretary-General
of the Central Committee of the Soviet Union Communist Party,
President of the ??????????? of the Supreme Soviet of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, comrade L.I. Breznev said in
his report to the congress: "Life requires the fruitful
co-operation of all countries for the performance of the peaceful
and constructive tasks that lie before all peoples and all
mankind. And this co-operation is not a baseless Utopia. Its
seeds, germinating discreetly as yet, already exist in our time.
We must know how to recognize them, appreciate them and develop
them".

We are faced with different and complicated problems that
require detailed discussion in the traditional spirit that
presides over our Consultative Meetings and tends towards the
achievement of co-ordinated resolutions. We are convinced that
in the course of this debate the Consultative Parties will show,
as they did at our previous meetings, a high degree of
responsibility in the protection of the Antarctic environment,
their concern for the continuation of scientific research,
and their unanimous aspiration towards the succesive
consolidation of the Antarctic Treaty as the cornerstone for
the resolution of all complicated problems.

In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, may I request you to convey
our gratitude to the Government of Argentina for the possibility
of holding the XI Consultative Meeting in Buenos Aires, as
well as our conviction that this meeting will be a further
step forward in the attainment of the objectives and principles
of the Antarctic Treaty.

Thank you.
