Report of the intersessional contact group to review the Scientific
Information in the Electronic Information Exchange System
Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the
Scientific Information in the Electronic Information Exchange
System
Summary
ATCM XLIV agreed to establish an Intersessional Contact Group
(ICG) on Scientific Information in the Electronic Information
Exchange System (EIES) to discuss how Parties could improve the
scientific information exchanged within the EIES. This document
reports on the ICG work developed during the intersessional period
and proposes the adoption by the ATCM of a Decision to update the
consolidated list of information exchange requirements, annexed
Decision 5 (2022).
Background
After considering WP 9 Review of the scientific information
contained in the EIES, presented by Spain, ATCM XLIV agreed to
establish an ICG on Scientific Information in the EIES to discuss
how Parties could improve the scientific information exchanged
within this system (paragraph 168 final report). The ICG was tasked
with the following terms of reference:
Discussing the advisability of reporting on the existence of
international scientific cooperation among the Parties;
Examining the fields contained in item 2.1.2. (Science Activities in
Previous Year) of the Annex to Decision 7 (2021) to determine
whether it is necessary to include other customisable fields that
would allow to generate summarised reports and thematic maps;
Analysing the advisability of including a section in item 1 (Pre-
season Information) of said Annex on science projects foreseen to be
developed in the following year’s campaign;
Avoiding duplicating information already submitted to prevent
overload in fulfilling the exchange requirements;
Reporting on the results and proposals of the ICG at the ATCM XLV
in order to update Decision 7 (2021); and
Identifying any specific trends in EIES reporting by Parties with the
view of increasing utilisation of the EIES.
It was decided that Observers and Experts of the ATCM were
invited to provide input, and that Spain would act as convener and
report to ATCM XLV.
The work of the ICG
ICG’s work was developed in four rounds. Comments were received
from 7 Parties (Argentina, Australia, Ecuador, France, Poland,
Norway, and the United States).
Participants were invited to discuss the possibility of incorporating
some changes to the consolidated list of information exchange
requirements, annexed to Decision 5 (2022). The goal of these
proposed changes was to report specifically on science activities
with international cooperation, to foster science collaborations, and
to facilitate processing the information exchanged, allowing the
generation of summarised reports or thematic maps. Such proposed
changes specifically referred to the addition of two new articles in
the Pre-season and Permanent information sections of the EIES,
respectively and the modification of an article in the Annual report
section.
In addition, the ICG also discussed likely ways to avoid duplication
of scientific information.
Proposals, comments received and ICG outputs
It was proposed to add a new article 3.5. International Cooperation,
in Section 3. Permanent Information. While general consensus was
reached on the spirit of the addition, two different options for the
first part of such an article were discussed:
Option A: Existing formal Antarctic (or polar) cooperation
agreements with other Parties. Option B: Existing formal Antarctic
(or polar) cooperation agreements supporting scientific
collaboration with other Parties.
Option A broadly refers to any kind of cooperation agreements,
while Option B limits the scope only to those cooperation
agreements that support scientific collaborations. The ATCM should
decide which one is preferred.
As some Parties suggested these notifications should not be
mandatory, the ATCM should also decide which part(s) of this new
article should be considered “optional”.
It was proposed to make a couple of additions in point 2.1.2 Science
Activities in Previous Year (Annual Report) to allow Parties to: a)
describe research projects through searchable and processable
information (using up to 5 keywords); and b) include information
on international cooperation.
Most participants supported this proposal for additions to the
current information on research projects but preferred to leave this
requirement as “optional”, given the already large amount of
information reported through the EIES.
It was proposed to add a new article 1.3. Scientific Information
within Pre-season information, redacted as: “List of research
projects planned for next season (giving project name or number,
location(s), principal investigator details, and international
cooperation, if any, providing country and institution involved in
each case)”.
Some participants expressed that providing detailed pre-season
information on specific projects may be of limited use, as
engagement and collaboration at a project level would rely on a
longer planning timeframes, and advance planning.
Consequently, it was suggested not to proceed with this proposal.
To avoid duplication of scientific information, the proposal to the
ICG consisted of discussing whether the information provided in the
“Key Scientific Priorities” section of the ATS website could
adequately fulfil what was requested in point 2.1.1 “Forward Plans”
of the EIES.
The general view was that the information provided in the “Key
Scientific Priorities” section of the ATS website adequately covers
the forward plans for scientific research.
Therefore, there was consensus in retaining point 2.1.1 “Forward
Plans”, but to avoid likely duplications, participants proposed to
leave the possibility to respond to this requirement with a link to
the “Key Scientific Priorities” section of the ATS website.
Finally, in response to TOR 6 “Trends in EIES reporting by Parties
with the view of increasing utilisation of the EIES” some comments
revealed difficulties to provide the scientific information in the EIES
and the convenience to reduce the workload of entering the
information. Participants suggested that having an excel file as a
template to complete the fields of information on scientific projects
would facilitate the uploading process by Parties. The ATS could
assess the viability of this option.
Proposal to the ATCM
After the work done by this ICG, it is proposed to the ATCM to
revise the consolidated list of information exchange requirements,
annexed to Decision 5 (2022) in order to improve the scientific
information exchanged within the EIES.
In summary, changes would include:
Adding a new article on International Cooperation in the Permanent
section of the EIES (3.5 International Cooperation).
Including two new items to the Annual report in section 2.1.2.
Science Activities in Previous Year.
In section 2.1.1. Forward Plans, offering the possibility to add a link
to the corresponding “Key Science Priorities” section of the ATS
website.
The ICG also recommends the ATS assess the viability of preparing
an excel file as a template to complete the fields of information
included in point 2.1.2 Science Activities in Previous Year of the
Annual Report to facilitate the uploading process by Parties.
Annex 1 to this Working Paper contains a draft of a proposed
update to the consolidated list of information exchange
requirements (with proposed changes in red), and Annex 2, a draft
Decision to adopt such a list.
Annex 1
Information exchange requirements
Pre-season Information
The following information should be submitted as early as possible,
preferably by 1 October, and in any event no later than the start of
the activities being reported.
Operational information
National Expeditions
Stations
Names of stations (giving region, latitude and longitude),
seasonality, operating period (for seasonal), status, maximum
population, and medical support available.
Names of refuges (giving region, latitude and longitude), medical
facilities, and accommodation capacity. Other major field activities,
eg, scientific traverse (giving locations).
Non-Military Ships
Name of non-military ships, ice strength, country of registry,
number of voyages, planned departure dates, areas of operation,
ports of departure and arrival to and from Antarctica, and purpose
of voyage. Maximum crew, maximum passengers.
Non-Military Aircraft
Type of non-military aircraft, planned number of flights, period of
flights or planned departure dates for inter-continental flights,
purpose. Maximum crew, maximum passengers.
Research Rockets
Coordinates of the place of launching, time and date/period,
direction of launching, planned maximum altitude, impact area,
type and specifications of rockets, purpose and title of research
project.
Military
Number of military personnel (officers and enlisted) in expeditions.
Number and types of armaments.
Information on military equipment, if any, not included in Section
3.2.D below, including its site name, coordinates (latitude and
longitude), type of equipment, and purpose of equipment.
Ship: Name of military ship, ice strength, number of voyages,
planned departure dates, areas of operation, ports of departure and
arrival to and from Antarctica, and purpose of voyage. Maximum
crew, maximum passengers.
Aircraft: Type of military aircraft, planned number of flights, period
of flights or planned departure dates for inter-continental flights,
and purpose. Maximum crew, maximum passengers.
Non-governmental Expeditionsi
Vessel-based Operations
Name of operator, name of vessel, maximum crew, maximum
passengers, country of registry of vessel, number of voyages,
expedition leader, planned departure dates, ports of departure and
arrival to and from Antarctica, areas of operation including the
names of proposed visited sites and the planned dates at which
these visits will take place, type of activity, whether these visits
include landing, (optionally) duration of landing and the number of
visitors that participate in each of the specific activities.
Land-based Operations
Name of expedition, name of the operator, method of transportation
to, from and within Antarctica, type of adventure/activity, location/
s of activities and/or routes, dates of expedition, number of
personnel involved, contact address, web-site address.
Aircraft Activities
Name of operator, type of aircraft, number of flights, period of
flights, departure date per flight, departure and arrival location per
flight, route per flight, purpose per flight, and number of
passengers.
Denial of Authorizations
Name of vessel and/or expedition, name of operator, date, reason
for denial.
Visits to Protected Areas
Name and number of protected area, number of people permitted to
visit, date/period and purpose.
Annual Report
The following information should be submitted as early as possible
after the end of the austral summer season, but in all cases before 1
October, with a reporting period of 1 April to 30 March.
Scientific Information
Forward Plansii
Details of strategic or multi-year science plans, or a link to the
corresponding Key Science Priorities section of the ATS web site, or
contact point for printed version. List of planned participations in
major, international, collaborative science programmes/projects.
Science Activities in Previous Year
List of research projects undertaken in previous year under science
discipline (giving location(s), principal investigator, contact details
of the responsible institution, project name or number, discipline,
up to 5 keywords defining the project [optional], international
cooperation, if any, providing country and institution involved in
each case [optional] and main activity/remarks).
Operational information
National expeditions
Update of information given under 1.1.1.
Non-governmental expeditions
Update of information given under 1.1.2 plus, for section 1.1.2.A
and B: total amount of passengers transported in each journey, total
number of crew members on board in each journey and combined
activity for section A, B and C. Information on unusual incidents for
sections A, B and C, including type of unusual incident occurred
(affected people, environment and/or materials/assets), date, place,
from whom assistance was received and contact point for more
information on the incident (operator or a member of the National
Programme or whoever the competent authority considered).
Permit Information
2.3.1. Visits to Protected Areas
Update of information provided under 1.2.
2.3.2. Taking and harmful interference with flora and fauna
Permit number, permit period, species, location, amount, sex, age
and purposeiii.
2.3.3. Introduction of non-native species
Permit number, permit period, species, location, amount, purposeiv,
removal or disposal.
2.4. Environmental Information
2.4.1. Compliance with the Protocolv
Description of measure, date of effect.
2.4.2. Contingency Plans
Title of Contingency Plan(s) for oil spills and other environmental
emergencies, copies (PDFs) or contact point for printed versions.
2.4.3. List of IEEs and CEEsvi
List of IEEs/CEEs undertaken during year giving proposed activity,
(optionally) period/length, location, level of assessment and
decision taken.
2.4.4. Monitoring activities reportvii
Name of activity, location, procedures put in place, significant
information obtained, action taken in consequence thereof.
2.4.5. Waste Management Plans
Title, name of site/vessel, copy (PDF) or contact point for printed
version. Report on implementation of waste management plans
during the year.
2.4.6. Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex Vviii
Description of measures.
2.4.7. Procedures relating to EIAs
Description of appropriate National Procedures.
2.4.8. Prevention of marine pollutionix
Description of measures.
Permanent Information
The following information can be updated at any time.
Science Facilities
Automatic Recording Stations/Observatories
Site name, coordinates (latitude and longitude), elevation (m),
parameters recorded, observation frequency, reference number (eg,
WMO no.).
Operational Information
Stations
Name of stations (giving region, latitude and longitude), status,
seasonality, date established, accommodation and medical facilities.
Names of refuges (giving region, latitude and longitude), medical
facilities, and accommodation capacity.
B. Non-Military Ships
Name of non-military ships, country of registry, ice strength,
maximum crew, maximum passengers.
C. Non-Military Aircraft
Type of non-military aircraft, maximum crew, maximum
passengers.
D. Military
- Number of military personnel (officers and enlisted)
- Number and types of armaments.
- Information on military equipment, if any, not already reported in
the EIES, including its site name, coordinate (latitude and
longitude), type of equipment, and purpose.
- Ship: Name of military ship, ice strength, maximum crew,
maximum passengers.
- Aircraft: Type of military aircraft, maximum crew, maximum
passengers.
3.3 Environmental Information
3.3.1 Waste Management Plans
Title of Plan, site/vessel, copy (PDF) or contact point for printed
version.
3.3.2 Contingency Plans
Title of Contingency Plan(s) for Oil Spills and other environmental
emergencies, copies (PDFs) or contact point for printed versions.
3.3.3 Inventory of Past Activities
Name of station/base/field camp/traverse/crashed aircraft/etc.,
coordinates (latitude and longitude), period during which activity
undertaken, description/purpose of activities undertaken,
description of equipment or facilities remaining.
3.3.4 Compliance with the Protocolx
Description of measure, date of effect.
3.3.5 Procedures relating to EIAs
Same as 2.4.7.
3.3.6 Prevention of marine pollution
Same as 2.4.8.
3.3.7 Measures taken to implement the provisions of Annex V
Same as 2.4.6.
3.4 Other Information
3.4.1 Relevant National Legislation
Description of law, regulation, administrative action or other
measure, date of effect/enacted, giving copy (PDF) or contact point
for printed version.
Cooperation Agreements
OPTION A: Existing formal Antarctic (or polar) cooperation
agreements with other Parties. If any, indicate for each case: a) title
of the agreement; b) subject matter of the agreement (general,
science, logistics, environmental management, other); c) description
[optional]; d) year of signing [optional]; e) duration of the
agreement [optional]; f) copy (PDF) or link to the document
[optional].
OPTION B: Existing formal Antarctic (or polar) cooperation
agreements supporting scientific collaboration with other Parties. If
any, indicate for each case: a) title of the agreement; b) subject
matter of the agreement (general, science, logistics, environmental
management, other); c) description [optional]; d) year of signing
[optional]; e) duration of the agreement [optional]; f) copy (PDF)
or link to the document [optional].
i provision of information on Non-governmental expeditions will be
allowed for it to be provided as soon as possible after completion of
national processes, with the relevant timing description being: ‘as
soon as possible following completion of national processes,
preferably by the pre-season target date of 1 October, and no later
than the start of the activity’.
ii optional provision of information on Forward plans will be
allowed at any time, for example when domestic plans are
completed or updated.
iii purpose with reference to Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol.
iv purpose with reference to Article 4 of Annex II to the Protocol.
v new measures adopted during past year in accordance with
Article 13 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty including the adoption of laws and regulations,
administrative actions and enforcement measures.
vi information on IEEs and CEEs is encouraged to be provided ‘as
soon as domestic processes are concluded, while maintaining the
existing deadline for Parties to submit the information’.
vii Monitoring activities connected with activities subject to initial
and comprehensive environmental evaluations (referred to in
Protocol Annex I, Art. 6.1 c)
viii Information on measures taken to implement Annex V including
site inspections and any steps taken to address instances of activities
in contravention of the provisions of ASPA or ASMA management
plans
ix Measures to ensure that any warship, naval auxiliary or other
ship owned or operated by a State and used, for the time being,
only on government non-commercial service acts in a manner
consistent, so far as is reasonable and practicable, with the Annex.
x Measures adopted in accordance with Article 13 of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty including the
adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and
enforcement measures
Annex 2
Decision X (2023)
Updating requirements of Information Exchange on Scientific
Information
The Representatives,
Noting Articles III (1)(a) and VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty;
Conscious of the obligations within the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”) and its Annexes
to exchange information;
Conscious also of decisions of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting (“ATCM”) in relation to the information to be exchanged
by Parties;
Desiring that the exchange of information by Parties be conducted
in the most efficient and timely manner;
Desiring also that the information to be exchanged by Parties could
be readily identified to maximise its utility;
Recalling Decision 4 (2012), which decided that the Parties will use
the Electronic Information Exchange System (“EIES”) to exchange
information in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and the
Protocol and its Annexes and which specified that Parties will
continue to work with the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (“the
Secretariat”) to refine and improve the EIES;
Noting that Decision 4 (2012) requires Parties to update relevant
sections of the EIES regularly throughout the year, in order that
such information be made available and accessible to Parties as
soon as practicable;
Desiring to make changes to the consolidated list attached to this
Decision, on sections 2.1.1. Forward Plans and 2.1.2. Science
Activities in Previous Year (Annual report), and to add a new article
on Cooperation Agreements to section 3. Permanent information.
Decide:
the Annex to this Decision represents a consolidated list of the
information agreed to be exchanged by Parties
the Secretariat shall modify the EIES to reflect the information
contained in the Annex to this Decision; and
the Annex to Decision 5 (2022) is no longer current.
