Surveillance and coordination for the prevention and detection of
Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in Antarctica
Surveillance and coordination for the prevention and detection of
highly pathogenic avian influenza in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
This paper provides information about the concern over the largest
worldwide outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI)
which could potentially be introduced to Antarctica. The United
States has developed and implemented procedures to detect and
prevent the introduction or spread of HPAI between seabird and
marine mammal colonies. The United States encourages Parties to
develop and implement procedures for preventing the introduction
or spread of HPAI by their National Antarctic Programs, to share
information on HPAI detections in Antarctica, and requests that
SCAR provide updates to the CEP on the potential impacts of HPAI
to native birds and mammals in Antarctica.
Introduction
Avian influenza is a highly contagious viral disease which rapidly
evolves. Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) strains can
cause high levels of mortality in both domestic poultry and wild
birds. The current HPAI outbreak has led to record numbers of bird
mortalities in both North America and Europe, with over 58 million
cases in the United States and over 47 million cases in Europe,
including mortalities of thousands of seabirds around the world.
The World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) has reported
that the virus has shown an unusual persistence in wild birds for the
first time and that the number of outbreaks is expected to increase
in the coming months. As of January 2023, WOAH has reported
that outbreaks of HPAI have been detected in Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Peru, the United
States of America, and Venezuela. In 2022, the SCAR Antarctic
Wildlife Health Working Group (AWHWG) suggested that there was
a high risk that HPAI could be introduced into Antarctica and
recommended that National Antarctic Programs and tourism
operators should monitor wildlife colonies for signs of HPAI, take
precautions when working around wildlife, and maintain the
highest biosecurity to prevent transmission.
Avian influenza can be spread through direct contact with
respiratory secretions or feces from infected birds. Additionally,
avian influenza viruses can survive for a long period at low
temperatures, so could be introduced or spread to seabird colonies
in Antarctica by contaminated clothing or equipment from visitors,
or by scientists. According to WOAH, the severe mortality rates
caused by HPAI in wild birds can lead to devastating impacts to
ecosystem biodiversity.
Response
The United States developed and implemented guidance for
enhanced detection and response of HPAI outbreaks in wildlife
colonies (Attachment 1). The guidance also covered enhanced
biosecurity steps to reduce the threat of anthropogenic introduction
or spread of HPAI. This guidance applies to all participants in the
U.S. Antarctic Program. Specifically, the guidance requires
surveillance of a wildlife colony from at least 150m away before
entry to detect any common behavioural signs of HPAI. If signs of
HPAI are detected, personnel are not permitted to enter the wildlife
colony. Researchers who work directly with birds require specific
clearance from permitting officials, and should wear appropriate
personal protective equipment during bird handling. The United
States is further coordinating with U.S. authorized tour industry
vessels and asking them to report any potential detections of HPAI.
Additionally, all boots and equipment must be decontaminated
before and after any wildlife colony visit. As of March 2023, no
signs of HPAI have been detected in any locations where the U.S.
Antarctic Program is operating.
While HPAI was not detected by the United States in Antarctica
during the 2022-2023 season, the threat of introduction remains
high. The ability to detect signs of HPAI outbreaks in Antarctica
could be enhanced by further coordination amongst Parties which
could allow communication of detections to all Parties, allowing
National Antarctic Programs, and tour operators to avoid areas with
outbreaks, and reducing the risk of spreading the outbreak to
nearby colonies. Other National Antarctic Programs could also
implement guidance on detection and response to HPAI outbreaks,
which would reduce the level of risk of introducing or spreading
HPAI infections in wildlife colonies in Antarctica.
Recommendations
The United States recommends that the CEP:
Encourages Parties to develop and implement procedures for
preventing the introduction or spread of HPAI by their National
Antarctic Programs;
Encourages Parties to share information on HPAI detections in
Antarctica, including the location of the outbreak, the species, and
approximate number of individuals affected, and the symptoms
observed;
Request that the SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Working Group
provide updates to the CEP on the potential impacts of HPAI to
native birds and mammals in Antarctica.
