Monitoring the impacts of human activity in Antarctica
Monitoring the impacts of human activities in Antarctica
Summary
The monitoring of impacts of human activities in Antarctica is
important to inform the development of approaches and tools for
the management of activities for the protection of the Antarctic
environment. This paper provides a summary of some of the
programmes that the UK undertakes or supports, which already
provide data relevant to the monitoring of human impacts. The
paper also describes the results of a recent project to assess the
utility of satellite imagery for monitoring human impacts, and
outlines proposed next steps for developing an approach to assess
the use of RPAS imagery to monitor human impacts at multiple
highly-visited tourist sites.
We recommend that Parties:
Note the summary of UK-led or supported programmes that could
contribute data for the future monitoring of impacts of human
activities in Antarctica;
Continue to share information about their own programmes
relevant to the monitoring of human impacts on the Antarctic
environment;
Discuss how best to collate information on existing monitoring
programmes; and
Note the results of a recent project to assess the use of satellite
imagery for monitoring human impacts, and consider contributing
to the proposed continuation project to assess the use of RPAS
imagery to monitor human impacts at multiple highly-visited tourist
sites.
Background
Following the presentation of ATCM XLIV/WP22, the CEP promoted
the development of monitoring programmes to assess the actual
impacts arising from tourism activities Final Report of the Forty-
fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, paragraph 286.,
underscoring the desirability of concrete action on the monitoring
of tourism impacts.
In response to the Committee’s recommendations, the UK is
providing information on existing monitoring programmes that
could contribute information for the future monitoring of human
impacts. We also provide the findings from a new project to assess
the utility of using satellite imagery to monitor human impacts at
some of the most visited tourist sites and provide a proposal for
further development of the study.
Existing Monitoring Programmes
Gentoo penguin monitoring at Goudier Island, Port Lockroy
Since 1996/1997 the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and UK
Antarctic Heritage Trust (UKAHT) have undertaken a long-term
study of gentoo penguin populations at Goudier Island, Port
Lockroy, one of the most heavily visited tourist sites anywhere in
the Antarctic. The programme is the longest-running study
measuring potential tourist disturbance to breeding penguins in the
Antarctic.
The findings of the study were published in 2018 Dunn et al. 2018
and concluded that there had been a notable change in the breeding
success of the gentoo penguin population at Goudier Island and
Jougla Point, Port Lockroy; however, the processes driving these
long-term changes remained unclear
and complex. Nevertheless, alterations to the management of
visitors to Goudier Island were implemented and ongoing annual
monitoring of the Goudier Island and Jougler Point gentoo penguin
breeding populations was recommended by the report, and this has
been continuing.
Oceanites monitoring around the Antarctic Peninsula
The UK continues to provide annual financial support to Oceanites’
Antarctic Site Inventory project, which has been collecting penguin
data consistently since 1994, making over 2,100 census visits and
collecting data at 258 different Antarctic Peninsula locations. The
project began with the aim of examining whether opportunistic
visits could be used:
to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused
changes in the physical features, flora and fauna of sites in the
Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists;
to collect baseline information necessary to detect possible changes
in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and
to determine how best to minimise or avoid possible environmental
impacts of tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula area.
In 2016 the Mapping Application for Penguin Populations and
Projected Dynamics (MAPPPD) launched. MAPPPD is an open
access, decision-support tool developed for Oceanites that assembles
Antarctic penguin population data and makes such data easily and
publicly available. The MAPPPD database now contains counts from
740 sites across the entirety of the Antarctic continent,
encompassing 4,489 records from 145 data sources of on-the-
ground colony counts and satellite photo analyses.
MAPPPD is the reference for Oceanites’ annual State of Antarctic
Penguins reports which is regularly submitted to ATCM by SCAR
The most recent was State of Antarctic Penguins 2022 report,
presented in ATCM XLIV/BP14..
In 2023, Oceanites began using Remotely Piloted Aerial Systems
(RPAS) to count penguins using photogrammetry, with the aim of
creating a long-term 3D dataset of penguin colonies showing
population change over time due to shifts in snow cover at the
colonies.
Time-lapse camera monitoring around the Antarctic Peninsula
Oxford University’s programme uses a network of remote time-lapse
cameras across the Antarctic Peninsula to monitor penguins.
Approximately 100 camera units across the Scotia Arc region are
programmed to capture images once per hour throughout the
breeding season. Images are analysed by volunteers through the
Penguin Watch citizen science project Jones et al. 2018. The camera
network has been used to assess drivers of intra- and inter-annual
dynamics in gentoo penguin breeding success Youngflesh et al.
2021. The opportunities for the use of time-lapse cameras for the
monitoring of species in the Antarctic Treaty area was also
highlighted in ATCM XLIII/IP9.
Ecosystem monitoring at Signy Island and Ryder Bay
As part of a long-term monitoring programme, BAS undertakes
ecosystem monitoring at Signy Island in South Orkneys; and
Rothera Point and islands in Ryder Bay in the Antarctic Peninsula.
Much of that monitoring contributes to the CCAMLR Ecosystem
Monitoring Programme (CEMP), which is intended to monitor any
impacts of the fishery for Antarctic krill on krill-dependent
predators. At Signy Island, gentoo, chinstrap and Adélie penguins
are monitored as a contribution to the CEMP, with additional
monitoring of fur, Weddell and elephant seals, southern giant
petrels and Antarctic shags Phillips et al. 2019 . At Rothera and
islands in Ryder Bay, south polar
skuas and Antarctic shags are monitored. Parameters monitored
include population sizes, breeding success and chronology, weights
of adults and offspring, foraging duration and diet.
Marine debris monitoring at Signy Island and Goudier Island
Marine debris surveys on beaches are undertaken by BAS at Signy
Island, South Orkneys, and by the UKAHT at Goudier Island, Port
Lockroy. Incidences of entanglements in anthropogenic materials
and hydrocarbon soiling of seabirds and seals are also recorded. The
results of this monitoring work is submitted annually to the
CCAMLR marine debris program.
Project to test utility of satellite imagery for monitoring human
impacts
Project outline
During the 2022-23 intersessional period the UK undertook a new
project to determine if very high resolution (VHR) satellite imagery
can be used to detect signs of change at the most frequently visited
Antarctic sites. The intention was to provide evidence to how
remote sensing methods might be able to support ongoing
monitoring of Antarctic visitor sites to detect change resulting from
human visitors.
An assessment was undertaken to visually compare two VHR
satellite images from eight different highly-visited sites The sites
selected were Barrientos Island, Half Moon Island, Brown Bluff,
Neko Harbour, Whalers Bay, Cuverville Island, Goudier Island and
Danco Island. , with the two images separated by approximately
five years. Side-by-side comparison was undertaken to assess visible
differences, specifically considering:
Changes in number and extent of trails;
Changes to extent or density of vegetation; and
Changes in location of penguin colonies in relation to established
trails.
Results
At a number of visitor sites, it was possible to discern trails that
corresponded with walking routes from landing sites. In some
locations (e.g., Whalers Bay), it appeared that the trails were more
significant in recent images, potentially indicating that the impact
from human visitors has increased. Elsewhere trails are visible
where they cross areas of snow (e.g., Peterman Island, Neko
Harbour). In these cases, the impact is probably ephemeral, but it
was not possible to determine if there was any lasting impact on the
underlying surface.
Based on the images included in this study, it has not been possible
to discern changes in vegetation or penguin colonies. This is likely
because any changes are small relative to a highly variable
background and a longer-term analysis (longer than five years) is
required to detect significant trends.
Proposed next steps
VHR satellite imagery provides some limited information about
extent of trails caused by human footfall at Antarctic visitor sites
but does not provide sufficiently high-resolution detail that is
considered necessary to fully assess and monitor changes.
There has already been much work on the use of RPAS for
monitoring the Antarctic environment Including: Zmarz et al. 2015,
Dąbski et al. 2020, Malenovský et al. 2017, Turner et al. 2014 and
Rümmler et al. 2018. Building on this experience, we propose that a
further study could be undertaken
to assess the utility of using imagery collected by RPAS, with
sufficient high spatial resolution and positional accuracy, to
monitor human impacts at the most highly-visited tourist sites.
Recommendation
It is recommended that Parties:
Note the summary of UK-led or supported programmes that could
contribute data for the future monitoring of impacts of human
activities in Antarctica;
Continue to share information about their own programmes
relevant to the monitoring of human impacts on the Antarctic
environment;
Discuss how best to collate information on existing monitoring
programmes; and
Note the results of the project to assess the use of satellite imagery
for monitoring human impacts, and consider contributing to the
proposed continuation project to assess the use of RPAS imagery to
monitor human impacts at multiple highly-visited tourist sites.
References
Dąbski M, Zmarz A, Rodzewicz M, Korczak-Abshire M, Karsznia I,
Lach K, ... & Chwedorzewska K (2020). Mapping glacier forelands
based on UAV BVLOS operation in Antarctica. Remote Sensing,
12(4), 630.
Dunn MJ, Forcada J, Jackson JA, Waluda CM, Nichol C, Trathan PN
(2018) A long‑term study of gentoo penguin (Pygoscelis papua)
population trends at a major Antarctic tourist site, Goudier Island,
Port Lockroy.
Jones FM, Allen C, Arteta C, Arthur J, Black C, Emmerson LM, et al.
(2018) Time-lapse imagery and volunteer classifications from the
Zooniverse Penguin Watch project. Sci Data 5, 1–13.
Malenovský Z, Lucieer A, King DH, Turnbull JD, & Robinson SA
(2017). Unmanned aircraft system advances health mapping of
fragile polar vegetation. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 8(12),
1842-1857.
Phillips RA, Silk JRD, Massey A, Hughes KA (2019) Surveys reveal
increasing and globally important populations of south polar skuas
and Antarctic shags in Ryder Bay (Antarctic Peninsula). Polar
Biology, 42. 423-432. 10.1007/s00300-018-2432-0
Rümmler MC, Mustafa O, Maercker J, Peter HU, & Esefeld J (2018).
Sensitivity of Adélie and Gentoo penguins to various flight activities
of a micro UAV. Polar Biology, 41, 2481-2493.
Turner D, Lucieer A, Malenovský Z, King DH, & Robinson SA
(2014). Spatial co-registration of ultra-high resolution visible,
multispectral and thermal images acquired with a micro-UAV over
Antarctic moss beds. Remote Sensing, 6(5), 4003-4024.
Waluda CM, Staniland IJ, Dunn MJ, Thorpe SE, Grilly E, Whitelaw
M, Hughes KA (2020) Thirty years of marine debris in the Southern
Ocean: annual surveys of two island shores in the Scotia Sea.
Environment International, 136. 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105460
Youngflesh C, Jones FM, Lynch HJ, Arthur J, Ročkaiová Z, Torsey
HR, Hart T (2021) Large-scale assessment of intra- and inter-annual
breeding success using a remote camera network
Zmarz A, Korczak-Abshire M, Storvold R, Rodzewicz M, &
Kędzierska I (2015). Indicator species population monitoring in
Antarctica with UAV. The International Archives of the
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences,
40(W4), 189-193.
