Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
ASPA No.122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004), Measure 3 (2011), Measure 3 (2016), Measure 8
(2022)
Current management plan:
Measure 8 (2022)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983),
Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987),
Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
SCAR Recommendation XXIII-6 (1994), Resolution 1 (1998)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map 1 incorrectly labelled an area of the McMurdo Ice Shelf as
the Ross Ice Shelf and this has been corrected.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 6(v) Special Zones within the Area. Paragraph (4) listed
under Geomagnetic Observatory Restricted Zone: boundary extent
and conditions for access and installations has been replaced by
wording to facilitate safe access to the Geomagnetic Observatory
during the winter months.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is the scientific value of the
Area as an electromagnetically ‘quiet’ site for study of the upper
atmosphere. Under Article 3.2 of Annex V the main reason for
special protection is:
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research.
While the Area is not intended to be kept inviolate, compared to the
surrounding area it has remained relatively undisturbed and thus
has value for ecological comparisons.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. ACBR9 – South Victoria Land.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
No.
ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
The Management Plan for ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point
Peninsula, Ross Island was last reviewed in 2022. Changes were
made in particular because of construction of a new Geomagnetic
Observatory within the Area, which required special access
provisions. As a result, a new Restricted Zone applying to the
Geomagnetic Observatory was adopted.
In light of practical experience over the winter following adoption
of the new plan, scientists raised concerns about the new access
provisions for the Restricted Zone, and in particular implications for
safe access and operations at the Geomagnetic Observatory in the
dark and cold winter months.
Scientists working within the Area recommended that provisions for
access to the Geomagnetic Observatory be changed so vehicles
could approach closer to the facility in winter months.
New Zealand and the United States consulted together and with
scientists working within the Area to agree a revised provision for
winter access to the Restricted Zone.
The proposed change to the existing Management Plan is:
Section 6(v) Special zones within the Area. Under Geomagnetic
Observatory Restricted Zone: boundary extent and conditions for
access and installations Paragraph (4):
Existing wording - to be deleted – 4) Vehicles and machinery are
prohibited within the inner part of the Restricted Zone, except as
required for essential scientific or maintenance purposes specified
by a permit. Access into the inner part of the Restricted Zone shall
generally be on foot.
Revised wording - to replace existing wording – 4) Vehicles and
machinery are generally prohibited within the inner part of the
Restricted Zone, except as required for essential scientific or
maintenance purposes specified by a permit. Access into the inner
part of the Restricted Zone shall thus generally be on foot.
However, in winter (01 Mar – 31 Oct) vehicles may approach the
Observatory along the designated foot access route (Map 2) to
within 50 m of the huts to facilitate safe access. Winter visitors
should observe all restrictions on use of headlights and radios as
specified in other sections of the Management Plan.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
