Review of International Maritime Organization (IMO) and Antarctic
Treaty system (ATS) guidelines and agreements concerning ship
biofouling and ballast water management
Review of International Maritime Organization (IMO) and Antarctic
Treaty system (ATS) guidelines and agreements concerning ship
biofouling and ballast water management
Working Paper presented by Australia, New Zealand and the United
Kingdom
Summary
Marine non-native species present an increasing threat to Antarctic
marine ecosystems, particularly under climate change. To advance
actions identified in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan and Climate
Change Response Work Program (CCRWP), Australia, New Zealand
and the United Kingdom undertook a review of International
Maritime Organisation (IMO) and Antarctic Treaty System (ATS)
guidelines and agreements concerning ship biofouling and ballast
water management. This paper presents a report on the review,
which provides an overview of the status and risks of marine non-
native species in the Antarctic region, summarises relevant IMO and
ATS provisions, and presents observations arising from the review.
The co-authors recommend that the CEP considers the information
presented in the report, considers requesting COMNAP and IAATO
to provide up-to-date advice on the ship biofouling and ballast
water management practices employed by their members, and
encourages monitoring for non-native marine species.
Background
Non-native species drive ecological changes that impact biodiversity
in almost all marine environments, and are one of the most pressing
global conservation concerns. There is growing awareness that ship
activity globally spreads invasive marine non-native species,
especially through transport in ballast water and hull fouling.
Concurrently, there have been developments in the availability of
methods and technologies to reduce the risk of non-native species
introductions associated with ballast water and vessel biofouling.
In recent years, there have been substantial developments in
knowledge of the risk marine invasive non-native species present to
Antarctic marine ecosystems. So far, no established populations of
non-native marine species are confirmed in the waters around
Antarctica. However, as highlighted in the 2022 SCAR report
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis
and Recommendations for Action, establishment is expected to
become more likely as the effects of climate change become more
pronounced.
The potential for ships to transport species to Antarctic waters has
been the subject of discussions in the CEP since its first meeting in
1998, as a component of the Committee’s broader efforts to
understand and address the environmental risks associated with the
introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic region. A
summary of CEP discussions on ship biofouling and ballast water
management is presented in ATCM XLV Information Paper 9.
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan has long included ‘Introduction of
non-native species’ as a top priority issue with a range of associated
actions, including reviews of IMO biofouling and ballast water
management guidelines. The current work plan (CEP XXIV Report,
Appendix 1) includes a specific action to ‘[r]eview IMO report on
biofouling guidelines’. The work plan also includes a further action
to ‘[i]nitiate work to assess the risk of marine non-native species
introductions’, and identifies several related science, knowledge and
information needs.
Recognising that marine non-native species risks are expected to
increase with increasing human activity, and as climate change
creates less hostile conditions for human-assisted arrivals
from outside the region, the CCRWP also includes a high priority
action to ‘[r]eview… IMO biofouling guidelines to check adequacy
for Southern Ocean and vessels moving from region to region’.
Accordingly, the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) has identified a task to ‘[u]ndertake a brief review of IMO
biofouling and ballast water treatment guidelines.’
Similarly, the CEP Non-Native Species Manual: Revision 2019
identifies the need to improve understanding of risks and pathways
for non-native species introductions to the Antarctic marine
environment, and to develop related guidelines (Annex: Guidelines
and resources requiring further attention or development).
Review of IMO and ATS guidelines and agreements concerning ship
biofouling and ballast water management
Following discussions within the SGCCR during the 2021-22
intersessional period about advancing priority actions in the
CCRWP, Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom offered to
undertake a review of IMO and ATS guidelines and agreements
concerning ship biofouling and ballast water management. A
preliminary report was presented to CEP XXIV (2022) in ATCM
XLIV/IP049, noting that work undertaken to date had included:
the compilation of relevant scientific papers;
the review/summary of CEP papers and related discussions relevant
to the introduction of marine non-native species, biofouling and
ballast water management; and
the compilation of related ATS and IMO guidelines and agreements,
and the initiation of work for their consideration and comparison.
Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom continued the
review during the 2022/23 intersessional period. The results are
presented in the attached report, which:
provides an overview of the status and risks of marine non-native
species in the Antarctic region;
summarises the related provisions of Antarctic Treaty system (ATS)
and International Maritime Organization (IMO) instruments; and
presents observations for consideration in further work on these
issues by the CEP and SGCCR (reproduced below).
Observations
Based on the information arising from the review, Australia, New
Zealand and the United Kingdom have identified the following
observations:
General
Through the Five-Year Work Plan and CCRWP the CEP has
prioritised action to understand and address the risk that vessels
operating in the Antarctic region could introduce marine non-native
species, including by highlighting the relevance of reviewing IMO
biofouling and ballast water management requirements and
guidelines.
The CEP and ATCM have previously received useful information
from COMNAP and IAATO regarding the ballast water management
practices of their member vessels, and from SCAR regarding risks
associated with hull fouling, although much of that information is
now over 15 years old.
Since that time, new National Antarctic Program and non-
government vessels have been constructed and have commenced
operating in the Antarctic region, including vessels that would have
been designed to comply with IMO biofouling and ballast water
management requirements and guidelines. Other existing vessels
operating in the region would also employ related practices and
technologies.
Up-to-date information about the biofouling and ballast water
management practices of ships operating in Antarctic waters would
assist the CEP and Parties to consider the possible need for further
steps to address risks to the Antarctic marine environment.
Improved monitoring for non-native marine species would also
enhance understanding of the rate of introductions, which in turn
would inform environmental management of the risk through use of
marine biosecurity measures.
Management of biofouling
Beyond the provisions of Annex II to the Environmental Protocol
and general non-native species guidance provided in the CEP Non-
Native Species Manual, there are no specific ATS requirements or
guidelines for managing biofouling on ships operating in Antarctic
waters.
The IMO has developed Guidelines for the control and management
of ships' biofouling to minimize the transfer of invasive aquatic
species (the Biofouling Guidelines), which are currently under
review. These are general in nature rather than specific to the
operating conditions or environment of the Antarctic region. The
Polar Code also provides limited guidance on biofouling practices
specific to operations in polar waters
Ballast water management
When the ATCM Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in
the Antarctic Treaty Area were agreed in 2006, the Parties noted
their status as an interim measure until such time as ballast water
treatment technologies were developed, as set out in the IMO
Ballast Water Management Convention. The IMO Ballast Water
Management Convention has now entered into force, and its ballast
water treatment requirements will apply to all relevant ships by 8
September 2024.
The IMO has developed a suite of guidelines related to ballast water
management. The Convention’s provisions and associated IMO
guidelines are not specific to the operating conditions or
environment of the Antarctic region. The IMO Polar Code notes that
ballast water management systems should be suitable and effective
for use in polar waters, but there are no specific requirements or
guidance.
The ATCM Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the
Antarctic Treaty Area recommend ballast water management
practices similar to the requirements of the D-1 standard under the
Ballast Water Management Convention, and do not reflect the
ballast water treatment requirements under the D-2 standard, which
already applies to some ships and which will apply to all relevant
ships by 8 September 2024. As such, it may be appropriate to
consider the ongoing utility of the ATCM guidelines, following the
entry into force of the Ballast Water Management Convention.
Conclusions and recommendations
Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom invite the CEP to
consider the information contained in this paper and accompanying
report, to inform its ongoing work on actions in the Five-Year Work
Plan and CCRWP to understand and address the environmental risks
associated with marine non-native species. Related future work
might include updating the CEP Non-Native Species Manual to
provide practical guidance for ship biofouling and ballast water
management in the Antarctic region, and reviewing the utility of
the Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic
Treaty area following the entry into force of the Ballast Water
Management Convention.
Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom recommend that
the CEP:
Considers requesting COMNAP and IAATO to provide up-to-date
advice to CEP 27 (2025) regarding the ship biofouling and ballast
water management practices and technologies employed by their
members in the Antarctic region.
Brings this ongoing work to the attention of the Scientific
Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (SC-CAMLR) in light of shared objectives and
responsibilities for managing marine non-native species risks in the
Antarctic region.
Encourages monitoring for non-native marine species to enhance
understanding of risks and to inform consideration of marine
biosecurity measures, in line with needs identified in the Five-Year
Work Plan, CCRWP and Non-Native Species Manual.
Encourages SCAR to develop an Antarctic Environments Portal
Information Summary on pathways for the introduction of marine
non-native species (similar to the existing Information Summary on
Pathways for the Introduction of Terrestrial Non-Native species).
