The United States Recognizes the Emperor Penguin as a Threatened
Species and Provides Additional Protection for Emperor Penguins
The United States Recognizes the Emperor Penguin as a Threatened
Species and Provides Additional Protection for Emperor Penguins
Working paper submitted by the United States
Summary
This paper provides information about the November 2022
designation and protection of the emperor penguin as a threatened
species by the United States under the Endangered Species Act. The
designation was based on the best scientific, technical, and
commercial information available, which included an estimate that
by 2050, the global population size will decrease by 26 to 47
percent. The impact of climate change on sea-ice, which provides
breeding habitat for the species, is the primary threat to the
penguin. The designation provides the emperor penguin with
protections in addition to those in the United States Antarctic
Conservation Act.
The United States recommends that the Committee encourages
Members to;
Note that Member’s domestic legislation may contribute to the
protection of Antarctic species under threat;
Implement the draft Antarctic Specially Protected Species Action
Plan for the emperor penguin, attached to ATCMXLIV WP34; and
Report recent research results on the status of the emperor penguin
at CEP XXVII with the aim to reconsider recommending to the
ATCM the designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially
Protected Species under Annex II to the Protocol.
Introduction
The emperor penguin currently exhibits high resiliency,
redundancy, and representation. Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes
forsteri) breeding colonies are distributed around the continental
coastline of Antarctica with no indication that their distribution is
presently decreasing. There are approximately 61 breeding colonies
along the coastline of Antarctica, and the species’ population size is
estimated to be between 270,000 - 280,000 breeding pairs or
625,000 - 650,000 individual birds. However, according to the best
scientific, technical, and commercial information available, by 2050
their global population size will likely decrease by 26 percent (to
approximately 185,000 breeding pairs) to 47 percent (to
approximately 132,500 breeding pairs) under low and high carbon
emissions scenarios, respectively. The estimated decrease in
population size is not equal across Antarctica. The Ross and
Weddell Seas are strongholds for the species, and populations in
these areas will most likely remain stable. However, emperor
penguin colonies within the Indian Ocean, Western Pacific Ocean,
and Bellingshausen Sea and Amundsen Sea sectors are projected to
decline by over 90 percent due to melting sea ice. Therefore, the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) review of the best
scientific, technical, and commercial advice available indicates that
the emperor penguin meets the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as
amended (ESA) definition of a threatened species. Climate change is
the most substantial threat to emperor penguins in the future
because of an increase in air and sea temperatures that negatively
affects sea-ice habitat and, relatedly, prey abundance in Antarctica.
Most of the difference between the present climate and the climate
at the end of the century and beyond will be determined by
decisions made by policymakers today and during the next few
decades.
Basis for Action
The ESA (16 U.S.C. §1531, et seq.) defines a “threatened species” as
any species which is likely to become an endangered species within
the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its
range. The ESA requires that the U.S. FWS determine whether any
species is a threatened species because of any of the following
factors: (A) the present or threatened destruction, modification, or
curtailment of its habitat or range; (B) overutilization for
commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes; (C)
disease or predation; (D) the inadequacy of existing regulatory
mechanisms; or (E) other natural or manmade factors affecting its
continued existence. These factors represent broad categories of
natural or human-caused actions or conditions that could have an
effect on a species' continued existence. In evaluating these actions
and conditions, the FWS looks for those that may have a negative
effect on individuals of the species, as well as other actions or
conditions that may ameliorate any negative effects or may have
positive effects.
The FWS has determined that climate change (Factors A and E)
presents the most substantial threat facing the emperor penguin.
Other stressors on the species include tourism and research,
contaminants and pollution, and commercial Antarctic krill fisheries
(Factor E), but these stressors are not considered to be driving
factors of the emperor penguin's viability now or in the foreseeable
future.
Process
On August 4, 2021, the FWS published in the Federal Register a
proposed rule (86 FR 41917) to list the emperor penguin as a
threatened species under the ESA with a proposed rule that
provides measures that are necessary and advisable to provide for
the conservation of emperor penguin. On August 23, 2021, the
United States informed Antarctic Treaty Contracting Parties via the
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Forum/Communications among
National Competent Authorities of the basis and implications of the
proposed rule, as well as information about how to comment on the
proposal. On October 22, 2022, the FWS announced via a press
release that it had finalized the proposed rule. On October 26,
2022, the FWS published in the Federal Register the Final Rule. The
listing of the emperor penguin became effective on November 25,
2022.
Protection Granted in Finalized Rule
The following activities, except as otherwise authorized or
permitted, are regulated or prohibited: importing or exporting; take;
possession and other acts with unlawfully taken specimens;
delivering, receiving, transporting, or shipping in interstate or
foreign commerce in the course of commercial activity; or selling or
offering for sale in interstate or foreign commerce. Under the ESA,
“take” means to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill,
trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such
conduct. “Take” can result knowingly or otherwise, by direct and
indirect impacts, intentionally or incidentally. The ESA applies
within any area under the United States' jurisdiction and on the
high seas.
The protections in the ESA are in addition to those provided by the
Antarctic Conservation Act (ACA), as amended, 16 U.S.C. § 2401, et
seq. administered by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF).
The NSF issues permits under the ACA for certain, otherwise
prohibited activities for specific purposes. The ACA has provided
significant conservation benefits and protections to the emperor
penguin through its regulation of these activities. Accordingly, the
ESA provides exceptions for take in Antarctica, import to the United
States from Antarctica, and export from the United States to
Antarctica when these activities are authorized under an ACA
permit issued by the NSF.
Recommendations
The United States recommends that the Committee encourages
Members to
Note that Member’s domestic legislation may contribute to the
protection of Antarctic species under threat;
Implement the draft Antarctic Specially Protected Species Action
Plan for the emperor penguin, attached to ATCMXLIV WP34; and
Report recent research results on the status of the emperor penguin
at CEP XXVII with the aim to reconsider recommending to the
ATCM the designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially
Protected Species under Annex II to the Protocol.
