Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry
Valleys, Victoria Land
ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls,
McMurdo Dry Valleys, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes, existing ASPA.
First designation:
Measure 9 (2012).
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 9 (2012).
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 6 (2018).
Current management plan:
Measure 6 (2018).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
Measure 18 (2015). The ASPA lies within ASMA No. 2 McMurdo
Dry Valleys
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. The maps have been replaced by new versions prepared in
color to improve the clarity of site features and ASPA boundaries.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Section 6(i) Boundaries and coordinates has been clarified to
specify that within the Sub-aerial component of the Area the
vertical boundary includes the entire glacier depth from the surface
to the glacier bed. The other vertical and all lateral boundaries of
the Area remain unchanged.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
The scientific value of Blood Falls as one of the few locations where
Antarctic groundwater can be collected at the surface has been
added to Section 1.
Section 6 Description of the Area has been updated to include
recent scientific results and the reference list was updated.
A minor amendment on following guidelines for use of Remotely
Piloted Aircraft Systems has been added (Section 7(ii) Access).
In Section 7(iii) it was clarified that activities with educational aims
do not include tourism.
The latest ATCM Resolution on Non-native species and the CEP
Non-native Species Manual (2019) is referenced in Section 7(vi).
Section 7(viii) has been revised to be more specific about sampling
procedures.
Minor editorial changes have been implemented throughout the
plan.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(e) an area of particular scientific interest; and
(f) an area of outstanding geological, glaciological and
geomorphological features.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
ACBR 9 South Victoria Land.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
No.
ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls, McMurdo Dry
Valleys, Victoria Land
The management plan for ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and
Blood Falls was last reviewed in 2018 and adopted through
Measure 6 (2018); review thus falls due in 2023.
The United States consulted with scientists working within the Area
and made minor updates to the management plan, including
updates on recent scientific research and taking into account
agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last
plan was adopted. Permits issued for visits to the Area since the
previous revision of the management plan were reviewed, with few
visits made, and no significant changes to management policies
were required.
The scientific value of Blood Falls as one of the few locations where
Antarctic groundwater can be collected at the surface has been
added to Section 1.
In Section 6(i) Boundaries and coordinates it was clarified that
within the Sub-aerial component of the Area the vertical boundary
includes the entire glacier depth from the surface to the glacier bed.
The other vertical and all lateral boundaries of the Area remain
unchanged.
Section 7(viii) has been revised to provide more specific guidance
on sampling procedures.
A range of minor editorial changes have been implemented and the
reference list has been updated.
The maps have been replaced by new versions prepared in color to
improve the clarity of site features, policies and the ASPA
boundary.
The exceptional values of the Area remain valid and the
management plan continues to protect those values.
Recommendation
The revised management plan and maps are attached for
consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for
recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
