Report on the informal ICG to develop an ASPA Draft Management
Plan for Danger Islands Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic
Peninsula)
ASPA No. XXX Danger Islands Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic
Peninsula)
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Note: this
information may be found on the ATS website in the Documents
database by searching under the name of the area. While the ATS
has made every effort to ensure the completeness and accuracy of
the information in the database, occasional errors or omissions may
occur. The proponents of any revision to a protected area are best
placed to know the history of that area, and are kindly requested to
contact the Secretariat if they notice any apparent discrepancy
between the regulatory history as they understand it and that
displayed on the ATS database.
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species,
including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, Environment Domain E - Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and
other islands
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, ACBR 3: North-west Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes, ANT062, ANT063, ANT064, Antarctic marine IBA 13,
proximity to Area of Ecological Significance (AES)
Report on the informal ICG to develop an ASPA Draft Management
Plan for Danger Islands Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic
Peninsula)
Working Paper submitted by Germany and the United States of
America
Summary
After compiling a first Draft Management Plan for the new ASPA
proposal Danger Islands, Germany and the United States opened an
Informal ICG asking experts to comment on the Draft Management
Plan. After finishing the discussion and considering the incoming
comments, an updated Draft Management Plan (see Attachment)
was compiled.
At ATCM XLV - CEP XXV the Committee on Environmental
Protection (CEP) and Parties are invited to take note of the Draft
Management Plan for the proposed multi-site ASPA at the Danger
Islands (see Attachment) and agree that the Draft Management Plan
will be passed on to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for
further intersessional considerations.
Introduction
In May 2022, at ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV in Berlin, Germany and the
United States submitted WP13 entitled ‘Prior assessment of a
proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Danger Islands
Archipelago’. At ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV, the Parties agreed to the
proposed prior-assessment for Danger Islands. The CEP noted ‘the
quality of the evaluation put forward by the proponents and
considered this to be an area worth taking forward in the
intersessional period with the aim of drafting a management plan
for the area. The Committee encouraged Members with knowledge
and information relevant to this process to engage in these
intersessional discussions’ (see Final Report CEP XXIV and WP13
XLIV ATCM).
Report on the Informal ICG
In October 2022, the proponents and conveners of the informal ICG,
Germany and the United States, kindly invited experts (scientists,
environmental experts, IAATO representatives) to comment on the
first Draft Management Plan for the Danger Islands which Germany
and the United States had compiled beforehand. After evaluating
and considering the incoming comments and proposals from the
experts, the conveners updated the Draft Management Plan
respectively.
Recommendations
Germany and the United States of America recommend that the
CEP:
take note of the present Draft Management Plan for the proposed
multi-site Antarctic Specially Protected Area at the Danger Islands
Archipelago (North-eastern Antarctic Peninsula) at Attachment,
agree that the Draft Management Plan will be passed on to the
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) for further
intersessional considerations by the Committee for Environmental
Protection.
