Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
ASPA 145, Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is the designation of a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is the designation of a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
Original designation:
SSSI 27
First adoption of the management plan:
Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
Management plan reviews:
A revised version was approved by Measure 3 (2005)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2005)
Any extension of the expiry date of the management plan:
Two extensions, approved through Measure 2 (2000) and Measure 5
(2009).
Change of name and number to ASPA 145 by virtue of Decision 1
(2002).
ASPA 145, Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Other significant measures:
The Area was incorporated into ASMA 4, Deception Island, by
Measure 3 (2005).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) Is it a major or minor rectification?
There are major and minor changes.
(ii) Are there any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The protected area is expanded with sub-site C in the south-
east sector of Port Foster.
(iii) Are there any changes to the maps?
Yes. A bathymetric map is incorporated and legends and graphs are
modified.
(iv) Are there any changes to the description of the Area that are
significant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The polygons that delimit subsite A are corrected and the
description in the subsites is modified with the incorporation of
subsite C.
(v) Are there any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or
HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, explain if
there has been any merger with existing sites or areas or if any were
determined to be added or removed.
No.
vi) Other – brief summary of other kinds of changes, indicating the
Management Plan paragraphs containing them.
Introduction: in paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. In addition, paragraphs (3,
6 and 8) are added and one was deleted.
1. Description of the values that require protection, in paragraphs 1,
2, 3 and 6. Paragraphs (4 and 5) are added and one moved to the
introduction.
2. Purposes and objectives, in points 1 and 4. A new point for non-
native species was included and one was deleted.
3. Management activities, in the five points.
5. Maps and Figures, two maps are added (location of Deception
Island in relation to the Antarctic Peninsula and SSSI [Map 1] and a
bathymetric map of Port Foster [Map 3]) and the map with the
three sub-sites on Deception Island (Map 2) was modified. One of
the figures was included.
6 (i) Geographic Co-ordinates, Boundary Indicators and Natural
Features, corrected text in GENERAL DESCRIPTION and text was
added to paragraph 2. 
In BOUNDARIES paragraph 1 was added to describe the Area; the
boundary points of subsites A and B (para. 2 and 3) were corrected
and two new paragraphs (4 and 5) were added. In subsite C, text
was corrected and added (para. 6), since part of the text was moved
to section 1 and a paragraph was included (para. 7). 
Information was added to describe GEOLOGICAL AND VOLCANIC
FEATURES (para. 1 to 3).
In BENTHIC SPECIES, paragraphs 1 and 3 were added, paragraph 4
was modified.
Information was added about OTHER ANIMALS at the end of the
section.
6(ii) Access to the Area was modified and corrected, and now has
four paragraphs.
6(iii) Location of structures within the Area and in adjacent areas,
the wording of paragraph 2 was corrected.
6(iv) Location of protected areas in the vicinity, paragraph 1 was
added and paragraph 2 was amended.
6(v) Special areas inside the Zone, the text was modified.
7(i) General conditions of permits, points 1 and 5 were amended.
7(ii) Access to and movement within or on the Area, information
was modified and added, and now there are 5 paragraphs.
7(iii) Activities that can be carried out within the Area, two points
(4 and 5) were added.
7(iv) Installation, modification or dismantling of structures, two
points (4 and 5) were added.
7(v) Location of camps, it was modified and corrected.
7(vi) Restrictions regarding materials and agencies that may be
introduced into the Area, text was added in paragraphs 2 and 3.
7(vii) Collection of native flora and fauna or damage they may
suffer, one paragraph was added (par. 3).
7(viii) The collection or removal of materials not brought into the
Area by the permit holder, paragraph 3 was modified and
paragraph 4 was added.
7(x) Actions that may be necessary to continue to meet the
objectives of the Management Plan, paragraph 2 was amended and
paragraph 3 added.
7(xi) Requirements regarding reports, the text was completely
changed and new paragraphs (4 and 5) were added.
8. The supporting scientific documents were updated with
information on the results of the studies carried out in the Area.
If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine area?
A new zone is not proposed, but subsite C, which corresponds to a
marine area, is incorporated.
If so, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
Yes
If so, has the prior approval of the CCAMLR been obtained?
Yes.
If yes, the reference to the significant paragraph of the CCAMLR
Final report should be provided.
In 2012, the CCAMLR Scientific Committee stressed the importance
of this area for scientific research and recommended approval of the
Management Plan (para. 5.61 and 5.62), which was ratified by the
Commission the same year (para. 5.63 (i) and 5.64).
In the round of meetings of the CCAMLR-41, in 2022, the Scientific
Committee supported the proposed review of the management plan,
which was endorsed by the Commission (para. 6.40, Report of SC-
CCAMLR-41, CCAMLR-41 para 5.9)
If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The area is protected mainly because it pertains to a unique marine
ecosystem of special interest for scientific research.
Was the main environmental domain represented by the ASPA/
ASMA identified (Resolution 3 [2008])?
Yes, the main associated domain is G.
Has the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR)
represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified?
Yes, the ACBR3, in the Northeast Antarctic Peninsula.
If applicable, have Important Bird Areas in Antarctica (Resolution 5
[2015]) represented by ASPA/ASMA been identified?
No.
Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 145 Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Summary
Chile and Spain present the revised Management Plan for ASPA 145
with the aim of improving the conservation of benthic fauna in an
Antarctic ecosystem with unique characteristics, incorporating
subsite C and updating the information contained in the plan, in
accordance with the recommendations received in the SGMP.
Background
In 1987, due to the proposal submitted by Chile, two Port Foster
sites were designated as SSSI 27 under Recommendation XIV-5 to
protect benthic values associated with two types of seabed, at
depths between 50 and 150 m (subsite A) and between 100 and 150
m (subsite B). Subsequently, through Decision 1 (2002), the site
designation was changed to ASPA 145. Following two extensions to
the Management Plan, a revised version was approved and
incorporated into the package for Antarctic Specially Managed Area
(ASMA) No. 4, Deception Island.
Studies carried out by the Spanish Antarctic Programme indicate
that the southern sector of Port Foster, the area surrounding Fildes
Point, contains considerable marine biodiversity related to rocky
bottoms, uncommon in other locations in Puerto Foster. Since this
sector is also in the area of the island that receives the largest
number of visitor vessels, Chile and Spain considered it necessary to
protect the site by including it as a new sub-site of ASPA 145.
The Management Plan project was initially presented to the XXIII
Meeting of the CEP (2021) attached to the working document WP
39 rev.1 Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 145, Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
of ATCM XLIII. The XXIII Meeting of the CEP forwarded the draft
Management Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans
(SGMP) for review during the 2021-2022 intersessional period. 
In response to the comments received from the SGMP, Chile and
Spain refined the revised Management Plan and included a
clarification of the description of the values that require protection
and from the information of the three proposed subsites (A, B and
the new subsite C); the correction of the co-ordinates of the
boundaries of subsite A; the location of Deception Island in the
Antarctic Peninsula region (Map 1), new bathymetric cartography
(Map 3); a modification of Map 2 (formerly Map 1) with more
recent topography and bathymetric charting incorporated, plus the
11 ASPA 140 sub-sites; a clarification of the description of the
benthic species present in the Area, with a new Figure 2 with
representative images of the sites; new information about the
geological and volcanic characteristics of Port Foster, and about the
sighting of other animals; clarification on access to and movement
within the Area; an improvement to the description of the removal
of artefacts from the seabed in the Area and of the newsroom to
report on the activities that are going to be developed. The
documentation has been reviewed and recently published
documents have been referenced.
Subsequently, the revised Management Plan was presented at the
XXIV Meeting of the CEP (2022, in the SGMP activity report (WP
08) and it was agreed that Chile would submit it to CCAMLR, by
virtue of Decision 9 (2005). At the CCAMLR meeting (2022) the
Scientific Committee endorsed the revised management plan
proposal for ASPA 145. (paragraph 6.40, Report of SC-CAMLR-41 ;
paragraph 5.9, Report of CCAMLR-41).
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection, in order for it to
recommend its approval by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
