Promoting Diversity and Inclusion among Antarctic operators and
expeditions
Promoting Diversity and Inclusion among Antarctic operators and
expeditions
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
Following a successful pilot of a Code of Conduct to encourage all
British Antarctic operators and expeditions during the 2022/23
season to make a voluntary commitment to promote equity,
diversity and inclusion issues, the United Kingdom proposes the
ATCM considers further options to promote its desire that everyone
working on Antarctic matters was safe, welcomed, respected and
free from discrimination. In addition to encouraging Parties,
Observers and Experts to continue to share information and best
practices about relevant activities and initiatives, the UK also
proposes that the ATCM’s commitment to promoting Equity,
Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) be reflected on the Antarctic Treaty
System public website, and that Parties consider developing EDI
plans.
Context
Last year, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting expressed its
desire to ensure that everyone working on Antarctic matters was
safe, welcomed, respected and free from discrimination (ATCM
XLIV Final Report, paragraph 259). In recent years, a number of
Parties have submitted information about activities designed to
promote diversity and inclusion among those working on Antarctic
matters, and the ATCM expressed a desire for further information
sharing on this issue.
The UK shared information about some of the activities delivered
through its Diversity in Polar Science Initiative (DiPSi) in XLIII/
IP45. DiPSi was inaugurated in 2019 with the aim of celebrating the
existing diversity within the UK Polar community, and promoting
and enhancing Antarctic science opportunities to under-represented
groups, including women, people from ethnic minorities, people
with a disability, and LGBT+.
As part of DiPSi, during the 2022/23 Antarctic season, a voluntary
Code of Conduct was included alongside all Antarctic permits issued
to those travelling to Antarctica with a British operator or on a
British expedition. This noted that inclusive environments tend to
be safer, healthier and have a more proactive approach to
addressing risk. The Code of Conduct invited permit holders to
indicate their commitment to encouraging everyone involved in
their visit to:
Act and behave respectfully and honestly, and ensure there is no
unfair or discriminatory effect on others;
Contribute to a safe operating environment that is based on trust,
cooperation and mutual respect;
Uphold a zero tolerance to any form of bullying, harassment,
discrimination or hate speech directed at a minority group,
including comments about a person’s gender identity, sexual
orientation, disability, age, marital status, physical appearance,
body size, ethnicity, religion, belief or national origin;
Respect the authority of those in positions of leadership; and
Be informed about how to raise any concerns relating to health,
safety or environmental protection.
The Code of Conduct is attached at Annex A.
Initial feedback on the Code of Conduct has been positive, with
most UK operators affirming their commitment to supporting efforts
to enhance and support diversity and inclusion issues.
Recommendation
The UK proposes that the ATCM discusses further ways to
operationalise the desire it expressed last year to ensure that
everyone working on Antarctic matters was safe, welcomed,
respected and free from discrimination, including through:
Continuing to encourage Parties to share experiences and best
practice on equity, diversity and inclusion initiatives;
Inviting Parties to consider developing EDI implementation plans,
to describe measures being taken, or planned, to deliver the ATCM’s
desire, as expressed last year; and
Including a new topic on the ATS website, under ‘About’ on ‘Equity,
Diversity and Inclusion’ to publicly confirm the ATCM’s
commitment to supporting equity, diversity and inclusion. Once
established, this page could be regularly updated as the ATCM
continues to discuss these important issues, as well as provide links
to the work of SCAR, COMNAP and others in this field.
ANNEX A
Travelling to Antarctica: Code of Conduct
Antarctic Treaty Parties have expressed their desire to ensure that
everyone working in Antarctica is safe, welcomed, respected and
free from discrimination. Inclusive environments tend to be safer,
healthier and have a more proactive approach to addressing risk.
You have been issued with a British permit to travel to, or
undertake specialist activities in, Antarctica. You have a legal
obligation to ensure that everyone travelling to, or operating in,
Antarctica under your permit complies with the conditions therein,
to ensure the protection of the Antarctic environment and the safety
of others operating in the region. As part of our commitment to
embracing and enhancing diversity and inclusion, the Foreign,
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) invites you, in
addition to ensuring compliance with any applicable legislation that
may include obligations relating to equality or non-discrimination,
to also indicate your commitment to encouraging everyone involved
in your visit, particularly those who will be working in Antarctica,
to:
Act and behave respectfully and honestly, and ensure there is no
unfair or discriminatory effect on others;
Contribute to a safe operating environment that is based on trust,
cooperation and mutual respect;
Uphold a zero tolerance to any form of bullying, harassment,
discrimination or hate speech directed at a minority group,
including comments about a person’s gender identity, sexual
orientation, disability, age, marital status, physical appearance,
body size, ethnicity, religion, belief or national origin;
Respect the authority of those in positions of leadership;
Be informed about how to raise any concerns relating to health,
safety or environmental protection.
If you are happy to subscribe to these values, you are encouraged to
sign the attached certificate and share with all those travelling with
you, or display prominently, as you consider appropriate.
Thank you and we wish you safe and environmentally responsible
travels to Antarctica.
Polar Regions Department
FCDO
September 2022
Code of Conduct in Antarctica
As the permit holder for the following Antarctic [voyage/
expedition/activity]
…………………………………………………………………………………………
During the period …………………………….. to
…………………………………….
I am legally responsible for ensuring all of our activities are
conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible way, in
accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on
Environmental Protection.
In addition, I am committed to ensuring that everyone engaged in
this [voyage/expedition/activity] feels safe to be themselves,
welcomed, respected and free from discrimination. As well as
ensuring you comply with relevant laws on equality and non-
discrimination, I also encourage everyone to:
Act and behave respectfully and honestly, and ensure there is no
unfair or discriminatory effect on others;
Contribute to a safe operating environment that is based on trust,
cooperation and mutual respect;
Uphold a zero tolerance to any form of bullying, harassment,
discrimination or hate speech directed at a minority group,
including comments about a person’s gender identity, sexual
orientation, disability, age, marital status, physical appearance,
body size, ethnicity, religion, belief or national origin;
Respect the authority of those in positions of leadership;
Raise any concerns relating to health, safety or environmental
protection, through your organisation’s reporting mechanisms [or]
by [insert appropriate details of how or to whom any concerns
should be raised
…………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………..]
Signed: ……………………………………
