Environmental monitoring: an international framework
Environmental monitoring: an international framework
Summary
Monitoring has since long been identified as key to better assessing
possible environmental changes and identifying impacts of human
activities, including tourism. Monitoring is also the subject of
obligations in the Protocol on environmental protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protocol, art. 3.2.), and many Parties
have included monitoring activities in the National Programs. It is
however unlikely that, put together, these national monitoring
activities provide a full overview of developments in the Antarctic
environment, given the lack of a coherent, spatially explicit
framework, the lack of a coordinating mechanism and the lack of
adequate resources.
This WP proposes to establish an ICG that will be tasked to develop
a proposal for an overall framework for environmental impact
monitoring, also taking into account cumulative impacts. It is
proposed that the ICG uses important suggestions and elements that
have already been identified in recent years. The WP proposes a
ToR for the ICG.
Introduction
The Antarctic environment is changing. Drivers of that change
include increased human presence and human activities and their
impacts, that are exacerbated by climate change, pollution, and so
on. Beyond the general finding that the Antarctic environment is
changing, much is unknown, including the way in which the
environment is changing, as well as the extent of the changes.
Environmental monitoring lays the groundwork for better
understanding threats and impacts and provides the basis for
coherent and comprehensive policy action where needed.
Environmental monitoring is an obligation under the Environment
Protocol, and many if not all Parties are undertaking environmental
monitoring to some extent. However, these approaches may show
differences in terms of research approach (e.g., indicators) and
cover only specific geographical areas. An international framework
for environmental monitoring is needed, but so far, not in place.
Such a framework should not only provide guidance on what to
monitor, but also where to monitor, and how. Ideally the
framework, following a Driver-Pressure-State-Impact-Response
approach (DPSIR-approach), would be able to distinguish different
drivers of change, the pressures that stem from them, as well as the
impacts on and responses of the Antarctic environment and the
effectiveness of policy responses. Additionally, an international
monitoring framework appears to be the only way to achieve the
objectives of Art. 3.2.c of the Environmental Protocol regarding the
consideration of cumulative impacts in the planning and conduct of
Antarctic activities.
In recent years, much concern has been expressed around the
impacts of tourism, climate change and pollution, and the way in
which these factors might interact. In the informal workshop on
Antarctic tourism in Rotterdam (2019), the need for the
development of an international framework for environmental
monitoring, capable of assessing the impacts of tourism as well as
the effectiveness of tourism policies was recognized. The subsequent
ATCM meeting requested SCAR to develop this framework. To date,
that has not yet resulted in concrete proposals.
In 2022, back-to-back with ATCM XLIV, a special workshop on
environmental monitoring was held in and organised by Germany.
In that workshop, a number of important issues to be monitored
were identified, and importantly, much attention was also paid to
the organization of
the monitoring. It was recognized that once an international
guiding framework would be established, ideally the national
programs would respond, and contribute to it. This however would
require effective international coordination, a mechanism to fill
gaps (in terms of Antarctic areas or parameters covered), as well as
a sustainable funding base. Concrete proposals put forward included
the establishment of a dedicated subsidiary body under the CEP.
This body would be responsible for developing and maintaining the
international framework, overseeing implementation, building on
national programs’ efforts, as well as additional monitoring
implemented by the subsidiary body. A fee collected from the
tourism industry was proposed as a basis for funding.
Most recently, in the informal workshop on Antarctic tourism held
in Paris, France (8-10 March 2023), the need for such an
international framework was reiterated, acknowledging previous
proposals arising from formal and informal ATCM discussions made
in this regard, . It was felt by many participants that it was time to
convene an ICG to - on the basis of existing work and suggestions -
develop a proposal for an international framework, including the
institutional and financial aspects.
Proposed intersessional work
France and the Netherlands, as co-hosts of the Paris workshop,
therefore, propose the CEP to discuss the matter, and to advice to
the ATCM XLV to establish an ICG on an international framework
for environmental monitoring.
The Terms of Reference would include the following:
The ICG would be tasked to:
Develop a concrete proposal for an international framework for
environmental monitoring, laying out the parameters of what and
where to monitor, on the basis of the DPSIR-concept, and taking
into account the important issue of cumulation;
Identify the organizational and institutional conditions needed for
full implementation of the framework, including by considering the
need for a dedicated monitoring body under the Treaty system;
Identify options and develop a proposal for the funding base needed
for the full implementation of the framework.
The ICG may draw from experiences and practices from other
organisations, including CCAMLR;
The ICG would work intersessionally and report to ATCM 46.
