Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 168 Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
ASPA No. 168 Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2008)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2008)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 17 (2015)
Current management plan:
Measure 17 (2015)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 168 Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
In the Introduction section, the description of the latest visit is
updated.
Twelve surveying rods for current velocity were erected in the area.
Description is added in paragraph 6(iii).
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is to protect the precious
physiognomies of glacier erosion preserved in the ice sheet of
inland Antarctic. Under Article 3.2 of Annex V the main reasons for
special protection are:
(e) areas of particular interest to on-going or planned scientific
research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Yes. Environment T –Inland continental geologic (Dronning Maud,
Mac Robertson, Victoria, Oates lands, Ford Range)
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
Yes. ACBR16 –Prince Charles Mountains
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
N/A.
Revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 168 Mount Harding, Grove
Mountains, East Antarctica
ASPA No. 168 Mount Harding, Grove Mountains, East Antarctica
was designated through Measure 2 by the 31st ATCM in 2008. The
Management Plan for ASPA No. 168 was reviewed last time in
2015, and the review therefore fell due in 2020. However, due to
the pandemic of COVID-19, the investigation of Grove Mountains
was delayed and the visit was recovered until February 2023 by the
39th Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE).
China has verified with scientists working in the Area that the
values under special protection are still valid and that the measures
for protection of those values are sufficient.
The 39th CHINARE has carried out the activities as below:：
In the top area at the south Mount Harding, the investigations of
the cold-desert soil, ventifacts, wind ridges and surrounding
environment and landform were carried out.
In the area of Kunming Lake, West Lake and Jingyu Peak at the
west Mount Harding, surveys on the ice-cored moraine, ice-core
pyramid, blue ice area, pool of melted water, blue ice cliff, steep
rock cliff, wind-eroded ice ditch and etc. were carried out.
UAV aerial photography was carried out in the Area.
12 surveying rods were erected in the Area for ice flow rate.
A new meteorological station (72 ° 47 ′ 50.52 ″ S, 74 ° 24 ′ 20.4 ″ E)
has been set up in the adjacent area outside the north boundary of
the Area.
Comments from the scientists engaged in Mount Harding survey
was requested and received, and the protected values and
management procedures were reviewed and brought to up to date.
The review concluded that the values of glacial erosion and wind-
erosion physiognomies of the Area remain valid and the protection
measures are still sufficient. No changes have been made to the
boundaries of the Area. Therefore, the revisions have been classified
as "minor" in nature and in effect.
The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management
Plan include the following elements and are shown in red words in
the attached text of the revised management plan:
Introduction. Minor update to the description of Chinese expedition
to the Area.
Section 3 Maps and Photos. Photos have been updated, including 2
photos replaced and a new photo for cold-desert soil.
Section 6 (iii) Locations of structures within and adjacent to the
site. The description of the surveying rods was added.
Add photo 5 in the annex: extremely cold desert soil, and adjust the
number of subsequent pictures in order.
Table 1 on the coordinates for 12 surveying rods was added in the
annex.
Recommendation
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for
adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
