Review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No.156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
New Zealand has undertaken a review of the management plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.156, Lewis Bay,
Mount Erebus, Ross Island in accordance with Annex V to the
Protocol. A revised management plan for ASPA 156 has been
prepared. The revisions are minor and outlined in the table below.
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached
revised management plan for ASPA 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus,
Ross Island.
Introduction
New Zealand has undertaken a ‘five-year review’ of the
Management Plan for ASPA No. 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus,
Ross Island in accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The Area on the lower slopes of Mount Erebus, above Lewis Bay on
the north side of Ross Island, was originally declared a tomb in
Recommendation XI-3 (1981) after notification by New Zealand
that 257 people of several nationalities lost their lives when the
DC-10 aircraft in which they were travelling crashed at this site on
28 November, 1979.
The Area was designated as a Specially Protected Area No. 26 by
Measure 2 (1997) primarily to ensure the Area was kept inviolate as
a mark of respect in remembrance and in order to protect the site's
emotional values. The site was re-designated as Antarctic Specially
Protected Area No. 156 by Decision 1 (2002) and a revised
management plan was adopted by Measure 2 (2003).
The management plan was reviewed and continued without
changes at CEP XI (2008).
In 2013, New Zealand proposed minor changes to the management
plan including the addition of an introduction, the addition of
Section 6(ii) ‘Access to the Area’, reference to the Environmental
Domain in which the site falls, and the inclusion of a new Figure 1
(photo). The revised management plan was adopted at ATCM
XXXVI by means of Measure 13 (2013).
The Management Plan was presented to the CEP in 2018 with no
changes and it was agreed that the adopted plan should remain in
force.
The most recent review was undertaken as a desk top exercise and
in consultation with key stakeholders. No visits have been
undertaken to the site in recognition of the principle of ensuring
that as far as possible the Area should be left in peace.
The review concluded that minor updates to the management plan
were appropriate to strengthen the protection of the values of the
area and an updated management plan has been prepared.
Recommendation
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached
revised management plan for ASPA 156, Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus,
Ross Island.
ASPA 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
Recommendation XI-3 (1981) Lewis Bay declared a tomb,
Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 26, Lewis Bay Tomb, by
Measure 2 (1997)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (1997)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Current management plan:
Measure 13 (2013)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus
Other relevant measures:
No
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes, captions and graphics.
Map A has been updated (Map 1) with the addition of Map 2 of the
topography at a larger scale.
Both maps are in colour.
Flight TE-901 is in the legend rather than DC-10, which is more
generic. The year is added to the plane symbol in the map, as per
the SCAR standard.
The icefree area on which the Memorial Cross (HSM 73) stands has
been updated with its official name, Te Puna Roimata Peak.
Elevations of the main peaks have been added and more names and
legends have also been added.
Icefree areas have been updated and included.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes
The boundary is now aligned and buffered 200 m from the coastline
as defined by the Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) 1:50K
digital data. The old boundary was buffered against an outdated
and inaccurate coastline, which varied from ~200-450 m from the
present coast. The new coastline has been checked against recent
Sentinel satellite imagery and agrees well.
The boundary change alters the size of the Area – now 15.2 km2.
Minor text updates to clarify position of northern boundary 200m
from the coastline.
The east, west and south boundaries remain the same and are
labelled with their coordinates.
The Deg-Min-Sec format of coordinates has been updated to Degrees
and Decimal Minutes as this is what pilots use.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
Introduction: Addition of sentence on 2013 Management Plan.
Section 1: Minor update “to within 200m of the coastline”
Section 5: Descriptions of new maps added.
Section 6(i): Very minor editorial updates.
Section 6(iii): Sentence adding the name and elevation of HSM 73,
very minor editorial update.
Section 6(iv): Correction of ASPA 130 to APSPA 175
Section 7(ii): Additional sentence prohibiting overflight and
landings by Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS).
Section 7(iv): Addition of “or scientific equipment installed” and
removal of “It is prohibited to modify or remove any structure that
was present with the Area at the time of special protection
designation” It is deemed the plane and associated debris are
considered ‘materials’ and covered under 7(viii). As there are no
structures in the ASPA and therefore no structures to modify or
remove, the second sentence has been removed to clarify and avoid
confusion.
Section 7(v): Minor edit to the coordinates to match those of the
1981 Royal Commission Report and additional sentence stating the
coordinates are approximate as of 1981. The coordinates stated are
of the impact site centre, but the debris has moved downslope and
these coordinates therefore approximate.
Section 7(viii): Minor wording updates. Addition of sentence “The
wreckage of TE-901 and associated debris are considered ‘materials’
within this management plan”
Map A updated to Map 1
Addition of Map 2.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The Area is designated to protect the crash site of Air New Zealand
flight TE-901, on the slopes of the north side of Mount Erebus, Ross
Island.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis
for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))?
N/A
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
N/A
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012))?
N/A
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
N/A
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer
to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
N/A
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.)
N/A
