Addressing management implication of loss of sea-ice
Addressing management implication of loss of sea-ice
Summary
There are indications of a significant change in the sea-ice extent
around Antarctica. Between 2017 and the present, the four lowest
annual minimum extents have been recorded, with both 2022 and
2023 setting new records for minimum extent. The sea ice loss is
not spread uniformly around the continent, it varies between
regions. The SCAR Decadal Update to the Antarctic Climate Change
and the Environment (ACCE) report notes that loss of sea ice is one
of the ongoing changes that will present new challenges for the
management of areas of high human activity in the Antarctic.
Norway and the United Kingdom recommend that the ATCM
request the CEP, with the support of SCAR, to provide advice on
how human activity can avoid or mitigate unintended or unforeseen
negative impacts on vulnerable species or habitats affected by local
or regional sea-ice loss.
ACCE report recommendation
The ACCE report notes that the loss of sea ice is one of the ongoing
changes that will present new challenges for the management of
areas of high human activity in the Antarctic (including where
infrastructure and other NAP assets are deployed), and underscores
that the associated challenges should be urgently addressed by
Parties.
Antarctic sea-ice
Antarctic sea ice plays a controlling role in the regional and global
climate, and its summer melt-back is one of the most dramatic
seasonal events on Earth. At its maximum extent it occupies around
18 x 106 km2, whilst at its minimum it reduces to less than 3 x 106
km2 , with most of the remaining sea ice being located in the
Weddell and Ross seas. Sea ice provides an important ecological
niche for many species, and it forms a barrier between the
atmosphere and the ocean, modulating the exchanges of heat,
momentum, fresh-water, and gases such as CO2. Sea ice is
recognised by the World Meteorological Organisation as one of
seven headline Global Climate Indicators which are key to
describing the changing climate.
Recent changes
Over the last few years there are indications of a significant
reduction in the sea-ice extent around Antarctica. However, loss of
sea ice is not spread uniformly around the continent, it varies
between regions. For example in summer 2023, the Pacific, Ross
and Amundsen-Bellingshausen seas had little sea ice remaining,
while the Weddell Sea and Indian sector had less substantial
change.
This year Antarctica reached its minimum extent for the year, at
1.79 million square kilometers on February 21, 2023. The 2023
minimum is the lowest in the 45-year satellite record. This year’s
minimum extent is lower than the previous record low set in 2022
by 136,000 square kilometers. The four lowest annual minimum
extents have been recorded between 2017 and the present (2023).
Changes in the timing (phase) of sea-ice advance and retreat might
be driving contemporary trends in Antarctic sea-ice. The anomalous
decay of sea ice in 2016 was associated largely with a change in
when sea-ice retreated (phase) rather than the amount of retreat
(amplitude), with an earlier (August rather than at the end of
September) and faster than usual seasonal retreat. More generally,
the loss of sea ice early in the spring allows more solar radiation to
be absorbed by
the ocean, which can hasten the melt. The subsequently longer ice-
free season leads to increased shortwave absorption in the ocean
during summer months that delays sea-ice formation the following
autumn.
Long-term regional sea ice trends
Despite global warming, Antarctic sea ice expanded slightly during
most of the first four decades of satellite observations. However, in
2016 the Antarctic sea ice area plummeted, in a change far outside
the range of previously observed variability. Since this time, the
Antarctic sea ice extent has not recovered. Before the major sea-ice
shift around 2016 it was already recorded that sea ice extent to the
west of the Antarctic Peninsula had decreased 6–10% per decade
with the greatest changes in autumn and summer and that the
length of the sea ice season on the west of the Peninsula had
reduced by ~4 days between 1979 and 2010
The future
In the information summary on sea-ice trends and future projections
on the Antarctic Environments Portal it is noted that model
projections generally agree that over the next 50 to 100 years,
Antarctic sea-ice will decrease, with significant physical and
biological implications for the polar region and beyond (e.g., for
global climate, indirectly sea-level rise, and ecosystems). There is
currently substantial uncertainty as to the magnitude, regionality,
seasonality, and timing of future change in Antarctic sea-ice
coverage and properties. The latest IPCC assessment report (IPCC
AR6 WG1) noted that there remains low confidence in existing
future projections of Antarctic sea ice extent.
Interestingly, there are indications that the western Antarctic
Peninsula region is seemingly and potentially moving towards (i)
lower minimum sea-ice extent, (ii) a later sea-ice advance, and (iii)
earlier retreat. Taken together, the consequence is a shorter sea-ice
season with more areas experiencing extended ice-free periods.
Changes in sea-ice extent increases access to (new) areas over a
longer time period
While there are few data available to assess trends at this stage,
experience elsewhere indicates that when new areas are made
available in space and time due to decline in sea-ice extent, human
activity will follow. Examples are provided below:
In northern Canada, between 1990 and 2012, statistically
significant increases in vessel traffic were observed on monthly and
annual time-scales coincident with declines in sea ice area. Ship
activity also increased during the start and end of the summer
season corresponding to the increasing melt season length.
In the Norwegian high Arctic - a major hotspot of maritime activity
and retreating sea ice cover – a study has revealed a slight overall
increase in fisheries and cruise activity, as well as notable trends of
stretching operational seasons and expanding navigational areas in
these sectors between 2012 and 2019.
There is anecdotal information that indicates a potential increase in
activity in the southern parts of the western Antarctic Peninsula
area in seasons that now experience less sea-ice obstacles than
before. It is, however, too early to determine whether sea-ice cover
is a cause, or part of the cause, as aspects such as ship construction
and design could also be a player; as could the search for new or
less used landing sites, due to the expansion of the tourism industry.
Locations, habitats or species vulnerability at the start and end of
the tourist season
The examples provided above suggest that a longer ice-free period
has the potential to lead to an expanded visitation season in
Antarctica i.e. visitation taking place earlier in the austral summer
and visitors departing later (thus extending the so-called ‘shoulder
season’). This will/can expose new areas or species/habitats to
increased human disturbance, including during more vulnerable
periods. Some examples include, but are not limited to:
Earlier access to penguin and other seabird colonies may contribute
to a higher level of visitation and thereby higher level of stress in
one of the more vulnerable periods in their life-cycle.
Earlier access to areas previously inaccessible during the early
summer season may lead to additional pressures on species that are
also having to adapt to changes in their breeding and feeding area
as a result of reduced sea ice extent.
Earlier access to landing sites may contribute to a higher level of
pressure on existing vegetation communities at a point when snow
melt and the resulting high moisture availability make plants,
mosses and lichens more vulnerable to trampling impacts.
Periglacial features may be more vulnerable to trampling damage
during wetter times earlier in the season when snow is melting.
Expanded and longer shipping routes could have implications for
marine ecosystems at the start and end of the season, for example
through marine noise, whale strikes etc.
Conclusion and proposal
Under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty, Parties should take steps to avoid or minimise the risk of
human activity leading to unintended or unforeseen negative
impact on vulnerable species or habitats. Parties may therefore find
it useful to have a clear general understanding of what areas and
what species/habitats may be particularly vulnerable to temporal
and spatial changes in human activities resulting from on-going and
potential future changes in sea ice extent. Such information may be
particularly relevant to discussions relating to management of
human activities in the Antarctic Peninsula region; the region which
already experiences the highest level and diversity of human
activities, and which is experiencing the highest level of growth.
Norway and the United Kingdom recommend that the ATCM
request the CEP, with the support of SCAR, to provide advice on
how human activity can avoid or mitigate unintended or unforeseen
negative impacts on vulnerable species or habitats affected by local
or regional sea-ice loss. In the first instance:
SCAR could be invited to provide a first level assessment of
vulnerabilities in space and time, exposed by changing sea-ice
extent in the Antarctic Peninsula region; and
the CEP could be asked to consider potential management
implications for this region, noting that it experiences high and
increasing levels of human activity.
