Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
renovation of Petrel Base, Dundee Island, Antarctica"
Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the
renovation of Petrel Base, Dundee Island, Antarctica"
Working Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
The National Directorate of the Antarctic (DNA) of the Argentine
Republic, in its capacity as appropriate authority of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, prepared this
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) with the purpose
of renovating the Petrel base while the scientific and operational
activities of the Argentine Antarctic Programme (PAA) are being
maintained at said base, both at sites on the ground and at the
facilities that the base supports. This CEE project has been prepared
following the requirements of Article 3, Annex I to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the Revised
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica-
Resolution 1 (2016) and the applicable laws of Argentina.
The activities that make up the project consist of: renovation and
use of the Base facilities; construction and use of a new runway for
airplanes; construction of a Photovoltaic Central; improvements in
the use and consumption of water supply lagoons. The estimated
time range for the activity encompasses the period from the
summer of 2023/2024 to the end of the summer of 2028/2029.
After a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed activities and
their related mitigation measures, it has been concluded that the
proposed activities are likely to have a greater than minimal or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. We thus conclude
through this CEE project that the proposed activities should proceed
on the basis that the positive impacts in terms of improvements to
safety, environmental protection, and ability to support science are
greater than the negative impacts associated with the proposed
activities. 
CEE dissemination and translation
The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty distributed the notification
on the availability of the CEE to all Parties through Secretariat
Circular 4 (30 January 2023). The president of the CEP reported
this through CEP Circular 3 (31 January 2023). In addition, the
Secretariat made available to Committee members, on the CEP
workspace within its website (https://www.ats.aq/devAS/EP/
CEPWorkspace), both the Non-Technical Summary and the
complete package of files that make up the CEE project, in the four
official languages of the Antarctic Treaty.
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP
consideration of draft CEEs (Appendix 3 of the Final Report of the
20th Meeting of the CEP), an intersessional contact group (ICG),
coordinated by New Zealand, was established to carry out the
review of the CEE project. The ICG correspondence was made
available to CEP Members and Observers through the CEP
discussion forum, which also provided the Non-Technical Summary
(NTS) translated into the official languages of the Treaty. 
Non-Technical Summary and CEE Conclusions
The NTS is attached as Annex A to this document. The NTS includes
a description of the activities that are proposed to be carried out,
the stages of completion, the evaluation of alternatives, the
environmental conditions, the identification and forecast of
impacts, the mitigation measures, the monitoring programme and
the conclusions.
In 1976 the Petrel Base became a temporary summer base after a
fire destroyed its main house room. From that moment on, the
activity at this base was significantly reduced, limited to periodic
maintenance for short periods of time in the austral summer. Its air
activities were transferred to the Marambio base, which has
constituted the hub for the Argentine Antarctic Programme air
activities from 1976 to the present.
In recent years, the increase in scientific activity of the Argentine
Antarctic Programme, added to changes in climatic conditions and
the new logistic means incorporated into the activity, has made us
rethink the way we carry out our science and the consequent
logistical support required. Therefore, the development of the Petrel
base has emerged in response to the inconveniences that arise in the
access, operation and maintenance of the Marambio base in order
to support the activity of the Argentine Antarctic Programme.
Through the Environmental Impact Assessment process, the
National Antarctic Directorate of the Argentine Republic concluded
that the level of impact of the proposed activity is acceptable
considering the important benefits that it would bring. Among
them, it is worth highlighting improvements in environmental
terms, and the possibility of expanding scientific and logistical
collaboration with other Antarctic programmes, which will open up
new opportunities for international scientific cooperation. On the
other hand, positive effects would be verified on the scientific
programme of the Argentine Antarctic Programme, due to the
greater efficiency of resources and greater capacities, thus offering a
better platform for scientific research currently underway in
Antarctica.
Response to the ICG
Argentina appreciates the comments and recommendations on the
CEE presented by the ICG coordinated by New Zealand. Argentina
will present a preliminary response to the comments received to
date through an Information Paper and also during the presentation
of the CEE on the occasion of the XXV Meeting of the CEP.
Both the comments raised during the ICG process and any other
observation made during the debates of the XXV Meeting of the CEP
will be taken into account for the final CEE. 
