Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay)
Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay)
Summary
The Analysis of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile
Bay (Discovery Bay), carried out by Chile, concluded that, having
completed the benthic fauna research programme and determined
that its special interest as a control area for fauna restoration at
Port Foster is no longer valid and that the research has not
indicated the significant presence of other values that support
continuing with its special protection, Chile suggests that the CEP
cancel the additional protection of the Area as an ASPA.
Background
In 1967, Chile initiated a program to study the benthic fauna of the
South Shetland Islands in Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich
Island. Following the volcanic eruption in Deception Island in
December of that year, it was decided that the benthic studies
would be focused on Port Foster. Later on, it was decided that Chile
Bay (Discovery Bay) should be maintained as a reference and
comparison site for the studies developed by Chilean researchers on
Deception Island. 
Under Recommendation XIV-5 (1987), considering the proposal
submitted by Chile, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) on Greenwich Island
was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 26.
In accordance with Decision 1 (2002), the Area was renamed
Antarctic Specially Protected Area, ASPA, No. 144. The Area
designation was meant to protect the marine biological values
present in it, mainly to conduct scientific activities and for
comparison with the recovery and development of the benthic
fauna in Port Foster, Deception Island.
In 2012, Chile submitted to the Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), a revision of the
Management Plan for ASPA No. 144, which was also submitted for
the consideration of the Committee for Environmental Protection
(CEP). The document was accepted by the CCAMLR Scientific
Committee and the Convention, while the management plan was
forwarded to the CEP Subsidiary Group on Management Plans. 
Chile continued to assess the status of the values protected in the
Area, at CEP XXI in 2018 presenting working document WP 11,
which reported the main results of the analysis of ASPA 144, and
informative document IP 9, which provided the details of the
analysis carried out on the current state of the Area.
With these documents, Chile informed its determination that the
original designation of the ASPA be cancelled, considering that the
original proposal as a control area for the repopulation studies at
Port Foster, Deception Island, was no longer valid since they are
actually different environments, and that due to the end of the
ongoing research programme to provide a baseline for long-term
research and the low level of activity in the Area, the values for
which it was originally designated are not at risk, recommending
that the Committee assess the need to continue protecting this Area
as an ASPA.
The Committee recalled on that occasion that an offer had
previously been accepted for Norway to lead the development of
guidelines and criteria for the elimination of ASPAs, a proposal that
they expected to present at the following meeting for consideration
by the CEP. It further indicated that it would be appropriate to
suspend the SGMP’s consideration of the Management Plan,
pending further discussion and decisions regarding a possible
revocation of the Area. 
Given that during CEP XXIII, the Committee approved the
Guidelines for de-designation of ASPAs (Appendix 3 to the Report of
CEP XXIII), Chile then presented their progress in the analysis of the
current state of the area through IP 127 and IP 128 at CEP XXIV
(2022). At said meeting the Committee recognised that de-
designation of ASPAs was an important topic that required careful
consideration, in view of which Chile has reinforced its analysis of
the state of Chile Bay, which it has included in a new IP and the
conclusions from which are presented in this WP.
Results
Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) is located in the southwestern sector of
Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands. The entire bay comprises
an area of about 25 km2, from the intertidal line to a depth of
200 m. For its part, ASPA 144 comprises an area of about 0.66 km2,
with two sub-sites between 50 and 200 m depth. 
Its designation was based on the benthic research that Chile had
been carrying out continuously since 1967, which provided a
baseline for long-term research and its usefulness as a control area
with respect to the study of the restoration of benthic fauna at Port
Foster, Deception Island, after the volcanic eruption of December
1967.
The area was analysed based on the Checklist to assist in the
inspection of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic
Specially Managed Areas, the Guidelines for implementation of the
Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Annex V of the Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and the
Guidelines for de-designation of ASPAs. The most relevant results
are:
The quantitative and qualitative benthic research to provide a
baseline ended in the 1990s and its special interest as a control area
for the re-establishment of benthic fauna is no longer valid
according to the research carried out. The scientific data indicates
that environmental instability at Port Foster has allowed the equal
and parallel development of a large number of species with regular
changes in the composition of the dominant species, which has
maintained low diversity and homogeneity values and high
dominance values, conforming the structure of this type of
environments that have been altered by volcanic influence, while
Chile Bay maintains a typical structure of areas with stable
environments, with a high species diversity, high homogeneity and
low dominance.
Chile Bay is considered a highly productive system during the
austral summer, exhibiting seasonal changes in bacterial and
plankton communities. The vertical temperature distribution is
clearly stratified, with values above 0ºC and up to 2.0ºC. Salinity is
also stratified, with values between 32.5% and 34.2%. Although the
mixture of the water column is very dynamic due to the strong
winds that lash this coastal area, the glacial melt in Chile Bay seems
sufficient to establish a slight stratification in the first five metres of
the water column.
The area presents the typical structure of areas with a stable
environment, with a high specific diversity, high homogeneity and
low dominance. Both benthic habitats (subsites) present a high
diversity of species and biomass. Seabed topography and sediment
characteristics influence community structure and distribution
patterns.
The benthic fauna present at the subsites is dominated by
polychaetes, bivalve molluscs, crustaceans and pycnogonids. Subsite
A, is dominated by bivalves Yoldia eightsii and Eudorella gracilor as
the characteristic fauna. Subsite B is located on the outer part of the
bay and is dominated by polychaetes Maldane sarci antarctica,
especially below a depth of 100 m. Other characteristic species are
Genaxinus bongranii, Cyamonactra denticulum, Typhlotanais
greenwichensis and Pycogonida spp.
A review of the scientific data available provides no conditions of
Chile Bay that may significantly differentiate it from other nearby
soft-bottom bays or that may make it particularly unique or of
special scientific interest.
Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), on the other hand, is not a regular site
for tourist visits, so the vessels that arrive in the area correspond
mainly to those of the National Antarctic Programmes carrying out
activities in the area (Chile and Ecuador), although it may
sometimes receive visits from boats heading to the Aitcho Islands or
Yankee Bay. Neither is it an active area for fishing vessels operating
in CCAMLR sub-area 48.1.
Recommendation
Taking into account that:
The continuous research programme on benthic fauna has ended,
the protected area of Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) was of special
interest as a study control for Port Foster, Deception Island, but the
scientific data indicates that the sites present different population
structures and environmental conditions, which means that they are
not comparable;
An analysis of the scientific literature on Chile Bay does not
indicate the significant presence of new values that are particularly
singular or of special scientific interest;
The area has been subjected to a low degree of human interference,
therefore it is considered that the values for which the Area was
originally designated are not threatened and that its permanence
under the general protection of the Environmental Protocol is
appropriate to safeguard the values it holds.
Chile suggests that the CEP remove the designation of Antarctic
Specially Protected Area ASPA 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay).
