Helsinki Declaration on Climate Change and the Antarctic
Helsinki Declaration on Climate Change and the Antarctic
Summary
The ATCM has agreed to hold a full-day joint session of the CEP and
the ATCM on 2 June 2023 to consider the implementation of the
recommendations in SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment (ACCE): A Decadal Synopsis (ATCM XLIV Final
Report, paragraph 278).  Following discussion about the modalities
of this day on the ATS on-line forum, it was suggested that it would
be important to emphasize the necessity of urgent climate action in
Antarctica by adopting a Joint Declaration.  Finland has been happy
to lead the intersessional discussions to formulate the Declaration
and is keen to engage with all Parties and the CEP to finalize the
text to be agreed and adopted in the ATCM in Helsinki.
Background
In 2022, the ATCM XLIV welcomed SCAR’s Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and
Recommendations for Action, adopted Resolution 4 (2022) and
Decision 4 (2022) on the subject and agreed to hold a full-day joint
session of the CEP and the ATCM, with SCAR and COMNAP, to
consider the implementation of the ACCE recommendations at
ATCM XLV. The Meeting encouraged Parties, Observers and Experts
to submit papers on the topic to ATCM XLV, and to bring experts to
the meeting to support this work.
Finland is pleased to host the 45th Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting in Helsinki from 29th May to 8th June 2023.  Following
the agreement that one day of this year’s Meeting should be
devoted to discussing matters related to climate change in
Antarctica, Finland has been happy to lead intersessional
discussions on the modalities of this special day.  These discussions
have included a proposal to develop of a Helsinki Declaration on
Climate Change and the Antarctic (the “Helsinki Declaration”).
Finland is grateful to all those who have actively participated in the
discussion so far.
Proposal
Finland suggests that the Consultative Parties adopt the Helsinki
Declaration on Climate Change and the Antarctic at ATCM XLV.
In keeping with the way that previous ATCM declarations have
been developed, Finland has provided a first draft for the
Declaration and asked the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to open a
new topic for discussion on the ATS on-line forum. Based on the
comments made so far, Finland
proposes to continue the forum discussion on the Declaration
encourages all Parties to engage actively in the discussion with the
aim of developing the draft Declaration as far as possible so that it
can serve as a basis for the discussion at the ATCM in Helsinki.
Furthermore, Finland suggests that the CEP considers suggesting to
the ATCM an operative paragraph that could be included in the
Declaration, reflecting the CEP’s commitment to climate change
work.
Finland is looking forward to a fruitful discussion on the ATS on-
line forum and at this year’s ATCM in Helsinki.
