CEP strategic priorities and the 5-year work plan: Outcomes and
recommendations from the intersessional discussions and workshop
CEP strategic priorities and the 5-year work plan: Outcomes and
recommendations from the intersessional discussions and workshop
Summary
Informal intersessional discussions and an informal workshop have
since CEP XXIV considered the CEP strategic priorities and the 5-
year work plan. This paper presents an overview of the outcomes of
these discussions, referring to details in IP 150 Informal CEP
Workshop on strategic priorities and 5-year work plan – convener’s
preliminary report. It is proposed that the CEP:
Exchange views and reflections on the outcomes of the informal
intersessional discussions, in particular the outcomes from the CEP
workshop.
Establish an Intersessional Contact Group tasked to further develop
a final draft revised 5-year work plan for discussion and adoption at
CEP XXVI in India; and further develop a draft checklist to guide
the CEP in its efforts in initiating, pursuing, and monitoring
progress on actions under the 5-year work plan.
Encourage Members to consider the outcomes of the informal CEP
workshop and continue to engage in developing a framework that
could guide the CEP in its efforts in framing and monitoring
knowledge needs in the future.
Background
At CEP XXIV the Committee agreed that it would revisit its
priorities, the functioning of the Committee, and its Five-year Work
Plan at CEP XXV.
The Committee agreed that this should be taken forward in the
following manner:
The Chair/CEP Bureau would be tasked with facilitating
intersessional discussions to prepare for a workshop in Helsinki
prior to CEP XXV, in collaboration with the host country, Finland.
Discussions before and during the workshop would be open and
inclusive of all Members and Observers.
Members and Observers would be encouraged to facilitate
participation in the intersessional discussions and workshop by
early career researchers and policy makers/managers, as
appropriate, and ensure diversity and inclusivity; and
At CEP XXV in Helsinki, the Committee would consider the
outcomes of the workshop and earlier intersessional discussions.
Through three rounds of discussions on the CEP Discussion Forum
Members and Observers provided input on issues that contributed
to shape the background material for the informal CEP Workshop
on CEP strategic priorities and 5-year work plan. Eleven Members
and one Observer contributed to the informal intersessional
discussions on the CEP Discussion Forum. During the discussions
participants also provided valuable input to the framing of the CEP
workshop itself. The full discussion is documented and found on the
CEP Discussion Forum.
The informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and the 5-year
work plan took place in Little Finlandia, Helsinki on 25 and 26
May. 32 participants attended the workshop: from 16 Member
countries, from 4 Observer organisations and the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat.
The workshop was generously supported by the Finnish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the Finnish Ministry of the Environment.
Outcomes
The informal CEP Workshop discussed and delivered outputs
toward the following three aims:
Using the outcomes of the intersessional informal discussions that
had taken place since CEP XXIV –identified and agreed to those
elements that could be core in a revisited and revised 5-year work
plan - specifically:
issues and topics that the Committee should focus efforts on in the
coming period;
objectives for the Committee’s work on identified priority topics;
and
priority actions with concrete outcomes to pursue under each of the
priority topics.
On basis of the discussions under this point, the workshop has put
forward a draft revised 5-year work plan as basis for further
discussion and development by the CEP (see IP 150). An at-a-glance
overview of proposed Priority Topics and Objectives is provided in
Appendix 1.
Identify mechanisms and procedures that can assist the Committee
in moving priority action items forward and monitor progress on
these actions.
On basis of the discussions under this point, the workshop has put
forward reflections and suggestions relating to how to move actions
forward – a potential starting point for a checklist for the CEP in
initiating, pursuing, and monitoring progress on actions. See IP 150
for details.
Initiate discussions aiming to assist the Committee in formulating
its information and knowledge needs in an efficient and functional
manner.
On basis of these discussions the workshop has put forward
reflections and suggestions relating to handling of knowledge needs
– a potential starting point for a guidance document for the CEP’s
framing and monitoring of knowledge needs in the future. See IP
150 for details.
Recommendation
It is recommended that the CEP:
Exchange views and reflections on the outcomes of the informal
CEP workshop, as presented in IP 150 Informal CEP Workshop on
strategic priorities and 5-year work plan – convener’s preliminary
report.
Establish an Intersessional Contact Group tasked to - on basis of the
outcomes of the informal CEP workshop (as reflected in IP 150) and
with reference to relevant views, comments and agreements made
at CEP XXV:
further develop a final draft revised 5-year work plan for discussion
and adoption at CEP 26 in India; and
further develop a draft checklist to guide the CEP in its efforts in
initiating, pursuing, and monitoring progress on actions under the
5-year work plan.
Draft Terms of Reference for an ICG is provide in Appendix 2.
Encourage Members to consider the outcomes of the informal CEP
workshop and continue to engage in developing a framework that
could guide the CEP in its efforts in framing and monitoring
knowledge needs in the future.
Appendix 1: Overview of proposed Priority Topics and Objectives
Gist of objectives discussed and provided through informal
workshop. Wording will be finetuned through further process.
1.
Environmental Pressure Priorities
1a.
Management of non-native species & wildlife disease
Draft Objective: Facilitate monitoring of and surveillance for NNS
and wildlife disease, particularly in high risk areas, and ensure that
operators have enough tools to prevent and mitigate NNS and
wildlife disease.
1b.
Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities
Draft Objective: Ensure a robust knowledge base, including
monitoring, to understand the impacts of tourism and non-
governmental activities, seen also in light of other environmental
impacts and ongoing activities. Through CEP actions provide tools
and guidance that limit environmental impacts.
1c.
Climate Change Implications for the Environment
Draft Objective: To support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty
system to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental
impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for
the governance and management of Antarctica through the
implementation of the CCRWP.
1d.
Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage
Draft Objective: Through CEP actions facilitate actions to identify,
respond to, repair and remediate environmental damage in
Antarctica. Furthermore assess whether all actions that should have
been taken with respect to repair and remediation have been taken
and promote actions where it still may be required.
1e.
Response to Long-range and local Pollution
Draft Objective: Through CEP actions facilitate initiatives to track
long-range pollution and enable Parties to respond appropriately,
including communication to/with relevant global organizations.
Furthermore, provide guidance and tools to monitor, reduce and
respond to local pollution (primarely chemical and plastic
pollution).
2.
Management Response Priorities
2a.
Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Draft Objective: Encourage coordinated and systematic monitoring
efforts. Enable reporting on state and trends for key environmental
values in Antarctica.
2b.
Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
Draft Objective: Support monitoring, protection and management of
[key] marine species and processes and areas within the framework
of the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.
2c.
Systematic approach to the protected areas system
Draft Objective: Assess the effectiveness of the current series of
ASPAs with regard to the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V and
provide a framework for a systematic further development of the
protected area system.
2d.
Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Draft Objective: Ensure clear guidance to all those responsible for
activities in Antarctica on conducting appropriate assessments of
the activities. Assist through guidance material Parties in assessing,
authorizing and permitting activities on basis of EIAs. Allow for a
continuous improvement of EIA process, including EIA follow-up.
2e.
Understanding and protecting Antarctic Biodiversity
Draft Objective: Keep up to date and take into account trends in
biodiversity and threats and implement relevant management
actions with respect to [unique] Antarctic Biodiversity [and/or
biodiversity at risk].
2f.
Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
Draft Objective: Provide Parties with guidance and support in
assessing and managing heritage.
3.
Operational Priorities
3a.
Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Draft Objective: Ensure that the CEP systematically, works to
provide advice in implementing the objectives of the Protocol to the
ATCM prioritized, strategic and efficient manner. Facilitate for a
broader participation by Members in the work of the Committee.
Appendix 2: Draft Terms of Reference for ICG on revision of the
CEP 5YWP
Review the outcomes of the CEP Workshop as recorded in WP 62
CEP strategic priorities and the 5-year work plan: Outcomes and
recommendations from the intersessional discussions and workshop
and IP 150 Informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and 5-
year work plan – convener’s preliminary report, and on the basis of
this:
Develop a draft revised five-year prioritised workplan for
consideration at CEP XXVI;
Prepare advice on practical measures that the CEP might consider
in initiating, pursuing and monitoring progress on workplan
actions; and
Report back to CEP 26.
The ICG is open to participation of CEP Members, Observers and
Experts.
