Proposal for an Informal Intersessional Process to Share Information
on Domestic Implementation of Annex VI to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Proposal for an Informal Intersessional Process to Share Information
on Domestic Implementation of Annex VI to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Summary
The 2005 ATCM adopted Measure 1, Annex VI to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Liability arising
from environmental emergencies. As at ATCM XLIV (2022), 19 of
27 Parties whose approval is required for this liability annex to
enter into effect had approved Measure 1. This paper proposes an
informal intersessional process to continue the ATCM’s work on
evaluating progress towards Annex VI becoming effective and to
exchange information on the actions Parties can take to approve
Measure 1.
Background
At ATCM XXVIII (2005) Consultative Parties adopted Measure 1
(2005) Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty: Liability arising from environmental emergencies.
Annex VI is an important element in supporting the objective of the
Environmental Protocol to comprehensively protect the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.
Annex VI deals with ‘environmental emergencies related to
scientific research programs, tourism and all other governmental
and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for
which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the
Antarctic Treaty’. The operators of such activities will be required
to undertake reasonable preventative measures and to establish
contingency plans for responses to incidents with potential adverse
impacts on the Antarctic environment. In case of environmental
emergencies, operators will be required to take prompt and
effective response action; if they do not, they will be liable for its
cost.
Annex VI becomes effective on the date on which Measure 1 (2005)
has been approved by all 27 Consultative Parties entitled to attend
ATCM XXVIII. As at ATCM XLIV (2022), 19 Parties whose approval
is required for this liability annex to enter into effect had approved
Measure 1. A further two Parties not entitled to attend ATCM
XXVIII had approved Measure 1.
Over the past 18 years, the ATCM has adopted a series of Decisions
to annually evaluate the progress towards Annex VI becoming
effective and what action may be necessary and appropriate to
encourage Parties to approve Annex VI in a timely manner,
including Decisions 1 (2005), 4 (2010) and 5 (2015). Most recently,
Decision 2 (2022) called on Parties to continue to share with one
another information and experience in relation to approving
Measure 1 (2005), to support progress towards Annex VI becoming
effective.
The Consultative Parties have also regularly highlighted the
importance and urgency of bringing Annex VI into force through
declarations adopted at the ATCM, including the 2021 Paris
Declaration, which reflects their aim ‘to make all necessary efforts
to bring Annex VI of the Environmental Protocol on Liability
Arising from Environmental Emergencies into force, as a critical
step towards implementing Articles 15 and 16 of the Environmental
Protocol’. Further, the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
(Decision 3 (2022)) includes a related priority issue and actions.
Proposal
This paper seeks to support the call for Parties to share information
and experience to make progress towards Annex VI becoming
effective in a timely manner. Parties that have approved Annex VI
have demonstrated a willingness to share information, including
through disseminating legislation passed to domestically implement
Annex VI, and the annual ATCM provides an opportunity for
valuable exchanges. However, there would be value in a less time-
constrained and more detailed intersessional dialogue to support
further Parties to approve and domestically implement Annex VI.
This recognises that many Parties have already approved Measure 1
(2005) and may be well placed to provide advice and support to
Parties that have yet to do so.
An informal intersessional process could provide a practical and
constructive forum for relevant Parties to raise questions and seek
information, or to share experiences on the actions they have taken
to domestically implement Annex VI. Noting that some Parties may
face similar challenges, it could allow for the sharing of targeted
information on shared challenges. As identified in previous
discussions, these may include inter alia approaches to establishing
reasonable preventative measures to reduce the risk of
environmental emergencies; developing contingency plans for
responses to environmental incidents; taking prompt and effective
response action to any environmental emergency arising from such
activities; and maintaining adequate insurance or other financial
security to cover the costs of response action taken by a Party on its
behalf.
Australia proposes to coordinate an informal intersessional process
on these issues. While the primary purpose would be to support
Parties to take their own domestic steps to implement Measure 1
(2005), a summary report could be prepared for ATCM XLVI,
highlighting key matters discussed. We would be pleased to consult
and collaborate with other Parties interested in taking this
important work forward.
