The awareness-raising strategy on equality, diversity and inclusion
addressed to the personnel participating in the Antarctic campaigns
The awareness-raising strategy on equality, diversity and inclusion
addressed to the personnel participating in the Antarctic campaigns
Summary
Antarctic activities take place in remote, isolated environments and
in close coexistence with unknown people. Since 2018, the Spanish
Polar Committee includes a course on equality, diversity and
inclusion in its mandatory training for staff participating in the
Antarctic campaign. The purpose of this course is to avoid
discriminatory behaviours and address the challenges that, in these
circumstances, arise to achieve an environment that facilitates
equality, diversity and inclusion of all people who participate in
Antarctic activities, whether they are scientific or operational. Spain
recommends that the Parties incorporate this awareness objective
into their training programmes.
Background
The first time that an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM) paid attention to issues related to equality, diversity and
inclusion was in 2019 when “The Meeting agreed to make two
amendments to the [Secretariat] staff rules regarding the issue of
gender, to better align the rules with international best practices”
(ATCM XLII, Final Report, paragraph 152).
Subsequently, this topic was included in the Multiannual Strategic
Work Plan (PTEP). At ATCM XLIII, as priority 18; and at ATCM
XLIV, as priority 13 with the following formulation: Address issues
of equality, diversity and inclusion by encouraging the full
participation of under-represented groups in Antarctic scientific
activities and operations for all Antarctic issues including science,
operations, policy and law.
Spanish regulatory framework
The progressive development of legislative initiatives in favour of
equal treatment and non-discrimination, which fulfils commitments
assumed by Spain within the framework of the United Nations, the
Council of Europe or the European Union, has recently ended up
with the adoption of the Comprehensive Law for equal treatment
and non-discrimination (Law 15/2022, of 12 July), have placed
Spain at the forefront of the most advanced countries in equality
policies.
The purpose of this law is to guarantee and promote the right to
equal treatment and non-discrimination, and to respect the equal
dignity of persons, as established in the Spanish Constitution. For
these purposes, the law: regulates the rights and obligations of
persons (physical or legal; public or private); establishes principles
of action of the public authorities; and provides for measures aimed
at preventing, eliminating and correcting all forms of
discrimination, direct or indirect, in the public and private sectors.
Outreach to raise awareness
Antarctic activities take place in remote, isolated environments and
in close coexistence with unknown people. The right to equality,
diversity and inclusion9 must be effectively guaranteed. Not
perceiving inequalities or inappropriate behaviours does not mean
that they do not exist. For this reason, it is essential to raise
awareness through specific courses that enable to prevent, detect
and act against any discriminatory conduct, “the eye does not see
what the mind does not know”.
Since 2018, the Spanish Polar Committee has included a session on
“awareness raising on equality, diversity and inclusion” in the
mandatory training received by personnel participating in the
Spanish Antarctic campaign. Some of the fundamental ideas are as
follows:
Consolidate basic concepts related to equality
Recognise and consider diversity
Guarantee equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities
Moving from a “legitimised” inequality to a fundamental right that
must be effectively guaranteed
This action is a first step to raise awareness about a problem that is
becoming increasingly visible in Antarctic activities. Alerting about
what kind of behaviours are unacceptable and may even have legal
consequences. It is very important to establish procedures and
channels for advice and reporting that guarantee the
confidentiality, speed, security and protection of people.
Conclusions and recommendation
After five years incorporating this objective of raising awareness of
equality, diversity and inclusion, the following conclusions have
been reached:
Most of the personnel participating in the Antarctic campaign,
particularly women, received the inclusion of this training session
positively
The outreach component is essential (“The eye does not see what
the mind does not know.”)
We recommend that the Antarctic Treaty Parties include specific
sessions on equality, diversity and inclusion in their training
programmes.
