Implementation of ACCE Imperatives: A COMNAP perspective
Implementation of ACCE Imperatives: A COMNAP perspective
Introduction
This Working Paper aims to inform discussions and provide advice
on how to achieve implementation of imperatives.
Antarctic Messages
The ACCE Decadal Synopsis says, “The messages informed by
research in the Antarctic are clear. It is urgent that states meet, and
exceed, the greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets of the Paris
Climate Agreement to maintain the Antarctic and Southern Ocean
in a state close to that known for the past 200 years.” SCAR ATCM
XLIV (2022) WP 30 rev 1.
This identifies the Antarctic as, “both a site where knowledge about
climate change is produced, and the most important source of
melting” See Roberts, P. (2023) Does the science criterion rest on
thin ice?. The Geographical Journal, 189, 18–24. https://
doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12367..
This is not a new dichotomy, but one that has only recently been
appreciated.
Within the ATS, we understand well “the Antarctic as a site for
knowledge production” with scientific investigation being an ATS
foundation. We can therefore, easily, negotiate and create policy in
support of Antarctic science, including environmental protection
provisions. Through COMNAP, we interpret that policy into
practical guidance for implementation by National Antarctic
Programmes.
We are, however, not so adept at negotiating, creating and
communicating policy that recognises the Antarctic as the most
important “...conduit through which emissions become
consequences…a site where the consequences of emissions are
revealed…” Ibid This is a recent emerging conceptualisation that
requires engagement with those traditionally “outside” the ATS.
Knowledge production: ACCE Decadal Synopsis Research
Recommendations (SCAR ATCM XLIV WP31rev.1) & Policy
Recommendations (SCAR ATCM XLIV WP30rev.1)
Reducing uncertainties
National Antarctic Programmes’ Antarctic research strategies
(Appendix 1) reflect that they understand the recommended
research imperatives. Continued funding of, and support for, this
critical research remains important. Long-term monitoring
networks, some established over 60 years ago, continue across the
Antarctic and provide data to reduce uncertainties. However, due to
the brief research season and the large study area, we may never
have a comprehensive understanding of all aspects of the Antarctic
region even through remote sensing. For example, winter data is
lacking.
Integrated research approaches
One of SCAR’s two key messages to the COMNAP Science
Facilitation Expert Group was “develop large-scale integrated
research approaches across National Antarctic Programmes”
(SCAR presentation to COMNAP AGM XXXIV, 15 June 2022; see
also CEP XXIV Report (2022) para 31).
We take this to mean internationally collaborative, transdisciplinary
research and note that there is no shortage of such collaboration in
the Antarctic; it is the hallmark of the ATS. Through COMNAP and
by way of bi-lateral and multi-lateral agreements, National
Antarctic Programmes facilitate, develop and deliver large-scale
integrated research projects (Appendix 2), share operations and
logistics, exchange innovations and best practice that enables
Antarctic research.
Research from Antarctica provisioned the IPCC Reports and will
continue to fill our gaps in knowledge. The ATCM has articulated its
support to National Antarctic Programmes in their ongoing efforts
to undertake research about climate change (ATCM Resolution 8
(2021) Antarctica in a Changing Climate).
Even with continuing or increasing delivery of internationally
collaborative research in Antarctica, we cannot change the fact that
global emissions are a driver of a changing Antarctica. We can
ensure, however, Antarctic data informs global policy and decision-
making, and work together to distribute understanding to inform all
countries’ adaptation strategies, not just those within the ATS.
Many places in the world that will be especially vulnerable to
climate change are not Antarctic Treaty countries. Six such places
are Haiti, Lagos (Nigeria), United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Manila
(Philippines) and Kiribati. As identified in https://
time.com/5687470/cities-countries-most-affected-by-climate-
change/.
Convey research outcomes
SCAR encouraged Parties to communicate the urgency of meeting
and exceeding the Paris Climate Agreement’s Nationally Determined
Contributions and convey the outcomes of our research. This can be
a focus of our collective efforts.
The Parties play a key leadership role in this communication
through other international fora within which all Parties
participate. National Antarctic Programmes have a role to play too.
Often charged with development, and delivery, of their country’s
key Antarctic messages through their education and outreach
programmes, through policy briefs to their Ministries, through art
and community engagement, and through a range of social media to
name only a few (see COMNAP ATCM XXXVIII IP009 rev1
Workshop on Education and Outreach - Making an Impact: National
Antarctic Program Activities which Facilitate Education and
Outreach). These already established communications’ pathways
can be strengthened and utilised to deliver key Antarctic messages.
International collaboration in regards to communication and
outreach is just as important as the role international collaboration
plays in science projects. The COMNAP Education, Outreach &
Training Expert Group provides a forum for such collaborations. We
can all work together to develop the key messages.
Management Implications
National Antarctic Programmes facilitate the science that has
provided the evidence of a changing Antarctica. They have also
been first-hand witnesses to a changing Antarctic for over a decade.
They work together, through COMNAP to share their expertise to
respond to changes, to interpret guidance as determined by the
ATCM or the CEP into practical implementation, and address
management, operations, logistics, science and science support
challenges using planning processes that include risk assessment
and contingency planning. The National Antarctic Programme
Managers know well of the management implications (see COMNAP
ATCM XXV (2012) IP004 Management Implications of a Changing
Antarctica.)
Operating in the Antarctic has always meant addressing the usual
challenges polar operations present. Now, Programmes are facing
new challenges, cross Antarctic and regionally, that are related to
unpredictability of weather, higher than average temperatures,
unpredictable sea ice and melting ice. Uncertainty, or
unpredictability, disrupts plans, invokes contingency plans and can
result in research campaign impacts.
We are already addressing complications related to:
(In)ability to carry out aircraft operations on sea ice
(In)ability to traverse land ice, sea ice and/or ice shelves
Changeable and unusually high winds causing grounding of aircraft
or stopping land traverse
Vessel movement impediments
(In)ability to deploy science teams to the areas that are
experiencing the most rapid change
Changes in precipitation creating new research season dynamics &
durations
Unusual temperature extremes and storms causing unexpected
impacts and delays to science support, operations, delivery of
cargo/fuel
(In)stability and/or vulnerability of facility infrastructure.
Infrastructure impacts already identified include:
Structural instability of station footings due to permafrost changes
Repositioning of entire stations due to ice shelf changes
Reengineering of logistics platforms (including docks and runways)
Waste management, including sites of past waste disposal
Drinking water supply and sewage treatment/disposal
Growth of moss and lichens areas, some beyond the boundaries of
the current Protected Areas that were established to protect that
biodiversity.
Address new challenges
Infrastructure vulnerability
With much of our Antarctic science support infrastructure being in
coastal areas, Programmes are looking to understand how sea level
changes (see COMNAP/SCAR IP to this ATCM) and sea ice
conditions will affect critical Antarctic infrastructure. Many
Programmes are doing vulnerability assessments as part of their
modernisation projects. Through the COMNAP Environmental
Protection Expert Group, we have begun discussion and exchange of
information on vulnerability. Outcomes will inform future Antarctic
infrastructure investment and long-term maintenance to allow for
uninterrupted delivery of science. Tools that we already have at our
disposal, such as EIA, monitoring and maintenance, will continue to
be essential to mitigate effects.
Showing leadership in decarbonisation
In regards to Antarctic stations, “despite improvements in the last
two decades, the predominant source of electricity and heat
generation comes from fossil fuels, mainly Antarctic diesel.” J.J.
Lucci, et al. (2022). Renewables in Antarctica: an assessment of
progress to decarbonize the energy matrix of research facilities,
Antarctic Science 34(5), 374–388 (2022). doi:10.1017/
S095410202200030X. These systems provide year-round,
dependable energy that is critical to safety of human life in the
Antarctic. National Antarctic Programmes recognise the benefits,
including environmental and cost saving, of migrating over to
renewable energy sources. Domestic policies are driving shifts to
renewables.
Progress is being made. Which, coupled with implementation of
energy efficiency practices & new technologies, is reducing the
relatively low-level of carbon emissions from National Antarctic
Programmes’ activity. COMNAP continues its work on this topic and
has adopted the COMNAP Ambitions Framework (2021). The
Framework aims to increase efficiency and
reduce emissions and waste. Decarbonising Antarctic operations
and science support as far as possible is a symbolic gesture and
shows leadership without compromising safety of human life in
Antarctica and impacting science.
Parties have a key role to play with their commitment to keep
Antarctic fossil fuels in the ground as per the Environmental
Protocol mineral prohibition.
Biosecurity protocols
COMNAP and SCAR have long been working together on
understanding unintentional introduction of non-native species
(NNS) and advising the CEP on the topic. The usual biosecurity
practices may not be sufficient to prevent a NNS introduction
becoming invasive if coupled with changing climate conditions.
There will be variations inter- and intra-regionally. The ACCE
recommendation to implement strengthened biosecurity protocols
for all pathways requires review of COMNAP, SCAR and CEP
guidance in the context of expected milder conditions, especially in
the Antarctic Peninsula, but also in the marine environment.
Biosecurity protocols at ports of departure vary. The traditional
Antarctic air and sea gateways have a key role to play in
implementing strengthened biosecurity protocols, including those as
mandated by the IMO. The National Antarctic Programmes, IAATO
Members, and fishery-related entities all have roles to play, as do
Parties, especially those with bi-polar operations.
Recommendations to the ATCM, the CEP and for the joint session:
As a community who holds dear the values of Antarctica, we
recognise the critical need to communicate externally the urgency,
coupled with why it matters to humanity, to ensure we all work
together to maintain the Antarctic Treaty Area in a state close to
that known for the past 200 years. We advise:
Parties to continue to support National Antarctic Programmes to
engage in research that is internationally collaborative, fills gaps in
knowledge and reduces uncertainty in regards to a changing
Antarctic region. This includes support for long-term monitoring
efforts that often require long-term sustainable investment;
The ATCM and the CEP to jointly develop key messages for the
global community in regards to a changing Antarctica based on best
available research, that those changes are globally significant, what
impacts those changes will have to global society and how we can
stop or mitigate changes through our global actions;
Parties to work with their National Antarctic Programmes, and
through COMNAP and SCAR, and other ATS organisations, to
deliver and promote those key messages through the range of
education, outreach and communications fora and through a range
of media including art and social media;
Continuing support to couple global communications with local
management policies that enable ongoing and long-term efforts to
facilitate Antarctic research, while continuing to assess our impact
on the Antarctic Treaty area of direct human activities there;
Through COMNAP, continue work to assist National Antarctic
Programmes to assess risk of change in climate to Antarctic
infrastructures, to impacts to operations, logistics and science
delivery and support;
Parties to continue to support National Antarctic Programme efforts
to decarbonise or reduce fossil fuel use, safely, as part of their
Antarctic activities in line with domestic policies and through
sharing of best practice through COMNAP;
The need to review CEP guidance and advice in regards to existing
biosecurity practices (Non-Native Species Manual), especially to
adapt current “response protocols” to better respond to marine NNS
introduction in a changing ocean (Biofouling and Ballast Water
Management), and update accordingly. Such a review might also
consider the emerging issue of microorganisms and virus
introductions. Parties who develop biosecurity
protocols at air and sea gateways have a key role to play as well as
does guidance and conventions of the IMO;
Parties to (re)assess which sites of their past activities are most
likely to be affected by a changing climate and to prioritise their
clean-up efforts based on their (re)assessment. This should be
coupled with a review of CEP guidance and advice in regards to
clean-up of sites of past activity (Clean-Up Manual) especially
considering areas that may be affected by changing environmental
conditions near those sites of past activity.
Appendix 1: List of National Antarctic Programmes’ research
priorities/strategies with links to the information.
Appendix 2: Just a few of many examples of National Antarctic
Programmes’ large-scale integrated research projects and those they
participate within or support.
Beyond EPICA (https://www.beyondepica.eu/en/about/
participants/) ISP-CNR & ENEA, Italy AWI, Germany UKRI-BAS, UK
IPEV & CNRS, France
UU, Netherlands
NPI, Norway
SU, Sweden
UCPH, Denmark
ULB, Belgium
DEEPICE (https://deepice.cnrs.fr/)
The goal of DEEPICE project is to build a training program
benefiting from the momentum created by the Beyond EPICA
project .An innovative training network for a new generation of 15
early-stage researchers in instrumentation, ice core analysis,
statistic tools, glaciological and climatic modelling. Ten research
organisations and Universities as well as 11 partner organisations
from 11 different countries.
International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration (https://
thwaitesglacier.org/)
NSF, CIRES & NSIDC, USA
NERC & BAS, UK
KOPRI, Republic of Korea
AWI, Germany
Sweden
CRiceS Climate Relevant interactions and feedbacks: the key role of
sea ice and Snow in the polar and global climate system (https://
www.crices-h2020.eu/home)
Twenty international research teams, from Europe, Canada, South
Africa, and India. Includes researchers from: NPI, Norway; BAS,
United Kingdom; NCPOR, India; & AWI, Germany.
MOSAiC (Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of
Arctic Climate) (https://mosaic-expedition.org/)
Approximately 500 people from twenty countries participated in or
contributed to the expedition, including about 300 scientists from
different disciplines, who opened their research data and
measurements directly on site to interdisciplinary exchange.
Leadership was provided by the AWI, Germany, in collaboration
with co-lead from CIRES, USA.
PROTECT Cryosphere & Sea Level (https://protect-slr.eu/) A
research project with 27 beneficiaries from EU member states, with
associated countries and third countries involvement. More than
200 senior and early-career scientists will be actively involved
during the four-year course of the project. Coordinated by the
Institute for Geoscience and Environmental Research (IGE) of the
French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).
HiRISE (State and fate of Antarctica’s gatekeepers: a HIgh
Resolution approach for Ice ShElf instability) (https://www.nwo.nl/
projecten/ocenwgroot2019091) A consortium through NWO,
Netherlands, consisting of TUDelft, Institute for Marine and
Atmospheric Research Utrecht (IMAU), KNMI & NIOZ, Netherlands,
and ULB, Belgium.
PolarRES Exploring future polar climates (https://polarres.eu/
about/) PolarRES studies the interactions between the atmosphere,
oceans, and sea ice in the Arctic and Antarctic. The team consists of
17 organisations.
OCEAN:ICE (Ocean-Cryosphere Exchanges in Antarctica: Impacts on
Climate and the Earth System) (https://ocean-ice.eu/) 19 project
partners.
SOOS (The Southern Ocean Observing System) (https://
www.soos.aq) A coordinating body to enhance and ensure the
delivery of data across nations, organisations, programmes and
stakeholders, and to provide the infrastructure for organisation of
community networks to develop sustained observing systems and
syntheses of existing datasets. National representatives from 19
Antarctic Treaty countries and affiliated network that includes
many national Antarctic programs and researchers.
The IceCube Neutrino Observatory Collaboration (https://
icecube.wisc.edu/about-us/overview/) Currently, the collaboration
includes more than 350 people from 58 institutions in 14 countries.
It began in 1999 with the submission of the first IceCube proposal,
and many of the original members are still active on the project.
