Improving the Effectiveness of Antarctic Environmental Impact
Assessment
Improving the Effectiveness of Antarctic Environmental Impact
Assessment
Summary
The paper presents a summary of the informal intersessional
discussions on improving the effectiveness of the Antarctic
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system, and proposes next
steps for taking this work forwarded.
It is recommended that the Committee:
Continues to encourage Members to share, via Information Papers,
templates, guidance and other documents associated with the
operation of their EIA processes for the benefit of Members;
Recommends that the ATCM adopts the attached Resolution on the
requirement to include mitigation measures in preliminary and IEE
stage assessments;
Commissions the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to prepare a
comprehensive summary of previous CEP discussions on assessing
cumulative impacts, as a first step for progressing work on
improving the assessment of cumulative impacts; and
Updates the CEP 5 Year Work Plan to appropriately take forward a
programme of work for taking actions associated with improving
the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA system.
Background
At CEP XXIV the United Kingdom and the Netherlands presented
WP 33 Report on Effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment
in Antarctica, which summarised the findings of an independent
assessment of the effectiveness of EIA in Antarctica. The paper
highlighted five high priority improvement opportunities for
improving the Antarctic EIA system, as outlined in the assessment.
Following a discussion amongst Members, the Committee agreed to
progress this issue through informal discussions during the
intersessional period. The committee agreed that the intersessional
discussions would address the following:
Intersessional Discussions
The United Kingdom convened informal intersessional discussions
using the CEP Forum, making an opening announcement on 28
October 2022 and sharing a Discussion Document with questions
for Members. Nine Members and two Observers participated in the
first round of discussions providing general comments, answering
questions posed in the Discussion Document, and sharing
documents and templates associated with their EIA and
authorisation processes for the benefit of Members. A summary of
those discussions is at Annex II.
Better defining the preliminary stage assessment in Antarctic
settings
During the informal intersessional discussions Members shared
information about their preliminary stage assessments, including
the information requested from applicants. Some Members also
shared templates and guidance documents for the benefit of
Members. These documents are available on the CEP Forum.
It was noted that there is already guidance for preliminary stage
assessments in Resolution 1(2016), although one Member
commented that the guidance is not necessarily easy to interpret or
implement. While some Members suggested that some additional
guidance for preliminary stage assessments might improve the
consistency of approach, others cautioned that the creation of any
standard template, checklist or guide could be difficult, as each
Member would need to consider and address the particular
requirements of its relevant national legislation and procedures.
One Member commented that they are considering developing
guidance to assist in determining the level of assessment required,
and would be pleased to share their experience. There was
some enthusiasm for creating a dedicated repository where
Members could share EIAs and associated documents for the benefit
of Members.
We recommend that Members continue to share, via Information
Papers, their templates, guidance and other documents associated
with the preliminary stage assessments for the benefit of other
Members. Arrangements for improving the sharing of information
could be discussed as part of ongoing work to be set out in the CEP
5 Year Work Plan.
Requirement for mitigation measures for Preliminary Assessment
and IEE level assessments
During the intersessional discussions many Members noted that
they already required mitigation measures to be included in
preliminary and Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) level
assessments. There was support from several Members for
proposing a Resolution to encourage a consistent approach in
requiring mitigation measures to be included as part or preliminary
and IEE level assessments. It was noted that a resolution would
strengthen the EIA Guidelines, which state that, ‘The EIA process
should consider measures to decrease, avoid, or eliminate any of the
components of an impact on the environment, or on the conduct of
scientific research and on other existing uses and values. This can
be considered a process of feedback, and should occur throughout
the EIA process, not simply as a final step. Such measures include
mitigation and remediation actions’.
A draft Resolution was included in the Discussion Document, and
several members made comments. As a result, the text of the draft
resolution has been amended, including to improve the clarity of
the operative paragraph, to reference in the preamble the
environmental principles in Article 3 of the Environmental Protocol,
and to refer in the preamble to paragraph 2(g) of Article 3 of Annex
I to the Environmental Protocol that requires mitigations to be
included in Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation assessments.
We recommend that the Committee considers recommending that
the ATCM adopts the draft Resolution at Annex I.
Consideration of cumulative impacts
During the intersessional discussions many Members agreed that
assessing cumulative impacts is one of the most important aspects
of Environmental Impact Assessment, and yet, is very hard to do
well. It was noted that effective assessment of cumulative impacts
relies on knowledge of past, current and future planned activities in
relevant locations, and this required the comprehensive sharing of
information amongst Members.
There was broad agreement that collective progress on this topic
would be helpful. Suggestions for how to take the work forward
included:
Continuing an open dialogue on the topic (one Member noted their
ongoing work on assessing cumulative impacts, and that they would
be pleased to share their findings);
Producing a comprehensive summary of previous CEP discussions
on assessing cumulative impacts (noting that the summary in the
‘Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica – A Report on
Effectiveness’ was a good start);
Dedicating time during a CEP meeting for a presentation or
discussion on the topic, or potentially arrangement of a CEP
workshop ahead of a CEP meeting.
Creating a clear outcome pathway in the CEP 5 Year Work Plan.
For further consideration, practical actions that were suggested
included:
Considering how to make information about activities more
accessible (potentially through the EIES or by improving the EIA
database to make it easier to find previous EIAs);
Considering reviewing methodologies used in non-Antarctic
contexts, as well as commissioning a report; and
Considering undertaking an assessment of an exemplar study from
Antarctica to assess strengths and weaknesses.
We recommend that the Committee commissions a comprehensive
summary of previous CEP discussions on assessing cumulative
impacts, as a first step, and updates the CEP 5 Year Work Plan to set
out a programme of work for addressing the assessment of
cumulative impacts (which could include consideration of the
suggestions of practical actions from Members).
Next steps and actions for subsequent years
The intersessional discussions demonstrated enthusiasm for taking
further action to improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA
system. There was general encouragement for Members to continue
to share information relevant to EIAs with each other. Some
Members agreed that there would be benefit in considering some of
the other improvement opportunities identified in the Report. Other
suggestions included:
improving access to the EIA database to make it easier for Parties to
identify past, present and future activities in each area (for
improving consideration of cumulative impacts);
considering whether a threshold could be established for whether
an EIA could be amended or whether a new EIA should be produced
when changes are made to the proposed (and already authorised)
activities;
improving guidance for assessing baseline environmental
conditions; and
improving (through additional guidance) the process for monitoring
compliance with EIAs.
There was some support for considering a multi-year work plan for
improving the EIA system, potentially by developing the existing
EIA issue in the CEP 5 Year Work Plan. We therefore recommend
that the Committee considers revising the ‘Implementing and
improving the EIA provisions of Annex I’ Issue in the CEP 5 Year
Work Plan to provide direction for taking forward these areas of
work.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the Committee:
Continues to encourage Members to share, via Information Papers,
templates, guidance and other documents associated with the
operation of their EIA processes for the benefit of Members;
Recommends that the ATCM adopts the attached Resolution on the
requirement to include mitigation measures in preliminary and IEE
stage assessments;
Commissions the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to prepare a
comprehensive summary of previous CEP discussions on assessing
cumulative impacts, as a first step for progressing work on
improving the assessment of cumulative impacts; and
Updates the CEP 5 Year Work Plan to appropriately take forward a
programme of work for taking actions associated with improving
the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA system.
Annex I
Resolution X (2023)
Consideration of Mitigation Measures in Environmental Impact
Assessment
The Representatives,
Recalling the Environmental Principles under Article 3 of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the
Protocol”), and specifically Article 3(2)(c) which states that
‘activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be planned and
conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior
assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible
impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems and on the value of Antarctica for the
conduct of scientific research’;
Recalling also the requirements under Article 8 of the Protocol and
its Annex I regarding environmental impact assessment for
proposed activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Recalling specifically paragraph 2(g) of Article 3 of Annex I to the
Protocol, which requires a Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation to include ‘identification of measures, including
monitoring programmes, that could be taken to minimise or
mitigate impacts of the proposed activity and to detect unforeseen
impacts and that could provide early warning of any adverse effects
of the activity as well as to deal promptly and effectively with
accidents’;
Recognising that Parties should already have in place national
procedures for implementation of the Protocol in accordance with
Article 1 of Annex I;
Noting that under Resolution 1 (1999) the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (“ATCM”) adopted Guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica;
Noting also that under Resolution 1 (2016) the ATCM adopted
revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica (“the Guidelines”); and
Desiring to ensure that, consistent with the Guidelines, all
environmental impact assessments for proposed activities in
Antarctica include mitigation measures, commensurate with the
nature of the activity and the level of environmental impact
assessment;
Recommend that their Governments ensure that Preliminary Stage
and Initial Environmental Evaluation level environmental impact
assessments include identification of measures, commensurate with
the nature of activity and the level of environmental impact
assessment, to minimise or mitigate the impacts of the proposed
activity.
Annex II
Summary of Response to the Discussion Document: Improving the
Effectiveness of the Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment
System
Background
At CEP XXIV WP 33 summarised the findings of an independent
assessment of the effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) in Antarctica (Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
– A Report on Effectiveness). The report found that, although the
Antarctic EIA system had been effective overall, the system could be
improved given the increasing pressures on the Antarctic
environment. WP 33 highlighted five high priority opportunities for
improving the Antarctic EIA system as outlined in the assessment.
These included:
better defining the preliminary stage assessment;
development of more comprehensive guidance on cumulative
impact assessments based on best practice approaches elsewhere;
requirement for mitigation measures for Preliminary Assessment
and IEE level assessments;
development of guidelines and/or checklists to support national
competent authorities in their assessment of EIAs; and
reminding Parties of their monitoring obligations as set out in the
Environmental Protocol, and developing a reporting template and
procedure to assist Parties in meeting these requirements.
The Committee agreed to progress this issue through informal
discussion during the intersessional period, but agreed that
opportunities for improving the Antarctic EIA system needed to be
handled carefully so as not to cause additional challenges.
The Committee advised the ATCM that it had agreed to review and
progress recommendations in WP 33 to improve the effectiveness of
the Antarctic EIA system through informal intersessional discussions
(Final Report of the Forty-fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting, paragraph 73). The Committee further agreed that the
intersessional discussions would address the following:
Discussion Document
On 28 October 2022 a discussion document was circulated on the
CEP forum to facilitate discussion and seek views from Members on
the four subjects that the CEP agreed to address during the
intersessional period.
Summary of Responses
Nine Members and two Observers participated in the informal
discussions, providing comments generally on the Antarctic EIA
system and in response to the specific questions asked. Members
also shared documents and templates as well as described processes
used in their own implementation of the EIA system for the benefit
of other Members.
The discussion was helpful in sharing experiences in handling the
development and assessment of EIAs as well as the authorisation
process.
A summary of the responses and comments received is included
below.
Report recommendation - Better defining the preliminary stage
assessment in Antarctic settings, taking into account screening and
scoping processes observed elsewhere
For intersessional discussion: To consider sharing examples of best
practice or case studies which could facilitate consistency in
approach to determining the appropriate level of EIA for an activity
in Antarctic settings. Could also consider the need for any
supporting guidance.
The report noted that the preliminary stage assessment could be
better defined, based on screening and scoping processes elsewhere.
It was suggested that the process could be improved through the
development of a standard format or template for preliminary
assessment, as well as development of a checklist or guide for
National Competent Authorities (NCAs) to use when assessing
preliminary assessments.
Questions to Members
Members were invited to:
Summarise the type of information included in their preliminary
stage assessments (which may include type and location of activity,
duration of activity, identification of possible impacts, details of
mitigation measures, etc.);
Some Members commented that their national regimes did not
include a separate preliminary stage assessment step. One Member
noted that while its system included a preliminary stage assessment,
it was not defined in detail.
Several Members whose national regimes include a preliminary
stage assessment shared the information that is requested from
applicants as part of that assessment. There was a lot of common
information requested as part of a preliminary stage assessment,
with many Members asking for information on the type, location
and duration of the activity, as well as information about plans to
access protected or sensitive areas. Members also asked applicants
to state predicted impacts on the Antarctic environment, with many
also asking for proposed mitigation measures. While there was
much commonality in the type of information required, there was
some variation in the level of detail requested.
Some Members also asked for additional information, including
alternative options to the planned activity, details of any
monitoring plans, information on use of Remotely Operated Aircraft
Systems (RPAS), details of any emergency planning and information
about waste management.
Share examples, case studies, process diagrams, templates, and
internal or external guidance (to applicants, or for internal
screening process), which could support Members to:
Help applicants to effectively undertake a preliminary stage
assessment; and
Help NCAs to effectively assess preliminary stage assessments (and
decide whether a higher level of EIA might be required); and
All those Members who responded to this question noted that some
form of guidance is offered to those undertaking preliminary stage
assessments, and Members shared examples of guidance offered.
Some members noted that brief instructions were included on the
preliminary stage application form or template, others commented
that applicants are provided with separate guidance documents and
links to further guidance. Several Members noted that applicants
are encouraged to discuss their applications with the National
Competent Authority.
Members generally commented that they do not have internal
guidance for assessing preliminary stage assessments. One Member
noted that they are considering developing guidance to assist in
determining the level of assessment required, and would be pleased
to share their experiences.
Comment on whether any additional guidance may be useful to
support Members to:
Set requirements for preliminary stage assessments (as identified in
the report, this could include: a description of the activity, a
description of the location(s) where it will be undertaken and the
duration of the activity, an identification of the actual or potential
environmental impacts that have been identified including on other
uses and values, and the mitigation measures that will be
employed); and
Effectively assess preliminary stage assessments.
While most Members that replied to this question were broadly
content with the way that preliminary stage assessments are
undertaken, several commented that some additional guidance
might improve the consistency of approach. In particular, it was
noted that additional guidance could be developed to improve the
way that actual or potential impacts are identified and assessed.
While some Members noted that there was already some guidance
for preliminary stage assessments in Resolution 1(2016), one
Member commented that the guidance was not necessarily easy to
interpret or implement.
Some Members cautioned, however, that the creation of any
standard template, checklist, or guide could be difficult, since each
Member would need to consider and address the particular
requirements of its relevant national legislation and procedures.
The sharing of example EIAs through an appropriate repository was
suggested.
Report recommendation – Requirement for mitigation measures for
Preliminary Assessment and IEE level assessments.
For intersessional discussion: To review previous discussions on this
topic, and consider how to share best practice or propose a
Resolution to encourage inclusion of mitigation measures as part of
Preliminary and IEE level assessments, including by considering
best practice elsewhere. Consider ways in which NCAs could
monitor the implementation of these measures as well as the
consistency between the activity and the EIA.
The report notes that mitigation measures are not required for
activities assessed at preliminary assessment and IEE levels. Since
the requirements for what to include in an IEE make no explicit
mention of the need to identify measures to mitigate the identified
impacts, the implication is that impacts that are judged to be no
more than minor or transitory need not be further mitigated.
The report notes that previous intersessional discussions undertaken
by CEP raised the issue of requiring a consideration of mitigation
measures to be included at all levels of EIA. Noting that the recently
revised EIA Guidelines emphasised that the application of
mitigation and remediation measures is a fundamental part of the
EIA document, it was agreed to wait and see if the revised
guidelines had the desired effect in ensuring all EIAs cover
mitigation measures or whether further action was required (ATCM
XL / WP41). The report commented that a more deliberate means
of addressing this concern is probably needed.
Questions to Members
Members are invited to:
Comment on a draft Resolution which could be proposed to
encourage Members to require mitigation measures to be included
in Preliminary and IEE level assessments:
The Representatives,
Recalling the requirements under Article 8 of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”)
and its Annex I regarding environmental impact assessments for
proposed activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Recognising that Parties should already have in place national
procedures for implementation of the Protocol in accordance with
Article 1 of Annex I thereof;
Noting that under Resolution 1 (1999) the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (“ATCM”) adopted Guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (“Guidelines”);
Noting also that under Resolution 1 (2016) the ATCM adopted
revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in
Antarctica;
Desiring to ensure that all Environmental Impact Assessments
include mitigation measures, reflecting current best practice in the
revised environmental impact assessment of proposed activities in
Antarctica;
Recommend that:
All Parties ensure that Preliminary Stage and Initial Environmental
Evaluation level Environmental Impact Assessments include
identification of measures, including monitoring programmes, to
minimise or mitigate impacts of the proposed activity and to detect
unforeseen impacts and that could provide early warning of any
adverse affects of the activity as well as deal promptly and
effectively with accidents.
Several Members supported the proposal for a Resolution,
commenting that it would be useful in encouraging Members to
require the inclusion of mitigation measures in preliminary and IEE
level assessments. However it was also noted that a Resolution
would not fill a legislative gap, nor do much to address the
challenge of ensuring that identified mitigations are implemented
on the ground. Many members also noted that the inclusion of
mitigation measures was already required as part of their own
preliminary and IEE level assessment processes.
Some comments were received on the text of the draft Resolution to
improve clarity, including to require mitigations for both seen and
unforeseen impacts, and to suggest referencing the preamble in
Article III to the Protocol.
Some Members commented that it would be helpful to understand
other Members’ practice with regards to preliminary and IEE level
assessments before discussing the requirement for a Resolution.
Describe how they determine appropriate mitigation measures
(sharing any guidance or methodology which might be useful to
other Members), and offer suggestions for the best way for ongoing
sharing of best practice on appropriate mitigations for inclusion in
preliminary and IEE level assessments; and
Most Members noted that they do not have any particular
methodology for determining whether proposed mitigation
measures are appropriate, and that they rely on the experience and
expertise of those in their assessment teams. It was commented that
it was primarily the activity proponent’s responsibility to identify
appropriate mitigation measures, but that NCAs’ role may include
requiring additional or modified measures as conditions of
approval.
Some Members noted that they had domestic databases used for
logging mitigation measures proposed in previous EIAs, and
appropriate mitigation measures for recurring activities. There was
some enthusiasm for sharing of information or best practice to help
NCAs assess the appropriateness of proposed mitigations, possibly
through the ATS website or forums, and it was commented that one
of the recommendations in WP41 (2017) was to create a central
repository for EIA guidance and resources. It was suggested that the
CEP could again encourage Parties to upload copies of IEEs to the
EIA Database.
Some Members also noted that additional guidance, advice, or
feedback on effective assessment of preliminary level mitigation
measures would be helpful.
Provide a description, preferably supported by case studies or
examples, of how their National Competent Authorities (NCAs)
monitor compliance with proposed mitigation measures, to support
other NCAs in doing similar.
One Member noted that monitoring in-field compliance was one of
the greatest challenges for the EIA system. Most Members who
responded explained that they have requirements in place for
activity proponents to submit post-season reports, which include a
self-assessment of compliance with conditions of authorisation and
the EIA.
Some Members noted that they also undertake monitoring
activities, including using observers on tourist vessels to monitor
compliance with authorised mitigation measures or by undertaking
in-field audits of authorised activities.
Report recommendation - Development of more comprehensive
guidance on cumulative impact assessments, taking into account the
best practice approaches elsewhere.
For intersessional discussion: CEP to present general avenues to
explore on cumulative impact assessments based on a benchmark
study on best practices on this area.
The report provides a summary of previous CEP discussions and
work to address cumulative impacts (see section 3.2.2.1),
concluding that current guidance with respect to assessing
cumulative impacts is relatively modest, and that there are
opportunities to develop more comprehensive guidance on
methodological approaches based on best practice approaches
elsewhere.
Questions to Members
Members are invited to:
Comment on their approach to assessing cumulative impacts (and
share examples, case studies and guidance related to assessing
cumulative impacts of activities); and
Members were in agreement that assessing cumulative impacts is
one of the most important aspects of Environmental Impact
Assessment, and yet, it is very hard to do well. Many Members that
responded to this question commented that they did not use any
formal methodology for monitoring cumulative impacts (relying
instead on the expertise and experience of their NCAs), although
some Members referenced the use of EIES, GIS, joint EIAs, and
requesting activity proponents to highlight previous or
contemporary activities.
Members noted that effective assessment of cumulative impacts
relies on knowledge of past, current and future planned activities in
relevant locations. While Members had good knowledge of their
own authorised activities, it was noted that it was harder to have a
good understanding of activities authorised by other Parties. In this
respect it was commented that while the EIES and EIA database are
useful tools, their usefulness relies on timely updates from all
Parties.
There was broad agreement that collective progress on this topic
would be helpful, potentially resulting in additional guidance
(drawing on international examples). One Member noted that they
are undertaking some work on assessing cumulative impacts, both
from the perspective as an activity proponent as well as an
authorising NCA, and would be pleased to share their findings.
Members remain keen to share experiences in assessing cumulative
impacts.
Offer views on what the next steps might be for improving the
assessment of cumulative impacts as part of environmental impact
assessments, including whether a comprehensive summary of CEP
discussions to date on assessment of cumulative impacts would be
helpful, and if more comprehensive guidance might be useful.
Members agreed that the topic of improving assessment of
cumulative impacts is important, but difficult. Challenges include
having sufficient access to up-to-date information about past,
present and foreseeable future activities to be able to make an
assessment on potential cumulative impacts. There was some
agreement that additional guidance or development of a tool to
assist with assessing cumulative impacts would be helpful.
Other suggestions included considering how to make information
about activities more accessible (potentially through the EIES or by
improving the EIA database to make it easier to find previous EIAs).
In terms of taking the work forward, there was also some agreement
that a comprehensive summary of previous CEP discussions on
assessing cumulative impacts would be a good place to start (noting
that the topic had been discussed by CEP for some time).
Consideration could also be given to reviewing methodologies used
in non-Antarctic contexts, as well
commissioning a report. It was also suggested that there may be
benefit in undertaking an assessment of an exemplar study from
Antarctica to assess strengths and weaknesses.
Given the importance of the topic and the need for working
together, it was suggested that time could be given during a CEP
meeting for a presentation or discussion, or perhaps a workshop
prior to a CEP. While an ICG discussion was suggested as another
option, it was noted that such an approach may be less effective in
encouraging broad participation. It was also noted that having a
clear outcome pathway in the CEP 5 Year Work Plan would be
important.
Consider next steps and actions for subsequent years.
For intersessional discussion: Further discussions on how to take
forward other actions for improving effectiveness of the Antarctic
EIA system.
WP33 (ATCM XLIV) presented a number of high priority
improvement opportunities that are likely to have the greatest
impact on improving the Antarctic EIA system. But the Report on
Effectiveness of Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
highlighted a number of other opportunities that could also
improve the Antarctic EIA system.
Questions to Members
Members are invited to:
Comment on any other opportunities that should be considered for
improving the Antarctic EIA system; and
Many Members agreed that we should continue to encourage and
support Parties to implement the Environmental Protocol through
domestic legislation. While there was a suggestion that improved
standardisation of the approach to EIAs might be useful,
particularly to avoid the issue of ‘permit shopping’ by operators,
other views were that it would be hard to try to standardise the
system too much given the difference in Parties’ domestic
requirements.
There was some agreement that there could be benefit in further
consideration of the CEE process, including collating the existing
procedures into a single, easily-accessible document.
There was some agreement that there would be benefit in
considering some of the other improvement opportunities noted in
the report, including, for example, the potential application for
Antarctica of ‘screening and scoping’ processes commonly applied
as part of the EIA process for large projects in other parts of the
world.
Other noted areas of improvement included:
improving access to the EIA database to make it easier for Parties to
identify past, present and future activities in each area (for
improving consideration of cumulative impacts);
considering whether a threshold could be established for whether
an EIA could be amended or whether a new EIA should be produced
when changes are made to the proposed (and already authorised)
activities;
improved guidance for assessing baseline environmental conditions;
and
improving (through additional guidance) the process for monitoring
compliance with EIAs.
Offer any other views on how the work to improve the Antarctic
EIA system could be best taken forward (such as whether we could
consider any changes to the EIA Database, or whether it would be
useful to propose a multi-year EIA system improvement plan).
It was noted that implementation of the EIA system relies on open
communication and information sharing amongst Parties, and
commented that better and more active use of the NCA forum page
would allow for sharing of experience and improving consistency.
We were also reminded that we should take account of the
difference in means and expertise within Members’ NCAs, and
consider that while some Members may be confident in processes,
others may consider some succinct guidance to be of great help.
Members agreed that there were several topics that would benefit
from further consideration, and it was suggested that it would be
helpful to consider relative priorities.
There was some support for considering a multi-year work plan for
improving the EIA system, potentially by including it in the CEP 5
Year Work Plan or developing the existing EIA Issue in the 5 Year
Work Plan.
