Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area
No.1 Admiralty Bay, King George Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (2006) ASMA No. 1
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 2 (2006) ASMA No. 1
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 14 (2014)
Current management plan:
Measure 14 (2014)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
None.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Map of ASMA No. 1 boundaries and Comandante Ferraz Antarctic
Station’s visitor zone updated as per guidelines established in
Resolution 1 (2017) Annex B; Map of Henryk Arctowski Polish
Antarctic Station visitor zone was removed, due its current
renovation; Maps of Flora (colonized areas) and Birds (occurrence
sites) was removed, because updated georeferenced references of
the information contained in these maps were not found.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
None.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
None.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
General review of the contents of the current Management Plan and
their comparison with applicable Antarctic Treaty regulations and
guidelines;
Information updated on the current status of values to be protected,
biological communities, scientific research and monitoring being
conducted, climate, tourism, and commercial harvesting within the
ASMA No. 1;
Contacts were made with IAATO for updated information on
tourism on Admiralty Bay;
Code of Conduct for Visitors (appendix A) and Scientific and
Environmental Guidelines (Appendix B) revised, to make sure this is
up to date, and to include reference to relevant Treaty documents;
New maps of ASMA No. 1 boundaries and Comandante Ferraz
Antarctic Station visitors zone included.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
N/A
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
Environment A – Antarctic Peninsula northern geologic;
Environment E – Antarctic Peninsula, Alexander and other islands
main ice fields and glaciers; and
Environment G – Antarctic Peninsula offshore islands.
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2017).
ACBR 1 - North-east Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27
and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
ANT045: Point Hennequin, King George Island
IBA criteria A4ii
Coordinates 58°22'48" W, 62°06'57" S
Area 277 ha
Altitude 0 – 250 m
Protection ASMA No.1
ANT046: West Admiralty Bay, King George Island
IBA criteria A1, A4ii, A4iii
Coordinates 58°28' W, 62°12' S
Area 1804 ha
Altitude 0 – c.350 m
Protection ASPA No.128, ASMA No.1
Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area
No.1 Admiralty Bay, King George Island
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the ASMA No. 1
Management Group has initiated in 2019 a five-year review of the
management plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area Admiralty
Bay (ASMA No. 1). Resolution 1 (2017) Annex B (Guidelines for the
preparation of ASMA management plans) has been followed in the
process of revising the management plan. According to the work
plan presented in IP 133 at CEP XXIII/ATCM XLIII, the review
continued during the intersessional periods. The revised
Management Plan for ASMA No.1 Admiralty Bay is attached for
consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP)
for recommendation to adoption by the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
