Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for
Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for
Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
Working Paper submitted by Belgium, Türkiye and the United
Kingdom
Summary
Belgium, Türkiye and the United Kingdom have prepared a draft
Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for Farrier Col,
Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay, following support from the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) at CEP XXIV.
Belgium, Türkiye and the United Kingdom recommend that the CEP
refer the draft Management Plan to the Subsidiary Group on
Management Plan (SGMP) for intersessional review.
Introduction
At CEP XXIV, Belgium, Türkiye and the United Kingdom submitted
ATCM XLIV WP38, which provided a prior assessment for a
proposed new ASPA on Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite
Bay, Antarctic Peninsula. The information was provided in a form
consistent with the purpose and provisions of the Guidelines: A
prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs
and outlined the environmental, scientific, wilderness and aesthetic
values of the proposed ASPA.
The proposed ASPA would afford protection to oligotrophic lakes
that are of outstanding scientific value. Sediment cores from one of
the lakes contains material radiocarbon dated to 36,000 years old,
with unequivocal evidence of biological occupation from 29,000
years ago for aquatic mosses and 21,000 years ago for zooplankton.
This is the longest known biological occupation of any lake in the
Antarctic Peninsula region, most being less than 9000 years old. 
Thus, these lakes were likely refugia for species through the last
glacial cycle – one of very few locations like this.
The proposed ASPA would also protect environmental values
associated with the lakes, which are representative of the small
number of similar water bodies found in the region. Oligotrophic
lakes of the southern Antarctic Peninsula are not currently
represented in the protected area network. The lakes also contain
the freshwater shrimp Branchinecta gaini (the largest freshwater
invertebrate in Antarctica), which is at the southern extent of its
range. The proposed area also has considerable wilderness and
aesthetic values.
The Committee agreed that the values of the proposed ASPA
merited special protection and endorsed the development of a
Management Plan for the area led by the three proponents. It also
encouraged interested Members and Observers to work with the
proponents informally during the intersessional period in the
development of a Management Plan for potential submission at CEP
XXV (CEP XXIV Report, para. 118).
Development of the draft Management Plan
During the intersessional periods, Belgium, Türkiye and the United
Kingdom prepared a draft Management Plan for the proposed ASPA
(see Attachment A) in accordance with the requirements of Annex V
to the Protocol and the Revised guide to the preparation of
Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas,
appended to Resolution 2 (2011) (a Cover Sheet is provided at
Annex A).
Recommendations
The draft Management Plan is submitted for consideration by the
Committee for Environmental Protection. Consistent with the
Guidelines for CEP Consideration of New and Revised Draft
Management ASPA and ASMA Management Plans, Belgium, Türkiye
and the United Kingdom recommend that the CEP refer the draft
Management Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plan
(SGMP) for intersessional review.
Annex A.
ASPA No. XXX Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
Yes
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
(If so, list all Recommendations, Measures, Resolutions and
Decisions pertaining to this ASPA/ASMA, including any previous
designations of this area as an SPA, SSSI or other type of protected
area. In particular, please include the date and relevant
Recommendation/Measure for the following:
No
First designation:
N/A
First adoption of management plan:
N/A
Any revisions to management plan:
N/A
Current management plan:
N/A
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
N/A
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
N/A
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
N/A
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
N/A
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
N/A
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, Environment Domain B - Antarctic Peninsula mid-northern
latitudes geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes, ACBR 3: North-west Antarctic Peninsula
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
None
