Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 19
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 19
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (1996), Measure 10 (2008), Measure 8 (2013).
Current management plan:
Measure 8 (2013).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 7 (1995), A 0 (2018)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land.
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011). Measure 18 (2015). The ASPA lies within
ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys.
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. The maps have been replaced by new versions prepared in
color to improve the clarity of site features and ASPA boundaries.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Dr Laura Selbmann (University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy) contributed
new information that the first endolithic fungal endemic species
Cryomyces antarcticus and Friedmanniomyces endolithicus were
described at Linnaeus Terrace. This has been added to Section 1
Values and Section 6 Description of the Area. Dr Selbmann also
noted recent
research showing a strong genetic divergence and diversity of
microbial species in the Area, which remain largely undescribed.
References were added in support of these observations.
A new provision on use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems has
been added (Section 7(ii) Access).
Updates are made to reference the latest ATCM Resolutions on Non-
native species and the Environmental Code of Conduct in Section
7(vi).
The first bullet Section 7(viii) has been expanded to be more
specific about procedures for sampling.
Minor editorial changes have been implemented in the plan, and
the reference list has been updated.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2 (c) an area with important or unusual assemblages of
species; (d) a type locality for original detailed Antarctic
cryptoendolithic descriptions and several endemic algal species; (e)
an area of particular scientific interest; and (f) an area of
outstanding geological, glaciological and geomorphological
features.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
ACBR 9 South Victoria Land.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
No.
ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
The ATCM approved in 2018 continuance of the ASPA No.138
Linnaeus Terrace management plan which was adopted in 2013,
and the five-year period until the next review was then reset to fall
due in 2023.
Accordingly, the United States has updated the management plan in
light of recent research and scientific observations at the site, and
has taken into account agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty
Parties since the last plan was adopted.
The review has identified an important new value of the Area: the
first endolithic fungal endemic species Cryomyces antarcticus and
Friedmanniomyces endolithicus were described at Linnaeus Terrace.
This reinforces the value of Linnaeus Terrace as a type locality.
New research since the previous review has also revealed a strong
genetic divergence and diversity of microbial species in the Area.
These remain largely undescribed, which emphasises the need to
continue to protect the Area while so much remains unknown about
the microbial ecosystem.
Permits issued for visits to the Area since the previous revision of
the management plan were reviewed, with few visits made, and no
significant changes to management policies were required.
The maps have been replaced by new versions prepared in color to
improve the clarity of site features, policies and ASPA boundaries.
The amendments to the management plan are considered minor in
nature.
The exceptional values of the Area remain valid, and the
management plan continues to protect those values.
Recommendation
The revised management plan and maps are attached for
consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for
recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
