Dedicated process for the development of a comprehensive and
consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and other non-
governmental activities
Dedicated process for the development of a comprehensive and
consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and other non-
governmental activities
Summary
From 8 to 10 March 2023 representatives of Parties and experts met
in Paris to informally discuss growth and other developments in
Antarctic tourism and relating concerns. The workshop discussions
reflected a common belief that the concerns associated with the
growth, diversification and compliance cannot all be solved by the
industry and national competent authorities and that international
governance action by the ATCM is required. It was also emphasized
that the ATCM should move away from a piecemeal approach. In
light of the strong growth, complexity and urgency, a dedicated and
intensive negotiation process on the whole package of policy issues
and related concerns regarding tourism and other NGO activities in
Antarctica is required. With this WP, France, the Netherlands, and
co-sponsors propose to the 45th ATCM to adopt the attached
Decision to organise an intensive dedicated process to discuss the
development of a comprehensive and consistent framework for the
management of tourism and other non-governmental activities in
Antarctica through a series of Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative
Meetings.
Urgent time for ATCM action
The ATCM has regularly reaffirmed its responsibility for managing
Antarctic tourism proactively in line with the objectives, principles
and values of the Antarctic Treaty System. For several years, the
development of “a strategic approach to environmentally managed
tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica” has been
identified as a priority of the ATCM Multi-year Strategic Work Plan.
However, to date, the regulation of Antarctic tourism by the ATCM
has been largely reactive and focused on a small range of tourism-
related issues that were addressed in mainly non-binding
Resolutions and Recommendations.
The substantial growth of tourism (e.g, in the numbers of tourists,
ships and visited sites), the diversification of activities and the
increasing likelihood that increasing pressures from tourism in
conjunction with climate change, scientific activities etc will
significantly impact the Antarctic environment, clearly show that
the ATCM needs to step up its efforts to proactively regulate
tourism.
In the margins of the 44th ATCM and in the intersessional period
between the 44th and 45th ATCM, the hosts of the 43rd, 44th, 45th
and 46th ATCM (i.e France, Germany, Finland and India) and the
delegations of the Netherlands and the United Kingdom informally
discussed ways to accelerate a more robust discussion on the future
of Antarctic tourism. The overall goal of this initiative was to jointly
accelerate and support an ATCM-wide, transparent and inclusive
debate and subsequent decision-making on the future of Antarctic
tourism. The most significant milestone was the informal workshop,
co-hosted by France and The Netherlands in Paris, on March 8-10
2023. The co-chairs summary of that workshop can be found as
IP11
The Paris workshop was extremely useful and in addition to a lively
exchange of views led to a common belief that the concerns
associated with the growth, diversification and compliance in
relation to Antarctic tourism require the ATCM to take
responsibility for governance action.
Thanks to the efforts of IAATO, self-management has long achieved
a high level of environmental protection and safety of Antarctic
tourism operations, but a point has been reached where guiding and
robust policy choices have to be made that cannot be expected from
the industry. In this context, it was repeatedly emphasized that
competent authorities cannot provide answers to the big questions
at the national level either. In their work, the emphasis is often on
assessing individual projects, decisions cannot be made in the light
of overall developments and related cumulative impacts, and in the
absence of an international basis for refusing activities, there is also
often pressure to allow activities.
From piecemeal approach to a dedicated process for the
development of a comprehensive and consistent framework
In respect of the process of strengthening international governance,
it was emphasized that the ATCM should move away from a
piecemeal approach. Previous discussions have made it clear that
the outstanding policy questions are wide-ranging and complex.
Finding consensus on the appropriate governance action is
problematic when countries have only a short reflection period on
proposals in working papers, discussion time at ATCMs is short and
the connection between proposals is unclear. As a result, policy
decisions are being postponed while the tourism market and
activities develop rapidly. In this context it was emphasized that
developments that occur are difficult to reverse.
The developments therefore urgently require the development of a
comprehensive and consistent framework for the management of
tourism at the international level. In light of both, complexity and
urgency, this requires a dedicated and intensive negotiation process
on the whole package of policy issues and related concerns
regarding tourism and other NGO activities in Antarctica. Only such
an approach can ensure that:
sufficient political attention for joint policy action is generated;
proposals on different tourism-related issues can be discussed in
conjunction;
room for compromises and package deals is established;
time is invested to understand each other’s positions and to develop
adequate policy action that do justice to these positions;
legal certainty and a level playing field are established for the
sector; and ultimately:
further growth and diversification are anticipated through timely
governance action to minimize cumulative impacts on Antarctica’s
environmental, scientific, wilderness, aesthetic and historical values
and to enhance human safety.
In this light, France, the Netherlands, and co-sponsors of the WP
propose to the 45th ATCM to decide to organise an intensive
dedicated process to discuss the development of a ‘comprehensive
and consistent framework for the management of tourism’ through
a series of Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings; akin to
the process the ATCM followed in 1990-1991 to develop the
Protocol on Environmental Protection. See subsection 5 below and
the draft-Decision, attached to this WP.
Vision and building blocks for a comprehensive and consistent
framework
Based on the rich debate on Antarctic tourism in previous ATCMs
and the 2019 Rotterdam workshop, the Paris workshop discussed
elements for a proactive and precautionary vision to tourism, as
well as a number of building blocks with options for policies for the
short, medium and longer term.
Vision
The workshop discussed that a robust, strategic and precautionary
vision could be about what Antarctica should look like in 20 or 30
years time and what this would mean for Antarctic tourism
governance. The workshop provided much inspiration to articulate
such a vision. A recurring concept involved ensuring connections
between Antarctic tourism and the special values ​of Antarctica. As a
general criterion, activities that could also take place elsewhere or
that make the pure experience of Antarctica impossible for others,
should not be allowed. It was suggested that these concepts could
be summarised by an aspirational headline of ‘snow tourism must
be slow tourism’.
Building blocks
Building block 1: managing growth
Growth relates to total numbers of visitors, as well as to the
increase of the length of the season, the number of sites visited, the
geographic location of these visited sites, the number of ships and
aircrafts used and the number of voyages and flights per season.
Building block 2: managing diversification
Diversification relates to the increase of the types of activities
conducted, as well as, for instance, the types of transportation mode
and the type of operators offering tourism products.
Building block 3: monitoring
Environmental monitoring has since long been identified as key to
better assessing possible changes and identifying impacts.
Monitoring is also the subject of obligations in the Protocol.
Building block 4: compliance and enforcement
Given the complexity and specificity of the governance of
Antarctica, compliance and enforcement require specific and
detailed attention, to better monitor and ensure the effective
enforcement of existing and future regulations.
Building block 5: overall governance
All of these building blocks have to fit in a comprehensive and
consistent framework for the governance of tourism and other non-
governmental activities, which framework will also need some
overarching approaches or components.
The building blocks were considered relevant for the discussion and
development of the process of developing a framework as meant in
the draft Decision. Participants agreed to include safety and search
and rescue considerations in the further discussion as an element to
consider under relevant building blocks.
For each of these building blocks the Paris workshop identified
issues and options for policies for the short, medium and long term.
The concerns and policy options discussed
during the workshop varied in nature and complexity. In general,
underpinning policy action with best available knowledge was
considered an important starting point. However, it was also
emphasized that there will always be gaps in knowledge and that
the urgency of the problem can justify decision-making based on
common sense, expert judgement and the precautionary principle. A
factor here is that postponing decisions often implies an implicit
decision to allow further developments, developments that are
difficult to reverse. Workshop participants agreed that the building
blocks and issues identified under those deserve further discussion,
in a coherent and robust manner.
Proposals to the 45th ATCM in Helsinki
Against this backdrop, France, the Netherlands, and co-sponsors of
this WP propose to the 45th ATCM in Helsinki:
to decide to organise an intensive dedicated process to discuss the
development of a comprehensive and consistent framework for the
management of tourism through a series of Antarctic Treaty Special
Consultative Meetings and – for that purpose – adopt the attached
Decision.
DRAFT DECISION
Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meetings on a framework for
regulating Antarctic tourism and other non-governmental activities
in Antarctica
The Representatives,
Noting that the Article 2 of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection designates Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to
peace and science;
Considering Article 3.4 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty, stating that tourism activities shall comply
with its environmental principles;
Concerned about the continuing and substantial increase in the
numbers and diversity of tourism and other non-governmental
activities in Antarctica and the importance of applying the
precautionary approach in addressing concerns;
Acknowledging that the concerns associated with the growth,
diversification and compliance in relation to Antarctic tourism and
other non-governmental activities in Antarctica require the ATCM
with urgency to take responsibility for international governance
action;
Acknowledging that previous discussions have made it clear that
the outstanding policy questions are wide-ranging, complex and
interconnected, and can best be addressed through an international
dedicated process of intensified discussions on the development of a
comprehensive and consistent framework for the regulation of
tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica;
Noting that such a framework should build on the existing Antarctic
Treaty System, including in particular the Antarctic Treaty and its
Protocol on Environmental Protection and the adopted Decisions,
Resolutions and Measures relevant to Antarctic tourism and other
non-governmental activities in Antarctica, as well as on the output
of a workshop held in Paris during 8-10 March 2023 regarding
building blocks;
Decide to:
Convene a series of Special Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative
Meetings (SATCM) with the aim of developing a comprehensive and
consistent framework for the regulation of tourism and other non-
governmental activities in Antarctica;
Request the SATCM to examine, among possible other issues, the
following topics as potential building blocks of a framework:
managing growth;
managing diversification;
monitoring;
compliance and enforcement;
safety and self-sufficiency, including search and rescue;
overall governance;
Request the SATCM, in discussing the above mentioned and other
issues, to pay special attention to how best to deliver Parties’
commitments in the Protocol on Environmental Protection as
regards cumulative impacts on Antarctica’s values;
Encourage attendance at the Meeting by representatives from all
Consultative Parties, and to invite experts from Non-Consultative
Parties, the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research (SCAR), the
International Association of Antarctic Tourist Operators (IAATO),
the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), the World
Conservation Union (IUCN) and the Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP);
Request the Secretariat to support the SATCMs;
Accept the offer of the Government of …. to host the first SATCM in
…, to be held in advance of ATCM 46.
