Network of Observation Systems
Network of Observation Systems
Summary
Well-supported long-term monitoring programs of the physical and
living environment are essential to understand ongoing
environmental changes in Antarctica. The more coordinated and
integrated such observing efforts are, the better placed to respond
to the challenge. This paper explores the state of coordinated
observing efforts and suggests a need for and actions towards
further coordinated, comprehensive and complimentary observation
networks.
Introduction
SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE)
decadal update report, submitted and discussed at ATCM XXLIV,
notes that the Antarctic Treaty Parties have declared an obligation
to implement the mitigation and adaptation actions that will reduce
climate change-related and other human impacts on Antarctic
marine and terrestrial environments, their ecosystems and
biodiversity, and the ecosystem services they deliver. To meet this
obligation ACCE highlights inter alia well-supported long-term
monitoring programs of the physical and living environment as
essential element to meet this obligation.
The more coordinated and integrated observing efforts are, the
more complete spatial distribution of observations and the more
cost-efficient it will be. This again will strengthen the Antarctic
Treaty Parties’ and Antarctic National Programs’ joint ability to in a
timely manner contribute to closing key knowledge gaps in order to
understand large-scale Antarctic changes and their effects on the
global system.
Observations and observation systems in Antarctica
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean is obviously not void of
observations, observation systems or observation networks.
Most of the research stations in Antarctica have ongoing
observational efforts in one or more realms. A simplified overview
of these capabilities can be found in the COMNAP Antarctic Station
Catalogue (2017) which in addition to station details provides
information about the observational capacities at the stations.
There are also many stations and national programs that have
designed holistic observational networks as a fundament for the
research efforts in the region. The Troll Observing Network (TONe)
is one such example (see further information below).
System of networks exist for some observations. An obvious
example of this is weather observations through the Antarctic AWS
network, which has successfully been used for a wide range of
science activities as well as for weather forecasting.
There are also a number of efforts and initiatives aiming to
coordinate and facilitate observation efforts that are comprehensive,
compatible and coordinated, many of these within SCAR, and often
thematically oriented within scientific disciplines. For example,
ANTPAS aims to develop an internationally coordinated monitoring
system on Antarctic permafrost and soils. ANTOS which aims to
establish biologically focused, integrated and coordinated Antarctic-
wide observation is another example.
The Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) is one of few
examples of an ongoing comprehensive coordinated effort. SOOS is
a coordinating body to enhance and ensure the delivery of Southern
Ocean data across nations, organizations, programs and
stakeholders, and to provide the infrastructure for organization of
community networks to develop sustained observing systems and
syntheses of existing Southern Ocean datasets. See more at soos.aq.
Despite all these initiatives and efforts, there still seem to be gaps
and challenges to be overcome to allow for an efficient and
systematic observation data gathering effort in Antarctica.
Observations during the 2018 Norwegian inspection
The 2018 Norwegian inspection (ref. ATCM XXLI WP 26) in
Dronning Maud Land noted in its concluding reflections that at the
well-established year-round research stations emphasis is given to
ensure the longevity of fundamental and important time series
feeding into global observation systems. The inspection team
furthermore observed that there seems to be a fairly large degree of
comparable observations ongoing at the various research stations,
while at the same time it was not always clear if these individual
observations were fed into (as part of an) a systematically
coordinated effort. This may also raise questions with respect to
optimal spatial distribution, comparability and/or complementarity
of observations, the input and use in global observation systems and
processes, etc. On this basis the inspection team recommended that
there could be merit in getting an overview and assessment of
Antarctic observation efforts in order to enhance their use and
robustness, as well as identifying gaps in observation needs.
Furthermore, the 2018 inspection noted that there are many
innovative and exciting technological approaches developed with
regard to observation and data collection both in the physical and
biological scientific field. Many of these technical solutions seem to
have universal applicability and usability. However, while
knowledge across stations seem limited, and there thus is a
potential for more exchange of information also on technological
solutions for research and observation efforts in Antarctica.
Troll Observing Network – a node in a pan-Antarctic observation
network?
Troll Observing Network (TONe) is a comprehensive infrastructure
which aims to contribute significantly to observation and data
gathering efforts, centred at the Norwegian Antarctic research
station Troll. By utilizing TONe infrastructure and observations the
research community will will be able to answer questions and
generate knowledge related to climate and sea-level change,
atmosphere dynamics, solid Earth structure, cryosphere dynamics,
space weather effects, robustness of communication networks,
quality of weather and climate models, and the effects of global
changes on marine ecosystems. The data collected through the eight
TONe observatories are in themselves part of the TONe research
infrastructure and will be openly available to the entire science
community in line with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty For
further information about TONe, refer to XXLIV IP 73 XXLIV and
www.npolar.no/en/tone.
In establishing TONe, care was taken to consider how the
observatories sit in the context of other international observation
initiatives, envisioning the TONe observation network simply as one
module in a pan-Antarctic observation network in the future.
Troll research station has a unique location; no other permanent
station is located further inland in Dronning Maud Land (DML), or
anywhere else on the slope of East Antarctica. As such TONe fills a
observational void in this region. Its location on the slope provides
unique atmospheric observations, and the seismic array at Troll is
the only one in Antarctica located on the bedrock.
There are currently some 70 permanent research stations scattered
across Antarctica. In DML there are six all-year stations mostly on
or near the coast. The COMNAP Antarctic Station Catalogue served
a good basis when designing TONe, and the TONe partners strived
to ensure complementarity and comparability with the programmes
at the stations having similar observatories.
TONe infrastructure description
Landscape of similar observational capacities
Integrated Cloud Observatory (ICO).
Some relevant measurements at Princess Elisabeth/Neumayer; Same
suite at several Arctic sites
Atmosphere Composition Observatory (ACO)
Neumayer, Amundsen-Scott South Pole, McMurdo, Syowa
Infrasound Array (IA)
All other at the coast: Neumayer, Siple, Windless Bright
Ionosphere Observatory (IO)
Maitri, Syowa, SANAE-IV, Halley, Zhongshan
Seismic Array (SA)
No other SA on bedrock. Neumayer, South Pole, Concordia on ice
Fimbulisen Ice-shelf Observatory (FIO)
Filchner Ronne, Amery, Ross ice shelves, Thwaites, Langhovde
Glacier, Gerorg VI & Larsen
Multidisciplinary Ocean Moored Observatory (MOMO)
30E (NIPR), 17W (AWI, UEA), Maud Rise, S. Weddell & Penninsula
(UiB, NORCE, BAS, AWI, L'OCEAN, AWI, SU)
Seabird Monitoring Observatory (SMO)
Atka Bay (AWI), Adelie Land, Antarctic Peninsula, Ross Sea
Conclusions and recommendations
The urgency in closing knowledge gaps (and therefore observation
gaps) is ever increasing while the cost of Antarctic research is
increasing at the same time. In this context it will be ever more
important for Antarctic Treaty Parties and Antarctic National
Programs that their investments in Antarctic observation systems
gives the best possible value for the investments. A clear
understanding of where the gaps are and how they should be filled
would facilitate good investments. To enable well-founded
investments, it is suggested that:
ATCM should invite SCAR to give Parties an overview and
assessment of Antarctic long-term observation efforts in order to
enhance their use and robustness, as well as identifying gaps in
observation needs.
ATCM should consider mechanisms for and encourage further
exchange of information on technological solutions for observation
efforts in Antarctica, and in this manner strengthen the long-term
capacity for a pan-Antarctic observation effort.
