Relocation of artefacts from HSM 68: Supply depot, Hell’s Gate
Moraine
Relocation of artefacts from HSM 68: Supply depot, Hell’s Gate
Moraine
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand, Norway and the United
Kingdom
Summary
Artefacts from Historic Site and Monument No. 68 Supply Depot,
Hell’s Gate Moraine (HSM 68) were removed from their original
location in the 1994/95 season and have been stored in a container
at New Zealand’s Scott Base ever since. New Zealand, Norway and
the United Kingdom reviewed the future storage and display
options for the artefacts and recommend they be removed from
Antarctica for storage and safe keeping of the objects within the
Reserve Collection supported by the New Zealand Antarctic
Heritage Trust (AHT) at Canterbury Museum, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
Background
Heroic-era artefacts from HSM 68: Supply Depot, Hell’s Gate
Moraine located adjacent to Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay,
Ross Sea region (Figure 1), were removed from their original
locations in 1994/95 (Figure 2) under the directive of the Director
at the time of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme to prevent the
permanent loss of the artefacts to the environment.
The cache or artefacts comprises a sled, tools and food left as an
emergency depot for future sledging parties (Figure 3). In addition,
some artefacts from an emergency depot were recovered and
included within the cache including a handful of leather sledging
straps, some wooden spars from a sledge and some rope.
The artefacts have been cared for by the New Zealand Antarctic
Heritage Trust ever since. The artefacts have been conserved and
stored in a shipping container outside at Scott Base (Figure 3, 4 and
5). With the Scott Base Redevelopment underway, a more
permanent home is required for these artefacts. A list of artefacts is
presented in Attachment 1.
Assessment of options
The cache constitutes a unique part of the story of heroic-era
exploration, and their greatest value (having already been removed
from their original site) lies in being understood as a grouping of
objects.
With reference to the Guidelines for the designation and protection
of Historic Sites and Monuments (Resolution 3 (2009)) and the
Guidelines for the assessment and management of Heritage in
Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2022)), New Zealand, Norway and the
United Kingdom reviewed the provenance, condition, and future
storage and display options for the artefacts as outlined in Table 1.
It was identified that the most appropriate option for storage and
safe keeping of the objects is as part of the Reserve Collection
supported by the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust at
Canterbury Museum, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Recommendation:
New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom recommend the
CEP:
Support the preferred long-term storage and safe keeping of the
objects as part of the Reserve Collection supported by the New
Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust at Canterbury Museum,
Christchurch, New Zealand for possible future display as part of the
museums Antarctic collection or for possible return to Antarctica if
desired; and
Update the Conservation Status on the HSM No. 68 listing on the
Antarctic Protected Area database to read: Sledge and supplies
removed from site in 1994. The artefacts have been documented
and conserved (2017) by the New Zealand-based Antarctic Heritage
Trust. They are stored at Canterbury Museum, Christchurch, New
Zealand as part of the Reserve Collection supported by the New
Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust. The artefacts are extremely
fragile.
Figure 1: Artefacts as found before removal.
Figure 2: Artefacts removed to Scott Base in 1994/95.
Figure 3: Conserved Hells Gate Moraine sledge, tent poles, tools and
food boxes.
Figure 4: Hells Gate Moraine spade
Figure 5: Hells Gate Moraine Venesta case, after conservation.
Table 1: Long term storage options of artefacts from HSM 68.
Storage option
Assessment of the options
Retain artefacts in Antarctica
Return to the original cache sites
Keeps the objects in Antarctica but this will result in the items’
deterioration and loss to the environment (as occurred to Granite
Harbour depot) within 2-3 decades.
Not recommended
Placement in Discovery Hut (Hut Point), ASPA 158
Keeps the objects in Antarctica, and in a heroic era context.
Keeps food products frozen for most of the year, slowing
deterioration.
Places the cache collections at risk of being separated in the long
term due to future generations not realising the provenance and
significance of the cache items. It would also confuse the real Hut
Point stories, and is not a site the stores originated from.
Not recommended
Placement in Terra Nova Hut (Cape Evans), ASPA 155
Keeps the objects in Antarctica, and provides some context for the
items as stores were loaded at Cape Evans directly before the Terra
Nova headed north up McMurdo Sound and placed depots on the
return voyage to New Zealand.
Keeps food products frozen for most of the year, slowing
deterioration.
The sledge is 3 metres in length, and there isn’t an area big enough
for the sled in the hut except the hut rafters, meaning it will have to
be separated from the objects.
Not recommended
Placement in Borchgrevink’s Stores Hut (Cape Adare) ASPA 159
Keeps the objects in Antarctica, and provides some context for the
items. Scott’s Northern Party used both of the extant 1899 huts
during 1911 for additional storage and workspace. The Hell’s Gate
Moraine depot was left as a result of the Northern Party’s
subsequent experience of being marooned across a winter, in case
any future coastal party should find themselves in need of
emergency supplies.
Keeps food products frozen for most of the year, slowing
deterioration.
The sledge is 3 metres in length. There may be space for the sled
and objects in the re-roofed store room at Cape Adare but it will be
considerably cramped. There is no room in the Living Hut for these
artefacts.
Logistics for transporting these items from Scott Base to Cape Adare
and ongoing access for maintenance and conservation is extremely
difficult.
Not recommended
Return objects to New Zealand
Removal to the AHT Reserve Collection (New Zealand, based at
Canterbury Museum)
A controlled museum environment would ensure the artefacts are
preserved for longer, and they could be viewed as a discrete
collection from each cache site by researchers. Food products could
be assessed and emptied for warm storage, or added to frozen
collection.
Keeping the entire cache in the Reserve Collection is not part of that
collection’s intended purpose
(representative sample). However, it is not desirable to break up the
cache collection.
The Reserve Collection offers the next best option to leaving in
Antarctica, due to the existing approval for holding Antarctic items
which cannot be cared for in Antarctica.
Logistics transport and movement of the artefacts from Scott Base to
New Zealand would have less risk of damage during the transport
process.
Canterbury Museum’s redevelopment means that the Reserve
Collection will move temporarily to an offsite storage facility with
stable (albeit uncontrolled) environmental conditions. Freezer space
will be available for food products.
The flexibility of the Reserve Collection allows for the possible
future display of the artefacts as part of the museums Antarctic
collection or for possible return to Antarctica if required and as
logistics allows.
Recommended for consideration
Removal to the Canterbury Museum collection
A controlled museum environment would ensure the artefacts are
preserved for longer, and they could be viewed as a discrete
collection from each cache site by researchers. Food products could
be assessed and emptied for warm storage, or added to frozen
collection.
Permanent addition of the items to a New Zealand museum
collection implies an ownership claim by the museum, which is not
desirable.
Canterbury Museum is initiating a complete rebuild in 2022, and
their entire collection is moving to alternate offsite storage sites for
the next few years.
Permanent museum-level storage will not be completed for another
4-5 years.
Not recommended
Remove wet food products to frozen storage in New Zealand
An additional possibility would be to retain dry artefacts in
Antarctica, and return wet food products to frozen storage in New
Zealand. This option is not preferred as it necessarily involves loss
of the depot integrity.
Not recommended
