Proposal for an Intersessional Process to Review the Use and
Maintenance of the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
Proposal for an Intersessional Process to Review the Use and
Maintenance of the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
Summary
At ATCM XLIV (2022), the Parties expressed an intent to consider
how the Meeting could use, maintain, and optimise the Multi-Year
Strategic Work Plan. In support of this effort, the co-sponsors of this
Working Paper propose that an intersessional process, using the
Secretariat’s online discussion forum, be established for Parties to
review the use and functioning of the Work Plan and to identify
opportunities for improvements to further support the Meeting’s
work.
Background
Following discussions at ATCM XXXV (2012) and ATCM XXXVI
(2013), the Parties adopted the first Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
(MYSWP) under Decision 5 (2013). The preamble to the Decision
reflects the Parties’ recognition that such a Work Plan may
“contribute positively to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(‘ATCM’), so that the ATCM focuses on matters of priority and
timely importance, operates more effectively and efficiently and
schedules its work appropriately”.
The Annex to Decision 5 (2013) sets out principles to guide the
implementation and further development of the Work Plan. These
note that the purpose of the Work Plan is to ‘complement the
agenda by assisting the ATCM to identify a limited number of
priority issues and to operate more effectively and efficiently’. At
subsequent ATCMs, the Parties have continued to reaffirm their
commitment to the Work Plan and its principles and have adopted
annual updates.
At ATCM XLIV, the Meeting noted that the Work Plan had been in
place for ten years and considered it timely to dedicate attention to
the Work Plan. The Meeting requested the Secretariat to review the
Meeting’s use of the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan and report its
findings back to ATCM XLV. That report is presented in Secretariat
Paper 10.
Proposal
The co-sponsors of this Working Paper propose that the Meeting
establish an intersessional process, using the Secretariat’s online
discussion forum, to review the current use and functioning of the
Work Plan and to identify opportunities for improvements to
further support the Meeting’s work. Draft terms of reference are
provided below. For instance, the review could examine the issues
raised in Secretariat Paper 10, or questions such as how items are
distributed across future years, the clarity of priorities and actions
in the Work Plan, how it is maintained and updated at the Meeting,
and the retention of items that have not been actioned. If agreed,
Australia would be pleased to co-ordinate such an intersessional
process, in consultation and collaboration with other Parties.
Intersessional Contact Group to Review the Use and Maintenance of
the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan
Draft Terms of Reference
The Intersessional Contact Group will be coordinated by Australia,
via the Secretariat’s online discussion forum.
The aims of the Intersessional Contact Group are:
To review the use and functioning of the MYSWP to date, including
with reference to the issues identified in SP 10, and.
To identify and discuss opportunities for improvements to further
support the Meeting’s work.
Observers and Experts participating in the ATCM would be invited
to provide input.
Australia will prepare a report back on the discussion and findings
of the Review to ATCM 46.
