Reaffirmation of Commitment to Environmental Protocol Article 7
Reaffirmation of Commitment to
Environmental Protocol Article 7
Summary
In WP 38 (2016), Consultative Parties used the occasion of the 25th
anniversary of the signing of the Environmental Protocol to the
Antarctic Treaty to acknowledge the benefit of Protocol Article 7,
reaffirm their commitment to Article 7, and declare their firm
commitment to retain and continue to implement Article 7. This
resulted in Resolution 6 (2016). As WP 38 (2016) noted, the mining
prohibition under Article 7 remains in force “unless there is in force
a binding legal regime on Antarctic mineral resource activities that
includes an agreed means for determining whether, and, if so,
under which conditions, any such activities would be acceptable.”
While WP 38 (2016) demonstrated the strong support for retaining
the mining prohibition, it was unable to dispel the erroneous belief
that the Protocol will expire in 2048 or that action is necessary to
maintain Article 7. Since the introduction of WP38 (2016), the
ATCM has gone on record multiple times reaffirming their
commitment to Article 7, notably the Santiago Declaration (2016),
Prague Declaration (2019), and Paris Declaration (2021).
Additionally, numerous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties joined
the Madrid Declaration (2021).
In recognition of the 25th anniversary of the entry into force of the
Environmental Protocol, the United States and cosponsors propose
that a resolution be adopted similar to the draft provided in the
attachment to this paper to combat misinformation and reaffirm our
unchanging dedication to preserving Antarctica for peace and
science and to protecting the Antarctic environment and dependent
and associated ecosystems by reaffirming our collective
commitment to Article 7.
Draft Resolution X (2023)
Reaffirming ongoing commitment to the prohibition on Antarctic
mineral resource activities, other than for scientific research
The Representatives,
Recognizing that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty (“the Protocol”), which has been in force for more
than two decades, is an essential element of current efforts to
protect the Antarctic environment;
Noting that Article 7 of the Protocol prohibits any activity relating
to mineral resources, other than scientific research, in the Antarctic
Treaty area;
Taking into account that, outside the Antarctic Treaty system, many
hold the mistaken belief that the Protocol expires in 2048;
Recalling that the Protocol contains no expiration date and that
Article 25 relates solely to the possibility of a review conference at
the request of any Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party after the
Protocol has been in force for 50 years;
Recommend that their Governments publicly:
1. acknowledge the benefits to the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems that have resulted from the
prohibition on activities relating to mineral resources, other than
scientific research, under Article 7 of the Protocol;
2. reaffirm their commitment to Article 7 of the Protocol; and
3. declare their firm commitment to continue to implement this
prohibition as a matter of highest priority to achieve the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems.
