Preparation of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
Preparation of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
Working Paper submitted by France
Summary
This paper recalls the agreement reached at the CEP XXIV (2022) to
develop Terms of Reference for a next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop. It proposes draft Terms of Reference for discussion at
CPE 25 (2023) as well as the modalities for organizing this joint
workshop.
France recommends that the Committee:
Considers the proposed draft Terms of Reference for the next Joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop and the suggested modalities for its
organization
Agrees on a coordination process with SC-CAMLR to finalize the
organization of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) was
adopted through Resolution 4 (2015), and last updated in 2016.
The CCRWP contains an action (3e) to maintain a ‘regular dialogue
(or sharing of information)’ with the Scientific Committee for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) on
climate change, in particular on actions being taken.
At CEP XXIV (2022), Argentina, Australia, France and the United
States introduced WP 16 Review of progress in the implementation
of the recommendations identified at the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring (2016). It presented
the results of a review undertaken during the 2021-22 intersessional
period on progress in the implementation of the recommendations
identified in the report of the 2016 Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
on Climate Change and Monitoring.
CEP XXIV (2022) emphasized the importance of collaboration and
communication between the CEP and SC-CAMLR and agreed to
develop Terms of Reference for the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop.
SC-CAMLR-41 agreed to hold another climate change workshop
during the 2023 intersessional period to improve the integration of
scientific information on climate change and ecosystem interactions
throughout SC-CAMLR’s work program. SC-CAMLR-41 noted the
proposal for a joint CEP–CCAMLR climate change workshop to be
held at the latest in 2024. It further recognized that there could be
some overlap in objectives between both workshops, which should
be considered in developing terms of reference of both the joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR and the SC-CAMLR workshop. Given the timing of
these two workshops, the outcomes of the 2023 SC-CAMLR
workshop could be fed into the 2024 joint workshop.
Terms of Reference for the next joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop
The general scope of the 2016 joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop was
to identify the effects of climate change that were considered most
likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify
existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data
relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR. CEP XXIV WP 16 showed that
both committees have been active in considering
climate change implications for the Antarctic region since 2016,
and that such issues remain a high priority for further attention.
The Terms of Reference for the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop should take full account of the review presented at CEP
XXIV (2022), the ongoing work of the Subsidiary Group on Climate
Changes Response (SGCCR), the terms of reference of the climate
change SC-CCAMLR workshop planned for autumn 2023, and any
guidance provided by the ATCM through the joint CEP/ATCM
climate session in Helsinki. The outcome of the Joint CEP/SC-
CAMLR Workshop in 2024 should further feed into the
implementation of the CCRWP.
During this intersessional period, the SGCCR identified “intensifying
coordination in the marine realm - with SC-CAMLR” as a priority to
better preserve marine ecosystems as presented in WP 48.
The following draft Terms of Reference are therefore proposed to
the CEP for its consideration:
Examine how to progress on matters of mutual interests in the
marine realm in the context of climate change (including the five
joint priority areas identified in the 2009 joint workshop)
Identify common research needs and reference areas for future
research
Examine the need to enhance existing monitoring programs to
assess and integrate the impacts of climate change
Propose improvements to strengthen cooperation and coordination
between CEP and SC-CAMLR
Modalities of organization of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR
Workshop
CEP XXIV (2022) appointed Maude Jolly (FR) as co-convener of the
Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop. A second co-convener would need
to be identified by SC-CAMLR to ensure a balanced facilitation of
the meeting.
France proposes that the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop is held in
2024 at a date to be determined to ensure broad participation. CEP
Members may wish to consider whether the workshop could
usefully be held back-to-back with CEP 26 or SC-CAMLR-43. It
further invites CEP Members to consider whether a hybrid or virtual
workshop would be most appropriate. CEP Members might want to
consider adopting a similar approach as the one retained for the SC-
CAMLR 2023 climate change workshop, which consists of regional
hubs to facilitate board participation.
France suggests that the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop is open to
all Members of the CEP and all Members of SC-CAMLR, as well as
all Observers to both bodies.
Recommendation
France recommends that the Committee:
Considers the proposed draft Terms of Reference for the next Joint
CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop and the suggested modalities for its
organization
Agrees on a coordination process with SC-CAMLR to finalize the
organization of the next Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop
