Harmonised implementation of the IMO Polar Code
Harmonised implementation of the IMO Polar Code
Working Paper submitted by Argentina, Finland and Norway
Summary
This paper proposes that Parties strengthen their efforts in
implementing the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar
Waters (Polar Code) in a harmonised way.
Background
Pursuant to Resolution 8 (2009) adopted at the 32nd Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXXII), the Chair of ATCM
XXXII expressed to the International Maritime Organization (IMO)
the Antarctic Treaty Parties’ wish that the IMO develop a
mandatory shipping code for vessels operating in Antarctic waters.
The adoption of the mandatory International Code for Ships
Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) by the IMO in 2014–2015
and its entry into force in 2017 were important milestones in
ensuring safe shipping and the protection of polar marine
environments by addressing maritime risks present in polar waters
and not adequately mitigated by other instruments. Since 2017,
ships operating in harsh Arctic and Antarctic waters have had clear
rules and guidance on how to best tackle the additional demands on
ships and their crews in the inhospitable, yet unique, seas
surrounding our planet’s two poles.
However, in order to ensure the success of the Polar Code, it is
important to keep working towards harmonised implementation
and enforcement. There may be differences between Flag and Port
States in ways to implement and enforce the Code, as well as among
shipowners, operators and other stakeholders in the interpretation
of the Code. Cooperation is key, and the IMO, the Antarctic Treaty
Parties and the Arctic Council all have important roles to play on
this topic.
Challenges related to the implementation of the Polar Code have
been discussed, inter alia, in the Arctic Shipping Best Practice
Information Forum under the auspices of the Arctic Council’s
Working Group on Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment
(PAME). This work has been supported in many ways by both
Finland and Norway. Finland also was the convener of the first
International Conference on Harmonized implementation of the
Polar Code in Helsinki in February 2018 while chairing the Arctic
Council.
As six years have now passed since the entry into force of the Polar
Code, it may be a good time to take stock and think ahead also in
Antarctic cooperation. How can we ensure the harmonized
implementation of the Polar Code in Antarctic waters? Are there
any need for improvements? What role may the Antarctic Treaty
Parties have in better enforcing the Code?
IP 57 (ATCM XLIII in 2021) by Spain detailed Spain’s procedure
implementing the Polar Code on the Spanish research vessel
Sarmiento de Gamboa, and the work of the Spanish Maritime
Administration to certify this vessel in accordance with the Code.
Since then there has not been much discussion or information
exchange on the Polar Code among Parties.
The ATCM Multi-year Strategic Work Plan includes priority 9:
“Contribute to strengthening the consistent implementation of the
Polar Code”. ATCM XLIV in 2022 invited Parties to share papers on
the implementation of the Polar Code in the Antarctic at the next
ATCM, and supported the organisation of a topical session to the
agenda of the ATCM XLV to enhance and support harmonised
implementation of the IMO Polar Code in waters around both poles.
Key challenges
The safety part of the Polar Code is the first “goal-based standard”
instrument adopted by IMO. For national maritime administrations
and the industry, the strongly conceded three layers of “goal”,
“functional requirements” and “regulations” is a new type of legal
framework. The regulations set out one way of meeting the goals
and functional requirements, however, other solutions may be
applied, as long as it is documented that the goal and the functional
requirements are met. This gives all stakeholders larger freedom,
but at the same time, it requires a higher level of knowledge and
understanding of the risks to be mitigated and the necessary
measures to be applied.
The mandatory operational assessment to be carried out by
operators forms a basis for the determination of which set of
functional requirements and regulations of the Polar Code shall
apply to ships operating in polar waters. This will depend on,
among other things, the area of operation, anticipated weather
conditions, time of year, possible presence of sea ice, temperature
and latitude.
The submitters’ experiences so far show that operators find parts of
the Polar Code challenging with respect to the interpretation of
requirements. The variable levels of knowledge and understanding
of how and what to assess still constitutes a challenge.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the ATCM:
Recognises the need to continue prioritising the harmonised
implementation and effective enforcement the IMO Polar Code in
the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan;
Advises the Parties to keep promoting the Polar Code and its
implementation to shipowners and operators calling their ports, as
well as vessel designers, shipyards and other stakeholders in their
national maritime clusters;
Discuss possible ways for the Parties to cooperate with the Arctic
Council States and other major Flag States for sharing information
and best practices in implementing the Polar Code.
