Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter Peninsula
Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter Peninsula
Working Paper presented by Argentina
Summary
Argentina has carried out a revision of the Management Plan for the
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 132, Potter
Peninsula, and has determined that only minor amendments are
required. Argentina recommends that the CEP approve the attached
revised Management Plan.
Background
The Antarctic Specially Protected Area 132 was originally
designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest 13 according to Rec.
XIII-8 (1985). Its Management Plan was adjusted to the
requirements of Annex V by Measure 3 (Christchurch, 1997). It was
later re-numbered according to Decision 1 (Warsaw, 2002) as ASPA
132, and, under Measure 2 (2005), a first revision was approved.
The next revision was submitted in 2012 and, at the request of the
Committee, the Plan was revised between sessions by the
Management Plans Subsidiary Group, after which the Plan was
again submitted in 2013 and adopted by the Committee under
Measure 4 (2013). Finally, in 2018, the last revision of the Plan was
approved under Measure 3 (2018).
During this new revision process, which responds to the provisions
in Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the values present in the Area
were updated in detail based on the latest scientific findings and the
validity of the measures necessary to protect it were revised in
consultation with the main researchers who carry out tasks in this
Area and in light of an analysis of the corresponding Visit Reports.
Summary of amendments
A revised Management Plan for ASPA 132 is provided in Annex A.
There are no major changes in the Management Plan. The minor
amendments are summarised as follows:
Information has been updated within the Introduction and
Description of the Area.
The Aims and Objectives have been reworded without changes in
meaning to bring them into line with the writing standards used in
the latest management plans presented.
Some management guidelines have been incorporated in
accordance with standards adopted in the Antarctic Treaty in recent
years.
The following text has been added pursuant to section ii) of Article
7, “Access to, and movement within or over the Area: “The use of
RPAs will not be allowed within the limits of the ASPA, unless
previously analysed case by case during the environmental impact
assessment process. They may only be used when stated in the entry
permit and under the conditions established therein. During the
analysis and authorisation process, all Antarctic Treaty directives in
force will be taken into account.”
The supporting documentation section has also been updated.
A series of editorial changes have been made throughout the
process, largely in the interests of consistency with the provisions of
other ASPA Management Plans and with the “Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas”.
Recommendation
Argentina recommends that the CEP approve the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA 132, Potter Peninsula (Appendix A).
ASPA 132, Potter Peninsula
1. Is the designation of a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is the designation of a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? 1
Yes. ASPA 132
Original designation:
Designated as SSSI 13 according to Rec. XIII-8 (1985)
First adoption of the management plan:
Measure 3 (1997)
Management plan revisions:
Measure 2 (2005), Measure 4 (2013) and Measure 3 (2018)
Current management plan:
Measure 3 (2018)
Any extension of the expiry date of the management plan:
None
Change of name and number to............... pursuant to Decision 1
(2002).
ASPA 132, Potter Peninsula, 25 de Mayo/King George Island, South
Shetland Islands
Other significant measures:
Not applicable
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) Is it a major or minor rectification?
Minor
(ii) Are there any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) Are there any changes to the maps? If so, do the changes affect
only the legends or also the graphics?
No
(iv) Are there any changes to the description of the Area that are
significant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) Are there any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or
HSM within this
area or adjacent to it? In particular, explain if there has been any
merger with existing sites or areas or if any were determined to be
added or removed.
No
vi) Other – brief summary of other kinds of changes, indicating the
Management Plan paragraphs where they are established
(particularly useful if the plan is extensive).
• The introduction has been updated.
• The aims and objectives have been rewritten in accordance with
the current standards for the latest management plans.
• The description of the values to be protected has been updated.
• Management guidelines have been incorporated in accordance
with standards adopted in the Antarctic treaty.
• The Description of the area has been updated.
• The bibliography that makes up the support documentation has
been updated.
• The following text has been added pursuant to section iii) of
Article 7, Access to, and movement within or over the Area: “The
use of RPAs will not be allowed within the limits of the ASPA,
unless previously analysed case by case during the environmental
impact assessment process. They may only be used when stated in
the entry permit and under the conditions established therein.
During the analysis and authorisation process, all Antarctic Treaty
directives in force will be taken into account.”
• A series of editorial changes have been made throughout the
process, largely in the interests of consistency with the provisions of
other ASPA Management Plans and with the “Revised Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas”.
If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain a marine area?
No
If so, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? Yes/No
N/A
If so, has the prior approval of the CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, the reference to the significant paragraph of the CCAMLR
Final report should be provided.
If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (ie, which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2.
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
Examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features.
Have you identified the main environmental domain represented by
the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the Environmental Domains Analysis for
the Antarctic Continent appended to Resolution 3 [2008])?
If the answer is yes, the main environmental domain must be
indicated here).
ASPA 132 represents the Environmental Domain of the “Antarctic
Peninsula offshore islands”.
Has the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR)
represented by the ASPA/ASMA been identified? (see document
“Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions” annexed to
Resolution 6 [2012])
If the answer is yes, the main Antarctic Biogeographic Conservation
Region should be indicated here).
According to Terauds et al. (2012), the area represents the
“Northwest Antarctic Peninsula” region of the “Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Regions”.
If applicable, have Important Bird Areas (IBA) in Antarctica
(Resolution 5 [2015]) represented by ASPA/ASMA been identified?
(see the summary appended to the Information Paper IP27 from
ATCM XXXVIII, Summary of Important Bird Areas in Antarctica
2015) and the full report in: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)?
If the answer is yes, indicate the main Important Bird Area here.
According to “Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015” (Harris et
al., 2015), Potter Peninsula is area 047.
The above form can be used as a template or check-list for the
delivery note to ensure delivery of all requested information.
