Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.165
Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea
ASPA No. 165 Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 1 (2006)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 8 (2011), Measure 7 (2017)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2017)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
No
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located
(especially helpful if the plan is long).
An introduction has been added.
All paragraphs have been renumbered according to the Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans and editorial amendments have
been made throughout the document.
Paragraph 6 has been updated to take into account the results of
recent investigations in the area. This includes an updated
population estimates and reproductive success data for Adélie
penguins (years 2017 to 2022); a new description of the variability
of soils composition and of microfauna across soil environments.
Paragraph 8 has been revised to include addition of recent
publications.
Former Appendix 2 (list of permits issued) has
been removed as not requested by the above mentioned Guide
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please provide the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected
by human activities; (e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or
planned scientific research
9. If relevant, have you identified the main Environmental Domain
represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to the ‘Environmental
Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to
Resolution 3 (2008).)
If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Yes, Environmental Domain D East Antarctic coastal geologic
10. If relevant, have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA? (Refer to
the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to
Resolution 6 (2012).)
If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region
should be noted here.
Yes Region 8 – North Victoria Land
11. If relevant, have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird
Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA?
(Refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’
appended to ATCM XXXVIII - IP 27 and the full report available at:
http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)
If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here.
Yes/ IBA n. 175 (Harris, et al., 2015. Important Bird Areas in
Antarctica 2015 Summary. BirdLife International and
Environmental Research & Assessment Ltd., Cambridge).
Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 165
Edmonson Point, Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Italy has
undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 165 Edmonson Point,
Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea. The following sections briefly
describe the Area, and the minor amendments to the previous
management plan.
Background
Edmonson Point is located in Wood Bay, Victoria Land, Ross Sea.
The total Area of the ASPA is 5.49 km2 and comprises the ice-free
area of Edmonson Point, the smaller but similar ice-free area at
Colline Ippolito (designated as a Restricted Zone), and the adjacent
marine environment extending 200 m offshore and including Baia
Siena (Siena Bay).
The primary reasons for the designation of this Area as an ASPA are
the outstanding ecological and scientific values which require
protection from possible interference that might arise from
unregulated access. An exceptional diversity of freshwater habitats
is present, with numerous streams, lakes, ponds and seepage areas.
The site is considered one of the best in Antarctica for studies of
algal ecology. The Area hosts a colony of Adélie penguins
(Pygoscelis adeliae) and is an important breeding site of South Polar
Skua (Stercorarius maccormicki).
Review of Management Plan
The review of the management plan involved a literature review,
and consultation with scientists permitted to enter the Area during
the past five years. Italy wishes to thank Korea, New Zealand and
the USA for their valuable contribution and comments. There are no
major changes to the Management Plan. Minor amendments are
summarised as follows:
An introduction has been added.
All paragraphs have been renumbered according to the Guide to the
Preparation of Management Plans and editorial amendments have
been made throughout the document.
Paragraph 6 has been updated to take into account the results of
recent investigations in the area. This includes an updated
population estimates and reproductive success data for Adélie
penguins (years 2017 to 2022); a new description of the variability
of soils composition and of microfauna across soil environments.
Paragraph 8 has been revised to include recent publications.
Former Appendix 2 (list of permits issued) has been removed as not
requested by the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to
Resolution 2 (2011).
The revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 165 is provided at
Attachment A.
Recommendation
Italy recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised
Management Plan for ASPA No. 165 Edmonson Point, Wood Bay,
Victoria Land, Ross Sea (Attachment A).
