Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 18
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 18
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2002), Measure 9 (2008), Measure 7 (2013).
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2013).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-7 (1991), Measure 3 (2001), A 0 (2018)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound.
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Map 1 has been replaced by a new version prepared in color to
improve the clarity of site features and ASPA boundaries.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
New information on Weddell seal pup production has been added to
Section 6(i), and observations on exchange of individual seals
between the site and Erebus Bay, McMurdo Sound. A new
publication on seal genetic diversity has been cited.
A new provision on use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems has
been added (Section 7(ii) Access).
Updates are made to reference the latest ATCM Resolutions on Non-
native species and the Environmental Code of Conduct in Section
7(vi).
The first bullet Section 7(viii) has been expanded to be more
specific about procedures for sampling.
Minor editorial changes have been implemented in the plan, and
the reference list has been updated.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Article 3.2 (c) an area with important or unusual assemblages of
species; and (e) an area of particular scientific interest.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Environment P – Ross and Ronne-Filchner Ice Shelves.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
N/A. The Area lies outside of the areas covered by the ACBR
classification.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
No.
ASPA No. 137 – Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
The ATCM approved in 2018 continuance of the ASPA No.137
Northwest White Island management plan which was adopted in
2013, and the five-year period until the next review was then reset
to fall due in 2023.
Accordingly, the United States has updated the management plan in
light of recent research and scientific observations at the site, and
has taken into account agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty
Parties since the last plan was adopted.
Permits issued for visits to the Area since the previous revision of
the management plan were reviewed, with few visits made, and no
significant changes to the description of the Area or policies in the
management plan were required.
Map 1 has been replaced by a new version prepared in color to
improve the clarity of site features and ASPA boundaries.
The exceptional values of the Area remain valid, and the
management plan continues to protect those values.
Recommendation
The revised management plan and map are attached for
consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for
recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
