The Recommendations of SCAR on Climate Action in the Antarctic:
The Finnish Perspective
The recommendations of SCAR on climate action in the Antarctic:
The Finnish perspective
Working Paper submitted by Finland
Summary
This working paper provides Finland’s perspectives on the
recommendations of The Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR), identified in the report Antarctic Climate Change
and Environment (ACCE). The working paper encourages:
constant cooperation and exchange of information between the
UNFCCC and the ATCM as well as between IPCC and SCAR;
enhanced scientific cooperation between both polar regions in
terms of making scientific advances and advising policymakers;
assessment of the carbon footprints of scientific operations in the
Antarctic and the designing of low-emission research programmes;
an operative and holistic approach to be taken. International
collaboration and coordination are important in reducing the
emissions and other environmental impacts of research
programmes;
Antarctic Treaty Parties to increase their climate action by
revisiting their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under
the Paris Agreement.
Background
The Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) is changing rapidly and is projected to
contribute substantially to global mean sea level rise. The
consequences of sea level rise and melting ice (sea, land, and
shelves) around Antarctica’s coastline will present significant risks
to society and nature. The Southern Ocean itself is also undergoing
changes and these changes will continue, especially under higher
emissions scenarios. Major impacts on the cryosphere, marine
ecosystems, and their constituent species, and consequently on the
ecosystem services they deliver, including on systems and services
outside the Antarctic region, are expected. Significant changes are
anticipated in areas particularly vulnerable to ice sheet instability
and collapse once thresholds are reached.
Changes to the Southern Ocean and its ecosystems will present
growing management difficulties, logistics challenges, and research
requirements that will require special attention within the Antarctic
Treaty System. The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
(SCAR) offered in its report Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment (ACCE) recommendations for addressing these
challenges. The recommendations focus on three themes: outreach
and communication, research needs and coordination, and actions
and policy proposals.
Recommendations
1. Outreach and communication
According to the IPCC, NDCs announced prior to COP26 lead to a
median global warming of 2.8°C by 2100. We are not collectively
on track to reach the Paris Agreement’s long-term temperature goal
“holding the increase in the global average temperature to well
below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit
the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels”. For
polar regions, including Antarctica, exceeding the 1.5-level will lead
to a loss in several cryospheric elements, including the Antarctic ice
sheet, and subsequent sea-
level rise. The elevated sea levels have negative consequences for
societies and ecosystems in all coastal regions. Sea levels will
remain elevated for thousands of years.
Science shows that the Antarctic climate change has major global
consequences and therefore only global collective climate action
can mitigate the impacts. Therefore, the UNFCCC is a key forum to
engage with. Both the ATCM and the UNFCCC need to base their
decisions on the most recent scientific information. Such
information is compiled and conveyed by the IPCC and, specifically
in the Antarctic context, by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR). We encourage constant cooperation and exchange
of information between the UNFCCC and the ATCM, for example by
keeping up to date on the most recent scientific findings on the
consequences of climate change to the Antarctic and informing each
other on relevant activities and processes in this context. We also
encourage cooperation between the scientific communities (SCAR
and IPCC) to ensure the flow of the most recent information, for
example via the engagement of experts for both processes,
coordinated timelines, etc.
2. Research needs and coordination
As an Arctic country, Finland emphasizes the importance of
research in both polar regions, especially with regard to climate
change. It is important to use all existing scientific knowledge as
efficiently as possible to look for synergies. SCAR and its Arctic
sister IASC (International Arctic Science Committee) have
strengthened cooperation in terms of making scientific advances
and advising policymakers. Finland welcomes this development and
supports cooperation in projects of common interest such as the
International Polar Year.
The Finnish research activities in the Antarctic are internationally
highly interactive. Finnish scientists have been involved in several
international projects around the continent. The joint Antarctic
scientific programme in the Argentinean station Marambio serves as
an example of scientific success stories generated by cooperative
and coordinated research. The programme started in 1988 with its
weekly ozone soundings providing one of the first observations of
ozone loss above the Antarctic. Since then, collaboration has
expanded to topics of atmospheric composition and climate change
and resulted in new scientific insight. Antarctic research requires
well-coordinated international efforts in in-situ observations, in
analyses of existing and new data, and in experiments applying a
range of models (process models, operational weather and sea ice
models, and coupled climate models).
The Finnish researchers have identified specific future science
questions regarding Antarctic research and global climate change.
They include, inter alia:
Questions related to the ice sheet and the sea-level rise: How will
the mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet and ice shelves evolve
under changes in precipitation, surface and basal melt, as well as
iceberg calving? How stable are the ice shelves and the West
Antarctic ice sheet, and what are the consequences of major
collapses of ice shelves? What is the sensitivity of the Antarctic ice
sheet and its contribution to past and future sea level and climate
change? Is there a way to mitigate sea level rise from West
Antarctica? Can geoengineering prevent rapid ice sheet collapse?
Questions related to meteorology, oceanography, and sea ice: How
do small-scale processes (which need to be parameterized in climate
models) related to clouds, radiative transfer, snow, and sea ice
thermodynamics, as well as turbulent mixing and waves in the
atmosphere and ocean, interact with each other and with large-
scale dynamics of the atmosphere and ocean? How are the Antarctic
atmosphere and the Southern Ocean affected by forcing from mid-
and lower latitudes, and how will changes in the Antarctic affect
weather and climate in southern mid-latitudes?
Questions related to climate forcing parameters, atmospheric
composition, and atmosphere-cryosphere-ocean interactions: How
strong sink of atmospheric carbon dioxide is the Southern Ocean
and how is the strength of the sink connected to the biological
activity in the sea? Is the Southern Ocean a source or a sink for
aerosol
particles? What is the spatial distribution of different atmospheric
compounds in Antarctica and what are their major sources?
Biodiversity-related questions: What are the consequences of
climate change to Antarctic habitat and biodiversity?
Questions related to human activities in the Antarctic: What is the
effect of climate change on the operations of ships in the Antarctic
waters?
In the Finnish Antarctic expeditions, climate change is at the
forefront not only of research but also of the planning of operations
and logistics and implementation of actions. Emissions and other
environmental impacts from moving, living, eating, using water,
and waste management are assessed. The results contribute to the
planning of environmentally more friendly and safe activities.
Increasingly using solar and wind energy at the research station
Aboa has also been explored.
Finland recommends an operative and holistic approach to be taken
in operations. International collaboration and coordination can
reduce the environmental impact of operations, as demonstrated by
the environmental savings emanating from Finnish automated year-
round measuring. Expeditions stay at the research station only
during Antarctic summers, and for the rest of the year,
measurements are taken with automated measuring devices,
maintained by collaborators in the field. For instance, Finnish
scientists installed a cosmic ray detector in a Physics shelter at the
Italian-French Concordia Station in 2015. Instruments were
maintained by Italian collaborators, and the data were analysed in
Finland.
3. Actions and policy proposals
The changes happening in the Antarctic have significant global
impacts and therefore the climate actions in the Antarctic context
need to essentially be taken at a global level. The multiple changes,
driven by climate change, are a consequence of global GHG
emissions. Therefore, the mitigation of global GHG emissions
determines the success or failure to reach the long-term
temperature goals of the Paris Agreement, and further what the
future of the Antarctic looks like. Based on this evidence, it is clear
that all countries collectively need to increase ambition in
mitigation. Only deep, rapid, and sustained GHG emissions
reductions would limit further sea level rise acceleration and
projected long-term sea level rise commitment. The GHG emission
reductions need to take place immediately, or at the latest in 2025.
We call on all Parties to revisit their NDCs and increase the
ambition of their climate action to reach alignment with the Paris
Agreement.
Cooperation in National Antarctic Programs can contribute to a
smaller carbon footprint and enhanced capacities for research on
climate change. Parties are also encouraged to develop plans for
low-emission research programmes.
