Proposal for the improvement of observations of sea ice and
icebergs in polar and subpolar waters for the development of
nautical safety products by Ice Services
Proposal for the improvement of observations of sea ice and
icebergs in polar and subpolar waters for the development of
nautical safety products by Ice Services
Summary
It is possible for ships navigating in Antarctic Treaty waters to share
the information they collect through ice observations under
standard conditions, and this information can be used as field
information for the interpretation and validation of satellite images.
These images are used, among other purposes, to generate sea ice
charts that provide updated and georeferenced information on the
glaciological situation to the Ice Services of the countries that offer
this service for the Antarctic Treaty area.
Introduction
The observation, recording and reporting in operational times of the
characteristics of sea ice and icebergs by ships in waters with the
presence of ice are of fundamental importance for the preparation
of sea ice charts, iceberg risk charts and the validation of forecasts
and sea ice concentration and iceberg drift models. These products
are routinely generated on a daily, weekly and/or monthly basis by
the Ice Services with the sole purpose of contributing to nautical
safety, preventing environmental damage due to collisions or ice
pressure and generating better tools for the planning of shipping
routes, scientific and/or tourist activities. In addition, the
observations of the floating ice contribute to validate the
information obtained from satellites and allow subsequent
climatological studies and gaining insights in the current context of
climate change.
These observations can be made from a ship, from the coast, from
an aircraft or from the interpretation of data from remote sensors
on satellites.
Ice observations have multiple functionalities. An ice spotter aboard
a polar-capable ship or icebreaker can provide direct advice to the
commander, as can a spotter located at an Antarctic base when a
ship is sailing nearby. In turn, the observations are used as field
information for the interpretation and validation of satellite images,
which are used, among other purposes, to generate ice charts that
provide updated and georeferenced data on the glaciological
situation (Scardilli et al., 2022).
Glaciological observations are relevant for advice on decision-
making in navigation. Any ice records made contribute to nourish
the statistics of each area that are later made available to interested
users.
Therefore, having information from observations from ships or
bases is essential for the tasks of the Ice Services in their permanent
challenge of generating products and services to help nautical safety
in the least populated region of the world and, therefore, with a
paucity of significant information.
As far as possible, these observations should be made as frequently
as possible, routinely and periodically, following international
terminology and standards (according to the publications of the
World Meteorological Organization WMO 1215, 259 and 574), and
shared with the Ice
Services within operating times so that they can be useful in
preparing ice charts and other products.
Contributing actions
Argentina, through its Naval Hydrography Service (NHS), is
responsible for nautical safety in NAVAREA VI, a region that
includes the Antarctic Peninsula, which is the most visited part of
Antarctica by research, logistics and tourism vessels. For this
reason, one of the major actions in terms of the provision of aids to
navigation is the preparation of ice charts and the generation of
models and forecasts of sea ice concentration and iceberg drift.
Other countries other than Argentina also generate ice charts for
aids to navigation in the Antarctic region, so sharing ice
observations would be beneficial to many Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty.
To ensure the observation, recording and reporting of the
characteristics of sea ice and icebergs, Argentina, through the NHS,
makes available to the Parties a Sea Ice and Iceberg Observer’s
Manual (free download available in Spanish at: http://
www.hidro.gov.ar/Download/Download.asp), software developed
for the simple recording and reporting of observations called
SIGLAC-C (free download available in Spanish and English at:
http://www.hidro.gov.ar/Download/Download.asp) and training
for the role of ice observer through the UNESCO Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission’s (IOC) Ocean Teacher Global Academy
(OTGA) virtual platform.
Regarding training, it is important to highlight that at the moment
two international courses have been taught in Spanish through the
OTGA and for this academic year of 2023 one course will be taught
in Spanish and one in English.
Argentina considers that access to material, software and training
for the personnel of the ships navigating in the Antarctic Treaty
area will contribute effectively to an increase in the observations of
sea ice and icebergs and in their subsequent communication to the
Ice Services, and therefore in the production of ice charts and
forecasts that are used by seafarers in icy waters in Antarctica.
These observations may also be useful for scientific organisations in
the generation of knowledge regarding the climatic variability of
floating ice.
Argentina recommends to the Parties that:
Any Parties that operate ships in the Antarctic Treaty area,
routinely observe, record and report within operational times to the
Ice Services that make charts and forecasts the characteristics of sea
ice and icebergs when they are in polar waters, in order to improve
the navigation safety.
They invite their non-governmental ship and sailboat operators to
take up this practice.
They promote, to this effect, the training of ship personnel to carry
out observations of sea ice and icebergs so that these are performed
properly and in accordance with international standards through
the OTGA virtual platform.
References
Manual de Observador de Hielo Marino y Témpanos – H419 [Sea
Ice and Iceberg Observer’s Manual] (2020). 1st Edition. Naval
Hydrography Service.http://www.hidro.gov.ar/Download/
Download.asp
OceanTeacher Global Academy (OTGA) https://
classroom.oceanteacher.org/ Curso de Observador de Hielo Marino
y Témpanos [Sea Ice and Iceberg Observer Course] – 2022 Edition:
https://oceanexpert.org/event/3542
Scardilli, A., Salvó, C. and Gomez Saez, L. (2022) Southern Ocean
ice charts at the Argentine Naval Hydrographic Service and their
impact on safety of navigation. Front. Mar. Sci. 9:971894. Doi:
10.3389/fmars.2022.971894
Sistema de Información Glaciológica C (SIGLAC-C). Naval
Hydrography Service.http://www.hidro.gov.ar/Download/
Download.asp
World Meteorological Organization (2014a) Chart Colour Code
Standard (WMO 1215). https://library.wmo.int/index.php?
lvl=notice_display&id=11296#.YppAa3bMI2w.
World Meteorological Organization (2014b) Sea Ice Nomenclature
(WMO 259, Volume I – Terminology and Codes, Volume II –
Illustrated Glossary and Volume III – International System of Sea-Ice
Symbols).
https://library.wmo.int/index.php?
lvl=notice_display&id=6772#.YpoywXbMI2w.
World Meteorological Organization (2021) Sea-ice Information and
Services (WMO 574). https://library.wmo.int/index.php?
lvl=notice_display&id=7542#.YpodqHbMI2w.
