SCAR updates on Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
SCAR updates on Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
In convening a special joint session on climate change, the ATCM
and the CEP have a major opportunity to agree on effective and
coordinated actions to limit the impacts of climate change in
Antarctica, the Southern Ocean, and the rest of the planet. This
issue requires immediate implementation of collaborative
international responses to address critical research needs. The 18
recommendations from the 2022 ACCE Decadal Synopsis are
summarized here within the overarching themes of: 1) research
needs and coordination, 2) actions and policy proposals, and 3)
outreach and communication. SCAR will continue to provide
regular scientific updates to the ATCM and the CEP on Antarctic
climate change and the environment, focused on the realised
impacts of change in Antarctica, and information to support the
Parties in taking action on mitigation and adaptation. We encourage
the Parties to continue their efforts to implement all of the 2022
ACCE recommendations with urgency.
Summary of recommendations from the 2022 ACCE Decadal
Synopsis report
The 2022 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE)
Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action Chown, S.L.,
Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R., Brooks, C.M., Convey, P., Henley, B.J.,
Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips, L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II & Grant, S.M.
(Eds). 2022. Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A
Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action. SCAR,
Cambridge, U.K .https://scar.org/library/scar-publications/
occasional-publications/5758-acce-decadal-synopsis/file was
delivered by SCAR to ATCM XLIV in response to a request from the
Parties. The ACCE Decadal Synopsis was compiled based largely on
the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC)’s Sixth Assessment Reports (IPCC AR6, 2021 and 2022) and
IPCC Special Report on Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing
Climate (SROCC, 2019), the Intergovernmental Science-Policy
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) Global
Assessment Report (2019), and the International Cryosphere
Climate Initiative’s integrated report on the State of the Cryosphere
(2021). ATCM XLIV WP30 Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment: A Decadal Synopsis. Findings and Policy
Recommendations summarized the key findings of the report and
provided a series of policy recommendations derived from these
findings. ATCM XLIV WP31 Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment: A Decadal Synopsis. Research Imperatives provided
additional recommendations on the most significant and urgent
research required for the region.
The Parties agreed to convene a joint session of the CEP and the
ATCM to consider the implementation of the ACCE
recommendations at ATCM XLV. Following the proposed discussion
themes for the joint session, key messages from these
recommendations References in square brackets correspond to
numbered policy recommendations [PR] and research
recommendations [RR] in the 2022 ACCE Report. are summarized
here:
Research needs and coordination
There is a critical need for improved understanding about the
impacts of climate change on Antarctica and on the Earth System
[RR1]. In particular, multinational, large-scale, well-resourced and
coordinated research efforts must be focused on reducing
uncertainty about the current and future mass change of the
Antarctic Ice Sheet, including through the influence of rapidly
changing atmospheric circulation and ocean currents [RR2, RR3],
in response to anthropogenic warming. This is a globally urgent
research priority that will require further support from National
Antarctic Programmes, including novel observations to improve
understanding of the key physical processes and improve
projections [PR2]. The rate and magnitude of the contribution of
the Antarctic Ice Sheet to future sea level rise must be determined
with reduced uncertainty [RR4], and there must be effective
communication of the global implications of sea level rise – what
this means for mitigation pathways, as well as for adaptation to
unavoidable impacts [PR3].
Within Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, it is important to
identify and understand irreversible biological and physical
thresholds, as well as extreme events [PR4; PR5]. The loss of
Antarctic sea ice may be a key early-warning sign from Antarctica,
and a trigger for feedbacks such as heat absorption accelerating
surface warming, destabilization of ice shelves leading to the loss of
Antarctica’s ice sheets, weakening of global ocean circulation and
associated reduction of ocean carbon storage, heat distribution,
nutrient supply and productivity. Further understanding of these
processes and their effects in both marine and terrestrial systems
[RR5; RR6; RR7; RR8; RR9] is a priority in addressing their
implications for ecosystems, biodiversity and ecosystem services
[PR6; PR8].
Actions and policy proposals
Mitigation and adaptation actions to reduce impacts on Antarctic
marine and terrestrial environments and ecosystems will require
continued support for the research needed to deliver evidence-
informed options, including through coordinated, international and
transdisciplinary research efforts and long-term monitoring
programmes [PR6]. Sea level rise, loss of sea ice, fast ice and ice
shelves, the expansion of ice-free areas, and changes to temperature
and precipitation including extreme weather events, will present
new challenges for the management of areas of high human activity
in Antarctica, particularly where infrastructure and other NAP
assets are deployed [PR9]. Increased effort is needed to document
terrestrial and marine biodiversity and to understand their
vulnerability to the impacts of change and potential interactions
with non-native species, further informed by long-term monitoring
[RR7; RR9; PR8]. Strengthened biosecurity protocols and
surveillance processes are also needed in anticipation of the
growing ease of establishment of non-native species [PR7].
Outreach and communication
It is imperative that Antarctic Treaty Parties and observers to the
Treaty should communicate to governments and to civil society the
urgency of meeting and exceeding targets for the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions [PR1]. The need for resources to address
research priorities must also be communicated with the same
urgency [PR1], particularly where there is a critical need to
understand global impacts [RR1; RR2; RR3; RR4; RR5; RR6] as well
as impacts on Antarctic marine and terrestrial ecosystems and
species [RR7; RR8; RR9].
Climate change and the environment – update on SCAR’s main
research activities
Research published in the short time that has passed since the
publication of the ACCE Decadal Synopsis, is largely in line with the
messages contained within it, noting record high global
ocean heat in 2022 Cheng, L., Abraham, J., Trenberth, K.E. et al.
2023. Another Year of Record Heat for the Oceans. Adv. Atmos. Sci.
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00376-023-2385-2 and record
low Antarctic sea ice extent in 2023 Liu, J., Zhu, Z., Chen, D. 2023.
Lowest Antarctic Sea Ice Record Broken for the Second Year in a
Row. Ocean-Land-Atmos. Res. 2:Article 0007. https://
doi.org/10.34133/olar.0007. SCAR will continue to update the CEP
on emerging research.
SCAR continues to prioritize the facilitation of international science
coordination and the provision of evidence-based advice to the
Antarctic Treaty System, with a central focus on global climate
change and its impact on the Earth System. This commitment is
reflected in SCAR’s recent Strategic Plan 2023-2028 which
highlights the urgency to respond to the climate crisis, primarily
through its flagship Scientific Research Programmes (SRPs).
AntClimNow (Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic
Climate System), Ant-ICON (Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic
and Southern Ocean Conservation) and INSTANT (INStabilities and
Thresholds in ANTarctica) are addressing major questions on the
impact of climate change on Antarctica’s cryosphere and ecosystem
and the role of Antarctica in global climate change. Many other
SCAR subsidiary and affiliated science groups are also coordinating
research on physical climate processes, understanding and
predicting the impacts of change on biodiversity and ecosystems,
and on human engagement with the Antarctic in the context of
change (see ATCM XLIV IP81 Mapping SCAR affiliated research to
climate change related science needs identified by the CEP).
SCAR has also provided information to this meeting on current
research and new initiatives that will directly contribute to
implementing the ACCE recommendations (Annex 1).
Future provision of SCAR advice on climate change
SCAR reiterates its commitment to provide regular advice to the
CEP and the ATCM on the best available science representing
current understanding of, and projections for, climate change and
its impacts in Antarctica. As the impacts of climate change are
increasingly felt in Antarctica, we anticipate that in addition to
advice on future projections, SCAR’s advice will focus on the
realised impacts of climate change in Antarctica, the current status
of Antarctic environments and ecosystems, and information to
support the Parties in taking action on mitigation and adaptation. S
CAR will work with partners, including the World Climate Research
Programme (WCRP), to provide regular information on:
Key indicators and trends of Antarctic and Southern Ocean climate
and environment change and its impacts, extracted from global
synthesis reports;
Assessment and syntheses of the status of emerging science relevant
to issues outlined in the ACCE recommendations, including progress
against their implementation;
Potential impacts on activities and interests relevant to the Treaty
Parties.
We would welcome further feedback on the types of information
that CEP Members and Antarctic Treaty Parties would find most
useful to support understanding and to address science and
information needs for the development of actions and policy
proposals.
In addition to the provision of scientific information, it will also be
important to consider how to provide regular assessments of
progress against the recommendations and priority actions
identified by the 2022 ACCE Decadal Synopsis and by the 2023
joint CEP/ATCM session on climate change.
Recommendations
SCAR encourages CEP Members and Antarctic Treaty Parties to:
continue their efforts to implement the 2022 ACCE Decadal
Synopsis recommendations with urgency, particularly in
communicating internationally the critical importance of meeting
and exceeding targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions, and the need for resources to address research priorities
to understand global impacts, as well as impacts on Antarctica;
continue to engage with the research community to deepen
understanding of the key messages emerging from research as well
as to determine what science and what types of information will
best support the development of robust policies and actions;
consider how to provide regular assessments of progress against the
recommendations and priority actions identified by the 2022 ACCE
Decadal Synopsis and the 2023 joint CEP/ATCM session on climate
change.
Annex 1: SCAR papers provided to ATCM XLV / CEP XXV with
contributions to specific ACCE Decadal Synopsis recommendations.
SCAR papers to ATCM XLV / CEP XXV
Contribution to specific ACCE Decadal Synopsis recommendations
Contribution of information to inform State of the Antarctic
Environment Reporting (SAER): a potential new SCAR initiative
(ATCM XLV WP018) – proposed framework for delivery of the best
available science to inform policymakers on the state of the
Antarctic environment, with a focus on drivers of change in
Antarctica.
RR1 – integrated, international and targeted long-term monitoring
programmes and observatories are among the most important
efforts for reducing uncertainty and understanding the impacts of
mitigation and adaptation responses.
PR6 – research required to deliver evidence-informed options for
mitigation and adaptation actions;
PR7 – surveillance on the arrival and establishment of non-native
species;
PR8 – prioritize documenting terrestrial and marine biodiversity,
long-term monitoring of change, and documenting the benefits of
environmental management.
The Antarctic Nearshore and Terrestrial Observing System (ANTOS)
(ATCM XLV WP049) – update on the delivery of a continent-wide
environmental monitoring system.
PR6 – well-supported long-term monitoring of the physical and
living environment;
PR8 – long-term monitoring of change;
RR1 – integrated, international and targeted long-term monitoring
programmes and observatories are among the most important
efforts for reducing uncertainty and understanding the impacts of
mitigation and adaptation responses.
Understanding future sea-level change around Antarctica (ATCM
XLV IP095) – risks that future sea-level rise represents for
operations, coastal infrastructure and assets, heritage sites, specially
protected and managed areas, and bioregions; and future research
and actions to mitigate the risks through improved anticipation and
effective adaptation.
RR4 – determine contribution of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to future
sea-level rise, reduce uncertainties in projections of the rate and
magnitude of that contribution, and effectively communicate the
risks and impacts to stakeholders and users;
PR3 – communicate the need for, and outcomes of, research on sea
level in the Antarctic;
PR9 – address new challenges for management of areas of high
human activity, including where infrastructure and other NAP
assets are deployed.
Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (MEASO) -
Key Findings and Recommendations (ATCM XLV IP098) –
assessment of trends in Southern Ocean ecosystems, how species
and ecosystems are currently being affected by climate change, how
they are projected to be affected in the future, and priorities for
research and management.
RR7 – establish which species, ecosystems and food webs are most
vulnerable in the Southern Ocean, how they are likely to change
and over what period;
RR8 – determine how increases in harvesting in the context of
climate change impacts will affect harvested, associated and
dependent species, and Southern Ocean biogeochemical cycles;
PR4 – research and expanded long-term monitoring to understand
and address changes to the Southern Ocean and its ecosystems;
PR8 – prioritize documenting terrestrial and marine biodiversity,
and monitoring of change.
Update on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development (ATCM XLV
IP104)
PR1 – additional extensive research to resolve uncertainties about
cryosphere change, its rate and its implications;
RR1 – integrated, international and targeted long-term monitoring
programmes and observatories;
RR3 – understand how changes in atmospheric circulation drive
changes in ocean currents around Antarctica;
PR4 – research and expanded long-term monitoring to understand
and address changes to the Southern Ocean and its ecosystems;
PR6 – research required to deliver evidence-informed options for
mitigation and adaptation actions.
