Antarctic Near-shore and Terrestrial Observing System (ANTOS)
Antarctic Near-shore and Terrestrial Observing System (ANTOS)
Working Paper submitted by SCAR, New Zealand, Australia, Italy,
Korea (ROK), and the United States
Summary
The aim of SCAR’s Antarctic Near-shore and Terrestrial Observing
System (ANTOS) is to establish an integrated and coordinated trans-
continental and trans-regional environmental surveillance system to
identify and track environmental variability and change at
biologically relevant scales. This valuable information will be used
to provide a more complete understanding of changes occurring in
the Antarctic region, by informing biological, physical, and earth
science studies and supporting decision making. SCAR, New
Zealand, Australia, Italy, the Republic of Korea, and the United
States recommend that the CEP:
acknowledges and welcomes the concept and goals of ANTOS;
encourages national programmes to engage in ANTOS, and to
support the establishment of ANTOS sites within their areas of
operation and make data available from such sites as soon as
possible.
Background
The Antarctic Near-Shore and Terrestrial Observing System
(ANTOS) is a biologically-focussed initiative to coordinate a cross-
continent and cross-national programme-scale assessment of
environmental variability and change. It was established by SCAR
in response to the widely identified need for a long-term
commitment to acquiring fundamental information to underpin
identification of trends and changes in Antarctic ecosystems
Kennicutt, II M.C., Chown, S.L., Cassano, J.J., Liggett, D., Massom,
R., Peck, L.S., et al. (2014a) Six priorities for Antarctic science.
Nature, 512: 23-5., Kennicutt, II M.C., Chown, S.L., Cassano, J.J.,
Liggett, D., Peck, L.S., Massom, R., et al. (2014b) A roadmap for
Antarctic and Southern Ocean science for the next two decades and
beyond.Antarctic Science. Doi:10.1017/ S0954102014000674., and
was previously highlighted in ATCM XXVIII IP19 SCAR Annual
Report 2014/15.
The CEP has identified a need for long-term monitoring of change
in terrestrial and marine environments to inform its work on
priority issues. This is reflected in the science, knowledge and
information needs identified in the Five-Year Work Plan under the
priority issue ‘Monitoring and state of the environment report’, and
also in the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP),
which includes a call to ‘Support and undertake long term
monitoring of change, including collaborative efforts (e.g. ANTOS)’.
There is a critical need for long-term observations to underpin our
ability to understand how the Antarctic environment and
ecosystems are likely to respond to climate change. To accurately
predict and identify such changes, it is necessary to understand
existing patterns and processes, and the magnitudes and rates of
natural variability in both marine and terrestrial systems, at spatial
and temporal scales relevant to their biota and communities. Such
information requires
long-term commitments to monitoring, and is crucial for informing
effective management approaches.
Following a workshop held in August 2014 at the SCAR Open
Science Conference in Auckland, ANTOS was established as a SCAR
Action Group, with a remit to further develop the ideas behind
ANTOS. The Action Group continued until 2016, at which point it
was transitioned to an Expert Group. Further information on
ANTOS, including recent workshop reports, is available at: https://
www.scar.org/science/antos/home/.
Goals of ANTOS
ANTOS has been designed to be of relevance to all national
programmes. Its goals are to:
Establish an observation network of representative sites in the
terrestrial and near-shore marine environments around Antarctica
and the sub-Antarctic;
Measure parameters, using the same instrumentation technology
across the entire network and over the long-term, that will harness
the sensitivity of biological response to enhance our understanding
of environmental change;
Stimulate the development of new observation technologies, data
capture, and data sharing;
Encourage buy-in and involvement of all national programmes
through a ‘tiered observation network’ from basic and relatively
inexpensive to more complex systems, requiring varying levels of
resourcing, logistic and scientific capabilities (Annex 1);
Provide opportunity for alignment of national and international
programmes and projects, and an observational platform to
underpin other science activities;
Provide information to support policy decision-making, especially
in terms of long-term monitoring of sites with high biodiversity and
living values, including ASPAs and ASMAs.
Current status and next steps
A network of ANTOS instrument systems will be established at sites
in terrestrial (including freshwater and ice/snow where
appropriate) and near-shore marine environments. These ANTOS
sites will be selected based on current long-term monitoring efforts,
and will share basic characteristics of representative biodiversity for
the region concerned, environmental features likely to be
informative in the context of change studies, and practicality of
access and working. The goal is a network of representative sites
across Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic islands linked to other
southern continents. This is likely to be achieved through building
initially on a core set of existing and relatively well-documented
locations, while at the same time identifying additional locations
suitable for construction/installation of new sites.
Establishment of at least one ANTOS site in each Antarctic and Sub-
Antarctic bioregion, including each of the 16 Antarctic
Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) is desired to begin to
meet the goal of comprehensive spatial coverage. Thirteen potential
ANTOS sites have been identified in the Antarctic Treaty Area,
following a consultation process that included two SCAR
community surveys to assess where long-term biological monitoring
is occurring and to nominate other potential sites. These data and
proposed sites, along with other as yet unidentified sites, will be
discussed at an ANTOS workshop scheduled during the SCAR
Biology Symposium in July/August 2023.
Biological baseline data will be collected at ANTOS sites using
ANTOS installations of varying complexity and financial cost (Tier
systems 1-3, as described in Annex 1). At each site, measurements
of biologically relevant attributes of change will be made within six
broad
criteria: physical environment, colonisation, diversity, distribution,
function, and genetics. These attributes encompass desirable
parameters required for detecting, understanding, and interpreting
change in both near-shore and terrestrial systems.
All ANTOS installations should be consistent in design and makeup
(for near-shore marine and terrestrial, respectively).
Instrumentation will measure a suite of agreed parameters at the
specified resolution and temporal scale so that data can be
integrated and usefully compared. Data will be automatically
uploaded to an open-source database, and made available
immediately.
The success of ANTOS will be dependent on the extent of spatial
coverage and national programme participation, and on the long-
term sustainability of the monitoring effort.
Full technical manuals have been developed for each Tier system
(1-3) for both near-shore marine and terrestrial installations. Near-
shore marine and terrestrial biological survey manuals are being
developed and will be launched at the SCAR Biology Conference
(July/August 2023). The ANTOS database has been developed by,
and is now being hosted by the Korea Polar Research Institute
(KOPRI). There are currently four trial Tier 1 terrestrial systems
installed at Cape Adare and the McMurdo Dry Valleys, and the first
Tier 3 terrestrial system is scheduled to be installed at Casey Station
during the 2023/24 season. Trial near-shore marine Tier 1-2
systems are currently being tested at Cape Evans, Granite Harbour
and Terra Nova Bay.
Recommendations 
To ensure that the work of the CEP is supported by the most up-to-
date understanding of change in near-shore and terrestrial
environments and ecosystems, SCAR, New Zealand, Australia, Italy,
the Republic of Korea, and the United States recommend that the
CEP:
acknowledges and welcomes the concept and goals of ANTOS;
encourages national programmes to engage in ANTOS, and to
support the establishment of ANTOS sites within their areas of
operation and make data available from such sites as soon as
possible.
Annex 1: Details of ANTOS terrestrial and near-shore marine tiered
systems
Terrestrial Tiered system
Change
Tier 1
($)
Tier 2
($$)
Tier 3
($$$)
Physical
Wind speed and direction
Air temp (2 for calibration)
RH (air)
Light
PAR
Due point
Soil Moisture and temp
Wind speed and direction
Air temp (2 for calibration)
RH (air)
Light
PAR
Due point
Precipitation/snow fall
Active layer (soil moisture and temp – 10cm intervals)
Possibly – WiFi capability for local slave sensor arrays
Wind speed and direction
Air temp (2 for calibration)
RH (air)
Light
PAR
Due point
Precipitation/snow fall
Active layer (soil moisture and temp – 10cm intervals)
WiFi capability for local slave sensor arrays
Remote Sensing
NA
MODIS-basic snow cover assessment
MODIS, ISAT, Worldview 2, 3
Aeolian
Passive
Active inc. composition and particles size
Active inc. composition and particles size
Ice core analysis
Respiration
NA
CO2 gas Flux (local)
Soil CO2 Gas Flux (regional)
Soil CO2 flux subsurface array
Gas cycling
Biological activity
NA
PAM – photosynthesis
PAM – photosynthesis
Eddy covariance
Biodiversity
Basic local survey:
Composition
Distribution
Basic vegetation mapping
Complete survey (NZTABS style-10 yearly):
Composition
Distribution
Comprehensive vegetation mapping (5 yearly)
Complete survey (NZTABS regional style):
Comprehensive composition survey
Distribution
Comprehensive vegetation mapping
Spectral mapping
Population genetic survey
Soil Geochemistry
Basic Nutrients
EC
Conductivity
Nutrients, TOC, TON
Elements (ICP-MS)
EC
Nutrients, TOC, TON
Elements (ICP-MS)
EC
Near-shore Marine Tiered System
These Tier systems build on each other; i.e., Tier 2 systems collect
all Tier 1 data and more, and Tier 3 systems collect all of the Tier 1
and Tier 2 data and more.
Tier 1 ($)
Tier 2 ($$)
Tier 3 ($$$)
Site Description
General description
Location
Surroundings
Habitats
Sea ice characteristics/ Chlorophyll a /Sea Surface Temperature
(SST)
General description
Sea-ice characteristics
General description
Water column assessment (CTD)
Multibeam hydroacoustic mapping
Contaminants
Environment time series data Temperature
Photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)
Conductivity
Chlorophyll a
pH/ (Alkalinity/DIC/ pCO2) 
Environment time series data
pH/ (Alkalinity/DIC/ pCO2) /Turbidity/ O2
Environment time series data
Current (ADCP)
[Optional] Real-Time Data Transmission
Diversity/ Abundance/ Distribution
General description of Flora and Fauna
Epifauna / Flora
Infauna –Macrofauna,
Infauna - Meiofauna
Plankton
Seafloor substrate
Sediment characteristics (grain size, Chlorophyll a, organic content)
Hard substrate characterisations
Biogenic habitat
Greater Replication
Capture spatial variability as well as permanent transects
Epifauna / Flora
Photogrammetry (diver / ROV)
Sample and ID discrete specimens (genetic and
morphological analyses)
Infauna
Macrofauna, meiofauna
Plankton
Water sample / net (genetic analysis)
Nested Replication
Broad-scale Mapping
ROV/AUV/Vessel-towed imaging systems
Seawater
eDNA (emerging standard)
Colonisation
Settlement by epifauna/flora
Larval dispersal
Epifauna / Flora
Genetic analysis (barcoding / metabarcoding) of settlers/dispersers
Infauna
Sediment trays/cups (genetic analysis of settlers)
Ecosystem function
Epifauna / Flora
Trophic connections (isotope analysis)
Assessment of benthic primary production
Identify sentinel species
Epifauna / Flora
Time-lapse cameras (long-term)
Sentinel species (behaviour, fecundity, gene expression)
Ecophysiology
Experiments
Microbiome
