Contribution of information to inform State of the Antarctic
Environment Reporting (SAER): a potential new SCAR initiative
Contribution of information to inform State of the Antarctic
Environment Reporting (SAER): a potential new SCAR initiative
Working Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
This paper describes the outcomes of a recent SCAR workshop to
consider the potential provision of information to inform elements
of ‘State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting’ (SAER). SCAR
recommends that the Committee:
Notes the recent SCAR workshops held to consider how best the
scientific community might contribute to SAER (see the Workshop
Report at Attachment A to this Working Paper).
Considers the proposal by SCAR to develop a mechanism for the
provision of information relevant to SAER; and
Requests the views of CEP Members regarding (i) the usefulness of
this proposal and (ii) if considered beneficial, what information
would be most useful for supporting the Committee in their
provision of advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic
environment.
Background
Article 12 (1) of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty sets out the functions of the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP), i.e.:
‘…to provide advice and formulate recommendations to the Parties
in connection with the implementation of this Protocol, including
the operation of its Annexes, for consideration at Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meetings, and to perform such other functions as may
be referred to it by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.’
The Protocol goes on to state that amongst other things, the
Committee shall provide advice on ‘the state of the Antarctic
environment’ (Article 12(1)j). Annex II (Article 6) identifies a
requirement to obtain information on the status of native animals in
Antarctica, and the extent to which any population needs
protection.
The CEP has identified monitoring and state of the environment
reporting as a Priority 2 issue in its 5-Year Work Plan. Specified
actions include:
Identify key environmental indicators and tools;
Establish a process for reporting to the ATCM;
SCAR to support information to COMNAP and CEP.
Reporting concerning the state of the Antarctic environment is
likely to further support the work of the Committee (see also ATCM
XXII IP46 ATCM XXII IP46 Ross Sea Region State of Environment
Report). Such information could potentially be utilised to:
inform the development of the Antarctic Protected Area System,
increase understanding concerning environmental monitoring
needs;
identify sites where management could be used to improve
environmental state, such as by reducing pollution; and
highlight gaps in scientific knowledge.
Earlier CEP discussions on SAER
SCAR has been engaged in discussions concerning SAER since
before the Protocol entered into force (ATCM XX Final Report, para.
164; ATCM XXI WP19 ATCM XXI WP19 State of the Antarctic
Environment Report). However, recent CEP discussions of SAER
have been limited, with the last paper submitted to the CEP on this
topic dating from 2008.
Earlier considerations of which information could be usefully
synthesised for SAER are provided in several CEP documents (see
ATCM XXI WP19; ATCM XXII IP46; and ATCM XXV IP54 ATCM
XXV IP54 Antarctic State of the Environment Reporting) along with
information on the development of state of the environment reports
for the Arctic (ATCM XXII IP40 ATCM XXII IP40 Development of
"State of the Environment" Reports in the North - Experiences with
the EEA and AMAP processes), the Ross Sea Region (ATCM XXIII
IP1 ATCM XXIII IP1 Ross Sea Region State of the Environment
Report: An Update on Progress; ATCM XXV IP7 ATCM XXV IP7 Ross
Sea Region 2001: A State of the Environment Report for the Ross
Sea Region of Antarctica; ATCM XXV WP12 ATCM XXV WP12 Ross
Sea Region 2001: A State of the Environment Report for the Ross
Sea Region of Antarctica); and the European Arctic, India, New
Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom (ATCM XXVI WP21
ATCM XXVI WP21 Report of the Intercessional Discussion Group on
State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting).
Earlier Intersessional Contact Groups (ICGs) on SAER were
established to consider how uncertainties about the focus of a State
of the Antarctic Environment Report and the methodology of
production might be resolved (see ATCM XXII WP11 ATCM XXII
WP11 Report on the Work of the Intersessional Contact Group on a
State of the Antarctic Environment Report) and further clarify the
report framework, resource implications and the role of SCAR and
other experts (see ATCM XXIII WP5 ATCM XXIII WP5 Report on the
Work of the Intersessional Contact Group on SAER). The ICGs
largely agreed that the audience should be environmental
managers, and decision- and policy-makers, including governments
and the CEP (ATCM XXIII WP5). A possible focal area for SAER was
considered to be the area south of the Antarctic Convergence
(ATCM XXI WP19). This is an environmental boundary that
includes all of the Antarctic Treaty area, and most of the areas
subject to the CAMLR Convention. The contact groups suggested
that SAER could be based on existing research results and the
synthesis of existing knowledge (ATCM XXI WP19).
In ATCM XXVI WP21, the intersessional discussion group
recognised that indicators of change could be considered under two
categories:
Pressure indicators: (i.e., measurements of activity levels or outputs
which may affect environmental condition) relate to many of the
requirements under the Protocol (e.g., waste management), and
may have immediate management implications for Treaty Parties.
Condition indicators: (i.e., measurements of the physical or biotic
environment, such as air temperatures or sea ice extent) reflect
significant aspects of the Antarctic environment but may have less-
immediate management implications.
The discussion group recommended that a set of 10-15 pilot
indicators should be developed as the first in a step in developing a
SAER system. It was also considered that a system with devolved
responsibilities (i.e., where experts in each indicator, rather than
the CEP, handle data and generate regular report information)
would be of great advantage.
Intersessional-discussion participants advocated the establishment
of a web-based SAER system that is relevant to and easily accessible
by all national Antarctic programmes and Parties to the Protocol
(ATCM XXV IP54 ATCM XXV IP54 Antarctic State of the
Environment Reporting; ATCM XXVI WP21). Consequently, a SAER
pilot system was developed using temperature as an initial example
indicator (ATCM XXVII WP20 ATCM XXVII WP20 Towards a CEP
State of the Antarctic Environments Reporting System: Report of the
Intersessional Contact Group, Annex 3). The intersessional
discussion group considered the use of reporting templates (ATCM
XXVIII WP10 ATCM XXVIII WP10 State of the Antarctic
Environment Reporting System: Report of the Intersessional Contact
Group, Annex 4), as well as the use of a summary page where the
state of the Antarctic environment might be gauged “at a glance”.
In ATCM XXXI WP24 ATCM XXXI WP24 Improving the CEP’s Role
in Advising the ATCM on the State of Antarctic Environments, New
Zealand suggested that some key, achievable improvements to the
way that the CEP works would allow the CEP to have a more
systematic approach to fulfilling its functions to provide advice on
the state of the Antarctic environment to the ATCM. These
improvements included regularly reviewing priority work,
improving working relationships between CEP participants, and
implementing new ways of working, such as utilising web-based
approaches.
Recent developments
For many decades, SCAR has provided Antarctic policymakers with
information relevant to SAER, but generally on an ad-hoc basis
(e.g., ATCM XLIV WP30rev.1 ATCM XLIV WP30rev.1 Antarctic
Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis. Findings
and Policy Recommendations; ATCM XLII WP68 ATCM XLII WP68
Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update; ATCM
XXIX WP37 ATCM XXIX WP37 Biodiversity in the Antarctic).
Today, SCAR provides independent, relevant and up-to-date
scientific information on Antarctic environments and human
activities in the region through Information Summaries posted on
the SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal. However, there may be an
opportunity to provide policymakers, and other stakeholders
including COMNAP, with further and potentially more-detailed and
area-specific information, with scope to report on environmental
change and trends in Antarctica. With this in mind, the SCAR
Scientific Research Programme (SRP) ‘Integrated science to inform
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Conservation’ (Ant-ICON) has
proposed a community-led initiative to provide information
relevant to elements of SAER, in order to support the work of
Antarctic policymakers.
The project proposes the development of a framework and platform
for provision of best-available science on selected topics to inform
policymakers’ advice on the state of the Antarctic environment. The
initial focus would be on ‘drivers of change’ in Antarctica (or
pressure indications, as described in ATCM XXVI WP21). To gauge
community interest in such a project, two online community
workshops were held on 25th and 26th October 2022. In large part,
the views of many of the workshop participants were similar to
those expressed during intersessional discussion on SAER in the
early to mid-2000s (see the Workshop Report in Attachment A to
this Working Paper).
Main points discussed at the workshops included:
Identifying the primary target audience for the reported information
as (i) the decision-makers participating in the policy organisation of
the Antarctic Treaty System (i.e., the ATCM, CCAMLR and CEP), (ii)
national governments, and (iii) national Antarctic programmes and
COMNAP. However, other stakeholders, operating within Antarctica
and globally, may also find the information useful. The area under
consideration for reporting could include the Antarctic Treaty area,
the CAMLR Convention area and, as relevant, other dependant and
associated ecosystems.
Drivers of change in the Antarctic environment that could be
considered under this project include: (i) human activities and land
use; (ii) non-native species; (iii) pollutants; and possibly (iv)
extraction of resources. Consideration of climate change and the
synergistic/cumulative impact of multiple drivers of change will be
integral to the project.
The various drivers of change do not influence all parts of
Antarctica equally, resulting in the need for information provision
at different spatial scales (i.e., local, regional, and/or continental).
As far as possible, information should be provided at a spatial scale
appropriate to the needs of policymakers.
An online and updatable reporting format may be most appropriate.
An interactive online map or Geographic Information System (GIS)
may facilitate effective representation of information at different
spatial scales.
The reporting outputs should be presented in an independent and
objective, policy-ready format with source information subject to
peer-review, to the maximum extent practicable. The SCAR
Antarctic Environments Portal (https://environments.aq/) provides
an existing platform for delivery of policy-relevant information to
decision-makers and could prove an effective and updatable
mechanism for delivery of information.
Several challenges and risks have been identified that will each
need to be managed in order to deliver a successful outcome.
Advice from several workshop participants with experience of large
collaborative projects was to ‘start small and build up slowly’. To
maximise the chances for success, it was agreed by workshop
participants that feedback from stakeholders, including ATS
policymakers, should be taken into consideration.
Recommendations
SCAR recommends that the Committee:
Notes the recent SCAR workshops held to consider how best the
scientific community might contribute to SAER (see the Workshop
Report at Attachment A to this Working Paper).
Considers the proposal by SCAR to develop a mechanism for the
provision of information relevant to SAER; and
Requests the views of CEP Members regarding (i) the usefulness of
this proposal and (ii) if considered beneficial, what information
would be most useful for supporting the Committee in their
provision of advice to the ATCM on the state of the Antarctic
environment.
