More data needed to manage air-supported land-based tourism
More data needed to manage air-supported land-based tourism
Summary
The focus of current discussions on tourism management have
mainly been focused on cruise tourism, which is both relevant and
understandable due to its nature and role as the key driver of
Antarctic tourism. Air-supported land-based activities seem to be
increasing. Information is also required for Parties to be able to
assess and understand trends and change in air-supported land-
based tourism. Lack of information impairs our ability to consider
management needs. Mechanisms for standard post-visit reporting
for air-borne tourism are proposed.
Background
There has been a substantial growth of tourism (e.g, in the numbers
of tourists, ships and visited sites) and diversification of activities.
This and likelihood that increasing pressures from tourism in
conjunction with climate change, scientific activities etc will
significantly impact the Antarctic environment has been the
foundation for regular discussions in the ATCM about its
responsibility for managing Antarctic tourism. Over the last few
years these discussions have intensified, supported by informal
workshop discussions, in Rotterdam (2019) and Paris (2023).
Underlying as a fundament to these discussions is the designation of
Antarctica as a natural reserve, the environmental principles of
Article 3 of the Protocol, and the General Principles of Antarctic
Tourism contained in Resolution 7(2009).
The focus of these discussions have mainly been concentrated on
cruise tourism, which is both relevant and understandable due to its
nature and role as the key driver of Antarctic tourism.
However, in many and most of the ongoing discussions it would
also be relevant to consider air-supported land-based/deep-field
tourism. This is particularly relevant if we wish to be in advance of
unforeseen future challenges, rather than being forced to resort to
reactive action, which has to a large degree been the case for the
cruise tourism management.
There are currently three operators that deliver air-supported land-
based tourism activities in Antarctica, all operating at high
standards and with a high level of focus on environment and safety.
However, an increase in land-based tourism and a potential larger
diversification of operators may give cause for concern. On a very
general level current operations can be described to include inter-
continental flight from one of the gateway cities to airfields in
Antarctica, field camp activity and intra-continental flights to points
of interest. Some operators are also using other means of
transportation, like 4X4 vehicles. Main camps with landing facilities
for intercontinental flights are found at Novo Airfield and Wolf’s
Fang in Dronning Maud Land and at Union Glacier in Ellsworth
Land.
Why the concern?
Since land-based tourism in Antarctica is mainly based on the use of
aircrafts, the means of transportation have other environmental
impacts and other safety concerns than cruise tourism. Another
aspect is that the locations used for land-based tourism can have
other characteristics than the sites visited by vessel-based tourism.
Both the environmental and the intrinsic values will have different
traits than the values affected by vessel-based tourism. Land based
tourism may be more remote, more widely distributed on the
continent and may take place on locations that are less well known,
both to operators and to Parties.
Land-based tourism is varied and can potentially have several types
of environmental impacts, like disturbance of flora and fauna, fuel
spill, tracks after vehicles, ground disturbances after
deep field camps, littering or other traces of activity. It might be
challenging to assess cumulative impacts without quite detailed
information on e.g. what activity has taken place where and when
and with how many participants.
Land based tourism can easily reach more extreme locations and
can operate in colder conditions and higher altitudes. This demands
more of the participants when it comes to experience, fitness and
knowledge of the use of emergency equipment. Search and rescue
operations can be even more challenging when it comes to land-
based tourism. The remote locations can be both difficult to reach
and unknown to the potential rescue team. Rescuers will often be
dependent on air transport to reach the site. The number of
available aircrafts on the continent is limited, and at some locations
landing can be impossible. There is a risk that the burden of a
search and rescue operation falls upon a single national program.
With incidents in connection with cruise tourism other cruise
operators are likely to assist.
Numbers and information
Proper management and regulatory action is reliant on good
information. To be able to assess the status and to understand
trends and changes of tourism there is an underlying need for
information on the relevant patterns and numbers. Parties now have
access to valuable and extensive information on cruise-based
activities, based on the data collected through the post-visit report
forms – PVRs – last updated through Resolution 6 (2022).
Information is also required if Parties are to be able to assess and
understand trends and change in air-supported land-based tourism.
Information relating both to flights (intercontinental and
intracontinental), number of passengers, destination, activities at
destinations etc is needed.
In ATCM XLIV IP 72 IAATO presented numbers relating to land-
based activities that shows what looks like a considerable increase
in such tourism, specifically with regard to intra-continental flights,
in the period between 2016-17 to 2021-22. For example, visits to
emperor penguin increased from 50 to 200 passengers, deep field
experiences from 51 to 289 passengers and visits to Vinson Massif
from 111 to 202. I the same period the total number of passengers
on intra-continental flights increased from 488 to 937.
IAATO has been so kind to give us access to some of the underlying
numbers from the 2015-16 season up to the 2021-22 season. The
level of detail in the reporting has increased in this period, the
reporting form seems to have varied, and we must make
reservations that we may have misunderstood. From what we can
understand there has been a noticeable increase in the use of both
intra continental flights and vehicles in connection with deep-field
tourism during the years before the pandemic, cf. table 1. The
2021-22 season could be understood in light of the pandemic.
Season
Intracontinental flights (times used)
Vehicles (times used)
2015-16
20
2
2016-17
3
12
2017-2018
59
33
2018-2019
56
22
2021-22
26
13
Table 1: Summary of times intracontinental flights and vehicles are
used in connection with tourism, based on our interpretation of
numbers from IAATO.
In EIES the sum of participants in Land-based operations for the
2021/2022 annual reporting is 278. This gives reason to believe
that the reporting is incomplete. This can be either because some
Parties have not reported, or because the reporting is incomplete.
The latter may possibly be related to how the form is designed.
In comparison, we have considerably more detailed information
available when it comes to cruise tourism. The Post Visit Reports
provides detailed information on visited sites with precise
coordinates, dates, if the visit included landings, number of visitors,
activities conducted and duration of landings. In Resolution 6
(2022) Parties noted the convenience of obtaining consistent
information that would facilitate the analysis of the scope,
frequency and intensity of tourism and non-governmental activities.
Some operators provide information on intracontinental flying
destinations on their web pages, but in addition to the routes
showed here they might have tailor-made expeditions that involve
flying to other destinations.
Conclusion
From the above it can be deduced that there is a lack of access to
robust data about air-supported land-based tourism, which is an
obstacle to having a good understanding of the current status,
trends and changes. This lack of information impairs our ability to
consider management needs. The information provided in the EIES
seems to be incomplete and deficient. It is suggested that the EIES is
adjusted to provide more information than currently required with
respect to land-based tourism (total number of participants, date of
commence and completion, location and route, aircraft and/or
vehicles used, number of clients, guides, crew and observers taking
part, activity sites and activities conducted at each site). If there is
agreement in this regard, then it is assumed that the Secretariat can
assist with this task.
At ATCM XLIV IAATO noted that the current Post Visit Reports (cf.
last updated through Resolution 6 (2022)) are tailored for sea borne
tourism activities and suggested it might be useful to also develop
PVRs for deep-field and air activities (para 320 of the Final Report
of ATCM XLIV).
It is suggested that Parties agree to formalise standard post visit
reporting also for air-supported tourism activities, in line with what
is currently formalised for cruise-tourism through Resolution 6
(2022), in order to ensure that Parties in the future have sufficient
data avaliable to follow and understand the development of such
activities. We have understood that IAATO is already developing a
Post Visit Report for land-based tourism, and it may be reasonable
to endorse this as soon as it is complete and available.
Recommendation
Norway suggest that Parties ensure more detailed information on
airborne tourism as basis for understanding the development of
such tourism and for assessing relevant management tools, and to
consider the following actions:
Allow for more detailed information on land based tourism
submitted through the EIES, specifically the total number of
participants and detailed information on each expedition including
date of commence and completion, location and route, aircraft and/
or vehicles used, number of clients, guides, crew and observers
taking part, activity sites and activities conducted at each site.
Request the Secretariat to update the EIES for this purpose.
Agree that it is desirable to adopt mandatory standardised Post Visit
Report for land-based tourism and agree to consider the PVR
currently being developed by IAATO as basis for this when
available.
