HSM No. 93 The Wreck of Endurance: Conservation Management
Plan and Future Protection
HSM No. 93 The Wreck of Endurance: Conservation Management
Plan and Future Protection
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
This paper provides an update on progress with the Conservation
Management Plan and future protection of HSM No. 93: Wreck of
Endurance following its discovery on the 5th March 2022 and as
noted in ATCM XLIV WP47.
It is recommended that the Committee:
notes the progress made to date on the Conservation Management
Plan for HSM No. 93 and proposed next steps;
notes the proposed consultation during the development of the
Conservation Management Plan for protecting HSM No. 93; and
invites Members to share any initial views on the possible future
proposal for seeking ASPA designation for the wreck site.
Background
The wreck of the Endurance, the vessel owned and used by Sir
Ernest Shackleton during his 1914-16 Imperial Trans-Antarctic
Expedition, was designated as Historic Site & Monument (HSM) No.
93 in 2019 through Measure 12 (2019) before the wreck was
located.
The British-led Endurance22 expedition embarked on board the
South African vessel Agulhas II, equipped with SAAB Sabretooth
underwater vehicles, and located the wreck site on the 5 March
2022, 107 years after it was lost. The expedition team undertook a
detailed survey of the site, capturing considerable data on the
condition of the wreck, its components, and its environment, which
will inform the future management of the site. Work continues on
the processing and analysis of these data.
Through Measure 18 (2022) the area protected by the HSM listing
was enlarged from a 150m to 500m radius around the wreck to
afford greater coverage of possible distributed debris that may have
dispersed as the wreck sank 3000m through the water column. The
report of the discovery of the wreck and the updated HSM listing
was also accompanied by the intention to produce a Conservation
Management Plan (CMP) for the site (ATCM XLIV WP 47).
In 2022, the UK government commissioned the UK Antarctic
Heritage Trust (UKAHT), the organisation responsible for the
conservation and care of several HSMs on the Antarctic Peninsula,
to create the CMP and provide recommendations for the future
protection of the site. This work is notable as it will be the first such
document for an underwater heritage site in Antarctica.
Creating the Conservation Management Plan
Following the Guidelines for the Assessment and Management of
Heritage in Antarctica (Resolution 1 (2022)) and drawing on
international guidance on the protection of underwater heritage the
preparation of the CMP is now underway. UKAHT has assembled a
team of experts to assist with the preparation of the document. The
detail for the CMP will include historical
research, analysis of the data collected by the expedition that
discovered the wreck, the analysis of the potential risks and
adoption of best practice policies and practices internationally for
heritage of this nature and significance.
Historical context and significance
To date, progress has been made to document the history and
significance of the vessel and to set up the framework for the full
document, identifying where there needs to be additional external
input or access to data and information. Archival research into the
construction of Endurance, the original expedition, the loss of the
ship and subsequent transactions between the insurers and the
Shackleton family is already shedding new light on the detailed
history of the vessel. A statement of significance is in preparation
and will be better informed with insights from new data collected
from the wreck site.
Contemporary data
New data collected by the Endurance22 expedition will be an
invaluable resource and, once processed and available, it will
provide insights into the composition and condition of the vessel
today and indications of the environment and the potential
environmental risks to the wreck.
Policy framework
The heritage policy framework will draw upon the guidance from
ATCM/CEP heritage management policies and best practice
internationally. It will also be informed by consulting with
international specialists.
Risk management
A full analysis of the risks to the wreck is being undertaken. Its
resting place at 3008m depth in the Weddell Sea offers some
protection, and the vessel appears from published imagery to be in
remarkable condition. However, the wreck may be vulnerable to
the impacts of both human activity and natural processes. Climate
change is a particular concern as a warming climate might make
the Weddell Sea more accessible and may disrupt the current
biological and chemical environment.
Instruments for protection
Additional measures for the protection of the wreck from
inappropriate or unmonitored human intervention are also being
explored. Remote monitoring and consideration of additional levels
of protection within the Antarctic Treaty System are also being
considered.
Further investigation
There will be much more to learn about the vessel, the site and its
environment and the CMP will make recommendations for future
study or data capture that might enhance understanding of this
unique site. The authors are not aware of any current intentions to
revisit the site.
Raising the ship or removal of artefacts
The status of the site as an HSM and the will of the descendants is
to leave the vessel and its artefacts intact and the CMP will seek to
strengthen this policy for the future protection of the site in line
with internationally accepted best heritage practice.
Consultation process
For the CMP to be as comprehensive and as effective as possible,
there will be a process of consultation to give expert bodies and
interested parties the opportunity to share their views on the draft
CMP. Given the international significance and interest in
Endurance, CEP members are welcome to contact the UK to find out
more about the plan. Equally the authors welcome suggestions or
recommendations of any expert bodies whom should be consulted
during the next year. There will also be a controlled public
consultation to raise awareness of the protection of Endurance and,
in turn, heritage protection in Antarctica.
Consideration of additional protection
As part of the CMP development process, consideration will be
given to any additional measures that may be needed to protect the
wreck. In particular, the work may indicate that the additional
protections afforded by ASPA designation may be appropriate. If
seeking ASPA designation is deemed appropriate, an ASPA prior
assessment template could be submitted to CEP XXVI in 2024.
We would welcome Members’ initial views on the consideration of
any future ASPA designation for the wreck of Endurance.
Next steps
The following work plan is proposed:
Step
Approximate dates
Stage 1 CMP prepared and circulated to expert advisors
June – August 2023
Open consultation on Stage 1 CMP
August – October 2023
Consultation analysis and response
November – December 2023
Stage 2 CMP – incorporation of results of consultation and
additional data
December 2023 – March 2024
Preparation of Stage 2 CMP
February - March 2024
Potential submission of ASPA Prior Assessment Template to CEP
XXVI
May 2024 (CEP XXVI)
Conclusion
The preparation of a Conservation Management Plan is always a
team effort. The CMP for Endurance is a unique undertaking for
Antarctica that will inform not only the protection of this site, but
may perhaps inform how other similar sites in the Southern Ocean
might be protected. This CMP will principally guide the UK in the
future management of the wreck site, but should further protection
under the Antarctic Treaty System be deemed necessary, it may
provide a bedrock for future management. Expertise, data, informed
opinion and stakeholder engagement is vital to the success of the
creation and implementation of such a plan and the authors
welcome any interest expressed by CEP Members.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the CEP:
notes the progress made to date on the Conservation Management
Plan for HSM No. 93 and proposed next steps;
notes the proposed consultation during the development of the
Conservation Management Plan for protecting HSM No. 93; and
invites Members to share any initial views on the possible future
proposal for seeking ASPA designation for the wreck site.
