Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area
No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 3
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 3
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2002), Measure 6 (2008), Measure 3 (2013), Measure 1
(2019)
Current management plan:
Measure 1 (2019)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983),
Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987),
Resolution 7 (1995), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011). Measure 18 (2015). The ASPA lies within
ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys.
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management
plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions
only or also in the graphics?
Yes. The map has been replaced by a new version prepared in color
to improve the clarity of site features and ASPA boundary.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to
identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within
this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger
with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the
paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
A new objective to “preserve the almost pristine ecosystem as a
biological reference area” has been added to Section 2.
Section 6 Description of the Area notes soil samples were collected
in 2019 for a new soil map of the McMurdo Dry Valleys in
preparation.
A new provision on helicopter access has been added to Section
7(ii), specifying that “Helicopter landings should avoid frozen lakes
and stream beds. By preference, and where safe and practical,
landings should be made on snow surfaces to minimize dust and
soil disturbance.”
The latest ATCM Resolution on Non-native species is referenced in
Section 7(vi).
Section 7(viii) has been revised to be more specific about sampling
procedures.
Minor editorial changes have been implemented in the plan, and
the reference list has been updated.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine
area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in
accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained?
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for
designation (i.e., which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future
comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected
by human activities;
(b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial
and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific
research;
(f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features;
(g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented
by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 3 (2008))?
Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land Geologic.
10. Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution
3 (2017))?
ACBR 9 South Victoria Land.
11. Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas
represented by the ASPA/ASMA (Resolution 5 (2015))?
No.
ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
The management plan for ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham
Valleys was last reviewed in 2018/2019 and adopted through
Measure 3 (2019); review thus falls due in 2024.
The review was initiated one year in advance to enable all ASPAs in
the McMurdo Dry Valleys for which the United States is responsible
to be reviewed synchronously going forward. This helps to simplify
the review process where common issues arise in the region (e.g.
updates to policies on non-native species). Moreover, this also helps
to ensure the plans remain consistent with each other and with the
management plan for ASMA No.2 McMurdo Dry Valleys more
generally.
The United States consulted with scientists working within the Area
and made minor updates to the management plan, taking into
account agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since
the last plan was adopted. Permits issued for visits to the Area since
the previous revision of the management plan were reviewed, with
few visits made, and no significant changes to management policies
were required.
A new objective to “preserve the almost pristine ecosystem as a
biological reference area” has been added to Section 2
As a result of comments received from scientists in the review
additional guidance on helicopter access has been given in Section
7(ii), specifying: “Helicopter landings should avoid frozen lakes and
stream beds. By preference, and where safe and practical, landings
should be made on snow surfaces to minimize dust and soil
disturbance.”
Section 7(viii) has been revised to provide more specific guidance
on sampling procedures.
A range of minor editorial changes have been implemented and the
reference list has been updated.
The map has been replaced by a new version prepared in color to
improve the clarity of site features, policies and the ASPA
boundary.
The exceptional values of the Area remain valid and the
management plan continues to protect those values.
Recommendation
The revised management plan and map are attached for
consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for
recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting.
