A five-year assessment of the impacts on emperor penguins of low
sea-ice extent
A five-year assessment of the impacts on emperor penguins of low
sea-ice extent
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, France, Germany
and the United States
Summary
The United Kingdom, France, Germany and the United States
present the results of a five-year assessment (2018 - 2022) of the
impact of low sea-ice extent and early fast ice break up on emperor
penguin colonies around Antarctica. Over the five-year period
examined, 42% of emperor penguin colonies (i.e., 28 of the 66)
likely experienced total or partial breeding failure due to fast ice
break up in at least one year.
In light of these findings, the Working Paper co-authors recommend
that the Committee encourages:
Members to report on their implementation of the draft Antarctic
Specially Protected Species Action Plan, attached to ATCM XLIV
WP34;
Members to report to the Committee their existing and planned
steps to enhance the conservation of the emperor penguin; and
SCAR and/or interested Members to report recent research results
on the status of the emperor penguin population and sea-ice extent
around Antarctica to inform the future consideration by the ATCM
of the designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially Protected
Species under Annex II to the Protocol.
Background
Sea ice, and particularly land-fast sea ice, is crucial for emperor
penguins as a breeding and moulting platform, as well as a foraging
habitat (see Attachment A for definitions of cryosphere terms and
supporting documentation). Current models, linked to IPCC climate
change predictions and based upon the scientifically-proven
relationship of emperor penguins and sea-ice concentration, suggest
that the emperor penguin population will decline dramatically by
the end of this century. In a scenario where greenhouse gas
emissions continue to rise at current levels, predictions suggest that
almost all colonies will be quasi-extinct by the end of the century.
At UNFCCC COP27, Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt (November 2022),
WWF, British Antarctic Survey, University of Canterbury/Te Whare
Wānanga o Waitaha (New Zealand), Woods Hole Institution, UK
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office and the
International Cryosphere Climate Initiative hosted an event to
highlight the risk that emperor penguins face a slippery slope
towards extinction and that only ambitious global climate and
environmental policy can help to safeguard the future of these icons
on ice - their fate rests in our hands.
At CEP XXIII, SCAR introduced WP 37 Projections of future
population decline emphasise the need to designate the emperor
penguin as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species. SCAR described
how the primary threats to emperor penguins are loss of breeding
habitats and the profound transformation of the foraging habitat
associated with significant change in and loss of sea ice as a
consequence of climate change.
In its review on the status of the emperor penguin, SCAR found that
the emperor penguin was vulnerable to ongoing and projected
climate change, which may be exacerbated through additional
human pressures to further degrade the species’ conservation status,
thereby warranting protection as an Antarctic Specially Protected
Species. SCAR recommended that the Committee establish an ICG to
review the draft Action Plan prepared by SCAR (provided in Annex
A to ATCM XLIII WP37) and provide a draft Action Plan.
The Committee agreed to establish an ICG to prepare a draft Action
Plan for the emperor penguin, which was presented subsequently to
the Committee in ATCM XLIV WP34, together with SCAR’s
assessment of the emperor penguin’s conservation status as
‘Vulnerable’ (see ATCM XLIII WP37).
The Committee did not reach consensus on the recommendation in
ATCM XLIV WP34 to propose the listing of the emperor penguin as
a Specially Protected Species despite receiving full support from all
but one Member. Many Members and Observers expressed intent to
use the draft Action Plan provided in WP 34 as guidance to support
their actions on the management of this species, including
conducting further monitoring of emperor penguin populations, and
encouraged other Members to do so.
In this Working Paper, the co-authors present a preliminary five-
year assessment of the impact of early fast ice break up, linked to
low sea ice concentrations, on emperor penguin colonies around
Antarctica.
New lows in Antarctic sea-ice extent
Over the last seven years, sea-ice extent and concentration around
Antarctica have fallen significantly, and four of the lowest sea-ice
extent minima recorded have occurred since 2017 (Figure 1; NSIDC,
2023). In particular, 2022 and 2023 were the first in the satellite
record (1979–2023) when the extent of sea ice around Antarctica
dropped below 2 million km2. One potential consequence of sea ice
loss is early break up of fast ice on which birds breed, thus leading
to chick mortality. Here, we assess if these low sea ice years had an
adverse effect on emperor penguin breeding success.
Figure 1. Antarctic minimum sea-ice extent over the satellite record
of 1979–2023. The black line denotes the annual minimum sea-ice
extent based on a five-day running average (NSIDC, 2023).
Sea-ice extent effects on emperor penguin colonies
Researchers used Sentinel2 optical satellite imagery to undertake a
five-year assessment of the potential impact of early fast ice break-
up on emperor penguin colonies around Antarctic. From 2018 to
2022, they assessed the locations of every emperor penguin colony,
and the corresponding fast ice conditions, over the latter part of the
breeding season (crèching and fledging). The exact dates of fledging
at each colony will vary and are not currently known, so a
conservative date for the beginning of fledging of 5 December was
used. Using satellite imagery, emperor penguin colonies can be
located by the brown staining on the ice, the result of their guano
and a unique identifier in this environment. Other seabirds do not
breed on sea ice and,
therefore, any staining would correspond to an emperor penguin
colony. The satellite images also clearly show where the fast ice
broke up. Prior to fledging, emperor penguin eggs and chicks are
not able to survive seawater immersion. Therefore, it was assumed
that total sea ice break-up prior to fledging would result in total or
almost total breeding failure (i.e., egg or chick mortality). In the
very small number of cases where partial ice break-up occurred
before the fledging period commenced and satellite imagery showed
the colony successfully moved to firmer ice, breeding success was
assumed. Partial fast ice break-up, or total break up during the
fledging period, likely reduces fledging success, but it was not
possible to ascertain the degree to which this occurred using
satellite data.
From the time-series data, there has been a significant increase in
the number of sites affected by ice loss over the five-year period
(Figure 2).
Figure 2. Emperor penguin colonies affected by partial or total ice
loss during the fledging period (yellow), or total ice loss before the
fledging period (red) between 2018 and 2022.
In 2022, the reduced extent of sea ice had the following effects on
emperor penguin colonies:
Thirteen colonies experienced total sea-ice loss before the fledging
period in early December, likely resulting in total or near-total
breeding failure.
Of the 13 sites that experienced total sea ice loss, eight had not
experienced total loss in the previous five years. However, only four
of the 13 had not experience partial break up in the fledging period,
suggesting that the majority of these sites are located in historically
less stable areas.
A further six colonies experienced ice loss during the fledging
period leading to an unknown impact upon breeding success.
In 2021, the reduced extent of sea ice had the following effects on
emperor penguin colonies:
Twelve colonies were affected by fast ice loss.
Six colonies of the 12 colonies experienced total fast ice loss before
the fledging period, and six experienced ice loss during the fledging
period.
In the previous three years (2018, 2019 and 2020), some colonies
also experienced sea ice losses.
Colonies that regularly experience sea ice loss, termed “blinking”
due to their inconsistent presence in given locations, are
characteristically small, often just a few hundred birds and could be
considered as marginal sites.
Over the five-year period examined, 28 of the 66 colonies (i.e.,
42%) were affected to some degree in at least one year.
Geographically, several areas were ‘hot spots’ of colony loss in 2022
(Figure 3), including the Bellingshausen Sea, central Amundsen Sea,
Wilkes Land and the Budd Coast. All areas had experienced large
negative anomalies in sea-ice concentration. Areas such as the Ross
Sea and Dronning Maud Land, which did not experience negative
sea ice anomalies, remained largely unaffected this year. Variations
in sea ice extent there were probably due to regional weather
patterns linked to global weather cycles, such as the Amundsen Sea
Low and the El Ninõ-Southern Oscillation (Turner et al., 2012).
However, two colonies in areas that did not have negative sea ice
anomalies were also lost (i.e., at Cape Darlington in the western
Weddell Sea and at Davies Bay on the Oates Coast), likely due to
recent ice-tongue break-off or calving events.
Figure 3. Emperor penguin colony locations recorded in 2022. Red:
total sea ice loss before fledging (taken as 5 Dec); yellow: sea ice
loss (partial or total) during fledging (taken as 5 – 31 Dec); green:
stable sea ice until the assumed end of fledging on 31 Dec. The
colonies are overlayed over the sea ice concentration anomaly map
for November 2022. Red colouration indicates areas of positive sea
ice concentration anomaly, while blue colouration indicates areas of
negative sea ice concentration anomaly (sea ice anomaly data from
NSIDC).
Conclusions
The extremely low sea-ice extents recorded around the Antarctic
coastline in 2021 and 2022 have likely led to high chick mortality
in a large proportion of emperor penguin colonies.
Around 29% of all colonies were affected by either total or partial
ice loss in 2022, while 18% were affected in 2021.
Over the past seven years, sea ice around Antarctica has decreased
significantly. Whether or not this trend will continue is unknown,
although climate models predict an accelerating decrease in sea-ice
extent. The results of this study highlight the effects of the changing
climate on the breeding success of emperor penguins and are an
indication of the challenges that the species will face in future
decades.
Recommendations
In light of these findings, the Working Paper co-authors recommend
that the Committee encourages:
Members to report on their implementation of the draft Antarctic
Specially Protected Species Action Plan, attached to ATCM XLIV
WP34;
Members to report to the Committee their existing and planned
steps to enhance the conservation of the emperor penguin; and
SCAR and/or interested Members to report recent research results
on the status of the emperor penguin population and sea-ice extent
around Antarctica to inform the future consideration by the ATCM
of the designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially Protected
Species under Annex II to the Protocol.
Attachment A.
Definitions
Term
Definition
Source
Sea ice
Any form of ice found at sea which has originated from the freezing
of sea water.
https://nsidc.org/learn/cryosphere-glossary/sea-ice
Fast ice
Ice that is anchored to the shore or ocean bottom, typically over
shallow ocean shelves at continental margins; fast ice is defined by
the fact that it does not move with the winds or currents.
https://nsidc.org/learn/cryosphere-glossary/fast-ice
Sea ice concentration
The fraction of an area that is covered by sea ice. Ice concentration
typically is reported as a percentage (0 to 100 percent ice), a
fraction from 0 to 1, or sometimes in tenths (0/10 to 10/10).
https://nsidc.org/learn/cryosphere-glossary/ice-concentration
Sea ice extent
The total area covered by some amount of ice, including open water
between ice floes; ice extent is typically reported in square
kilometers. Extent defines a region as either "ice-covered" or "not
ice-covered." A threshold determines this labeling. A typical
threshold is 15 percent, meaning that if the data cell has greater
than 15 percent ice concentration, the cell is labeled as "ice-
covered."
https://nsidc.org/learn/cryosphere-glossary/ice-extent
Supporting Documentation
Ancel, A., Cristofari, R., Trathan, P. N., Gilbert, C., Fretwell, P. T., &
Beaulieu, M. (2017). Looking for new emperor penguin colonies?
Filling the gaps. Global Ecology and Conservation 9, 171-179.
Barbraud, C., & Weimerskirch, H. (2001). Emperor penguins and
climate change. Nature 411, 183–186.
Fretwell, P.T., & Trathan, P.N. (2009). Penguins from space: faecal
stains reveal the location of emperor penguin colonies. Global
Ecology and Biogeography 18, 543-552
Fretwell, P.T. & Trathan, P.N. (2021). Discovery of new colonies by
Sentinel2 reveals good and bad news for emperor penguins. Remote
Sensing Ecology and Conservation 7, 139-153.
Fretwell, P., & Trathan, P. (2019). Emperors on thin ice: Three
years of breeding failure at Halley Bay. Antarctic Science 31,
133-138.
Jenouvrier, S. Holland, M. & Stroeve, J. (2012). Effects of climate
change on an emperor penguin population: analysis of coupled
demographic and climate models. Global Change Biology 18, 2756–
2770.
Jenouvrier, S. Holland, M. Stroeve, J. Serreze, M. Barbraud, C.
Weimerskirch, H. Caswell, H. (2014). Projected continent-wide
declines of the emperor penguin under climate change. Nature
Climate Change 4, 715–718.
Jenouvrier, S., Che-Castaldo, J., Wolf, S., Holland, M., Labrousse, S.,
LaRue, M., Wienecke, B., Fretwell, P., Barbraud, C., Greenwald, N.,
Stroeve, J., & Trathan, P. N. The call of the emperor penguin: Legal
responses to species threatened by climate change. Global Change
Biology 27, 5008– 5029.
Labrousse, S., Fraser, A. D., Sumner, M., Tamura, T., Pinaud, D.,
Wienecke, B., Kirkwood, R., Ropert-Coudert, Y., Reisinger, R.,
Jonsen, I., Porter-Smith, R., Barbraud, C., Bost, C., Ji, R.,
Jenouvrier, S. Dynamic fine-scale sea icescape shapes adult emperor
penguin foraging habitat in East Antarctica. (2019). Geophysical
Research Letters 46, 11206 – 11218.
LaRue, M.A., Kooyman, G., Lynch, H.J. and Fretwell, P.T. (2015).
Emigration in emperor penguins: implications for interpretation of
long-term studies. Ecography, 38 114-120.
Marchant, S. & Higgins, P.J. (co-ordinating editors) 1990.
Handbook of Australian, New Zealand & Antarctic Birds. Volume 1,
Ratites to ducks; Part A, Ratites to petrels. Melbourne, Oxford
University Press. Pages 125-126, 144-147
Miles, B.W.J., Stokes, C.R., Jamieson, S.S.R. et al. (2022). High
spatial and temporal variability in Antarctic ice discharge linked to
ice shelf buttressing and bed geometry. Science Reports 12, 10968.
National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC). (2023). Antarctic sea
ice extent sets a new record low. Available at: https://nsidc.org/
arcticseaicenews/2023/02/antarctic-sea-ice-extent-sets-a-new-
record-low/
Schmidt, A., & Ballard, G. (2020). Significant chick loss after early
fast ice breakup at a high-latitude emperor penguin colony.
Antarctic Science 32, 180-185.
Trathan, P.N., Fretwell, P.T., Stonehouse, B. (2011). First recorded
loss of an emperor penguin colony in the recent period of Antarctic
regional warming: Implications for other colonies. PLoS ONE 6,
e14738.
Turner, J., Phillips, T., Hosking, J. S., Marshall, G. J., & Orr, A.
(2013). The Amundsen Sea low. International Journal of
Climatology 33, 1818-1829.
