Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area
within the Argentine Islands and Kyiv Peninsula area, Antarctic
Peninsula
Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area
within the Argentine Islands and Kyiv Peninsula area, Antarctic
Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by Ukraine
Summary
A prior assessment for a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) within the Argentine Islands and Kyiv Peninsula area,
Antarctic Peninsula, has been carried out by Ukraine. The
proponent recommends that the CEP: (1) agrees that the values
within the proposed ASPA merit special protection, (2) endorses the
development of a Management Plan for the area, and (3)
encourages interested Parties to work with Ukraine informally
during the intersessional period in the development of a
Management Plan for potential submission at CEP XLVI.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions in Annex V to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Ukraine would
like to propose the establishment of an Antarctic Specially Protected
Area (ASPA) within the Argentine Islands and Kyiv Peninsula area,
Antarctic Peninsula.
The proposed ASPA would be a multi-site ASPA intended primarily
to protect a range of values.
Environmental values:
Valuable for the Antarctic Peninsula vascular plants habitats. The
vegetation in general represents a pattern of sharp discontinuities;
discontinuous and only known stands of some species, the peatlands
are valuable for paleoclimate reconstructions.
The flora is among the richest, the most studied and specific in the
Antarctic Peninsula region, with at least 7 liverworts, 51 mosses
and 123 lichens. Highly peculiar moss banks communities and
peatlands, and some of the moss banks here are up to 3800 years
old. In the terrestrial vegetation communities, there also grow fungi
(including some lichenicolous species) and micro- and macroalgae:
30 species of Chlorophyta, 41 diatoms and 7 cyanophytes. For both
vascular Antarctic plants, Antarctic hairgrass (Deschampsia
antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis), this is
the middle part of one of the richest in the region vascular plants’
areas (D.antarctica and C.quitensis) from Booth Island to Garcia
Point.
Small, and therefore vulnerable and valuable populations of
disjunctively distributed moss and lichen species.
A number of mosses, lichens and invertebrates, such as tardigrads
were first discovered and then described here, many of which are
still known only for this region.
The southernmost edge of the nesting range for Gentoo penguin
(Pygoscelis papua) and chinstrap penguin (P.antarcticus). There are
dramatic changes in this region in the context of global climate
change, which result in rapid expanding of nesting area of gentoo
penguins. It provides a unique opportunity to observe processes
influenced by climate change. Within the proposed ASPA, there will
be several sites with nesting birds combining both closed (control
monitoring) and open for human access areas, which also provides
a unique opportunity for real-time observations of human impact.
Local Adelie penguin (P.adeliae) colonies are dwindling, which also
requires immediate reaction. This provides a great opportunity to
observe processes influenced by climate change as well.
Two Antarctic Important Bird Areas located in the region (No 089
and 090).
Fully viable subpopulation of the Weddell seal (Leptonychotes
weddelli) from the Lemaire Channel to Lahille Island, breeding on
Cruls Islands.
The region is the southern frontier of the brown skua (Catharacta
antarctica lonngbergi) nesting area, and thus this site is very
important for monitoring the spread of this species.
Marine part of the proposed ASPA is approximately 0.05 km2.
These are biodiversity-rich and sensitive for navigation or diving
areas, with giant sponges and ascidians, starfishes, ascidians,
ophiuras and sea spiders, fields of gorgonian corals and others.
Many intraspecific taxa of phytoplankton were found here.
Scientific values:
The data archive inherited from the British Antarctic Survey, the
botanical and meteorology data in particular, became the basis for
further long-term plant monitoring, which have been conducted by
Ukrainian researchers for more than two decades.
Sites of the Argentine Islands Magnetic Polygon, which is the part
of a magnetic observatory complex of Vernadsky station.
CEMP cameras installed in 2016 for annual monitoring of penguin
breeding success: Yalour Islands, Galindez Island, Petermann Island.
A geodynamic polygon, laid to monitor the Penola-Lemaire Fissure,
is based on two output sites and 14 monitoring sites.
An installed equipment for distance probing of the ionosphere that
is a part of the electromagnetic research complex of Vernadsky
station on Galindez Island.
37 microclimate loggers for studying the microclimate and ecology
of Antarctic vascular plants and further climate impact studies.
Areas of the geologic and paleomagnetic polygons where
researchers actively search for bedrocks originating from different
epochs and magnetic rocks that are evidences of paleomagnetism.
The region contains a diverse though largely unstudied invertebrate
fauna, including two tardigrades that are new to science
(Bryodelphax olszanowskii sp. nov. and Diphascon puchalskii sp.
nov.); the copepod Pseudobocellia popeii was found here outside of
its general distribution.
Unique karyotypes of D. antarctica were found here, as well as one
of the largest populations of C. quitensis in this region, which is
believed to be the origin population for the whole region.
Plots for regular studies of the dynamics of development and
taxonomic structure of plankton communities (near Galindez
Island).
Wilderness, geology and aesthetic values:
The numerous rock outcrops on the Graham Coast and adjacent
islands are of great interest for studying the stratigraphy,
magmatism and tectonics of the Antarctic Peninsula as well as
reconstruction of its geological history during the Paleozoic,
Mesozoic and Cenozoic. Beside the wide range of ages, local
geological formations demonstrate significant petrographic diversity
of the rocks and their positioning.
A number of geological outcrops new to the Antarctic Peninsula and
important for the reconstruction of its geological history was
discovered here.
It also has high aesthetic value: Lemaire Channel, one of the most
famous channels in Antarctic for its beauty and spectacular views.
Spectacular views due to numerous islands of different heights,
which are also snowy to different extent; glaciers and impressive
views of high mountains of mainland in the closest vicinity.
Prior assessment
Following discussions at CEP XX, the Guidelines: A prior assessment
process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs were up dated to
include a non-mandatory ASPA prior assessment template to
facilitate the provision of information consistent with the
Guidelines. Ukraine has completed the prior assessment template
for the proposed ASPA (see: Attachment A), which includes
extended table of values of each site, maps, and list of relevant
publications.
If the CEP agrees that the area merits special protection, Ukraine
intends to develop intersessionally a Management Plan for the
proposed ASPA in collaboration with all interested Parties with the
expectation that this will be submitted for consideration during CEP
XLVI.
Recommendations
Ukraine recommends that the CEP:
agrees that the values within the proposed ASPA merit special
protection, as described under Annex V to the Protocol;
endorses the development of a Management Plan for the Area, led
by Ukraine; and
encourages interested Parties to work Ukraine informally during the
intersessional period in the development of a Management Plan for
potential submission at CEP XLVI.
