Nomination and election procedures – CEP Chair
Nomination and election procedures – CEP Chair
Summary
This paper suggest that the CEP agree to procedures for nominating
CEP Chair. Furthermore, it is suggested that the CEP Rules of
Procedure be updated to reflect such nomination procedures, as
well as earlier agreed upon procedures for election. A draft Decision
to this effect is attached.
Formalization of nomination and election procedures – CEP Chair
The CEP Rules of Procedure (rule 15) indicate that the Committee
should “select a Chairperson and two Vice-chairs from among the
Consultative Parties”. However, the current CEP Rules of Procedure
(2011) give no guidance to the nomination process, neither the
election procedures.
At the 17th meeting of the Committee in 2014, the Committee
found itself in an unprecedented situation where four candidates
were nominated as candidates to the Chair position, although only
one candidate had been nominated in advance of the start of the
Meeting. This challenged the Committee both with regard to i)
Members not having had a chance to pre-consider the candidates in
advance of the Meeting and ii) the Committee being able to conduct
a fair and structured election according to set procedures.
The Committee, before holding the election at that meeting, did
however agree to the format of the election itself. This procedure
has been recorded in the report of the Meeting, in para. 275 (CEP
XVII):
The Chair outlined the following voting procedure, which was
agreed by consensus:
A quorum was required for a valid election (this would be two
thirds of the membership of the CEP).
The outcome of elections would be decided by (simple) majority
vote of the present and voting Members.
In the case where there were more than two candidates for a
position, rounds of voting should be conducted, eliminating the
candidate with the least votes in each round. In the case of a tied
result in such an elimination round a new vote between these two
should be taken (after having identified which candidates have the
least number of votes). Should the second result not differ from the
first round, then elimination should be decided by the toss of a
coin.
When only two candidates were left, voting should continue until
one candidate won a (simple) majority.
The Committee noted that it would be desirable to incorporate this
new procedure in a future revision of the Rules of Procedure (para
276).
As of yet no procedure has been discussed or agreed upon with
regard to the nomination procedure. This leaves the Committee
vulnerable to similar situations as that was encountered in 2014. It
seems sensible to ensure that there is clarity with regard to the
number of candidates and which candidates in advance of the
meeting.
Two-meeting term rather than 2-year term
Rule 15 of the CEP RoP also notes that the “Chairperson and the
Vice-chairs shall be elected for a period of two years and, where
possible, their terms shall be staggered” and that “Chairperson and
the Vice-chairs shall not be re-elected to their post for more than
one additional two-year term”.
During the recent pandemic the CEP and ATCM was faced with the
unprecedented situation that the annual meetings were cancelled
(Helsinki 2020). The Chair was up for (re-)election at the Helsinki
meeting, but it clearly was not possible to conduct such an election
in the absence of the meeting, and thereby not possible to adhere to
the two-year term indicated in the Rules of Procedure. Though it is
not expected that this will be a frequently occurring situation, the
experience from this particular year indicate that it may be sensible
to formalize a two-meeting term rather than a two-year term for a
Chair, the Chair thus presiding over two meetings regardless of
unforeseen gaps in the meeting regularity, this in line with the
initial intention of enabling a Chair to have a bit of continuity in
effort.
Proposal
It is suggested that the Committee discuss and agree to procedures
for nomination of candidates for the position of CEP Chair. It is
suggested that these procedures could be as follows:
At least 180 days before the meeting of the Committee for
Environmental Protection in which a CEP Chair will be elected, the
current CEP Chair will issue a circular to: a) remind Members that
there will be an election; b) notify Members of his/her willingness
to stand a second term if this is the end of his/her first term; and c)
invite for nomination of candidates according to point 2.
Members should submit nominations for candidates to the
Secretariat at the latest 60 days before the start of the meeting of
the Committee for Environmental Protection. Nominated candidates
should:
be from among the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties;
have sound working knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty system, the
practices and the work of the CEP and the issues under
consideration by the Committee;
have the support of their Party to serve in the role for at least one
term covering two meetings; and
be from a Party different from the Parties of the current Vice-chairs
At least 20 days before the start of the Meeting, the current CEP
Chair will issue a circular summarising the results of any call for
nominations.
It is suggested that the CEP Rules of Procedure be updated to reflect
these nomination procedures. Furthermore, it is suggested that the
earlier agreed upon procedures for election (as referred to in the
above) be incorporated into the CEP Rules of Procedure.
It is also suggested that the CEP agree to amend Rule 15 so that the
serving term for Chair and Vice-chair is specified to span two
meetings, ie:
The Committee shall elect a Chair and two Vice-chairs from among
the Consultative Parties. The Chairperson and the Vice-chairs shall
be elected for a period of two years meetings and, where possible,
their terms shall be staggered.
The Chairperson and the Vice-chairs shall not be re-elected to their
post for more than one additional two-year meeting term. The
Chairperson and Vice-chairs shall not be representatives from the
same Party.
Attached are i) a draft Decision to this end and ii) a draft updated
RoP.
Decision X (20XX)
CEP Rules of Procedures: Nomination and election procedures
The Representatives,
Recalling Rule 15 of the CEP Rules of Procedure which specifies
that the Committee should select a Chairperson from among the
Consultative Parties;
Noting that Rule 15 of the CEP Rules of Procedure is silent as to the
selection and nomination procedures to be followed in selecting the
CEP Chair;
Recalling also the voting procedure, which was agreed by consensus
at CEP XVII (para 275 of the CEP XXVII Final Report);
Noting also that Rule 15 furthermore specifies the serving terms for
Chair and Vice-chairs;
Decide:
that CEP Chair candidates shall be nominated and elected in
accordance with the following procedure:
At least 180 days before the meeting of the Committee for
Environmental Protection in which a CEP Chair will be elected, the
current CEP Chair will issue a circular to: a) remind Members that
there will be an election; b) notify Members of his/her willingness
to stand a second term if this is the end of his/her first term; and c)
invite for nomination of candidates according to point 2.
Members should submit nominations for candidates to the
Secretariat at the latest 60 days before the start of the meeting of
the Committee for Environmental Protection. Nominated candidates
should:
be from among the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties;
have sound working knowledge of the Antarctic Treaty system, the
practices and the work of the CEP and the issues under
consideration by the Committee;
have the support of their Party to serve in the role for at least one
term covering two meetings; and
be from a Party different from the Parties of the current Vice-chairs
At least 20 days before the start of the Meeting, the current CEP
Chair will issue a circular summarising the results of any call for
nominations.
that the following procedure should be followed during elections
for Chair and Vice-chairs (under the appropriate agenda item on the
CEP agenda):
At least two thirds of the Members must be present for a valid
election.
The Chairperson and the Vice-chairs are elected by simple majority
vote of the present and voting Members.
In the event that there are more than one candidate for any of the
positions the following rules shall apply:
Rounds of voting shall be conducted until there are two candidates.
The candidate with the least votes in each round is eliminated.
In the event that two candidates have the same number of votes in
a round of voting according to a) a new vote between these two
shall be conducted.
In the event that two candidates have the same number of votes
when the procedures described in b) is followed elimination shall
be decided by the toss of a coin.
In the event that two candidates have the same number of votes in
the last round of voting, or in the event that there are two
candidates for the position election shall be decided by the toss of a
coin.
That the serving term for Chair and Vice-chairs shall be two
meetings, with an option to be re-elected for a term of two
meetings.
The Parties furthermore agree to update the CEP Rules of Procedure
to reflect this Decision (Attachment).
Attachment: Draft revised CEP Rules of Procedure
