Aviation in Antarctica: Communication mechanisms to increase
safety and reduce risks
Aviation in Antarctica: Communication mechanisms to increase
safety and reduce risks
Summary
With increased activity in Antarctica, both in terms of governmental
and non-governmental activity, follows an increase in aviation
activity. This includes inter and intra-continental flights, the use of
drones, helicopters, weather balloons etc. An increase in activity
can lead to a higher risk of accidents, incidents and near misses.
Having considered outcomes of the COMNAP Antarctic Aviation
Workshop (March, 2022) to increase safety and reduce risks ,it is
recommended that Parties strongly encourage operators they are
responsible for to keep aircraft transponders activated at all times,
and that operators work to establish regional communication
groups/networks to ensure real time information sharing on flights
within a region.
Discussion
Activity in Antarctica has increased over the last years as seen in
reports from IAATO (most recently IP42, ATCM 17) and in the
Electronic information Exchange System (EIES). These numbers are
expected to continue to increase. An increase in activity has been
followed by an increase in aviation activities, which is also visible
through the numbers from IAATO and in EIES. This includes inter
and intra-continental flights, drone flights, helicopter usage as well
as weather balloons to mention the most common. With an increase
in activity, the risk of accidents and incidents also increases. As
such it is important that the ATCM works towards minimising those
risks through implementing best practice and improving
communication where possible.
COMNAP had a successful Antarctic Aviation Workshop in March
2022, and there were several recommendations from the workshop
that we see as useful to take forward to the ATCM for discussion.
We highly recommend Parties to refer to the full workshop report
that is available on COMNAPs website for more detailed
information and further recommendations. In particular for this
paper, we would like to highlight recommendations 1 and the
recommendations relating to communication between operators
(4-8).
Recommendation 1 recommends that all aircrafts must operate with
transponders turned on while operating in the Antarctic Treaty
area. This was agreed by the ATCM in Resolution 3 (2022), and
implementation by all should therefore be a priority. Turning on
transponders is a simple way to decrease the risk of accidents and
incidents, and this should be done for both governmental and non-
governmental operators regardless of whether or not the activity is
taking place in an area of little, light or high flight activity.
The COMNAP aviation workshop also put forward a range of
recommendations dealing with different aspects of communication
between operators (recommendations 4-8). These highlight a range
of communication needs that need to be more formalised to ensure
that there is a high level of communication between operators, and
a high level of awareness of the activities going on in a given area.
One of our main takeaways from this is that there is a need for well-
established regional groups/networks that ensure that there is real-
time communication on aviation activities taking place -
encompassing all aviation activities including aircraft flights,
helicopter flights, balloons and drones.
From experiences in Dronning Maud Land (DML), and through our
involvement in DROMLAN (Dronning Maud Land Air Network
Project) we feel that we have relevant experiences that could be
used in other parts of the Antarctic. In DML, DROMLAN
administrates «DROMCOM» which is an updated communication
list for all operators and stations in DML, both governmental and
non-governmental. This together with updated email lists for
intercontinental and intracontinental flights used by all operators
operating in the DML area, allows us to update each other in real
time on activities taking place. All subscribers to the various email
lists get advanced notice as well as real time updates on all aviation
activities taking place in the region. This has worked very well and
proved very useful since all operators in the region actively use this
tool. This approach is something we think could be useful in other
regions to improve awareness of flight operations, and therefore
reduce the risk of incidents and accidents.
A difficulty we see with this system is in cases where new operators,
or operators that do not normally have activities in a region decide
to have activities there. For a well-functioning email system to work
optimally we need to have a way of making these systems known to
new operators and operators that are working in other regions than
those they usually operate in. We would like for the ATCM to
discuss this matter.
Conclusion
We ask that the meeting recommends that all Antarctic operators:
Ensure that aircraft transponders are turned on at all times in line
with point 6(b) in ATCM Resolution 3 (2022).
Encourage the establishment of regional communication groups/
networks for both national and non-governmental operators to
provide information in real time on all types of aviation activity
including flights, helicopters, drones, and balloons etc. This could
for example be through an updated email list.
Consider how to ensure that these email lists can be made available
as appropriate so that new operators, or operators flying in other
regions than they normally do can easily access the correct email
lists.
