DML-RINGS and Enderby Land RINGS – opening extensive
international collaboration to close critical data gaps for sea-level
projections
DML-RINGS and Enderby Land RINGS – opening extensive
international collaboration to close critical data gaps for sea-level
projections
Summary
Many coastal regions in Antarctica remain inadequately surveyed or
totally un-surveyed, which really hampers the development of our
knowledge on how the Antarctic Ice Sheet and Southern Ocean will
behave in the warming world in the coming centuries. Within
SCAR, RINGS is an effort aiming to develop a coordinated
framework that will facilitate and enable complementary and
comprehensive airborne surveys in the coastal zone of the Antarctic
Ice Sheet. On this basis an initiative has been taken to develop some
early efforts in Dronning Maud Land (DML) and Enderby Land,
through broad collaboration and contributions by national
programs active in these regions and beyond. It is suggested that
Parties lend their support to the pan-Antarctic RINGS initiative and
encourage coordinated regional efforts to close data gaps, using the
DML and Enderby Land effort as useful example and test case for
the broader Antarctic needs.
Why there is a need/desire to know the bed topography in the
coastal region
The Antarctic Ice Sheet is the largest freshwater mass on Earth,
holding a volume of water equivalent to 58 meters of global sea-
level rise. Accurate projections of the future evolution of the ice
sheet are essential for mitigating potential risks to people and
infrastructure along coastlines and on low-lying islands worldwide.
The sixth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC AR6) shows that the Antarctic contribution
to the predicted sea-level rise is comparable to contributions from
thermal expansion, the Greenland Ice Sheet, and glaciers.
Nevertheless, 51–52% of the total uncertainty in sea-level rise
predictions comes from the Antarctic Ice Sheet, which is far more
than that from the other sources. Moreover, the uncertainty
estimates only consider physical processes with medium or higher
confidence. The Antarctic Ice Sheet may introduce even larger
levels of uncertainty to future sea levels when processes that are
less well understood are considered because these processes could
lead to large, rapid, and possibly irreversible changes.
ACCE notes that Antarctic contributions to the global mean sea
level over coming centuries will be net positive. ACCE underscores
the importance of reducing uncertainties in the Antarctic
contribution to future sea level rise and refining estimates of the
rate and magnitude of that contribution. It notes as one of its key
research recommendations that we should “Urgently reduce
uncertainty about the current and future behaviour of the Antarctic
Ice Sheet. The current observation network, especially for the
hydrology and conditions at the base of the ice sheet, and the
temperature and bathymetry of ice shelf cavities, coastal regions
and the continental shelf, is inadequate to fully anticipate change
and to understand the risks of ice shelf collapse, loss of buttressing
and rapid ice sheet mass loss in the coming decades. An
international effort is urgently required to address this”.
For climate predictions in the coming centuries, it is key to
understand the interactions between the Antarctic Ice Sheet and
Southern Ocean, and their linkages to the global climate system.
Numerical models and satellite remote sensing have developed
tremendously improved capacity in the past decade. However, our
knowledge is still inadequate to constrain numerical models and to
take the full benefits of observational capabilities of the satellites.
For example, IPCC’s
Special Report on Ocean and Cryosphere pointed out that
inadequate knowledge of bed topography in the coastal regions is
one of root causes of large uncertainty to predict the future of the
Antarctic Ice Sheet. The bed topography cannot be measured from
satellites, requiring large-scale airborne geophysical surveys. In
particular, many coastal regions remain surveyed inadequately or
totally un-surveyed, which really hampers the development of our
knowledge on how the Antarctic Ice Sheet and Southern Ocean will
behave in the warming world in the coming centuries in the context
of Sustainable Development Goals #13 “Climate Action”.
SCAR RINGS – facilitating pan-Antarctic action in the coastal
regions
About two thirds of the Antarctic Ice Sheet coast has floating ice
shelves. The transition from the grounded ice sheet to the floating
ice shelf, called grounding line, has a complicated shape. Together
with the coastline where ice shelves are not present, the total length
of the ice-sheet margin all around Antarctica is nearly 1.5 times of
Earth’s circumference. Filling the data gap all around the 62,000-
kilometer-long margin of the Antarctic Ice Sheet is a big challenge.
Driven by the need for an internationally collaborative approach for
studying the ice-sheet margins, the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) established the RINGS Action Group, in
2021. The immediate goal of this initiative is to develop a
coordinated framework that will facilitate and enable
complementary and comprehensive survey and mapping initiatives
around the continent. The primary focus of this effort is surveying
the bed topography within 50 km from the grounding line to
landward, and under the ice shelves. This is critical knowledge to
predict the future of the ice sheet and to measure ice-flow discharge
from the ice sheet to the ocean, which defines the Antarctic
contribution to the global sea level rise when it combined with
snowfall over the entire ice sheet.
The RINGS Action Group organized the first International Workshop
in Norway last summer and identified high science priorities in the
coastal regions that can be largely addressed by airborne
geophysical surveys. In addition to radar, gravimeter and
magnetometer surveys for glaciology and geophysics, the
community prioritizes measurements of past snow accumulation for
improving climate models. It also seeks deployment of remote
sensors for collecting ocean properties in regions where research
vessels do not regularly visit. which remain as a large data gap.
These measurements are a critical step for better predictions of the
future of the Antarctic Ice Sheet and Southern Ocean.
No nation can carry out complete survey missions all around
Antarctica alone. The geographical distribution of bed topography
data shows that the data gaps become more significant farther from
established logistics hubs. This clearly indicates that logistics
feasibility is a main limitation of survey extent in the coastal
regions and international coordination is needed. RINGS is working
closely with COMNAP’s Science Facilitation Working Group to
develop efficient and iterative collaboration between logisticians
and scientists to reach beyond the historical capabilities of
individual National Antarctic Programs.
DML and Enderby Land RINGS –regional initiatives paving the way
While SCAR RINGS Action Group is developing the guidelines for
regional RINGS surveys, an initiative has been taken to develop
some early efforts in Droning Maud Land (DML) and Enderby Land.
DML have many active countries which provides a foundation for
collaboration in implementing a survey to fill the data gaps in this
region. Existing data are adequate enough to guide further surveys.
Enderby Land is completely different from DML; it has the largest
data gaps in terms of bed topography data near the grounding line,
it is out of normal logistics coverage of any National Antarctic
Programs, and it requires new efforts between nations that do not
work regularly in this field. Therefore, DML and Enderby Land
RINGS surveys are close to end-members of possible future regional
RINGS surveys. These projects can also serve as
useful examples and test-cases for the wider Antarctic needs. It is a
necessary step to best implement RINGS overall guidelines into
active missions.
Norwegian Polar Institute and Alfred Wegener Institute are co-
leading a regional RINGS mission in DML and will carry through an
airborne survey in the region in the 2023/24 season. Reflecting the
spirit of Antarctic Treaty System and SCAR, NPI and AWI has
sought to involve the other nations active in DML to contribute to
this mission. Belgium, Finland, India, Japan, South Africa and
Sweden have already committed to contribute or are in the process
of considering in which manner they can contribute. When Japan
indicated their interest in RINGS, it provided a new opportunity to
plan the next regional RINGS surveys in Enderby Land, and
Australia, China and USA have joined this initiative. While DML
RINGS and Enderby Land RINGS were established separately at the
beginning, they are now integrated together to avoid data gaps
between and to use logistics resources in the most efficient way.
Discussions pertaining to the practical aspects of the mission have
been initiated, and both DML and Enderby Land RINGS are likely to
be carried out in January 2024. The AWI (Germany) airplane will
cover primarily cover the DML region, whereas AAD (Australia) and
PRIC (China) airplanes will cover the Enderby Land. Runways at
Davis, Mawson, S17, PES, and Troll will support the mission. DML
RINGS will carry out about 100 flight hours to complete mapping
for RINGS in this region. Missions in Enderby Land will be rather
exploratory as there are no data with GPS-level positioning except
for the vicinity of Mawson Station.
After the survey in 2023-24 season, the data will be analysed to
estimate mass flux from this region and assess fundamental
instability of these regions. It includes the use of satellite data and
numerical models, and by nature it is multidisciplinary.
Proposal
Parties are encouraged to:
take note of the important SCAR RINGS initiative and its role in
increasing the science community’s ability to constrain the
uncertainties relating to Antarctica’s contribution to future sea-level
rise;
make appropriate efforts to enable regional surveys and
supplemental ground-based and vessel-based work in an
internationally coordinated manner, looking at the DML RINGS and
Enderby Land RINGS initiatives as useful examples of international
cooperation enabling such survey efforts; and
support and contribute to the DML RINGS and Enderby Land RINGS
as appropriate.
