Report of the CEP Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) 2022-2023
Report of the CEP Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response
(SGCCR) 2022-2023
Working Paper submitted by Germany as Convenor of the SGCCR
Summary
During the 2022-2023 intersessional period, the focus in the
Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) was laid on
prioritization of activities already described in the Climate Change
Response Work Programme (CCRWP). According to feedback from
eleven actively contributing SGCCR members, the six topics came
into focus; these were, among others, work to assess the status of
climate-vulnerable Antarctic species, intensified coordination on
climate change response in the marine realm with SC-CAMLR, as
well as the ever more urgent de-contamination of past sites of
activities.
The SGCCR invites all CEP members to more actively support
CCRWP implementation, including the proposed six areas of
activity.
Background
The CCRWP was adopted through Resolution 4 (2015) and updated
by CEP in 2016. To support updating, implementation and follow-
up of the CCRWP, a new SGCCR was established at ATCM XL
(Decision 1 (2017)). At CEP XXIII, following a review of the SGCCR,
the Committee agreed that the work of the SGCCR should continue
in the future under its current Terms of Reference (CEP XXIII Final
Report para. 35). The SGCCR maintains flexibility regarding
membership and encourages new members.
The Terms of Reference for the SGCCR are to facilitate the efficient
and timely implementation of the CCRWP. In addition to the agreed
Terms of Reference, CEP XX tasked the SGCCR to develop operating
mechanisms to support good participation and efficient handling of
work (CEP XX Final Report, para. 74). Regarding the CEP Five-Year
Work Plan, ‘Climate Change Implications for the Environment’ is set
as a Priority 1 issue, with the key action ‘Implementing the
CCRWP’.
Prior to CEP XXIV (2022) the SGCCR drafted an update of the
CCRWP based on emerging issues and surveyed developments of
climate change effects over last years, which was presented in WP
37 (ATCM XLIV/CEP XXIV). No consensus was reached on updates
to the CCRWP and the SGCCR therefore has continued working to
implement the existing CCRWP (2016) in accordance with the
current Terms of Reference.
SGCCR operation during the 2022-23 intersessional period
During the 2022-2023 intersessional period, the focus was laid on
prioritization of activities already described in the CCRWP. Actively
contributing were eleven representatives from eight CEP Member
countries (Australia, France, Germany, Norway, Portugal, Spain, the
United Kingdom and the United States) and three Observer
Organizations (ASOC, COMNAP and IAATO). The SGCCR was
convened by one of the CEP Vice-Chairs, Dr. Heike Herata.
Based on the given impulses of the involved representatives, the
SGCCR derived six activities out of the CCRWP, which should be
advanced by CEP members and Observer organizations in the
following intersessional period:
Supporting work to assess the status of climate-vulnerable Antarctic
species (Action 6c),
Developing guidance on climate change considerations in
documents for establishing and managing protected areas (Action
2e),
Keeping the Non-Native Species (NNS) manual updated with
current developments (Action 1a),
Intensifying coordination on climate change response in the marine
realm with SC-CAMLR (Action 3e),
De-contamination of past sites of activities in the Antarctic area
(Action 5f),
Assessing the risk of climate change for Antarctic existing and
projected infrastructure and associated environmental consequences
and considering the impacts of climate change linked with the EIA
guidelines, e.g. ensuring proposed long-term facilities are suitably
resilient to climate change (Action 5a and 5d).
Besides the above activities, all Parties’ activities supporting other
CCRWP actions are no less important and are equally valued.
The activity no. (1), requesting a “Programme of status assessments
for endangered or threatened Antarctic species in the light of
Climate Change, including species not yet listed in the IUCN Red
List as vulnerable”, was prioritized by several CEP members. As this
challenge will not be a task for the SGCCR to fulfill on its own, the
SGCCR likes to call on all CEP members to promote necessary
research linked to status assessment of climate-vulnerable species
and ask the SCAR colleagues for support, as far as possible. The
next steps will be discussed in more detail in the next intersessional
period of SGCCR.
Regarding activity no. (2), the SGCCR welcomes the ongoing
discussions of the SGMP regarding a better incorporation of climate
change issues into management of protected areas (see WP 48
SGMP report). Supporting these developments, the SGCCR likes to
reflect the idea highlighted by one of the SGCCR members to create
an inventory of projects/studies/scientific results for science
relevant for a protected area system.
With prioritized activity no. (3) which focuses on the NNS Manual,
the SGCCR members offer support to determine in the next
intersessional period whether aspects of climate change and climate
change adaptation have been sufficiently addressed in the existing
version from 2019 to give feedback for improvements to the
responsible NNS manual authors. The SGCCR notes that Australia,
New Zealand and the United Kingdom continued with the review of
IMO and ATS guidelines and agreements concerning ship biofouling
and ballast water management (see WP 14 and IP 9)
Ongoing developments for the activity no. (4), which addresses the
common concerns and options to better preserve marine ecosystems
in the light of climate change, can be seen in the planning of the
next Joint CEP/SC-CCAMLR Workshop for 2024 (see WP 12 on
Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop preparation by France). In
addition, SGCCR members reported on several research activities to
extend the knowledge base.
With activity no. (5), some SGCCR members raised the important
topic to prevent hazards by formerly contaminated sites linked to
the climate change driven melting of ice and permafrost. Although
the necessary cleanup may affect only a few states, the SGCCR likes
to ask affected Parties to address this challenge in a timely manner
and would welcome regular reports on potential pollution threats in
areas at particular risk by ongoing climate change.
The listed activity no. (6), aims at understanding the environmental
consequences and impacts on natural and heritage values due to
climate change impact to the built environment, and refers, inter
alia, to the exchange with COMNAP in previous intersessional
periods as well as on the former COMNAP contributions on
modernization of Antarctic Stations (e.g., ATCM XLII, IP 47; ATCM
XLIII, BP 10). SGCCR welcomes the ongoing work to develop a tool
to assess the
risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage values as direct
contribution to the work of the SGCCR (see IP 102 by Argentina,
Australia, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom and SCAR). The
SGCCR likes to motivate all CEP members to timely assess the risk
of climate change effects for their existing and projected
infrastructure and associated environmental consequences.
Recommendation
Germany on behalf of the SGCCR recommends that the CEP
members continue to work actively for the implementation of the
CCRWP and to prioritise the proposed six activities.
