Urgent Challenges for the Antarctic Treaty System
Urgent Challenges for the Antarctic Treaty System
Working paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Summary
Russia is an initiator of systematic discussion of topical issues,
challenges and trends for the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). The
emergence of new factors may give rise to potential threats to the
ATS, requiring the Meeting to assess and develop response
measures. This paper is intended to highlight the dangers of the
politicization of the ATCM, its negative consequences in terms of
the purposes and principles of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty (the
Treaty), other ATS norms, and the traditions of the Antarctic
community. The Consultative Parties are invited to review the
recent challenges of the ATCM. It is important to exchange views as
to whether politicization is an indication of systemic changes or
whether the Consultative Parties intend to make efforts to prevent
its influence from affecting to the future of the ATS.
Historical Context of the ATS
Russia is one of the founding states of the Treaty, which reserved
the southern polar region for peace and scientific research, as well
as international cooperation for these purposes.
The Treaty established the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
(ATCM, the Meeting) as a depoliticized forum for the development
of measures to promote the implementation of its principles and
objectives and for exchanging information on Antarctic matters.
The period of formation and development of the ATS included
examples of political confrontation and military conflicts between
individual Consultative Parties and with third countries. At the
same time, neither political positions t not directly related to
activities within the southern polar region, nor any confrontational
attitude, entered into the discussions of the Meetings.
Adherence to the principles of the Treaty and the constructive
interaction of the States parties based on this, confirmed the
significance and uniqueness of the international legal regime of
Antarctica. This factor probably played a role in the accession of a
large number of states to the ATS mechanisms.
Russia's Approach to Joint Efforts to Strengthen the ATS
As one of the founders of the ATS, Russia traditionally contributes
to its development and reinforcement.
The mandate of the Meeting covers all institutional and legal issues
relating to activity in Antarctica and provides opportunities to
identify relevant solutions to new trends and challenges faced by
the ATS. From 2019 to 2022, the ATCM's Multi-Year Strategic Work
Plan contained an item devoted to cooperation between the Parties
to identify and take into account current and future trends relating
to the ATS in a timely manner. Discussions within the sessions and
during the intersessional period as a whole indicated broad support
for this initiative.
The involvement of the Consultative Parties in such discussions is
intended to ensure the development of a unique international legal
regime for Antarctica in the spirit of the Treaty and is in line with
the goal of maintaining peace and stability in the region. In this
regard, the Russian Federation is carefully studying present trends
and considers it necessary to bring the current challenges and
problems facing the ATS to the Meeting for consideration.
Politicization as a Challenge for the ATS: Facts and Legal Aspects
A serious threat to the ATS today is the politicization brought to the
ATCM forum during the German presidency in 2022 by using the
Meeting as a vehicle for anti-Russian propaganda and departing
from the positive traditions of the Antarctic community.
Thus, the opening of the 44th ATCM by high-level representatives
of the host country was marked by a departure from Antarctic
issues and unfounded accusations against one of the Consultative
Parties.
For the sake of promoting anti-Russian rhetoric, a discussion was
related to Information Paper 85 (2022), submitted by Ukraine on 22
April, 2022.
This document included false statements, but did not contain any
information on the scale of the National Antarctic Program of
Ukraine in previous years and did not allow any conclusion to be
drawn regarding the extent of the potential reduction in the
programme of work and the reasons for it.
It should be noted that this document was prepared and submitted
in violation of the rules and practices of the ATCM.
In particular, the final section contains recommendations, including
proposals for the adoption of specific decisions, which is possible
only within the framework of a working paper. Moreover, calls to
condemn one of the Consultative Parties for activities outside the
borders of Antarctica and to exclude it from the Consultative Parties
is clearly contrary to the spirit and letter of the Treaty, in particular
the principle of international cooperation.
According to paragraph 5 of the Annex to the Revised 2016 ATCM
Rules of Procedure (Rules of Procedure) translation of a document
into all official languages of the Meeting is permitted only if
submitted no later than 45 days before the upcoming meeting (in
the context of the 44th ATCM no later than 8 April, 2022). In
accordance with the above paragraph “If any such paper is
submitted later than 45 days before the Consultative Meeting, it
may only be considered if no Consultative Party objects”.
Contrary to Rules 17-20 of the Rules of Procedure, the floor was not
given to the Russian Federation on a point of order as a matter of
priority, although the “hybrid” format of the event made it possible
to indicate the nature of the request in a clear manner. Moreover,
the decision to continue discussion of the issue was not put to a
vote.
Attention was also drawn to the Chair's attempt to limit the number
of contributions and the time allowed for speeches by individual
delegations, given that, in accordance with Rule 16 of the Rules of
Procedure, such decisions can only be taken by the Meeting.
Given the significant violations committed during the submission
and discussion of the document, the course of discussions was not
duly reflected in the final report.
In a politicized environment, one of the pillars of the ATS, the
principle of international cooperation, can become vulnerable.
It is important to take into account that appeals directed against
one of the Consultative Parties were presented not only at the
ATCM venue, but were also addressed by the head of the Ukrainian
Antarctic station in the presence of a large group of employees of
the Antarctic stations of other states, including Russian states.
In view of the role of the ATCM as the main Antarctic forum, it is
advisable that it oversees the activities of all subsidiary bodies,
including the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)
and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes
(COMNAP), and ensures that the bodies comply with its mandate.
Recommendations
1. The Russian Federation invites the ATCM to record the
understanding that politicization presents a challenge that threatens
the integrity of the ATS.
2. The Russian Federation invites the ATCM to record the fact that
politicization negatively affects the norms of the ATS, in particular,
the principle of international cooperation established by the Treaty.
3. The Russian Federation proposes to initiate an exchange of views
on the following issues:
- How can the Consultative Parties enforce the existing rules
regarding the established procedure of giving the floor to requests
from delegations in accordance with Rules 17-20 of the Rules of
Procedure? Which mechanisms are needed to prevent violation of
these rules?
- How do the Consultative Parties assess the risks of considering
documents for translation into all official languages, submitted
beyond the deadline allowed, and discussing these in the absence of
any joint agreement? How can the Consultative Parties enforce the
existing rules regarding the submission and consideration of
documents in the future?
- Do the current Rules of Procedure require amendments or
additions of a recommendatory nature in order to implement them
more effectively?
