TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE                                XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                      TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                               XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/50

Item 9 (c)

Original: English

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

HUMAN IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

HUMAN IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT: ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT ASSESSMENT

Recalling Recommendation XIV-2 and paragraphs 69 and 70 at the 
Final Report of the XIVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
relating to the implications of the word «significant» as used 
in Recommendation XIV-2;

Recognising, however, that it would assist all Contracting 
Parties contemplating scientific or associated logistic 
activity, or major extensions of existing activities, to 
have an indicative list of activities which might reasonably 
be expected to have a significant impact on the Antarctic 
environment and would justify proceeding to the preparation 
of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation in the planning 
stage.

Recommend to their Governments that in the planning stage of 
all their scientific and associated logistic activities they 
have regard to the following list of activities in deciding 
whether to prepare Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations.
Activities which might reasonably be expected to have a
'significant impact' on the Antarctic environment and would
justify proceeding to the preparation of a CEE in the planning
stage.

1.      Logistic/Support Activities.

1.a.    Activities which should        invoke a
CEE
- Establishment of new stations, airstrips,
wharfage,      and storage facilities

- Major increases in personnel or personnel
movements, aircraft flights or re-supply
operations.

- Major changes in amount or type of power generation,
or fuel consumption.

- Any operation affecting areas valued mainly for
their sterile or pristine nature, eg dry valleys,
remote ice caps.

- Any operation involving the closing of a station
which has been active for several years.

1.b.   Activities which would probably invoke a CEE.

- Establishment of field huts or refuges

- Changes in type of fuel storage

- Changes in waste disposal practices

- Extension of existing bases or stations,
or provision of storage or wharfage facilities

- Building of roads or vehicular access routes.
2.  Scientific Activities
2a.  Activities that should            invoke a CEE

- Interference with or modification of endangered
'or unique  systems, communities or population

- Operations which might adversely affect SPAs or
SSSls

- Operations affecting areas valued mainly for their
sterile or pristine nature, eg dry valleys, remote
ice cap areas

- Operations which might perceptibly impede the
recovery of any endangered, threatened or
seriously depleted population of native living
organisms

- Operations which will adversely affect
populations for which long time-series of
data have been, or are being, collected to
establish the status of the population or the
ecosystem of which it forms a part

- Introduction of radionucleides into the
environment where their subsequent recovery
and removal cannot reasonably be assured

- Drilling operations involving the use of
drilling fluids other than water or seawater,
and/or possible escape or vertical movement
of subterranean fluids

- Marine seismic surveys involving the use of
explosive charges

2b.  Activities which might involve a CEE

- Introduction of alien biota with the potential
to multiply or disperse
- Application of biologically active substances which have the potential to spread so as to cause perceptible effects outside the area of application

- Experiments deliberately designed to create adverse changes in populations or communities (perturbation experiments)

3. - Other Activities.

3a.     Activities that should invoke a CEE

- Tourist operations involving vessels carrying more than 10 passengers

- Tourist or 'adventure' air flights to blue-ice area of the interior of Antarctica.

3b.     Activities which might involve a CEE.

- Expeditions to the Antarctic not having scientific research as their major objective
