TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XV= CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/12
Item 9 b) of the provisional
agenda
Original : English

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON MARINE POLLUTION
(submitted by the United States)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON MARINE POLLUTION

Agenda Item 9(b)

(Preambular paragraphs)

Recommend to their governments that:

1. They approve and take measures within their competence necessary to ensure compliance with:

      a) a prohibition within the Antarctic Teaty area on all intentional discharges from vessels into the marine environment which include oil;

      b) a prohibition within the Antarctic Treaty area on disposal from vessels into the marine environment of all plastics and garbage other than food wastes, provided that disposal of food wastes should be made as far as practicable from land, but in no event within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves; and

      c) a prohibition on discharge of sewage from vessels within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves.

2. They develop contingency plans for pollution response in Antarctica in coordination with the International Maritime Organization (IMO), as appropriate, including contingency plans for vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area, particularly vessels carrying oil.

3. They implement and take measures within their competence necessary to ensure compliance by all their vessels engaged in Antarctic operations with the relevant provisions of the following conventions:

      a) the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (the London Dumping Convention);

      b) the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, and the Protocol of 1978 Relating Thereto, with Annexes I, II, III, and V (MARPOL 73/78);

      c) the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, and the Protocol of 1978 Relating Thereto (SOLAS);
d) the International Convention on Standards of Training,
Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers with Annex,
1978, (the STCW Convention);

e) the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966 (the
Load Lines Convention); and

f) the Convention on the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972 (COLREGs).

When such vessels are warships, naval auxiliaries or other
state-owned or state-operated vessels used, for the time being,
only on government non-commercial service, they shall take
appropriate measures not impairing operations or operational
capabilities of such vessels to ensure that they act in a manner
consistent so far as is reasonable and practicable with these
conventions.

4. If they are not parties, they become parties to the
conventions listed in 3 (a-f).

5. They take actions within the IMO to secure designation of the
waters south of 60 degrees South Latitude as a special area under
MARPOL 73/78 Annexes I and V, provided that the establishment of
reception facilities otherwise called for in these Annexes not
be considered either necessary or desirable in the Antarctic
Treaty area.
