TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/33
Item 13 of the agenda
Original : English

EFFECT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
EXPEDITIONS IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
(working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)
ANT/XV/WP
Date:
Original: English

Agenda Item 13

Effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in
the Antarctic Treaty Area

(Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

Explanatory Note: At the XIVth ATCM the United Kingdom
submitted a draft Recommendation which attempted to codify
the existing Recommendations on this subject together with
some relevant elements of the Report of the XIIth ATCM.
In the course of preparing for this meeting, the UK has
been asked by some ATCPs to resubmit its draft (ANT/XVI/6)
as a contribution to the debate on this issue.  A copy is
attached.

In the United Kingdom's present view, however, simple
codification of what has been agreed in the past is unlikely
to provide a regulatory framework adequate to ensure the
environmental sustainability of tourism and non-governmental
activity.  It is clear to the UK that some colleagues wi.h
to look rather more fundamentally at the problems posed by
the effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in
the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The UK agrees with this view.
It is, however, a matter which will need more time than is
available at a regular Consultative Meeting to deal with
adequately.

The UK therefore proposes, as a first step, that ATCPs
should attempt to define the scope of the matter by means
of a list of qu.stions. The UK would hope that an agreed
list might be included in the Final Report of this meeting
as a guide for the time when the matter is dealt with
substantively. The answers to many, but not all, such
questions are already contained in approved Recommendations.

A first attempt at such a list of questions is attached.
It is intended to be indicative rather than exhaustive.
EFFECTS OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL EXPEDITIONS IN THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA: QUESTIONS

1. How should the activity under consideration be defined?

2. Is the purpose to limit the amount of activity or,
irrespective of the amount of activity, to provide for
regulation in the interests of environmental sustainability?

3. For purpose: of exchanging information about such
activity, in advance, what are or should be the obligations
of:

      (a) All Contracting Parties?

      (b) Consultative Parties?

      (c) Contracting Parties in relation to activity
organised in their territory?

      (d) Contracting Parties in relation to activity not
organised in, but departing for the Antarctic from,
their territory?

4. What rights does or should a Contracting Party have to
refuse, limit or place conditions on, visits to its stations
by an activity?

5. How can it be ensured that an activity is made aware of
such refusals, limitations or conditions at the planning
stage?

6. What rights do or should station commanders have with
regard to an activity intending to visit or visiting their
stations?

7. Should activity be subject to environmental impact
assessment procedures?  If so,

      (a) how and by whom should assessments be prepared?

      (b) to whom should they be communicated?

      (c) how and by whom should they be monitored?
8. What obligations should rest with an activity to 
report on what is has done?

9. What roles should Areas of Special Tourist Interest or 
the management of activity within designated areas have 
with respect to recreational activity?

10. How are regulations to be enforced?  In particular, 
what role in securing compliance should be played by:

(a)    all Contracting Parties?

(b)    Contracting Parties with which an activity has 
        some special connection?
