TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE          XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ         XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  PARIS
                        9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/15
Item 12 b) of the provisional
agenda
Original : Spanish

MEASURES FOR FOSTERING INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC
CO-OPERATION : CONCENTRATION OF SITING OF STATIONS
(working paper presented by the Delegation of Uruguay)

Paris, 10 October 1989
1

MEASURES FOR FOSTERING INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC

CO-OPERATION : CONCENTRATION OF SITING OF STATIONS

(working paper presented by the Delegation of Uruguay)

This subject was specifically discussed for the first time at the
the         Thirteenth    Consultative   Meeting   which,   in   its
Recommendation XIII-6, stated that where stations have been established
in the same vicinity, there should be appropriate consultations to
safeguard existing scientific activities and preclude the operational
logistic  difficulties  and  adverse  effects  unduly  generated  by
their cumulative impacts.

Nevertheless, it was found necessary to continue to examine the
question  and  it  was  accordingly  discussed  again  at  the
Fourteenth Consultative Meeting.

It emerges from the Final Report of that Meeting that the discussion
on this question focussed on the following three aspects :

a) increased  opportunities  for  contributing  to scientific
knowledge that could be gained from the siting of stations in the
widest possible range of areas;
In so doing, it would be possible to ensure that the new stations
maximize their scientific potential and do not detract from the
programmes of existing stations.

b) SCAR's concern that the continued increase in the number of
stations in some parts of the Antarctic could result in unproductive
duplication  of  scientific  programmes ;  and

c) the creation of a new category of protected area in connection
with land-use planning round existing stations.
2

It was finally decided that it was important to examine the question in greater depth, and that is why it has been included 
in the agenda of the Fifteenth Consultative Meeting.

The problem in itself is a relatively recent one and has been 
caused by the growing number of scientific activities in 
Antarctica and the accession of new members to the Antarctic 
Treaty.

It is for this reason that the question calls for further 
studies and forecasts based on the current situation and 
requirements, but also on the principles arising out of the 
Antarctic Treaty proper and many of the Recommendations 
emanating from the Consultative Meetings.

The Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have agreed on a regime 
according widespread freedom of action to scientific research, 
under a system involving intensive co-operation.

Ideally, the two principles taken together entail a minimum of 
co-ordination of activities, so that efforts will not be 
dissipated and the utmost advantage is taken of them. Against 
that background, at this stage in the development of the 
Antarctic System the need for exchanging scientific information 
in some instances and the installation of new bases could also 
be said to entail engaging in prior consultations that would, 
in the final analysis, be geared to seeking and obtaining the 
best possible results from those new bases and the scientific 
programmes they are expected to implement.

In addition, the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have 
constantly recognised and re-affirmed that the unique and 
pristine nature of the Antarctic ecosystems makes them 
particularly vulnerable to human interference and that the 
consequences of significant changes in those ecosystems would 
finally have a far-reaching impact. It is for this reason that 
the Parties to the Antarctic system have repeatedly given a 
undertaking to protect the environment, adopt measures to 
minimize prejudicial human interference, and refrain from 
activities which might tend to change it, unless the requisite 
steps are taken to predict the likely changes and the necessary 
checks are made to prevent them from having detrimental effects 
on the environment.
3

As has already been aknowledged, all this can finally be 
achieved only though co-ordinated and orderly scientific 
research, so that as the number of Participating States 
increases and the volume of logistic and technological 
resources in the Antarctic is stepped up, scientific freedom, 
Antarctic co-operation, other authorized uses of the area, and 
the protection of the environment will all be rendered 
compatible and can be combined.

In an endeavour to seek an agreement on the question at issue, 
the Delegation of the Republic of Chile actually submitted to 
the Fourteenth Consultative Meeting a document on the subject 
which contains a considerable amount of data illustrating the 
increase in activities, among other information (ANT/XIV/WP36).

Some of the documents presented prior to the start of the 
Fifteenth Consultative Meeting point, either directly or 
indirectly, to ways and means of resolving the issue. For 
example, we have the document presented by the Delegation of 
the United-States (Prep./WP/6), on Antarctic Protected Areas, 
whereby it is specifically sought to regulate human activity in 
those Areas, so as to avoid or minimize mutual interference or 
adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment. The document 
presented by the Delegations of the Federal Republic of Germany 
and France (Prep/WP/3) likewise sets out to ensure that the 
National Antarctic Committees request SCAR to draw up a list of 
projects in terms of their ranking scientific utility which, 
inter alia, would make suggestions as to the location of 
research stations and the most innovative research projects.

It accordingly appears that the situation in the Antarctic has 
now reached the point where, without in any way detracting from 
the principles of scientific freedom under a co-operative 
regime, machinery should be set up in order to ensure that the 
installation of future bases is properly co-ordinated. Indeed, 
it might even be possible to designate global areas which, from 
the scientific standpoint, are not regarded as productive, 
either because such bases would be repeating research that has 
already been carried out or is underway, or else because they 
would interfere with each other or would affect or threaten 
the environment.
4

With the regard to this issue, it would appear necessary to 
take a variety of measures, which could include the following :

a) requesting SCAR to suggest those areas where it 
would be more advisable to site new stations based on 
the principles of freedom of Antarctic research, co-
operation and  scientific  co-ordination and of 
environmental protection.

b) engaging in prior consultations and co-ordination 
between States which already have scientific bases in 
the area and those States which will be setting up new 
bases, having regard to the aformentioned principles.

c) providing for the designation by the Consultative 
Parties, at the suggestion of SCAR or of the Parties 
themselves, of areas of scientific concentration, such 
as those areas in which the setting up of new bases 
would not be advisable or advantageous on account of 
the interference between them and/or  the scientific 
research they are carrying out, or on the grounds of 
environmental protection.

The governing criterior would acccordingly be to try and avoid 
cases where the concentration of stations or research would 
result in the saturation of areas and projects which, moreover, 
might  have  an  impact  on  the  environment.  In  these 
circonstances, areas such as these would become "sensitive", 
with an absorption capacity that would be liable to reach 
saturation point.

For this reason, it would not be sufficient to create new 
buffer zones around existing bases.  Instead, comprehensive 
consideration would have to be given to the entire surrounding 
area.

The exising categories of protected areas and some of the 
categories now being proposed do not appear to make specific 
provision for finding an appropriate solution to this problem. 
Hence, they are regarded as being insufficient to meet the 
repeated concern shown by the Consultative Parties for avoiding 
such concentrations. In fact, they even differ from those 
categories of area whose specificity is such that they are not 
altogether  consistent  with  the  parties  objectives  and 
requirements.
5

The logical conclusion would appear to be that there are areas 
in  Antarctica which have become sensitive to  further 
concentrations, even though this has been prompted by the keen 
scientific displayed by the Parties in their approach to the 
continent of Antarctica. Notwithstanding those praiseworthy 
activities, they must, of necessity, be harmoniously combined 
with the mandatory preservation of the fragile and vulnerable 
Antarctic environment. The development of science, which also 
purports  to  determine  the best way of safeguarding the 
environment, should not, as the result of undue concentration, 
be  instrumental in having an effect contrary to that being 
sought.

This issue, together with other issues on the agenda of this 
Consultative Meeting,  could  be  resolved  by  approving  new 
Recommendations and/or including it in the consideration of the 
Comprehensive Measures  aimed  at  preserving  the  Antarctic 
environment in the light of the current requirements of the 
area and of the Antarctic System itself.
