TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/14
Original : English

COMPREHENSIVE MEASURES FOR THE
PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT AND
DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS

(proposed outline of a draft recommendation
by the Swedish Delegation)
Delegation of Sweden
Working Paper
================

Comprehensive Measures for the Protection of the Antarctic Environment and Dependent and Associated Ecosystems: proposed outline of a draft recommendation.

The Swedish delegation has studied with great interest the proposals presented by Chile, France, Australia, New Zealand and the United States on different aspects of comprehensive measures for protection of the Antarctic environment, including the objectives, contents and conceptual framework of these measures.

The common characteristics of all proposals is the need to enhance the protection of the Antarctic environment in the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System.

On the basis of these proposals, an attempt has been made at defining their common ground and possible elements of a Recommendation for further work.

The draft Recommendation calls for a Consultative Meeting to be held in 1990 in order to elaborate further and comprehensive measures for the protection of the Antarctic environment. However, in order to achieve early and constructive results, we believe that some kind of preparatory meeting should be held so as to facilitate the work of the Consultative Meeting.

Outline for a draft Recommendation

The preambular paragraph should state the need for further protection of the Antarctic environment.

It should recognize the basic features of the Antarctic Treaty and the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole. In particular it should recognize the existing principles of environmental protection already imbedded in the Antarctic Treaty as well as in the Recommendations and the adopted conventions within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System.

It should stress the fundamental importance of scientific research.
2.

It should state the need for elaborating comprehensive 
measures for the protection of the Antarctic 
environment and emphasize the need to preserve 
Antarctica as a special conservation area.

It should recommend to the governments that a 
Consultative Meeting should be called in 1990 with the 
purpose of defining the framework and'contents of such 
a regime as well as the necessary steps to be taken in 
order to achieve this.

It might be useful to call for a "preparatory meeting" 
or a meeting of a special working group in order to 
prepare and facilitate such a Consultative Meeting.

It is proposed that following the preambular 
paragraphs, the substantive paragraphs should be 
structured primarilary around four elements:

1. The need to define more exactly the environmental 
concerns relating to activities in Antarctica, incl. 
the pollutants at issue;

Examples:

The general vulnerability of the Antarctic 
eco-system.

The influence of Antarctica on the development of 
the climate of the world, and hence its link with 
global environment developments, further enhances 
this concern.

Special efforts should be made to define 
pollutants in the atmosphere and the terrester 
and marine systems respectively.

Examples of pollutants that have been mentioned 
in the working papers are hydrocarbons and other 
hazardous materials.

2. The need to define the human activities involved 
that cause environmental concern:

Examples:

Threats to the environment are caused mainly by 
human activities in the area. The human impact 
should be defined and estimated (in quantitative 
terms).
3.

The organization of station facilities and the 
management of stations are of basic importance to 
the human impact in Antarctica. The increasing 
number of visitors is an additional factor of 
growing influence.

In all cases of human activities, transports, 
communications and waste management are elements 
of special risk.

3. The need to develop further the basic standards for 
all forms of human activities in the Treaty Area.

Examples:

The basic standards for all forms of human 
activity in the Treaty Area should be elaborated.

The general principles should recall the basic 
objectives and components of the Antarctic Treaty 
System.

More specific environmental measures are needed.

All activities in Antarctica should be submitted 
to effective environmental standards.

The needs to protect species of native Antarctic 
fauna and flora should be defined.

4. Proposals for action to be considered in the short-
and long-term perspective.

Examples:

Gaps in the present environment protection 
provisions should be identified and obligations 
clarified.

A scientific data base should be created, to 
support the monitoring of environment variables.

An early warning system should be set up, as a 
development of the monitoring system.

The environmental impact assessment instrument 
should be further developed to cover all 
activities in Antarctica.
4.

All human activities should be subject to an 
environmental Code of Conduct.

Steps should be taken to ensure a more effective 
use of the inspection system.

The network of protected areas should be reviewed.

The possibilities for the establishment of an 
infrastructure for the Antarctic Treaty might 
also be considered.

The protection of the marine environment should 
be strengthened.

The questions of compliance and liability 
regarding measures taken and future measures must 
be addressed.
