TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV th REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                          PARIS
                                                          9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/24
Item 15 of the provisional agenda
Original : Russian

WORKING PAPER

MARINE HYDROMETEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION SERVICES

IN THE SOUTHERN OCEAN

(submitted by the USSR Delegation)
I. Present state of the problem

I.1. The well-known events of 1988-89 which have extended 
the list of ships'in distress in the Antarctic provide fresh 
confirmation of the essential need to improve information 
services for maritime navigation in the Southern Ocean. The 
problem is of particular current concern in the coastal zone 
where mariners face heavy ice while accidents to ships have the 
most serious consequences for the environment; to no small 
degree this implicates the inadequacies in the current level of 
hydrometeorological services. In particular, the SCAR and WMO 
have pointed out, in documents submitted to the XVth 
Consultative meeting, that it appears from recent careful 
comparison of the analyses carried out world-wide that the 
Antarctic is the region where the biggest discrepancies are to 
be found between different analyses.

I.2. At the initiative of the USSR, the XIVth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting adopted Recommendation XIV-10, the 
objective of which is to improve and develop the marine 
meteorological and sea-ice information service operational in 
the Antarctic Treaty Area of the Southern Ocean. Recommendation 
XIV-10 appeals to Antarctic Treaty Member States to improve and 
broaden international coordination and cooperation concerning 
marine meteorological and sea-ice information services for 
maritime navigation in Antarctic waters between 60° south and 
the shores of Antarctica. Recommendation XIV-10 provided for 
examination of ways and means of reaching the indicated 
objectives through consultations organized between national 
representatives in the WMO, SCAR and IOC.

2. Progress in implementation of Recommendation XIV-10.

2.1. The question of the improvement of the marine 
meteorological and sea-ice information services, raised in 
Recommendation XIV-10, has been on the agenda of many 
international meetings. It was considered at the 40th session 
of the WMO Executive Committee and at meetings of the Working 
Groups; it was also discussed at the 5th session of the IOC 
regional Committee for the study of the Southern Ocean. 
Recommendation XIV-10 was the subject of great attention at the 
20th session of the SCAR. As a result, SCAR proposed to the WMO 
and IOC the convening of a joint meeting of experts on 
Antarctic meteorology, oceanology and sea-ice, which took place 
in Leningrad on 20-24 February 1989.

2.2. The meeting of experts essentially developed the 
scientific concept which should serve as basis for the creation 
of a unified international service to provide marine operations 
with hydrometeorological information. The concept was approved 
by SCAR, WMO and IOC and is submitted to the XVth ATCM as 
Appendix X to the SCAR Report.
2.3. That document contains proposals for the creation of a 
unified, highly efficient service collecting and disseminating 
hydrometeorological information for the benefit of navigation 
in the Antarctic Treaty Area of the Southern Ocean. The 
potential positive effect is considered to be two-fold :
scientific and practical.

2.4. The proposals reflect the general interest of the 
Treaty Member States in improving the quality of meteorological 
and ice forecasts through more extensive use of new 
technological means (automatic weather stations, buoys and 
satellites) to collect weather data and information on the 
state of the ice cover in the Southern Ocean. It will be 
necessary to have satellite communication systems and modern 
computer systems with programme software of a higher level than 
available at present as integral parts of the new forecasting 
system.

2.5. Expanding the network for collecting weather and sea-
ice information, and moving to a new level for processing it, 
would undoubtedly be a major contribution of the Antarctic 
community countries to a number of global scientific projects, 
such as the World Climate Programme (WCP) including the World 
Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), the International 
Geospheric-Biospheric Programme (IGBP), the Antarctic Sea Ice 
Programme (ASIP) etc. Thus, the data that could be obtained by 
setting up the international forecast service could provide an 
important part of the initial experimental base for studying 
global physical processes and modelling them.

2.6. The Soviet Union, viewing it as highly useful to 
continue discussing ways and means to develop and improve 
marine meteorological and sea-ice information services in 
Antarctica and to set up for this purpose a common regional 
system for collecting and disseminating hydrometeorological 
information, feels it desirable for there to be international 
cooperation among the Antarctic Treaty Member States in the 
following directions :

    a) clarification of user requirements for ice 
information ;

    b) further development of the ice information service by 
developing methods for remote measurement of sea-ice 
parameters  (including the use of buoys and automatic 
stations) ;

    c) improved methods of modelling and forecasting the 
formation and growth of masses of sea ice ;

    d) expediting the creation of an Antarctic sea-ice data 
bank.
XVth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting

RECOMMENDATION UNDER AGENDA ITEM 15

Cooperation in the field of meteorological and ice information 
services for maritime and air navigation in Antarctica

The representatives of Consultative Parties,

Recalling  item  11  of  the  Antarctic  Treaty  and  the 
recommendations relating to questions of cooperation in the 
field of Antarctic logistics (II-V, III-3, IV-25) as well as 
Recommendation XIV-10 on the marine meteorological and ice 
information service ;

Having  regard  to  the  continuing  occurrence  of  hazardous 
situations leading to loss of or damage to ships in the Treaty 
Area ,

Noting that as a result of joint efforts by SCAR/WMO/IOC acting 
in accordance with Recommendation XIV-10, a joint concept has 
been worked out for the means by which the Antarctic Treaty 
Member States could set up a unified service for collecting and 
disseminating hydrometeorological information by means of 
existing and possible additional national facilities ;

Taking into account the results of discussion on Recommendation 
XIV-9 concerning air safety in Antarctica, revealing the urgent 
necessity to improve meteorological information for flights in 
the area of the Antarctic ;

Wishing to act jointly to increase the efficiency and safety of 
maritime and air navigation in the Treaty Area on the basis of 
international cooperation,

recommend to their Governments :

1.  to continue cooperation among Antarctic Treaty Member 
States  to  develop  the  project  to  set  up  a  unified 
international  maritime  and  aeronautical 
hydrometeorological  service  for  maritime  and  air 
navigation in Antarctica.
2. to ask the MNAP, in association with SCAR, WMO, and 
IOC, to apply the concept developed by them to carry out a 
scientific technical and economic evaluation of the 
conditions for realization of the project of an 
international service collecting and disseminating 
hydrometeorological information and to submit the project 
for consideration to the XIVth ATCM,

3. to task their national Antarctic agencies with 
providing the MNAP with all the required information in 
respect of the plans they have developed on their own or 
with other countries to perfect means for the collection, 
processing and dissemination of hydrometeorological 
information and forecasting products, and also with 
providing input to the project of an international service 
providing hydrometeorological support to maritime and air 
navigation in the Antarctic.

4. with a view to improving hydrometeorological service to 
maritime and air navigation in the Antarctic, to take 
immediately all possible steps to activate participation 
in the IGOSS, drifting-buoy and automatic-station 
programmes and to provide a maximum of data for 
international exchange and operational use.
