TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA


PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989


XV ATCM/WP/49
Items 14 and 15 on the
Agenda
Original : Russian





DRAFT PARAGRAPHS FOR THE REPORT OF THE XVth ATCM
DRAFT PARAGRAPHS FOR THE REPORT OF THE XVTH ATCM ON AGENDA 
ITEMS 14 AND 15

1.  The consultative meeting was informed of the activity 
carried on in pursuance of Recommendation XIV-10, aomed at the 
improveme,t a,d development of the operational maritime 
meteorological and ice information service in the Antarctic 
Treay area.  For the review of this matter the meeting had 
before it a SCAR/WMO/IOC report on the results of a meeting of 
experts held in Leningrad in February 1989 on the means of 
improvement the abovementioned service. The main work of that 
meeting was to develop the scientific concept on the basis of 
which an international service for sea and air navigation 
should be set up.  Approved by SCAR, WMO and IOC, the concèpt 
was submitted to the XVth atcm (Appendix 9 to the SCAR report).

2. In the course of discussion of the ways and means to improve 
meteorological and communication services (Item 14),
a close connexion became apparent between the direction of 
proposed WMO activity anf the possible means of implementing 
Recommendation XIV-10. The WMO representative, Dr N.Streten, 
placed at the disposal of the meeting a WMO report giving the 
viewpoint  of that international meteorological organization on 
refinement of maritime meteorological services in the 
Antarctic.

3. The Soviet delegation submitted WP/24, containing the 
viewpoint of the USSR on the possible further steps to be taken 
by the international Antarctic community in order to expand and 
improve maritime meteorological services, such as pursuit of 
the work initiated by Recommendation XIV-10.

4. It was decided, with a view to more detailed review of this 
material, to set up a working group for consideration of agenda 
items 14 and 15.  The working group developed the draft of an 
appropriate recommendation which after further review and 
amendment was submitted for consideration to th Meeting and 
adopted as Recommendation XV...
XVth  Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting

RECOMMENDATION UNDER AGENDA ITEMS 14 AND 15

Cooperation in the field of meteorological and ice 
information services for navigation in Antarctica

The representatives of Consultative Parties,

Recalling  Article 11 of  the  Antarctic Treaty and  the 
recommendations relating to questions of cooperation in the 
field of Antarctic logistics (II-V, III-3, IV-25) as well as 
Recommendation XIV-10 on the marine meteorological and ice 
information service;

Having  regard to  the continuing  occurrence of hazardous 
situations leading to loss of or damage to ships in the Treaty 
Area,

Noting that as a result of joint efforts by SCAR/WMO/IOC acting 
in accordance with Recommendation XIV-10, a joint concept has 
been worked out for the means by which the Antarctic Treaty 
Member States could set up a unified service for collecting and 
disseminating hydrometeorological information by means of 
existing and possible additional national facilities;

Taking into account the results of discussion on Recommendation 
XIV-9 concerning air safety in Antarctica, revealing the urgent 
necessity to improve meteorological information for flights in 
the area of the Antarctic;

Wishing to act jointly to increase the efficiency and safety of 
maritime and air navigation in the Treaty Area on the basis of 
international cooperation,

recommend to their Governments:

1. to continue cooperation among Antarctic Treaty Member 
States  to  expand  and  improve  maritime  and  aviation 
meteorological services in Antarctica.

2. to  task  their  national  Antarctic  agencies  with 
providing the MNAP with all the required information in 
respect of the plans they have developed on their own or 
with other countries to perfect means for the collection, 
processing  and  dissemination  of  hydrometeorological 
information  and  forecasting  products,  and  also  with 
providing input to the project of an international service 
providing hydrometeorological support to maritime and air 
navigation in the Antarctic.
3. with a view to improving hydrometeorological service to 
maritime and air navigation in the Antarctic, to take 
immediately all possible steps to activate participation 
in  the  IGOSS,  drifting-buoy  and  automatic-station 
programmes and to provide a maximum of data for 
international exchange and operational use.

4. To request the MNAP to study the matter and develop 
proposals to ATCM XVI re the desirability of the States 
Parties to the Treaty setting up a system for assistance 
in emergency situations as one of the priority measures 
for the achievement of safety in sea and air operations in 
the Antarctic.
