TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  PARIS
                                  9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/63
Item 9 a) of the agenda
Original : English

WASTE DISPOSAL

(submitted by the delegation of Australia)
Draft paragraphs for XV ATCM final report on item 9(a). waste disposal

1. The meeting warmly received the report of the SCAR Panel of Experts on Waste Disposal in the Antarctic, which was made in response to Recommendation XIII-4. Drawing on the SCAR report, it adopted Recommendation XV- , which sets out agreed practices regarding waste management planning and waste disposal, as well as procedures to be followed in the implementation of the Recommendation. The Recommendation also states that governments must take measures within their competence to ensure compliance with the agreed practices by all those subject to their jurisdiction, including both private operations in Antarctica and activities sponsored by governments. It adds that the practices would not restrict any government from applying more stringent standards to Antarctic activities subject to its jurisdiction. Each government is encouraged as a matter of policy to ensure that its nationals and vessels are subject to measures governing waste disposal in Antarctica that are no less effective in affording protection of the environment than those applicable to their nationals and vessels outside of Antarctica.

2. The meeting noted that the implementation of some of these practices requires dedicated resources that should be regarded as a legitimate cost of operating in the Antarctic.

3. The parties reaffirmed the exhortation contained in the Code of Conduct for Antarctic expeditions and station activities annexed to Recommendation VIII-11, that they should continue to avoid the use in Antarctica of leaded fuels or fuels containing ethylene bromide and ethylene chloride.

4. The meeting reaffirmed the goals noted in para. 74(e) of the report of XIV ATCM, acknowledged the desirability of relying increasingly on retrograding wastes from Antarctica, and noted the need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent or associated ecosystems outside the Antarctic Treaty area. It also reaffirmed its agreement to encourage the implementation and application of new and improved methods of waste disposal and the exchange of information on them. In this context representatives emphasized the value of cooperation and of mechanisms for information exchange, taking note of the proposed Symposium on Logistics and exposition on polar technologies at XXI SCAR in Brazil, which will encompass waste management technologies.

5. Some delegations expressed concern about the possible environmental impacts of wrecked vessels and crashed aircraft. The meeting noted that in some cases efforts to remove such craft could result in environmental impacts more significant than non-removal. It stressed that the principal concern was that possible contaminants, such as fuel, should be removed.

1
6. Some delegations raised the issue of whether certain wastes might have potential historic value. The meeting agreed that such cases could  be dealt  with under the existing mechanisms for the designation of Historic Sites and Monuments.

Further Work

7. Appropriate Technologies: There was dis- cussion of the desirability of exploring further the utilization of low-impact waste management technologies and practices, including those that conserve energy and water. Attention was drawn in particular to the need for further study of the advantages and disadvantages of incineration technologies.

8. Dumping of Wastes at Sea: In addressing a future program of work, the meeting agreed to consider further restrictions on dumping  of  wastes at sea, and in particular the dumping of chemical wastes and ash from incineration, bearing in mind applicable international agreements for the protection of the marine environment. The meeting drew attention to coordinating this  effort with future work to be undertaken in relation to marine pollution.

9. National Waste Management Plans and A System of Classification of Wastes: Representatives took note of the reference in  paragraph 4 of Recomendation XV-   to the development of standardized formats for national waste management plans. They agreed that it would be useful to pursue this objective together with the elaboration of a classification system for wastes and their sources as called for in paragraph 2 of the Recomendation, as means of facilitating waste management planning and the evaluation of the impacts of waste storage and disposal. Such plans might take into account projected growth in activities and the resulting volume of wastes generated, including fuel consumption by vehicles and aircraft; methods for recording and keeping track of materials taken to and removed from Antarctica, such as labeling or the application of a system of manifests; and the characteristics of wastes and their potential hazards. In the elaboration of a waste classification system, the meeting noted that care should be taken to avoid inconsistencies with  classifications employed  in other relevant international agreements. In this regard specific mention was made of  the 1972 International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by the Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter and the 1989 Basel Convention on the Control of  Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal.

10. Vessels: Consideration will also be given to agreement on standards for  shipboard equipment to manage ship-generated garbage  in all  vessels  engaged  in  or  supporting  Antarctic programs, both  in regard  to existing vessels and the design and 

2
construction of new vessels.

11. Storage and Handling of Wastes:  The meeting took note of 
the conclusion in the report of XI ATCM on the appropriateness of 
setting up protective walls around oil  storage tanks  to reduce 
oil  contamination of the  marine  environment,  and  agreed to 
undertake  further  work  on  appropriate  means  of  storage  and 
handling of wastes.

12. Environmental Monitoring:  In outlining future work on these 
issues, the meeting took  note also  of Recommendation XV-  on 
Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica and of the need for means 
to  keep  under continuing  review  waste  reduction  and  waste 
management practices in Antarctica in light of new information on 
environmental impacts.

 
3
- 1 -

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON WASTE DISPOSAL

The Representatives,

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations
VI-4, VIII-11, XII-4 and XIII-4;

Reaffirming the commitment of Consultative Parties to take
measures to reduce the amount of wastes generated in Antarctica
and to minimize the impact of wastes on the Antarctic
environment, giving due consideration to the need to avoid
detrimental effects on dependent or associated ecosystems
outside the Antarctic Treaty area;

Recognizing that the Antarctic derives much of its scientific
importance from its uncontaminated condition;

Recognizing further that the support of science has an impact on
the Antarctic environment which it is impractical to eliminate
completely, but which, by good management can be limited;

Noting that the increasing level and complexity of Antarctic
operations have increased the quantity and variety of wastes
produced, but that improvements in logistics and technology have
increased the capacity to minimize wastes and their
environmental impacts;

Recognizing further that different environments, scales of
operation, and logistic infrastructures will require different
approaches to wastes management, and that further technical
developments can be expected to provide new solutions to waste
management problems;

Noting with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) in response to Recommendation XIII-4,
which invited National Antarctic Committees to undertake a
comprehensive review of the waste disposal aspects of the Annex
to Recommendation VIII-11, and to offer scientific advice
regarding waste disposal procedures and standards that it is
desirable and practical to achieve at coastal and inland
stations and field camps;

Desiring to revise the waste disposal aspects of the Code of
Conduct annexed to Recommendation VIII-11 to take account of the
recommendations of SCAR;

Recommend to their governments that they adopt the following
practices and take measures within their competence necessary to
ensure compliance with them:
- 2 -

General Obligation

1. The amount of wastes produced, or disposed of, in Antarctica shall be reduced to the maximum extent possible so as to minimize impact on the Antarctic environment and minimize interference with scientific research, or other legitimate uses of the Antarctic.

Waste Management Planning

2. Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall establish a waste disposal classification as a basis for recording wastes and to facilitate studies aimed at evaluating the environmental impacts of operational and scientific activity. Wastes produced may be classified as sewage and domestic liquid wastes (Group 1); other liquid wastes and chemicals, including fuels and lubricants (Group 2); solids to be combusted (Group 3); other solid wastes (Group 4); and radioactive materials (Group 5). Source classification codes, which represent individual processes or functions logically associated with points of waste creation, may be used in auditing studies.

3. Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall, in respect of those activities, prepare and annually update:

    a) plans for waste management (including waste reduction, storage, and disposal), specifying for each fixed site, for field camps generally, and for each vessel (other than small boats that are part of the operations of fixed sites or of vessels):

        (i) programs for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites;

        (ii) current and planned waste management arrangements;

        (iii) current and planned arrangements for analyzing the environmental effects of Antarctic waste and waste management systems; and

        (iv) other efforts to minimize any environmental effects of wastes and waste management.

    b) an inventory of locations of past activities (such as traverses, fuel depots, field bases, crashed aircraft) as far as is practicable, before the information is lost, so that such locations can be taken into account in planning future scientific programs (e.g. snow chemistry, pollutants in lichens, ice core drilling etc.).
- 3 -

4. Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall 
include the waste management plans referred to in paragraph 3 
(a) above in the annual exchanges of information in accordance with
Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty and related 
recommendations under Article IX of the Treaty.  The formats of 
such exchanges shall be determined by each government pending 
development of standardized formats. They shall also exchange 
the inventories referred to paragraph 3 (b) above.

5. Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall 
ensure that its national Antarctic operators designate a waste 
management official to develop and monitor waste management 
plans.  In the field, this responsibility shall be delegated to 
an appropriate person at each site.

6. Those carrying out activities in Antarctica shall ensure 
that members of their expeditions receive training designed to 
limit the impact of their operations on the Antarctic 
environment and to inform them of required practices.

7. Pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), non-sterile 
soil or polystyrene beads, chips or similar forms of packaging 
shall not be sent to the Antarctic. The use of poly-vinyl 
chloride (PVC) products in packaging shall be discouraged.

8. Those carrying out activities in Antarctica shall ensure 
that their expeditions to Antarctica are advised of any PVC 
products being provided.

9. Each government shall establish a long-term program to 
remove existing abandoned fuel drums and fuel, where such 
removal is practical. Such programs shall identify for clean up 
at the first opportunity those drum sites where the transport 
equipment which delivered the drums is no longer available in 
the same area.

10. Waste compaction, storage and incineration facilities shall 
be incorporated in the design and construction of ships engaged 
in or supporting Antarctic programs.

Waste Disposal

11. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic 
Treaty area:

    a)  radio-active materials;

    b)  electrical batteries (including lead/acid, dry cell 
        and other types);

    c)  fuel, both liquid and solid; and

    d)  wastes containing high levels of heavy metals or
- 4 -

harmful persistent compounds.

12. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty area unless they are incinerated in equipment which
neutralizes the harmful emissions that would otherwise be
produced:

      a) poly-vinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane foam,
         polystyrene foam, rubber and lubricating.oils which
         contain additives that are widely recognized as
         products that could produce harmful emissions;

      b) all other plastic wastes, including those of unknown
         composition.

13. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty Area to the maximum extent practicable:

      a) liquid wastes, other than sewage and domestic liquid
         wastes;

      b) solid, non-combustible wastes; and

      c) fuel drums.

14. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty area unless incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise treated
to be made sterile:

      a) residues of introduced animal carcasses;
      b) cultures of micro-organisms; and
      c) introduced avian products.

15. Combustible wastes, not removed from the Antarctic Treaty
area, shall be burnt in incinerators designed to reduce harmful
emissions to the maximum extent practicable.

16. All open burning of wastes shall be phased out and, pending
the completion of such phase out, when it is necessary to
dispose of wastes by open burning:

      a) allowance shall be made for the wind and the type of
         wastes to be burnt to limit, as far as practicable,
         particulate deposition on land and to avoid such
         deposition over sensitive areas; and

      b) wastes to be burnt shall be stored in such a way as to
         prevent their dispersal by wind, or access and
         dispersal by scavengers.

17. All wastes to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, or
otherwise disposed of, shall be stored in such a way as to
prevent their dispersal by wind or access and dispersal by
scavengers.
- 5 -

18. Solid non-combustible wastes, which cannot be removed to 
land disposal sites outside of the Antarctic Treaty area and 
which are to be disposed of at sea, shall only be disposed of at 
Antarctic Treaty area and only in accordance with the 
International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution 
by the Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (London Dumping 
Convention), as well as any other relevant international 
agreements.

19. Dumping of any other wastes at sea shall be carried out in 
accordance with the London Dumping Convention.

20. Sewage, chemical wastes and, to the maximum extent 
practicable, domestic liquid wastes shall not be disposed of 
onto ice free land. Sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be 
discharged directly into the ocean, provided that:

    a) such discharge be located, wherever practicable, where 
       conditions exist for rapid dispersal;

    b) large quantities of such wastes (generated by 
       approximately 30 individuals or more), receive at 
       least primary treatment, such as maceration; and

    c) consideration be given to the advantages of treating 
       very large quantities through systems, such as 
       Rotating Biological Contactor Systems, to reduce 
       biological oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids.

21. Vessels engaged in supporting Antarctic activities that are 
not fitted with incinerator facilities shall, to the maximum 
extent practicable, stockpile wastes, excluding untreated sewage 
and domestic effluents, for appropriate disposal at stations, 
bases, deep water sites or outside of the Antarctic Treaty 
area, provided that such wastes may be disposed of at stations 
or bases in Antarctica only in accordance with these practices, 
and at sea only in accordance with relevant Antarctic Treaty 
recommendations, the London Dumping Convention and any other 
relevant international agreements. Any incineration of 
ship-board wastes in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be 
conducted in incinerators of the type which are designed to 
reduce harmful emissions to the maximum extent practicable.

22. Those carrying out activities in Antarctica shall to the 
maximum extent practicable clean up the waste disposal sites and 
abandoned work sites of their Antarctic activities.

23. Wastes generated at inland stations shall be removed from 
the area of such stations to the maximum extent practicable for 
disposal in accordance with the practices set out in this 
Recommendation. Where this is not practicable, such wastes shall
- 6 -

be concentrated in deep ice pits.  In planning the location of 
inland stations where deep ice pits are the only practicable 
alternative, sites on known ice flow lines which terminate at 
ice-free areas or in areas of high ablation shall be avoided.

24. Wherever practicable, wastes generated at field camps shall 
be removed to their supporting stations, bases or ships for 
disposal in accordance with the practices set out in this 
Recomendstion.

Procedures

25. These practices shall be kept under continuing review so as 
to ensure that they are up-dated as necessary to reflect 
improvements in waste disposal technology and procedures and to 
ensure maximum protection of the Antarctic environment.  To this 
end it would be desirable for SCAR and the Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs to continue to consider problems, prospects 
and opportunities for cooperation in Antarctic waste management 
and to provide advice on appropriate steps that may be taken.

26.  Governments should ensure that their nationals and vessels 
are subject to measures governing waste disposal in Antarctica 
that are no less effective in affording protection of the 
environment than those applicable to their nationals and vessels 
outside of Antarctica.  Further, nothing in these practices 
shall be interpreted as replacing national environmental 
standards applicable to Antarctic activities, where such 
standards are stricter than those contained in these practices; 
nor shall any provision in these practices be interpreted as 
limiting governments from adopting stricter standards.

27. These practices shall not be interpreted or implemented in 
such fashion as to endanger human life.
