TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE                                XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                      TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                               XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  PARIS
                          9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/64
Point 9 b de l'ordre du jour
Original : English

MARINE POLLUTION
(United States)
Report on the Prevention, Control and Response to Marine
Pollution

The meeting welcomed the papers presented by the United States,
Uruguay, South Africa and the Federal Republic of Germany on this issue and adopted recommendation XV-  on the
Prevention, Control and Response to Marine Pollution. The
Recommendation calls for states to take measures within their
competence to prohibit within the Antarctic Treaty area certain
discharges and disposal from vessels and to ensure that their
vessels comply with the relevant provisions of specified
international conventions on vessel safety and pollution
control. It also calls upon them to become parties to theses
conventions if they are not. It calls in addition for the
establishment of contigency plans for marine pollution response
and sets forth a procedure for doing so.

In adressing the issue of vessels subject to the
prohibitions referred to in the Recommendation (Paragraph I),
the meeting took note of the difficulties and hazards posed for
small yachts in meeting the reqirements in paragraphs I (b)
and I (c) of having to dispose of food wastes and sewage beyond
12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves. In light of this, it
decided that theses provisions could be interpreted to provide
a limited exception for such vessels, while affirming that
every effort should be made to comply with them.

In discussing the sovereign immunity clause in paragraph
3, some representatives expressed a preference for limiting the
scope of the potential exception provided by this clause.
Others parallels similar provisions in a number of
international conventions governing vessels. The meeting
affirmed that the provisions of the Recommendation should apply
to all vessels and all agreed to make every effort to ensure
that their vessels with sovereign immunity engaged in or
supporting Antarctic operations act in a manner consistent with
theses provisions.

The prohibitions contained in the Recommendation on
discharge or disposal of certain wastes within the Antarctic
Treaty area are consistent with designation of the area as a
special area under the 1973/78 International Convention for the
Prevention of Marine Pollution from Ships. Therefore, the
meeting agreed that the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic
Treaty that are also parties to MARPOL 73/78 consider formally
doing so within the INternational Mari[?]ime Organization (IMO).
Nevertheless, the Representatives agreed in the Recommendation
that the establishment of waste reception facilities for
vessels in the Antarctic Treaty area would not be desirable,
because they wished to avoid tgransferring the probem of wastes
disposal from vessels to Antarctic stations and facilities.
They noted that this could place a significant burden upon
governments adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty area in providing
such reception facilities. In lignt of the fact, therefore,
they agreed that flag states of vessels concerned should
consider means of assisting at arriving at an acceptable
solution. It was noted that private commercial operations might
also be interested in providing solutions.
The meeting drew attention to the linkages between the issue of marine pollution and other issues on the agenda of the Consultative Meeting, including hydrographic charting and the provision and improvement of hydrometeorological services for vessels and aircraft safety. It also noted that it would be helpful if governments informed each other of steps taken to implement the provisions of the Recommendation.

In relation to fucure wor[?] on contingency plans for marine pollution response, the meeting noted that the time and place of themeeting of experts called for in paragraph 7 of the Recommendation would have to be decided through deplomatic Channels, and that the host government for the next consultative meeting should initiate the necessary consultations. The expert from the IMO informed the meeting that the development of contingency plans and establishment of reception avoid excessive demands on Antarctic experts by coordinating the timing and location of such meetings.

In looking at future work, there was agreement that issues related toliability for marine pollution damage warranted attentioin, as well as consideration of the relevance of additional international conventions to questionsof marine pollution in Antarctica. In this context specific mention was made of further restrictions on dumping and incenaration at sea in the Antarctic Treaty area, pursuant to the London Dumping Convention; considering designation of the Antarctic Treaty area as a special area under Annex II of MARPOL 73/78 on transport of chemicals in bulk; and the 1989 convention on Control of Transboundary Movementof Hazardous Wastes and Their Kisposa. attention was called to the hazards of vessel operation in the Antarctic Treaty area and the view expressed that it would be useful to consider special requirements for vessel construction in the future.
RECOMMENDATION ON THE PREVENTION, CONTROL, AND RESPONSE TO
MARINE POLLUTION

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations IX-6 and X-7 on oil contamination of 
the Antarctic marine environment;

Recognizing the special characteristics of the Antarctic Treaty 
area and the particularly hazardous nature of the area for 
vessel loperations;

Recognizing further that the Antarctic derives much of its 
scientific importance from its uncontaminated condition;

Reaffirming their commitment to the avoidance and reduction of 
the contamination of the sea by oil and other pollutants;

Noting the framework provided by the 1982 United Nations 
convention on the Law of the Sea in its Part XII and other 
relevant international agreements for the protection and 
preservation of the marine environment;

Bearing in mind the need to take measures relaing to the 
design, construction, manning, and equipment of vessels engaged 
in or supporting Antarctic operations to avoid marine pollution 
from vessels;

Recognizing further the importance of the expeditious exchange 
of information on weather and ice conditions in the Antarctic 
Treaty area and with respect to accidents and emergency 
response efforts;

Mindful of the need for accurate and up-to-date charting of the 
Antarctic Treaty area; and

Acknowledging the value of cooperation directly and through 
appropriate international organizations in eforts to avoid and 
respond to marine pollution incidents;

Recommend to their governments that:

1. They approve and take measures within their competence 
necdessary to ensure compliance with:

      a) a prohibition within the Antarctic Treaty area on all 
intentional discharges from vessl into the marine invironment 
which include oil;

      b) a prohibition within the antarctic Treaty area on 
disposal from vessels into the marine environment of all 
plastics and garbage other than food wastes, provided that 
disposal of food wastes, provided that from land, but in no 
event within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves; and
c) a prohibition within the Antarctic Treaty area on discharge of sewage from vessels within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves,

In implementing these provisions they give due consideration to the need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent or associated ecosystemsoutside the Antarctic Treaty area.

2. They take measures within their competence necessary to ensure compliance by all their vessels engaged in or supporting Antarctic operations with the rilevnt provisions of the folowing conventions:

    a) the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (teh London Dumping Convention);

    b) the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, and the Protocol of 1978 relating Thereto, with Annexes, I, II, III, and V (MARPOL 73/78);

    d) the International Convention on Stantdards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers with Annex, 1978, (the STCW Convention);

    c) the International Convention for the Safetyof Lefe at Sea, 1974, and the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (SOLAB);

    e) the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966 (the Load Lines convention); and

    d) the Convention on the International regulations for Preventing Collisions at sea, 1972 (COLREGS).

3. When such vessels are warships, naval ausiliaries or other state-awned or state-operated vessels used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial servie, they shall take appropriate measures not impairing operations or operational capabilities of such vessels to ensure that they act in a manner consistent so far as is reasonable and practicable with these provisions.

4. If they are not parties, they become parties to the conventions listed in 2 (a-f).

5. Those that are parties to MARPOL 73/78 consider taking actions within the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to secure designation of the waters south of 60 degrees South Latitude as a special area under Annexes I and V of that Convention, provided that the establishment of reception facilities otherwise called for in these Annexes not be considered either necessary or desirable in the Antarctic Treaty area.

6. They establish contingency plans for marine pollution response in Antarctica, including contingency plans for vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area, particulary vessels carrying oil. To this end they shall:
a) cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such 
plans and in responding to pollution emergencies in Antarctica;
and

b) draw on the advice of the IMO and other international 
organizations, as appropriate.

7. They convene, in accordance with Recommendtion IV-24, a 
meeting of experts to consider and provide advice on the 
establishment of contingency plans for marine pollution 
responsa and additional requirements to reduce and prevent 
pollution of the Antarctic marine environment, giving due 
consideration to the need to avoid detrimental effects on 
dependent and associated ecosystems outside the Antarctic 
Treaty area.

8. They keep under continuing review measures to reduce and 
prevent pollution of the Antarctic marine environment.
