TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/10
Item 9 a) of the
provisional agenda
Original : English

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON

WASTE DISPOSAL
W.P     USA.
(oiu·9a)                        U.S.

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON WASTE DISPOSAL

Recommend to their governments that ...

They adopt the following practices and take measures within their competence necessary to ensure compliance with them:

General Obligation

1.- The amount of waste produced, or disposed of, in Antarctica shall be reduced to the maximum extent possible so as to minimize its impact on the Antarctic environment and minimize interference with scientific research.

Waste Management Planning

2.  Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall, in respect of those activities, prepare and annually update:

    a)  plans for waste management (including waste reduction, storage, and disposal), showing for each fixed site for field camps generally, and for each vessel (other than small boats, which for this purpose shall be regarded as part of the operations of fixed sites or of vessels), specifying:

        (i)     programs for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work sites;

        (ii)    current and intended waste management arrangements;

        (iii)   current and intended arrangements for analyzing the environmental effects of Antarctic waste and waste management systems; and

        (iv)    efforts to minimize any environmental effects of waste and waste management.

    b)  an inventory of locations of past activities (such as traverses, fuel depots, field bases, crashed aircraft) as far as is practicable, before the information is lost, so that such locations can be taken into account in planning future scientific programs (e.g. snow chemistry, pollutants in lichens, ice core drilling etc.).

3.  Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall establish a waste disposal classification as a basis for recording wastes and to facilitate studies aimed at evaluating
- 2 -

the environmental impacts of operational and scientific 
activity. Wastes produced may be classified as sewage and 
domestic liquid wastes (Group 1); other liquid wastes and 
chemicals, including fuels and lubricants (Group 2); solids to 
be combusted (Group 3); other solid wastes (Group 4); and 
radioactive materials (Group 5).  Source classification codes, 
which represent individual processes or functions logically 
associated with points of waste creation, may be used in 
auditing studies.

4.  Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall 
include the waste management plans referred to in paragraph 2 
(a) above in the annual exchanges of information in accordance 
Article III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty and related 
recommendations under Article IX of the Treaty.  The formats of 
such exchanges shall be determined by each government pending 
development of standardized formats.  They shall also exchange 
the inventories referred to paragraph 2 (b) above.

5.  Each government carrying out Antarctic activities shall 
ensure that its national Antarctic operators designate a waste 
management official to develop and monitor waste management 
plans.  In the field, this responsibility shall be delegated to 
an appropriate person at each site.

6.  Those carrying out activities in Antarctica shall ensure 
that members of their expeditions receive training designed to 
limit the impact of their operations on the Antarctic 
environment and to inform them of required practices.

7.  Pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), non-sterile 
soil or polystyrene beads, chips or similar forms of packaging 
shall not be sent to the Antarctic.  The use of poly-vinyl 
chloride (PVC) products in packaging shall be discouraged.

8.  Those carrying out activities in Antarctica shall ensure 
that their expeditions to Antarctica are advised of any PVC 
products being provided.

9.  Each government shall establish a long-term program to 
remove existing abandoned fuel drums, where such removal is 
practical.  Such programs shall identify for clean up at the 
first opportunity those drum sites where the transport 
equipment which delivered the drums is no longer available in 
the same area.

10. Waste compaction, storage and incineration facilities 
shall be incorporated in the design and construction of ships 
engaged or in supporting Antarctic programs.
- 3 -

Waste Disposal

11. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty area:

    a) radio-active materials;

    b) electrical batteries (including lead/acid, dry cell
       and other types);

    c) fuel drums; and

    d) wastes containing high levels of heavy metals or
       harmful persistent compounds.

12. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty Area to the maximum extent practicable:

    a) poly-vinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane foam,
       polystyrene foam, rubber and lubricating oils;

    b) all plastic wastes of unknown origin;

    c) liquid wastes, other than sewage and domestic liquid
       wastes; and

    d) solid, non-combustible waste.

13. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty area unless incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise treated
to be made sterile:

    a) residues of introduced animal carcasses;

    b) cultures of micro-organisms; and

    c) introduced avian products.

14. Combustible wastes, not removed from the Antarctic Treaty
area, shall be burnt in incinerators designed to reduce harmful
emissions to the maximum extent practicable; provided that the
following wastes shall not be burnt unless equipment is
installed which neutralizes the harmful emissions that would be
produced:

    a) poly-vinyl chloride (PVC);

    b) polyurethane foam;

    c) polystyrene foam;

    d) all other plastics;

    e) lubricating oils which contain additives that are
       widely recognized as products which could produce
       harmful emissions; and

    f) rubber.
- 4 -

15. All open burning of wastes shall be phased out and,
pending the completion of such phase out, when it is necessary
to dispose of wastes by open burning:

      a) allowance shall be made for the wind and the type of
waste to be burnt to limit, as far as practicable,
deposition on land and to avoid deposition over
sensitive areas; and

      b) wastes to be burnt shall be stored in such a way as
to prevent its dispersal by wind and scavengers.

16. All wastes to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area,
or otherwise disposed of, shall be stored in such a way as to
prevent its dispersal by wind or scavengers.

17. Solid non-combustible waste, which cannot be removed to
land disposal sites outside of the Antarctic Treaty area and
which is to be disposed of at sea, shall only be disposed of at
selected dump sites in deep water, within or outside the
Antarctic Treaty area and only in accordance with the
International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution
by the Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (London Dumping
Convention), as well as any other relevant international
agreements.

18. Dumping of any other wastes at sea shall be carried out in
accordance with the London Dumping Convention.

19. Sewage, chemical waste and to the maximum extent
practicable domestic liquid wastes shall not be disposed of
onto ice free land. Sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be
discharged directly into the ocean, provided that:

      a) such discharge be located, wherever practicable,
where conditions exist for rapid dispersal;

      b) large quantities of such wastes (generated by
approximately 30 individuals or more), receive at
least primary treatment, such as maceration; and

      c) consideration be given to the advantages of treating
very large quantities through systems to reduce
biological oxygen demand (BOD) and dispensed solids,
such as Rotating Biological Contactor Systems.

20. Vessels engaged in supporting Antarctic activities that
are not fitted with incinerator facilities, to the maximum
extent practicable, shall stockpile wastes, excluding untreated
sewage and domestic effluents, for appropriate disposal at
stations, bases, deep water sites or outside of the Antarctic
- 5 -

Treaty area, provided that such waste may be disposed of at 
stations or bases in Antarctica only in accordance with these 
practices and at sea only in accordance with relevant Antarctic 
Treaty recommendations, the London Dumping Convention and any 
other relevant international agreements.  Any incineration of 
ship-board wastes in the Antarctic Treaty area shall be 
conducted in incinerators of the type which are designed to 
reduce harmful emission to the maximum extent practicable.

21.  Those carrying out activities in Antarctica shall to the 
maximum extent practicable clean up the waste disposal sites 
and abandoned work sites of their Antarctic activities.

22.  Wastes generated at inland stations shall be removed from 
the area of such stations to the maximum extent practicable; 
where this is not practicable, such wastes shall be 
concentrated in deep ice pits.  In planning the location of 
inland stations where deep ice pits are the only practicable 
alternative, sites on ice flow lines which terminate at 
ice-free areas or in areas of high ablation shall be avoided.

Procedures

23.  These practices shall be kept under continuing review so 
as to ensure that they are up-dated as necessary to reflect 
improvements in waste disposal technology and procedures and to 
ensure maximum protection of the Antarctic environment.  To 
this end, SCAR and the Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
shall continue to consider problems, prospects and 
opportunities for cooperation in Antarctic waste management and 
to provide advice on appropriate steps that may be taken.

24.  Governments should ensure that their nationals and vessels 
are subject to measures governing waste disposal in Antarctica 
that are no less effective in affording protection of the 
environment than those apllicable to their nationals and 
vessels outside of Antarctica.  Further, nothing in these 
practices shall be interpreted as replacing national 
environmental standards applicable to Antarctic activities, 
where such standards are stricter than those contained in these 
practices; nor shall any provision in these practices be 
interpreted as limiting governments from adopting stricter 
standards.

25.  These practices shall not be interpreted or implemented in 
such fashion as to endanger human life.
