TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA


PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989


XV ATCM/WP/69

Item 10 (c) (v)

Original: English

DRAFT REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR HISTORIC SITES AND
MONUMENTS

(Submitted by the delegation of New Zealand)
Agenda Item 10(c)(v) : Historic Sites and Monuments

Proposals were received by the meeting for two new designations to be added to the list of Historic Monuments
annexed to Recommendation VII-9.  The United States proposed that respect and protection required by that
Recommendation should be afforded to a monument to Richard E Byrd located at McMurdo Station (77°51'S, 166°40'E) and
to the buildings, artifacts and immediate environs of the Antarctic Service Expedition's East Base located on
Stonington Island (68°11'S,67°W).

Chile informed the meeting that it had added a bronze bust of Pilot Luis Pardo Villalon to the monolith and plaque at
Elephant Island (61°03'S, 54°51W) and to replicas of the monolith and plaque at the Chilean stations 'Arturo Prat" 
and 'Rodolfo Marsh', and that this information should be recorded in a modification of the description of Historic
Site No. 53.

These proposals were adopted as Recommendation XV-   and
Recommendation XV-   .

The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany informed
the meeting that the replacement of a plaque at Potter
Cove, King George Island commemorating the expedition of
Edward Dallmann had been completed, as mentioned in the
final report of the XIV ATCM.

In further discussion some delegations drew attention to
the issue raised at the XIV ATCM of the vulnerable
condition of monuments located in relatively accessible
areas of Antarctica and exposed to the risk of damage
arising from the increasing scale and intensity of human
activities on the continent.  In this regard the United
States submitted managment plans for the Richard E Byrd
monument and East Base as examples of useful means of
increasing protection for historic monuments and sites.
Some delegations urged consideration of further protective
measures for historic sites and monuments.  They proposed
that sites should be extended to include an area adequate
for preserving historical values of the monuments and to
avoid increased risk of damage.

Finally, the meeting noted with appreciation the reports
on visits to and condition of historic sites contained in
information papers submitted by the United States and
Australia.
The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7 and XIII-16;

Recommend to their Governments that the following historic monuments be added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Prescribed by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation VII-9 and that thereafter they be accorded the respect and protection required by the Recommendation recalled above:

Richard E. Byrd Historic Monument, McMurdo Station, Antarctica (77°51'S166°40'E)

1) Description of monument. Bronze bust on black marble, 5ft high x 2 ft square, on wood platform, containing inscriptions describing polar achievements of Richard Evelyn Byrd. Erected 1965 at McMurdo Station (77°51'S166°40'E).

East Base, Antarctica, Stonington Island (68°11'S67°W)

2) Description of site. Buildings and artifacts at East Base, Stonington Island (68°11'S67°W) and their immediate environs. These structures were erected and used during two U.S. wintering expeditions: the Antarctic Service Expedition (1940-1941) and the Ronne Antarctic Research Expedition (1947-1948). The size of the historic area is approximately 1,000 meters in the north-south direction (from the beach to northeast Glacier adjacent to Back Bay) and approximately 500 meters in the east-west direction.
`DRAFT RECOMMENDATION`

RECALLING that at the last Consultative Meeting, Recommendation 
XIV-8 added Historic Monument No 53 to the list of Historic 
Monuments. No 53 comprises the 3 monoliths marking the rescue 
by the Chilean pilot Luis Pardo Villalón of the survivors of 
the British vessel "Endurance" in 1916.

BEARING IN MIND that during the XXIVth Chilean Antarctic 
Scientific Expedition in 1987-1988, a bronze bust of the pilot 
Pardo was placed on each of the said monoliths.

RECOGNISING the need to extend the terms of Recommendation XIV-
8, the Contracting Parties,

RECOMMEND TO Their Governments  :

That the following clause be added at the end of the 
description of Historic Monument No 53 approved by 
Recommendation XIV-8.

"Historic Monument No 53 also includes the bronze busts of the 
pilot Luis Pardo Villalón and their plaques which were placed 
on the above-mentioned 3 monoliths, during the XXIVth Chilean 
Antarctic Scientific Expedition in 1987-1988."
