TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV° CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/36
Item 10 (a) of the Agenda
Original: English

DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON RE-DESIGNATION OF SPECIALLY PROTECTED
AREA N°11, CAPE SHIRREFF, AS A SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC
INTEREST

(Working Paper submitted by the Delegation of the United
Kingdom and the United States)
EXPLANATORY NOTE

Cape Shirreff was designated as SPA N°11 by Rec. IV-11 "on the grounds that the Cape supports a considerable diversity of plant and animal life, including many invertebrates, that a substantial population of elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) and small colonies of fur seals (Arctocephalus sp.) are found on the beaches and that the area is of outstanding interest". Since the SPA was designated, the fur seal colony has grown to a size at which non-invasive research can safely be undertaken without threatening the existence and continued growth of the colony.

The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) recognises that harvesting of species such as Antarctic krill could have adverse effects on krill-consuming species, such as fur seals, as well as on the target species. To provide a means of detecting and avoiding possible adverse effects on dependent as well as on target species the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR has established an ecosystem monitoring programme. A Working Group established by the Scientific Committee notes that predator species, including Antarctic fur seals, might be useful indicators of the possible indirect effects of krill harvesting. It recommended that populations of these predators be studied and monitored at a network of sites throughout the Antarctic.

During the 1986/87 austral summer, researchers from the United States surveyed areas in the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Penisula. This survey suggested that the Cape Shirreff-Telmo Islands area would be the best site for long-term monitoring of fur seal colonies that could be affected by fisheries around the South Shetland Islands.

Safely and effectively to carry out a long-term monitoring program, a multi-year field camp for 4-6 researchers would have to be established within the area currently designated as Specially Protected Area N°11. This might be considered inappropriate and hence the proposal is made to re-designate Cape Shirreff as a Site of Special Scientific Interest. Additionally, it is proposed substantially to enlarge the site by the inclusion of the Telmo Islands group, presently the site of the largest fur seal colony in the Antarctic.
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

Facilitation of scientific research:

Redesignation of Specially? Protected Area, No 11, Cape Shirreff, as Site of Special Scientific Interest No 32

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations III-8, VIII-3 and VIII-4;

Conscious of the need to facilitate research into important aspects of the Antarctica marine ecosystem;

Noting that there are certain long-term research programmes involving support activities which may not be appropriately provided in a Specially Protected Area, but which need not endanger the Antarctic ecosystem or its components;

Noting further that the degree of environmental protection specified in the management plan of a Site of Special Scientific Interest need not be less than that provided in a Specially Protected Area;

Aware that a management plan for a Site of Special Scientific Interest at Cape Shirreff has been prepared and approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. The inclusion in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora of Recommendation IV-11 (Specially Protected Areas : Cape Shirreff) be terminated;

2. The number 11 in Annex B of the Agreed Measures should not be used for another Specially Protected Area;

3. They voluntarily take account of the management plan, annexed to this Recommendation, for Site of Special Scientific Interest No 32, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.
SSSI  No 32

CAPE SHIRREFF, LIVINGSTON ISLAND,   SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1.  GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Cape Shirreff is a low, ice-free peninsula towards the western end of the 
north coast of Livingston Island, situated at latitude 62°27'S, longitude 
60°47'W, between Barclay Bay and Hero Bay. Telmo Island is the largest of 
a small group of ice-free rock islets, approximately 2 km west of Cape 
Shirreff.

2.  MANAGEMENT PLAN

i)  Description of site

The site includes the entire area of the Cape Shirreff peninsula north of 
the glacier ice tongue margin, and most of the Telmo Island group (see 
map).

ii) Reason for Designation

The presence of both Antarctic fur seal and penguin breeding colonies, and 
of krill fisheries within the foraging range of these species, make this a 
critical site for inclusion in the ecosystem monitoring network being 
established to help meet the objectives of the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. The purpose of the 
designation is to allow planned research and monitoring to proceed, while 
avoiding or reducing, to the greatest extent possible, other activities 
which could interfere with or affect the results of the research and 
monitoring programme or alter the natural features of the site.

iii) Outline of research

Long-term studies are being planned to better assess and monitor the 
feeding ecology, growth and condition, reproductive success, behaviour, 
vital rates, and abundance of pinnipeds and seabirds that breed in the 
area. The results of these studies will be compared with environmental 
data, offshore sampling data, and fishery statistics to identify possible 
cause-effect relationships.

iv) Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1999

v)  Access points

The Cape Shirreff part of the site may be entered at any point were 
pinniped or seabird rookeries are not present on or near the beach.  Access 
to the islands in the Telmo Island group is unrestricted but should be at 
the least densely populated areas and cause minimal disturbance to the 
fauna.  Access for other than the aforementioned types of research should 
avoid disturbing pinnipeds and seabirds.
vi)     Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Boats, helicopters, fixed-winged aircraft and land vehicles should avoid
the site except for operations directly supporting authorized scientific
activities.  During these operations, boats and aircraft should travel
routes that avoid or minimize disturbance of pinnipeds and seabirds.  Land
vehicles should not be used except to transport needed equipment and
supplies to and from the field camp to be established.  As far as possible,
the establishment and resupply of the field camp should be done before or after
the pinniped and seabird breeding seasons.  Pedestrians should not walk
through wildlife population areas, especially during the breeding season,
or disturb other fauna or flora except as necessary to conduct authorized
research.

vii)  Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not cause
harmful interference

Geological, glaciological, and other studies which can be done outside of
the pinniped and seabird breeding seasons, and which will not damage or
destroy pinniped or seabird breeding areas, or access to those areas, would
not adversely affect the planned assessment and monitoring studies.
Likewise, the planned assessment and monitoring studies would not be
affected adversely by periodic biological surveys or studies of other
species which do not result in killing, injuring or disturbing pinnipeds or
seabirds, or damage or destroy pinniped or seabird breeding areas or
access to those areas.

viii)  Scientific sampling

Killing, capturing, handling, photographing, and taking eggs, blood, or
other biological samples from pinnipeds and seabirds should be limited to
that necessary to characterize and monitor individual and population
parameters that may change in detectable ways in response to changes in
food availability or other environmental factors.  Sampling should be done
and reported in accordance with: 1) the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, and 2) the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals.

ix)   Other restraints

a)  Only structures directly supporting authorized scientific research
and monitoring programmes may be built within the site to house
research personnel and/or their equipment, and shall be occupied only
within the period 1 September to 1 June.

b)  All non-burnable or non-biodegradable materials brought to the site
should be removed when no longer in use.  Landfill disposal of non-
biodegradable materials, and the burning of non-organic materials, is
not permitted.
60°50’                                      
                                      
                      Telmo Island
                                      
                                      
             - 62°28’S                   
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                      Conic Hill         
                      Bay                 
                                      
             SHIRREFF                     
                      COVE                
                                      
                                      
                      Yamana Beach        
                                      
                      CAPE SHIRREFF      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                      Long Beach          
                                      
30                                        
                                      
                      Hall Moon Beach     
                                      
                                      
             - 62°29’     LIVINGSTON ISLAND 
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
60°46’W
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                Permanent ice           
                Ice-free ground           
                30 m contour              
                Boundary of site          
                                      
                                      
             0         0.5       1       
                      Km                    
                                      
4
