TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              ANTARCTIC TREATY
Ve CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE          XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/2

Item 7, on the provisional
agenda
Original : French/English

A JOINT AUSTRALIA/FRENCH PROPOSAL IN THE FORM OF A PAPER
INCLUDING A DRAFT RECOMMENDATION FOR ATCM XV
COMPREHENSIVE MEASURES FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENT AND ITS DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS

****
A JOINT AUSTRALIA/FRENCH PROPOSAL IN THE FORM OF A PAPER
INCLUDING A DRAFT RECOMMENDATION FOR ATCM XV

COMPREHENSIVE MEASURES FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENT AND ITS DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS

1. BACKGROUND

From the establishment of the Antarctic Treaty System, the
Consultative Parties, in exercise of their special
responsibilities, have demonstrated a sustained concern to
protect and conserve the fragile and unique Antarctic
environment.

That sustained concern is fully justified for a number of
reasons. Antarctica has a major influence on the world climate.
Moreover, by reason of its location, harsh climate and
relatively pristine wilderness qualities, the Antarctic
environment offers special opportunities for research in many
fields. Many of the most important areas of study concern the
world's climate. Partly as a result of Antarctic research, we
know that human activities are responsible for many changes in
the global environment. The process of studying those changes
and of developing responses to them is assuming some
considerable urgency.

The Antarctic region, including the Southern Ocean, is
inextricably linked with the global environment and thus has an
essential role in studies of it. Interactions between the
astmosphere, ice, ocean and living systems affect the entire
global system through mechanisms still insufficiently
understood. Antarctica has a major influence on the global
environment. The Antarctic ice sheet contains 70 % of the
world's fresh water. Any significant changes to the Antarctic
environment could have global consequences for atmospheric and
oceanic circulation and upon sea levels.
2

Antarctica presents an unsurpassed opportunity for 
wilderness preservation. The value of Antarctica's wilderness 
qualities is recognised by Consultative Parties. There is a 
value in the preservation of those qualities for their own 
sake. They are of outstanding significance. The vast majority 
of Antarctica is wilderness in the classice sense - large 
expanses affected principally by natural forces. Human impacts 
are limited mainly to the research stations, most of which are 
located on the few relatively small ice free areas. Antarctica 
is still remote from centres of industry and still relatively 
uncontaminated.

This is not to say that it is unaffected by human 
activity. The impact of human activities in some areas is now 
becoming an increasingly important issue. Of real environmental 
concern are the growing number of scientific stations 
especially where they become concentrated in some areas, the 
potential for dramatic increase in tourist activities, and the 
risks of accidents with even the best conducted scientific 
drilling.

The most obvious impact of human activities on the 
Antarctic environment lies simply in the impact of the 
infrastructure required to maintain a human presence there. The 
establishment of a station can have a permanent impact on the 
environment and its continued operation can have significant 
cumulative effects. The impact of wastes and their discharge 
into the sea or atmosphere is also relevant. Human activity in 
Antarctica cannot avoid the environmental impacts of foot, 
vehicular, air and marine traffic. The need to assess impacts 
and make judgements about their acceptability therefore assumes 
some importance.

2. EXISTING PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

The Antarctic environment, and its dependent and 
associated ecosystems, are protected in a number of ways 
including the legislation and management policies of states,
the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty System and measures 
under the Treaty System.

The measures under the Treaty System include :

. the agreed measures for the conservation of Antarctic 
fauna and flora;

. the code of conduct for Antarctic expeditions and 
station activities;

. Numerous recommendations including guidelines for 
environmental impact assessment, scientific drilling and 
consultation as to the siting of stations.

The conventions now forming part of the Antarctic Treaty System 
are:

. The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
("CCAS") and

. The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources ("CCAMLR").

In addition, the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic 
Mineral Resource Activities ("CRAMRA") has been concluded.

The present system of instruments and measures has evolved 
as human activity in Antarctica and awareness of the 
consequences of that activity has grown. As a result there is 
now a combination of hortatory measures and others requiring 
implementing measures to provide protection for some components 
of the Antarctic environment or in respect of different classes 
of activity.

3. THE NEED FOR A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH
While this evolutionary approach has been wide ranging, it 
left many significant gaps. It requires constant attention to 
ensure its adequacy in the face of changes in the nature of 
human activities. The differing standards and procedures in the 
various treaties, recommendations and measures reflect the 
differing times and contexts in which they were drawn up. There 
are real problems with adequacy, in ensuring compliance in 
practice and with coordination.

The need for a comprehensive scheme of protection for the 
Antarctic environment is now pressing. The world community is 
recognising that an integrated approach must be taken to 
environmental problems. Effects of human activity are no 
respecter of the artificial competences that may be set up 
between different institutions. A target obviously in need of 
protection may require attention to be given to a whole range 
of matters which may previously have been considered unrelated. 
There is also a need to protect the scientific value of an 
untouched Antarctica.

There is a fundamental tension between the value of 
Antarctica in its relatively untouched state and the increasing 
human activity. Many of the factors leading to human activity 
in Antarctica have their basis in its pristine qualities. Yet 
it is those very qualities that can be most at risk from human 
activity.

While noting the immediate scope for additional ad hoc 
measures to protect the Antarctic environment, in the view of 
France and Australia it is timely to consider the requirements 
for overall protection of the Antarctic environment. The only 
forum to do this lies within the Antarctic Treaty System which 
has proven able to respond effectively to changing 
circumstances. However, the future strength of the Treaty 
System will depend upon its ability to continue to grow and 
adapt.

4. PROPOSALS FOR A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH
5

At the Preparatory Meeting for ATCM XV held in Paris in 
May 1989 there was considerable discussion of the desirability 
of  a  more  comprehensive  and  coordinated  approach  to 
environmental protection in Antarctica.

The Secretary General of the French MFA, M. Scheer, 
referred to the matter in his opening remarks. The delegation 
of Chile took up this theme and circulated a paper, WP/PREP 1, 
proposing the inclusion of an item on the agenda for ATCM XV 
entitled "comprehensive measures for the protection of the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems". 
The inscription of this item received the unanimous support of 
the Treaty parties, and a number of delegations circulated 
papers or made comments designed to explore options and ways of 
advancing the consideration of the item through the 
consultative process. Since the Preparatory Meeting, the 
governments of France and Australia, amongst others, have 
declared their strong commitment to the protection of the 
Antarctic environment and the merits of the comprehensive 
approach. They have also suggested for consideration some 
specific options for the achievement of this objective which 
have built on earlier proposals made within the Treaty System. 
Further alternatives are likely to be forthcoming from other 
Consultative Parties.

5. DRAFT RECOMMENDATION TO ATCM XV

In order to assist this process the governments of 
Australia and France have developed the attached draft 
recommendation concerning  a  Special Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting on the protection of the Antarctic 
environment  in  accordance  with  the  approach  taken  at  the 
Preparatory Meeting in May.
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

The representatives,
considering and recognising that;

1. in the environment of the Antarctic Treaty area the ecosystem is particularly vulnerable to human interference;

2. the Antarctic derives much its scienfitic importance from its uncontaminated and undisturbed wilderness condition; and

3. there is an increasingly urgent need to protect the environment from the impacts of human activity;

conscious that international concern for the environment and the importance of Antarctica for the global environment requires a review of existing measures;

conscious that the growing intensity of human activity in the Antarctic calls for a coordinated approach to environmental protection and conservation contained under the Antarctic Treaty System;

recognising the prime responsibilities of the Consultative Parties in relation to the protection and conservation of the environment in the Antarctic Treaty area and the importance of the work they have undertaken to this end;

convinced further of the necessity of maintaining the Antarctic Treaty in its entirety and believing that the early conclusion of a comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems establishing Antarctica as a wilderness reserve would further strengthen the Antarctic Treaty Framework;

noting the unity between the continent of Antarctica, its atmosphere and the adjacent offshore areas;
2

recalling the history of action taken by Consultative Parties 
concerning  conservation  and  protection  of  the  Antarctic 
ecosystems including, in particular, recommendations III-VIII, 
VIII-11, XII-4, X-7 and XIV-2;

convinced  that  the  early  conclusion  of  an  environmental 
protection regime is required to enhance protection of the 
Antarctic environment;

RECOMMEND TO THEIR GOVERNMENTS THAT:

1.  a comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems should be 
concluded as a matter of urgency in order to establish the 
Antarctic as a wilderness reserve.

2.  they promote and co-operate in scientific investigations 
which would facilitate the effective operation of the proposed 
regime and that generally they intensify as far as possible 
scientific research related to the Antarctic environment.

3.  in keeping with consensus amongst ATCPS to protect fully the 
Antarctic environment, a Special Consultative Meeting be 
convened in 1990 in order to:

    a)  review exisiting measures under the Antarctic Treaty 
System  affecting  the  protection  of  the  Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems;

    b)  elaborate a comprehensive regime for the protection of 
the  Antarctic  environment  and  dependent  and  associated 
ecosystems as a wilderness reserve;

    c)  determine  the  form  of  the  regime,  including  the 
question  whether  an  international  instrument  under  the 
Antarctic Treaty System such as a convention or protocol 
is necessary;
d) establish a schedule for its deliberations, using formal meetings and sessions of the Special Consultative Meeting as appropriate; and

e) take any other steps that may be necessary to facilitate the conclusion of the regime, including a decision as to the procedure for its adoption;

4. the Special Consultative Meeting shall base its work on this recommendation and take account of the discussions at the Fifteenth Consultative Meeting, its report and the documents presented to it, and, in the elaboration of a comprhensive regime, shall take into account inter alia the following elements:

    a) the regime should explicitly recognise the prime responsibilities of the consultative parties in relation to the protection of the environment in the Antarctic Treaty area and take account of existing measures recommended by the Consultative Parties to this end;

    b) the Antarctic Treaty must be maintained in its entirety;

    c) the provision of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty shall not be affected by the regime. It should ensure that the principles embodied in Article IV are safeguarded in application to the areas south of 60 degrees South latitude;

    d) the regime should provide for the effective protection of the Antarctic environment and ecosystems as a whole with special regard to their scientific and related wilderness qualities;

    e) the need to determine the territorial scope of the regime bearing in mind existing instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System.
5. the regime should establish:

a) principles for the regulation or prohibition of human 
activities harmful to the Antarctic environment or its 
dependent or associated ecosystems;

b) means for assessing the possible impact of human 
activities on the Antarctic environment and the 
acceptability of them in order to provideQ for informed 
decision-making;

c) a requirement that all human activities undertaken 
within the territorial scope of the regime be undertaken 
in compliance with the regime;

d) appropriate institutional arrangements for its 
implementation by the ATCPS;

e) provisions for co-operative arrangements between the 
regime and other relevant international organisations;

f) provision for the promotion of research related to 
necessary environmental management decisions.
