TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/16
Item 9 a) of the
provisional agenda
Original : English

WASTE DISPOSAL IN ANTARCTICA :
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION
(submitted by the Delegation of Australia)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION - WASTE DISPOSAL IN ANTARCTICA

The Representatives,

Recalling Article II of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations
VI-4, VIII-11, XII-4 and XIII-4

Reaffirming the commitment of Consultative Parties to minimise
the impact of waste on the Antarctic environment;

Recognising that the Antarctic derives much of its scientific
importance from its uncontaminated condition;

Recognising that the support of science has an impact on the
Antarctic environment which it is impractical to completely
eliminate, but which, by good management, can be limited;

Noting that the increasing level and complexity of Antarctic
operations has increased the quantity and variety of wastes
produced, but that improvements in logistics and technology have
increased the capacity for effective management;

Recognising that different local environments, scales of
operation and logistic infrastructures and will require different
approaches to waste management, and that further technical
developments can be expected to provide new solutions to waste
management problems;

Noting with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) in response to Recommendation XIII-4
which invited National Antarctic Committees to undertake a
comprehensive review of the waste disposal aspects of the Annex
to the Recommendation VIII-11, and to offer scientific advice
regarding waste disposal procedures and standards that it is
desirable and practical to achieve at coastal and inland stations
and field camps;

Desiring to revise the waste disposal aspects of the Code of
Conduct annexed to Recommendation VIII-11 to take account of the
circumstances noted above, and the recommendations of SCAR;

Recommend to their Governments that, to the maximum extent
possible, they observe the code of conduct for the management of
waste generated by Antarctic expeditions and station activities,
as set out in the Annex to this recommendation.
ANNEX

Proposed code of conduct for Antarctic expeditions and station activities

The following objectives and practices, which are logistically feasible, are recommended:

Waste management planning

1   To the maximum extent possible, National Antarctic Operators should endeavour to
reduce the amount of waste produced, or disposed of, in Antarctica, so as to minimise
the impact of waste on the Antarctic environment and to minimise interference with
scientific research.

2   National Antarctic Operators should prepare, and annually update:

    (a)     Plans for waste management (including waste reduction, storage, and disposal),
showing for each fixed site, for field camps generally, and for each vessel (other
than small boats, which for this purpose should be regarded as part of the
operations of fixed sites or of vessels), specifying:

            (i)     programs for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work
sites;

            (ii)    current and intended waste management arrangements;

            (iii)   current and intended arrangements for analysing the environmental
effects of Antarctic waste and waste management systems; and

            (iv)    efforts to minimise any environmental effects of waste and waste
management.

    (b)     An inventory of locations of past activities (such as traverses, fuel depots, field
bases, crashed aircraft) as far as is practicable, before the information is lost, so
that such locations can be taken into account in planning future scientific programs
(e.g. snow chemistry, pollutants in lichens, ice core drilling etc.).

3   National Antarctic Operators should establish a waste disposal classification as a basis
for recording wastes and to facilitate studies aimed at evaluating the environmental
impacts of operational and scientific activity. Wastes produced may be classified as
sewage and domestic liquid wastes (Group 1); other liquid wastes and chemicals,
including fuels and lubricants (Group 2); solids to be combusted (Group 3); other solid
wastes (Group 4); and radioactive materials (Group 5). Source classification codes,
which represent individual processes or functions logically associated with points of 
waste creation, may be used in auditing studies.

4   In the development of their waste management plans, National Antarctic Operators 
should, where appropriate, take into account their respective national environmental 
standards. Where national environmental standards are higher than those recommended 
in this Code of Conduct, those national standards should apply.

5   National Antarctic Operators' waste management plans should be included in annual 
exchanges of information in accord with the Antarctic Treaty and recommendations of 
the Consultative Parties. The formats used for these plans can, initially, be at the 
discretion of each National Operator.

6   National Antarctic Operators should nominate a person within their organisation, as a 
waste management official, who would develop and monitor waste management plans. 
Implementat?ion in the field should be delegated to an appropriate person at each site.

7   The Managers of National Antarctic Programs should meet together from time to time to 
consider problems, prospects and opportunities for cooperation in Antarctic waste 
management and to advise their governments on appropriate steps, in this area, which 
may be taken by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

8   National Antarctic Operators should not send to the Antarctic, pesticides, polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs), non-sterile soil or polystyrene beads, chips or similar forms of 
packaging. Additionally, they should discourage the use of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
products in packaging and should advise their expeditions of PVC products being 
provided.

9   The removal of fuel drums, both full and empty, should be seen as a legitimate cost 
on projects and when a program is completed, or for some other reason the fuel dump is 
no longer necessary, all remaining fuel and drums should be removed.

10  National Antarctic Operators should establish a long-term program to remove existing 
abandoned fuel drums, where such removal is practicable; where the transport equipment 
which delivered the drums is no longer available in the same area, the drum sites should 
be recorded for clean-up at the first opportunity.
11 When planning the location of inland stations where it is intended to concentrate waste in 
deep ice pins, sites on ice flow lines which terminate at ice-free areas or in areas of high 
ablation should be avoided where possible.

12 National Antarctic Operators should incorporate on-board waste compaction, storage and 
incineration facilities in the design and construction of ships.

13 National Antarctic Operators should arrange for all expedition staff to receive training 
designed to limit the impact of their operations on the Antarctic environment and to 
inform them of required practices.

Waste disposal measures

14 Where practicable, National Antarctic Operators should clean-up their waste disposal 
sites and their abandoned work sites.

1

15 The following should be removed or else incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise treated to 
be made sterile:

    (a) residues of introduced animal carcasses;
    (b) cultures of micro-organisms; and
    (c) introduced avian products.

16 All combustible waste, which is not removed from the Antarctic, should be burnt in 
incinerators designed to reduce harmful emissions to the maximum extent practicable. 
PVC, polyurethane foam, polystyrene foam or lubricating oils which contain additives 
that are widely recognised as products which would produce harmful emissions, 
should not be burnt unless equipment is installed which neutralises the harmful 
emissions that will be produced. While burning of wastes is carried out in basic 
incinerators, no plastics should be burnt and operators should limit particulate emissions 
as much as practicable.

17 All plastic wastes of unknown composition should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty 
Area, unless incinerated in circumstances where equipment is installed which neutralises 
the harmful emissions that may be produced.

18 National Antarctic Operators should work toward eliminating open burning and should 
not burn any plastics or rubber other than in incinerators designed to reduce harmful 
emissions to the maximum extent practicable. Where it is necessary to dispose of waste
by open burning, operators should make allowance for the wind, and the type of waste to be burnt, to limit, as far as practicable, particulate deposition on land and to avoid deposition over sensitive areas.

19   Wherever practicable, solid, non-combustible waste should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area; if it cannot be transported to land sites outside the Antarctic, it should not be disposed of in inshore locations but in deep water at selected dumping sites, or outside the Antarctic Treaty Area, and in accordance with appropriate international agreements.

20   Waste to be burnt, or removed, should be stored in such a way as to prevent it being dispersed by wind or scavengers.

21   Any waste dumping at sea should be carried out in accordance with the International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by the Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, oth[?]rwise known as the London Dumping Convention (LDC).

22   Sewage and, where practicable, domestic liquid wastes, should not be disposed of onto ice-free land but may be disposed of direct to the ocean, preferably where conditions exist for rapid dispersal, with large quantities (from, say, over 30 people) first receiving at least primary treatment, such as maceration. It may be advantageous to treat very large quantities through Rotating Biological Contactor Systems, or the equivalent, to reduce BOD and suspended solids.

23   Other liquid wastes, solid non-combustible waste, PVC, polyurethane foam and polystyrene foam should, generally, be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area.

24   Radio-active materials, electrical batteries (including lead/acid, dry cell and other types) and wastes containing high levels of heavy metals or harmful, persistent compounds should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area.

25   Disposal of chemical waste to land should not occur.

26   At inland stations, National Antarctic Operators should make every possible effort to remove waste from the area; where this is not practicable, it must be concentrated in ice pits.
27 Wherever practicable, wastes generated at field camps should be removed to their supporting stations, bases or ships for proper disposal or subsequent removal from the Antarctic Treaty Area.

28 Where ships are not fitted with incinerator facilities, Antarctic ship operators should, whenever practicable, stockpile wastes, excluding untreated sewage and domestic effluents, for appropriate disposal at stations, bases, or in deep water at selected sites or outside the Antarctic Treaty Area. The incineration of ship-board wastes should be conducted at sea, preferably outside the Antarctic Treaty Area, unless the incinerators are of the type which are designed to reduce harmful emissions to the maximum extent practicable.

29 Nothing in the preceding recommendations should take precedence over safety.

30 The preceding recommendations should be followed by any non-government operator in the Antarctic.
