TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/26
Item 16 on the
agenda
Original : English

COOPERATION IN THE HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTING OF ANTARCTIC WATERS
(submitted by the delegation of the United Kingdom)
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION

INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN THE HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTING OF
ANTARCTIC WATERS

.. The representatives,

Recognising that the topography of the seabed in Antarctic
waters is rugged and irregular and has been very imperfectly
surveyed;

Recognising also that sea ice conditions can lead to the
diversion of shipping from acknowledged routes, thus placing a
premium on the charting of waters contiguous to such routes;

Aware that there have been significant increases in both the
number and size of vessels operating in Antarctic waters in
recent years;

Conscious that the protection of the Antarctic marine
environment requires that the Consultative Parties should take
all possible steps open to them to ensure that maritime
accidents are reduced to a minimum;

Recognising that the resources available to devote to
hydrographic surveys and the accurate positioning and depiction
of the Antarctic coastline are scarce;

Conscious of the benefits to be gained by making provision for
international cooperation between those countries which
undertake hydrographic surveys and charting of Antarctic
waters, and of utilizing to the maximum extent cooperative
arrangements which already exist routinely between hydrographic
offices, and, therefore, of the need to avoid the establishment
of a parallel system;

Aware of the role traditionally played by the International
Hydrographic Organisation in facilitating cooperation between
hydrographic offices;

Recommend to their Governments that, through their
representatives at the International Hydrographic Organisation,
they invite the International Hydrographic Organisation to
consider the establishment of a Regional Hydrographic
Commission for the Antarctic which, in its work, shall take
account of the special legal and political status of Antarctica
and the special responsibility of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties to ensure that all activities in
Antarctica are consistent with the purposes and principles of
the Antarctic Treaty.
COOPERATION IN THE HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTING OF ANTARCTIC WATERS

1. The topography of the seabed in Antarctic waters, and 
particularly those around the Antarctic Peninsula, is rugged 
and irregular and has been very imperfectly surveyed. This 
situation is exacerbated by the presence of ice, some 
inadequacies in the exchange and use of hydrographic 
information under existing arrangements but most fundamentally 
of all by the low quality and poor quality of the survey data 
available to produce nautical charts and publications.

2. All vessels are expected to carry a set of nautical charts 
and publications adequate for their voyage. These are vital to 
the safety of shipping. There have been significant increases 
in both the number and size of vessels operating in Antarctic 
waters in recent years and this necessitates more hydrographic 
surveying to provide the more detailed charting required both 
for the safety of maritime transportation and the protection of 
the marine environment.

3. Only a limited number of charts of Antarctica contain data 
from modern hydrographic surveys. In the main they rely on 
isolated lines of soundings recorded by ships on passage and a 
miscellany of other data for their source material. The result 
is a good deal of duplication of coverage with these charts 
collectively containing conflicting information and large 
amounts of doubtful data.

4. Little hydrographic surveying of Antarctic waters has been 
undertaken. Progress continues to be slow given the limited 
number of vessels with a surveying capability, other demands on 
ships' time, the short surveying season and the harsh 
environment. An additional pre-requisite to producing modern 
charts is the capacity accurately to position and depict the 
Antarctic coastline and its offlying islands. This will 
necessitate improvements in the geodetic control network and 
the acquisition of further aerial photography and satellite 
imagery. In all a very substantial programme of work is 
required to bring about the necessary improvements in the 
charting of Antarctica.

5. Hitherto there has been no formal international cooperation 
in, nor coordination of, hydrographic work in Antarctica. Faced 
with an inhospitable environment, growing traffic and 
inadequate surveys, cooperation is a concept to be strongly 
supported to ensure the greatest benefit is derived from the 
limited resources available. The expertise necessary to bring 
such cooperation about lies first and foremost with the 
International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO). All Consultative 
Parties are also member States of the IHO.
6. The IHO is an inter-governmental consultative and technical 
organisation amongst whose declared aims are to bring about the 
coordination of the activities of national hydrographic offices 
and the greatest possible uniformity in nautical charts and 
documents. The IHO has consistently worked towards achieving 
maximum standardization in the specifications, symbols, styles 
and formats of charts.

7. The IHO fosters international cooperation by encouraging the 
establishment of Regional Hydrographic Commissions and offers 
advice on their formation. To date, several such Commissions 
have been established. They are composed of representatives 
from Member States' Hydrographic Services within a defined 
geographical area who meet at regular intervals to discuss 
mutual hydrographic survey and chart production problems, plan 
joint survey operations and resolve schemes for the charting of 
their regions.

8. A regional Hydrographic Commission is an established means 
of achieving international cooperation in surveying and 
charting. In the forum of a Commission for Antarctica nations 
could begin to address such questions as a common surveying and 
charting strategy and geographic divisions of responsibility. 
The work of commissions elsewhere would serve as a valuable 
precedent whilst at the same time acknowledging that Antarctica 
has problems of a unique nature to be addressed.
