TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                          ANTARCTIC TREATY
                          XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
                          XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/13
Item 6 of the agenda
Original : English

REQUIREMENTS FOR SUPPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(submitted by the United States of America)
Requirements for Support of the
        Antarctic Treaty System

(Submitted by the
United States of America)

The attached paper discusses the requirements for
support of the Antarctic Treaty System.
Requirements for the Support of the Antarctic Treaty System

At the last Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), it 
was agreed that there should be further consideration at ATCM XV 
of the organizational aspects of the Antarctic Treaty system, 
including the possible establishment of some type of permanent 
infrastructure to support the consultative mechanism.  Most 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) endorsed the need to 
establish such infrastructure, though several took the position 
that the justification for such action was lacking.

Five working papers were presented on the topic at ATCM XIV 
and provided a basis for detailed discussion. Paragraphs 24-38 of 
the Final Report of ATCM XIV summarize the discussion.  As a 
result, there were enumerated a list of ten administrative support 
functions required for the effective operation of the consultative 
mechanism.  These included:

1) preparations for Consultative Meetings, including 
preparatory and special Consultative Meetings, primarily 
drawing up and distributing the provisional agenda and 
circulating other relevant documents in advance of the 
Meetings;

2) communications among parties to the Antarctic Treaty, 
including facilitation of communication necessary for the 
operation of the consultative mechanism among parties, 
irrespective of the status of their diplomatic relations;

3) administrative, secretarial and support services 
during the Meeting, including meeting facilities and 
translation and interpretation;

4) preparation and timely publication of the Final 
Reports of Consultative Meetings, updating the Antarctic 
Treaty Handbook and distribution of these documents in 
accordance with Consultative Meeting decisions;

5) maintenance of the archives of the documents of the 
Consultative Meetings;

6) provision of accurate and up-to-date information about 
activities in Antarctica and the Antarctic Treaty system;

7) preparation of information for public dissemination on 
the Antarctic Treaty system;

8) attendance at meetings of, and communications with, 
relevant international organizations;
- 2 -

9) coordination among the components of the Antarctic 
Treaty system;

10) meeting the costs of the operation of the 
consultative mechanism.

Of these, three (functions 1, 3 and 5) relate, in whole or in 
part, to the actual conduct of ATCMs and one (function 10) 
relating to costs is general in nature. The other six involve 
activities that need to be carried on a continuing basis, most 
particularly when the Treaty Parties are not meeting in ATCMs. 
What is becoming increasingly apparent, and what has been further 
demonstrated since ATCM XIV, is that these functions need to be 
carried out with an intensity, rapidity and continuity that was 
not envisaged in the early days of the operation of the Treaty.

The nature of the participation in ATCM XV provides evidence 
of this trend:

    there are now twenty-two (22) ATCPs and seventeen (17) 
NCPs, reflective of continuing growth in the Treaty 
system;

    observers and experts from a number of international 
organizations will be in attendance, reflective of growth 
in contact between the Antarctic Treaty system and other 
components of the international system; and

    receipt of increased numbers of reports from components 
of the Treaty system.

The nature of the issues facing ATCM XV perhaps paints a more 
graphic picture. The meeting will address items on overall 
protection of the Antarctic environment; human impact on the 
Antarctic environment, including marine pollution, waste disposal, 
and protected areas; the safety of air and maritime navigation; 
telecommunications and the exchange of meteorological data; 
tourism; and the role of Antarctica in global change. The scope 
of these issues testifies to expansion in the nature and scale of 
activities in Antarctica and in the interactions among them.

The challenge facing the Treaty Parties is to ensure that 
these activities are and continue to be consistent with the 
principles and purposes of the Treaty system. First, it is 
essential that those carrying out or seeking to carry out 
activities in Antarctica have accurate and up-to-date information 
and data concerning the measures applicable to such activities, 
of such activities, other activities in the relevant areas, and 
any available communications procedures and facilities, including 
emergency procedures.
- 3 -

Second, the Parties, individually and collectively, will need 
to undertake continuing oversight and monitoring of these 
activities and to be able to act rapidly where necessary.  This 
may well necessitate more frequent ATCMs, at least for the 
immediate future. Perhaps more important, the Parties require 
up-to-date and accurate information about ongoing and planned 
activities, as well as about past activities, in order to be able 
to determine trends and, thus, if and when regulatory action is 
needed.

Up until now, some of this information and data has been 
exchanged directly among the Treaty Parties, in large part through 
the annual exchange of information.  The Antarctic Treaty itself, 
as well as ATCM recommendations and reports, have addressed 
aspects of the issue and a number of categories of information and 
data have been identified that the Parties should share with each 
other.  These include, in addition to the annual activities 
reports, notifications of tourist and other non-governmental 
expeditions, inspection reports, reports on the number of tourists 
visiting stations, environmental impact assessments and reports on 
site visits to SPAs, SSSIs and historic monuments.

As has been widely recognized, however, much of the data and 
information exchange is not accomplished on a timely basis and 
takes place in a fragmented fashion.  Thus, it is often not 
available to potential users and is difficult to refer to in an 
emergency.  Ever-increasing numbers of visitors to the continent 
only heighten the importance of the need for this information to 
be current.

In short, the Antarctic Treaty consultative mechanism needs a 
repository of information to serve the growing management problems 
of the Treaty Parties.  Such a data base could perform archival 
and communication functions for the Treaty Parties.  It would be a 
repository not only for the reports and submissions referred to 
above, but also for additional kinds of information that the 
Treaty Parties will need, such as:

-- agreed management plans for protected areas;
-- records of permits issued under the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and for entry into 
protected areas;
-- information relating to air and maritime navigation in 
Antarctica;
-- up-to-date communications frequencies for stations in 
Antarctica;
-- information on available capabilities to respond to 
emergencies, including pollution incidents in Antarctica;
- 4 -

-- steps taken by the Treaty Parties to give effect to ATCM 
recommendations and measures.

    This repository could collate and integrate information from 
an ever-growing number of sources to support the needs of the 
Treaty Parties.  It would facilitate the timely submission of 
reports and information and generally assist in communications 
among the Treaty Parties.

An infrastructure to provide this consolidated data base would 
also offer an important means to serve the Treaty Parties' 
objective of ensuring the availability of complete and accurate 
information about the Antarctic Treaty system.  In coordination 
with national contact points, designated pursuant to 
Recommendation XIII-1, in particular, it could be a source of such 
information for international organizations interested or involved 
in Antarctic matters and for ensuring that Parties obtain 
information from those organizations on a timely basis.

These information requirements demonstrate the need for 
infrastructure to perform secretariat functions for the 
consultative mechanism. There is a gap that now needs to be 
filled.  There is a CCAMLR Secretariat and provision is made for a 
secretariat in the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic 
Mineral Resource Activities.  Perhaps more significantly, SCAR has 
moved to hire a full-time executive secretary and the Managers of 
National Antarctic Programs (MNAP) group has established a Council 
to carry out secretariat functions.  Without questioning the need 
for these latter steps, they constitute recognition that 
activities in Antarctica, scientific and logistic, have reached 
the stage that infrastructure is necessary.  As the ATCPs turn 
their attention to the implementation of emerging international 
programs for the study of Antarctica and global change, the 
support functions to be provided by such an infrastructure will 
become all the more important.  To ensure that the support 
requirements of the consultative mechanism avoid fragmentation and 
are met in coordinated and cost effective fashion, the Treaty 
Parties should act at ATCM XV to begin the development of 
necessary infrastructure.

The United States believes that the Treaty Parties should at 
ATCM XV commit themselves to work towards the establishment of a 
permanent infrastructure - a secretariat to support the 
consultative mechanism, the central component of the Antarctic 
Treaty system, including coordination with the existing or 
emerging machinery of the other components of the system.  It 
should be stressed that such a body will in no way hinder the 
normal country-to-country communication that has long been a 
hallmark of the Treaty.  In the view of the United States, a 
permanent infrastructure will enhance and improve the normal 
communication between Parties, not interfere with it.
- 5 -

The United States also recognizes that this process will take some time but believes that initial steps should be taken at once.
Such steps should include establishment of a full-time mechanism 
to consolidate and carry out the information functions outlined 
above.  Its operation would provide experience upon which to draw 
in defining and moving towards more definitive arrangements.

There are several forms which such initial steps could taken.
The four alternatives appear to be:

1) designation of an existing private Antarctic institute to 
perform these functions;

2) designation of existing machinery of another component of 
the Antarctic Treaty system to perform these functions;

3) designation of the Depository Government or other Treaty 
Party Government to perform these functions;

4) establishment of an Antarctic Treaty information office 
(with perhaps regional or hemispheric branches) to perform 
these functions.

For its part, the United States believes that the latter two 
alternatives offer the most promise and is prepared to engage in 
detailed discussion of how to establish and delineate the 
responsibilities of such a mechanism at ATCM XV.

8) attendance at meetings of, and communications 
with, relevant international organizations;

9) coordination among the components of the 
Antarctic Treaty system;

10) meeting the costs of the operation of the 
consultative mechanism.

Of these, three (functions 1, 3 and 5) relate, in whole 
or in part, to the actual conduct of ATCMs and one (function 
10) relating to costs is general in nature.  The other six 
involve activities that need to be carried out on a 
continuing basis, most particularly when the Treaty Parties 
are not meeting in ATCMs.  What is becoming increasingly 
apparent, and what has been further demonstrated since ATCM 
XIV, is that these functions need to be carried out with an 
intensity, rapidity and continuity that was not envisaged in 
the early days of the operation of the Treaty.

The nature of the participation in ATCM XV provides 
evidence of this trend:
- 6 -

--  there are now twenty-two (22) ATCPs and seventeen 
(17) NCPs, reflective of continuing growth in the 
Treaty system;

--  observers and experts from a number of 
international organizations will be in attendance, 
reflective of growth in contact between the 
Antarctic Treaty system and other components of the 
international system;

--  increased numbers of reports from components of the 
Treaty system.

The nature of the issues facing ATCM XV perhaps paints a 
more graphic picture.  The meeting will address items on 
human impact on the Antarctic environment, including marine 
pollution, waste disposal, and protected areas; the safety 
of air and maritime navigation; telecommunications and the 
exchange of meteorological data; tourism; and the role of 
Antarctica in global change.  The scope of these issues 
testifies to expansion in the nature and scale of activities 
in Antarctica and in the interactions among them.

The challenge facing the Treaty Parties is to ensure 
that these activities are and continue to be consistent with 
the principles and purposes of the Treaty system.  The 
Parties, individually and collectively, need to undertake 
continuing oversight and monitoring of these activities and 
be able to act rapidly where necessary.  This may well 
necessitate more frequent ATCMs, at least for the immediate 
future.

Equally important are the information requirements.  
Those carrying out or seeking to carry out activities in 
Antarctica require accurate and up-to-date information and 
data concerning the measures applicable to such activities, 
concerning the physical and environmental conditions in the 
areas of such activities, other activities in the relevant 
areas, and any available communications procedures and 
facilities, including emergency procedures.

Treaty Parties require this same up-to-date and accurate 
information and data, as well as such information and data 
about the ongoing and planned activities themselves.  They 
further require information about past activities in order 
to be able to determine trends and thus if and when 
regulatory action is needed.

Up until now, some of this information and data has been 
exchanged directly among the Treaty Parties, in large part 
through the annual exchange of information. The Antarctic 
Treaty itself, as well as ATCM recommendations and reports,
- 7 -

have addressed aspects of the issue and a number of
categories of information and data have been identified that
the Parties should share with each other. These include, in
addition to the annual activities reports, notifications of
tourist and other non-governmental expeditions, inspection
reports on the number of tourists visiting
stations, environmental impact assessments and reports on
site visits to SPAs, SSSIs and historic monuments.

As has been widely recognized, however, much of the data
and information exchange is not accomplished on a timely
basis and takes place in a fragmented fashions.  In
addition, it is not uniform in content or format.  Thus, it
is often not available to potential users and is difficult
to refer to in an emergency. Ever-increasing numbers of
visitors to the continent only heighten the importance of
the need for this information to be current.

In short, the Antarctic Treaty consultative mechanism
needs a repository of information to serve the growing
management problems of the Treaty Parties. Such a data base
could perform archival, analytical and communication
functions for the Treaty Parties. It would be a repository
not only for the reports and submissions referred to above,
but also for additional kinds of information that the Treaty
Parties will need, such as:

-- agreed management plans for protected areas;

-- records of permits issued under the Agreed Measures
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and
for entry into protected areas;

-- information relating to air and maritime navigation
in Antarctica;

-- up-to-date communications frequencies for stations in
Antarctica;

-- information on available capabilities to respond to
emergencies, including pollution incidents in Antarctica;

-- steps taken by the Treaty Parties to give effect to
ATCM recommendations and measures.

This repository could collate and integrate information
from an ever-growing number of sources, to support the needs
of the Treaty Parties. It would facilitate the timely
submission and distribution of reports and information and
generally assist in communications among the Treaty Parties.
Finally, it could also assist them in ensuring the
observance of ATCM recommendations and measures.
- 8 -

An infrastructure to provide this consolidated data base would also offer an important means to serve the Treaty Parties' objective of ensuring the availability of complete and accurate information about the Antarctic Treaty system. In coordination with national contact points, designated pursuant to Recommendation XIII-1, in particular; it could be a source of such information for international organizations interested or involved in Antarctic matters and for ensuring Parties' interested offices obtain information from those organizations on a timely basis.

These information requirements demonstrate the need for infrastructure to perform secretariat functions for the consultative mechanism. There is a growing gap that now needs to be filled. There is a CCAMLR Secretariat and provision is made for a secretariat in the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities. Perhaps more significantly, SCAR has moved to hire a full-time executive secretary and the Managers of National Antarctic Programs (MNAP) group has established a Council to carry out secretariat functions. Without questioning the need for these latter steps, they constitute recognition that activities in Antarctica, scientific and logistic, have reached the stage that infrastructure is necessary. To ensure that the support requirements of the consultative mechanism avoid fragmentation and are met in coordinated and cost effective fashion, the Treaty Parties should act at ATCM XV to begin the development of necessary infrastructure.

The United States believes that the Treaty Parties should at ATCM XV commit themselves to work towards the establishment of a permanent infrastructure - a secretariat to support the consultative mechanism, the central component of the Antarctic Treaty system, including coordination with the existing or emerging machinery of the other components of the system.  It should be stressed that such a body will in no way hinder the normal country-to-country communication that has long been a hallmark of the Treaty.  In the view of the United States, a permanent infrastructure will enhance and improve the normal communication between Parties, not interfere with it.

The United States also recognizes that this process will take some time but believes that initial steps should be taken at once. Such steps should include establishment of a full-time mechanism to consolidate and carry out the information functions outlined above. Its operation would provide experience upon which to draw in defining and moving towards more definitive arrangements.
- 9 -

There are several forms which such initial steps could 
taken. The four alternatives appear to be:

1) designation of an existing private Antarctic 
institute to perform these functions;

2) designation of existing machinery of another 
component of the Antarctic Treaty system to perform 
these functions;

3) designation of the Depository Government or other 
Treaty Party Government to perform these functions;

4) establishment of an Antarctic Treaty information 
office (with perhaps regional or hemispheric branches) 
to perform these functions.

For its part, the United States believes that the latter 
two alternatives offer the most promise and is prepared to 
engage in detailed discussion of how to establish and 
delineate the responsibilities of such a mechanism at ATCM 
xv.
