TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE         XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ        XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/6

Item 11, on the provisional
agenda
Original : French

WORKING DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATIONS OF THE FEDERAL
REPUBLIC OF GERMANY AND FRANCE

***
Working Document
Submitted by the Delegations
of the Federal Republic of Germany
and France

1. One of the most important activities that provide a
legitimate basis for the system of the Treaty on Antarctica of
1959 is scientific research, which is the subject of Article 2
of the Treaty.

2. Interest in Antarctica as an object and field of
scientific research has increased sharply: the 12 countries
that were the original signers of the Treaty have since been
followed by 27 other countries that have joined the system and
ten of which have achieved the status of Consultative Parties.
This increase in the number of countries conducting research in
Antarctica has led to a considerable accumulation of scientific
data and results. These have, in particular, made a decisive
contribution to the knowledge of processes in the atmosphere
and oceans of the earth.

3. However, some problems linked to the increase in this
scientific activity have appeared, e. g.:

    the overconcentration of new stations in certain more
easily accessible regions,

    the problem raised by the evacuation of waste in
connection with the protection of the environment,

    the decline in the value of some research efforts
as a result of duplication.

4. It has also become clear that, while the objective of
freedom of scientific research in Antarctica has been fully
attained, cooperation in this field, the principle of which was
also stated in Article 2 of the Treaty, could be improved even
more, though some appreciable results have been achieved and
relations are excellent among the scientists of the
Consultative Parties, especially, within the Scientific
Committee for Antarctic Research, which, it should be
emphasized, is making a major contribution to the system.
- 2 -

5. In the light of the above, it appears desirable that the
Contracting Parties orient their scientific research programs
according to the criterion of the greatest usefulness to the
international community and promote cooperation among
themselves towards that end, as allowed by their varying
scientific potential and respective responsibilities. These
considerations could, moreover, be very useful to countries
that are candidates for the status of Consultative Parties with
regard to their scientific activities, in complying with the
provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 9 of the Treaty on
Antarctica.

6. The usefulness of scientific research is not confined to
pioneering research or to programs that aim at spectacular
results. There is also considerable usefulness in repetitive
measurements, studies, and observations and in work done on the
basis of, or in connection with, established and confirmed
scientific discoveries. Although this kind of work requires
investments of a usually limited nature or a level of
scientific attainment below that needed for so-called
pioneering research, they are nevertheless useful, if not
indeed necessary, for the development of scientific knowledge,
of which they are the very basis. At this stage, they can also
serve to promote international cooperation and the progress of
less developed nations, to which they can also provide an
effective way of contributing actively, at the lowest cost, to
raising the worldwide level of international scientific
knowledge.

7. The Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research, in view
of the high scientific level of its members and its recognized
independence, is clearly an organization that is especially
well-qualified to provide the Consultative Parties with a study
the object of which would be to propose the following:

        -   those projects that are of a nature to lead to new
            scientific discoveries or observational data;

        -   the most promising, or even indispensable, fields
            of cooperation, especially with regard to inter-
            disciplinary research;

        -   the places or regions where it would be wise to set
            up stations, especially with a view to the decon-
            centrated and exhaustive recording of measurements
            needed for long-term research;

        -   the most useful expeditions that it would be
            appropriate to organize over sea or land routes.

8. The selection of fields or projects presented by SCAR will
also be guided by a twofold concern: the protection of the
environment and the essential contribution made by research in
Antarctica to the program of study of global processes.
- 3 -

9.  The SCAR study, written with a view to scientific 
usefulness and, where appropriate, in cooperation with the 
group of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (MNAP), will 
be submitted as a non-binding proposal for the Consultative 
Parties to examine.  It will constitute, in a context of 
transparence that is highly valued by the Consultative Parties, 
a very positive contribution, one that those Parties will be 
able to use in pursuing their efforts to develop international 
cooperation and help countries that wish to achieve the status 
of Consultative Parties to give a concrete and substantial 
expression to their interest in Antarctica, in the spirit of 
Article 9 of the Treaty of 1959.

10. The delegations of the Federal Republic of Germany and 
France present in an Annex a draft recommendation requesting 
member countries to invite SCAR to make proposals to them for 
the promotion of the most useful scientific fields or research 
projects.
DRAFT RECC. NDATION

Cooperation and efficiency in the field of Antarctic scientific 
research.

The Representatives,

Obserying the increasing importance of Antarctica for 
scientific research, especially for the worldwide environment,

Calling to mind the fact that freedom of scientific research in 
Antarctica and cooperation for that purpose, mentioned in 
Article 2 of the Treaty on Antarctica, constitute essential 
principles that provide a legitimate basis for the system of 
the Treaty,

Realizing that, while freedom of scientific research has been 
achieved in conformity with Recommendation XIII-6, cooperation 
and scientific research can be improved so as to reinforce the 
spirit of the Treaty,

Noting that the number of countries actively involved in 
Antarctic scientific research has increased considerably in 
recent years,

Recognizing that this development has led to a concentration of 
research stations and of logistical support facilities in the 
most easily accessible regions of Antarctica and that this 
situation may have an unfavorable impact on the environment and 
hamper already established scientific programs and their 
evaluation,

Well-aware that, in order to achieve the objective of the 
greatest efficiency at the lowest possible cost in the use of 
resources, which are scarce by definition, and in the use of 
facilities, scientific research must, in the service of 
mankind, be governed by a concern for the greatest scientific 
usefulness, which is not linked solely to pioneering research 
programs, but also to programs conducted on the basis of 
established discoveries as well as to work that is designed, 
through measurement and observation, to provide the material 
for the abovementioned pioneering research or to accompany it,

Observing that the concept of scientific usefulness thus 
defined can also help countries that are members of the Treaty 
and are candidates for the status of Consultative Party, by 
giving a concrete expression to their interest in Antarctica, 
as called for by Article 9, Paragraph 2 of the Treaty,
- 2 -

Recommond to their respective governments that:

through their National Antarctic Committee, they invite SCAR to
draw up, on the basis of the greatest scientific usefulness, a
list of projects

    (i)     that will serve as a basic indication in promoting
            the efficiency of Antarctic scientific research;

   (ii)     that will include suggestions on the following:
            - the location of research stations,
            - the most innovative research projects,
            - interdisciplinary projects requiring bilateral
              or multilateral cooperation,
            - useful expeditions over sea or land routes;

  (iii)     that take into account both particular and general
            aspects of the protection of the environment.
