TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE                                XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                      TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                               XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
XV ATCM/WP/45                                               9-19 OCTOBRE 1989
Original : Spanish

VIABILITY OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(submitted by the delegation of Chile)
ATCM/WP/45

VIABILITY OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

The successful operation of the Antarctic Treaty System for more than half a century is based on a number of features prominent among which is the distinction between Consultative Parties and States having acceded to the Treaty. That distinction was dictated by the unique and fragile characteristics of the geography and environment of the Antarctic which more than any other part of the world calls for a system of administration based on truly informed decisions in order to avoid damage with unknown consequences for the region. Hence the above distinction sui-generis in traditional international law, whereby those countries enjoying Consultative status take decisions to impose limits and obligations upon themselves rather than grant themselves specific rights and advantages in Antarctic affairs.

The distinction between Consultative Parties and Member States is based on the criterion of activity in the Antarctic which opens up progressive and coherent access to Antarctic decision-making levels; we can thus talk about a genuine "Antarctic career".

In this way, the initial manifestation of interest is by accession to the Antarctic Treaty, which is open to any United Nations member country. If the country involved is not a UN member, the agreement of the Consultative Parties to the Treaty is sufficient.

Accession carries with it the right to attend Antarctic Meetings as observer, to receive all documentation and exchanges of scientific information and to be informed of the concrete experience of the Antarctic expeditions carried out by the Consultative Parties.

The conditions to be met in order to take part in decision making as Consultative Party are contained in Article IX-2 of the Antarctic Treaty. The essential requirement is substantial scientific activity in the Antarctic, carried on with sufficient autonomy and continuity.
A constant scientific activity involving actual presence in the Antarctic  yields an adequate knowledge of realities and
requirements in the Antarctic. Those who carry it on are thus
qualified to take part in the making of decisions which affect
precisely those activities taking place south of 60° south.
Such decisions call for adequate information on the special
features of Antarctica and by their nature, which is normally a
restrictive one, they call for effective presence on the
Continent.

This explains how we have the activities criterion which is the
basis for the specific status of the Consultative Party as well
as its unique character.

The foregoing has already been declared before the General
Assembly of the United Nations on behalf of the Consultative
Parties.
