TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                          
                          PARIS                                  
                  9-19 OCTOBRE 1989                          

XV ATCM/WP/7
Item 7 on the provisional
agenda

WORKING PARPER
SUBMITTED BY THE DELEGATION OF CHILE
DELEGATION OF CHILE

WORKING PAPER

INTRODUCTION

The Preparatory Meeting of the XVth.Consultative
Meeting, which was held in Paris, France, from 9 to 13 May of
this year, agreed to include in the agenda of the XVth Consultative
Meeting the item "Comprehensive Measures  for  the protection of
the Antarctic environment  and of its associated and dependent
ecosystems which was proposed by the Delegation of Chile.

The substantive consideration of this matter should
conclude in the adoptionof a set of rules of a mandatory nature that
regulate all of man's activity in Antarctica, without prejudice
to the other instruments currently in force.

The unanimous approval of this new item is explained
by different reasons. Among them there is need to highlight the
increasing diversity and complexity of man's activities in Antarcti
the multiplicity of actors in Antarctic endeavors and the alarm
provoked by recent accidents or phenomenons such as the ozone layer
In the light of all of this it is necessary to apply the Antarctic
Treaty System's invariable policy of anticipating possible events
or damages that can occur in the frozen continent and adopt the
appropriate mea sures. This policy, which has not changed in the
thirty years of existence of the Antarctic Treaty, has resulted
in the preservation of Antarctica as an ecological reserve,
without affecting scientificresearch and the other legitimate
uses in the region.

Antarctica was conceived by the Treaty Parties
on the basis of a clear conservation approach.

./..
2)


This approach, which  is implied in the Antarctic
Treaty, was made explicit in Recommendation III-VIII, adopted in
Brussels in 1964. The final preambular paragraph of that Racom-
mendation states that the Consultative Parties "Hereby consider 
the Treaty Area as a Special Conservation Area."


The work done by the Consultative Parties on the
subject has always been governed by this fundamental principle
of the conservation and protection of Antarctica.


Something similar occurs with the Convention
regulating Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities. On the basis
of the protection of the ecosystems, article 4 of that Convention
establishes strict environmental protection principles, which
have no equal in any other multilateral treaty. These principles
operate on the basis that Antarctica is "closed" to all activities
of exploitation until the Consultative Parties declare it "open",
area by area, by means of a formal consensus bases on environmental
criteria.  This has been strenghned by the obligation to negotiat=
and adopt an additional Protocol on liability whose objective,
in accordance with article 8 of the Convention, is "to enhance
the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems. This provision has no other goal than
to strenghten the environmental protection of Antarctica.


Such is the case with regard to the Convention
on Marine Living Resources, which Is governed by an "ecosystem
approach" as the fundamental criterion for activities governed
by that instrument.

./. . .
3)
The Consultative Parties have maintained the 
moratorium ( or voluntary restraint in the opinion of others)
which is implied in the Antarctic Treaty and expressly agreed
upon in paragraph 8 of Recommendation IX-I, approved during the
IXth. Consultative Meeting held in London in 1977 and thereafter
renewed up to the present.

Accordingly, the Antarctic Treaty, the Agreed
Measures, the Recommendations regarding man's impact, the Conventic
that have been adopted or are in force,and the moratorium have give
concrete expression to the principle that Antarctice has always
been considered as an ecological reserve.

The aforementioned instruments configure a wide
and profound framework of environmental protection that has no
equal in the international community and has fulfilled its objec-
tives in a very satisfactory way. The need of improving this
framework, in the light of the increasing human activity in
Antarctica, led to the timely proposal that a new item be destined
to the protection of the ecosystems and thus enhance and consoli-
date Antarctica as an ecological reserve.

With this purpose in mind the Delegation of Chile,
that participated in the Preparatory Meeting of Paris, circulated
on that occasion a preliminary document which expressed that it
was an ethical, juridical and political imperative for the Consul-
tative Parties of the Antarctic Treaty System to perfect the
existing provisions on environmental protection.

This would be obtained through the comprehensive
treatment of the measures for the protection of the Antarctic
ecosystems from the impact of human activities. This proposal,
set forth by the delegation of Chile was accepted with interest
by the remaining Consultative Parties.

./..
4 )


It also elicited the request that Chile prepare
an additional document which would facilitate the substantive
consideration of this item during the XVth. Consultative Meeting.
That is the objective of this Working Paper.

At the same Preparatory Meeting a "Non-Paper"
which suggests a procedural approach and some terms of reference
for the substantive consideration was circulated (1). We consider
that the proposed operational approach is useful because it is
conducive to the adoption at the XVth.Consultative Meeting of
a Recommendation of a general character which would serve as a
framework and mandate for a Special Consultative Meeting, which
should take place in 1990,in principle, conclude with the
adoption of a binding instrument containing the Comprehensive
Measures.

The task before the Consultative Parties is difficult
and may require of additional meetings besides the XV Consultative
Special Consultative Meeting.

Without prejudice to this, we are of the opinion that
the substantive work on the Comprehensive Measures should not be
put off to that instance.

On the contrary, the XVth. Consultative Meeting should
begin the process by considering a collection of principles and
general rules applicable to all activities in Antarctica. Afterward
a comparison of existing measures should be carried out an evalua-
tion of their mandatory nature with the object of on the one hand,
compile them in an organic way and on the other, to give them the

(1) PRESENTED BY THE DELEGATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM.
necessary juridical precision in order to obtain their full 
compliance.

There ma? also be a need to detect the omissions 
that exist and repair them with references to human activities 
which are not covered by existing measures and thus stipulate 
whicn additional provisions are needed.

Likewise, attention shoud be given to possi:le 
measures witn regard to activities forseeaple in the short and 
medium future so as to prepare  provisions that have been agrea 
ved and are in force when these activities eventually come abou.

On the otner hand, it is useful to anticipate tne 
suitable procedural instruments, in this regard, the XVth Con-
sultive Meeting should adopt a substantive Recomendation that 
includes the appropiate chapters and convene a special Consul-
tative Meeting to consider the Comprehensive Measures.

Bearing this in mind, this working Paper deve-
lops the following chapters.

(I) PRINCIPLES

This task shouid necessarily begin by workin? out 
a wide conceptual framework applicable to the Comprehensive 
Measures. This conceptual framework should include principles 
and objectives, should be addressed generally to the protection 
of the environment and include a particular dimension related 
to Antarctica. The specific provisions should conform to these 
principles and objectives.

All human activity in Antarctica should be subor-
dinate to a set of fundamental rules and juridical principles 
that specify and complement those already existing in the An-
tarctic Treaty System. The same approach should apply to any add 
tio.
nal measures that are approved.

The conceptual framework ought to include tra-
ditional formulations that govern the Antarctic Treaty System.

These refer, amongothers to be considered, to
the use of Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes and
shall not become the scene or object of international discord.
Also, the need of preserving for the benefit of present and futur
generations the Antarctic resources, defining these as its
fauna, flora, air, water, ocean and earth , should be reserva-
ted.

It is necessary to also repeat the need to main-
tain scientific research in Antarctica, increase cooperation
to that objective and the disclosure of its results.

The area south of 60o South Latitude falls within
the special responsibility of the Consultive Parties, as conta
ned in the Antarctic Treaty and confirmed beginning with the
Ixth Consultative Meeting and each one after that. It also re-
ceived international recognition in a specific way during the
FAC Conference of 1975.

The general principles of environmental protectic
should include, inter-alia, those of the Antarctic Treaty, the
Recommendations and adopted Conventions. The specific principie
of the Comprehensive Measures applicaole to Antarctica should
begin oy the elaobration of those contained in Recommendation
XI-4 regarding the vulnerability of the Antarctic ecosystem
and the need to preserve if from human interference and comple-
mented oy additional concepts. The latter should refer to the
need of adopting informed decisions and a definition of what
is considered to be unacceptable risk and regarding cumulative
impact.

Also, principles of the following nature should
considered for inclusion:
- The responsibility for the protection of the
7)

Antarctic environment and its dependent and related ecosystems 
falls upon the Antarctic Treaty parties, particularly the Con-.
sultative Parties, assisted by SCAR and the Specialized Agen-
cies, in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty.

- The protection of the Antarctic environment 
and its dependent and related ecosystems should be the fundamer-
tal criteria for deciding the activities in Antarctica.

To that end, any activity to be carried out
should be subject to the following standards.

All activities, including scientific research,
tourism, navigation and the instalation of new stations should
be preceded evaluation of their environmental impact in order
to avoid :

- A significant degradation of the atmospheric,
earthly and marine of Antarctica and its dependent and related
ecosystem in the face of which effective restoration is not pos-
oble within a reasonable period of time;

- A degradation or significant risk in areas of
special biological, scientific,aesthetic or wilderness importan-
ce;

- that they have negative effects on regional and
global climatic patterns. These standards should be enhanced
additional elements (Art. 4 of CRAMPA and others).

The principles should include the "ecosystem
approach" as its contained in Article 2 of the Convention for
the conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, with
the adaptation that may be required.

Regarding the question of responsability, enter-
prises and individuals are liable regarding the activities
they are conducting in Antarctica.States are responsible for
the observance of their international obligations related to
the environmental protection and preservation of Antarctica.
They will be responsable in accordance with international law.
8)

There should also be an expression of the ge-
neral objectives pursued by the Comprehensive Measures. The spe-
cial responsibility of the Consultive Parties has already been
mentionned. A second general objective should be to conform the
Comprehensive Measures to all activities in Antarctica.  There
may be a need for additional objectives to be included.

II) EXAMINATION AND EVALUATION

A second chapter of the Comprehensive Measu-
res should fall on the examination, evaluation and validity of
the measures approved and in force. Recomendations, Codes of
Conduct and Agreed Measures adopted for the protection of the
Antarctic enviroment should be included in this evaluation.

This process should necessarily be conducted
in such a way that not only individual provisions are examined
but also establishing cross-references between Recomendations,
Codes of Conduct and Agreed Measures so as to obtain a ample and
coherent description of the current state of the Antarctic envi-
ronmental protection. An additional objective of this evaluation
would have to be the detection of specific areas where it is
necessary to reduce the discretionality of the State-Party in
the observance of the measures.

One fundamental aspect to the examination of
the Environmental Impact Assessment of the activities. In this
matter it seems appropiate to take as a basis Recommendation.
XIV-2, particularly the provisions regarding the Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation.

Here it should be established that if any act-
ivity that has environmental consequences which are not compatible
with the Principles and Objectives of the Comprehensive Measures
that activity should not be carried out.
9)

The former may determine the need to establis
criteria for what is to be considered a "significant" activity
that has consequences for the environment. It is possible to con-
seive the usefulness of preparing some guidelines to determine
the significant character of an activity, including the concept
of harmful interference.

One result of an agreement regarding tr.ese
guidelines could be the need to create a data base of a scien::i-
fic and technical nature which would be up to date, c?ns?wor::y
and comparable, which could assist in the determination, on the
one hand, of the significant character, and on the other, in the
adoption of informed decisions.

To that end it may be useful to elaborate a set of
methods and mechanisms that complement the Comprehensive Measures
and have as their task to monitor environmental variables and parame-
ters. An"early warning system"on the possible environmental effec-
of activities could be established. The system of inspections,
included in the Antarctic Treaty, could be extended to cover these
aspects.

With regard to the Agreed Measures for the
conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora it may be convenient
to evaluate its enforcement and validity and determine what amen-
dments are needed and include them as an Annex to the Comprehen-
sive Measures. In order to do this there may be a need to request
a report from SCAR on the current situation of specially protec:ed
species which could serve as a basis for the evaluation of the
system of permits.

As the same time, it is convenient to study
ways and means to increase the coordination between these Agreed
Measures and other related legal documents.
10)

It is essential to examine the validity of 
Recommendations IX-6 and X-7 of hydrocarbon pollution in Antarcti
waters, which has not been  done recently by the Consultive Par-
ties. The United States has some proposals which could serve as a 
basis for this. There may be a need to define the Antarctic ma-
rine environment.

The examination and evaluation of the provi-
sions in force must include those applicable to scientific drilli:
in order to reduce the harmful effects to the environment.

III) ADDITIONAL MEASURES

A third chapter is the consideration of addi-
tional measures that should be adopted, starting with the Stations,
their concentration, functioning and the validity of the Code of 
Conduct.

With regard to the provisions of the Code of 
Conduct. SCAR has suggested some amendments to waste disposal.
Additional privisions, to be included in the Comprehensive Measu-
res, should be considered to cover the modalities for transferring 
waste and garbage out of Antarctica. Another idea that has to be 
given some serious thought is to carry out clean-up operations of 
existing garbage dumps in Antarctica. It is also possible to con-
sider the possibility to extend these clean-up operations to other 
activities in Antarctica.

The problems affecting the concentration of 
stations are not limited only to waste disposal. There are other 
such as the installation of antennas and electromagnetic intercfé-
rences which endanger the safety of air traffic in the area.
Also, the concentration of stations generate problems with regard 
to shipping traffic and imposes the need of maintaining large fuel 
deposits,  increasing the potential risk of an ecological catas-
trophe.
Likewise, the excess of stations in one place 
has negative consequence with respect of scientific research 
and the other legitimate uses of Antarctica, risking the possibl
lity of supersaturation of scientific research and considerably 
increasing the risk of permanent contamination in that area.

One approacn to resolving this problem is con-
tained in document ANT XIV WP 36 proposed by Chile, which has in 
its operative part a suggestion that SCAR offer some advise on:

    - steps that possibly could be taken to impro-
ve coordination and cooperation in the location and use of sta-
tions and other scientific support facilities in the Antarctic,
including guidelines by SCAR on areas in which research has not
been conducted and which would be useful to know when conside-
ring the installation of new stations or other scientific faci-
lities.

    - the introduction of zoning schemes for deli-
miting specific sites and uses, allowing stations to expand in a 
manner consistent with the attainment of the collectives goals for 
which they were installed and thereby contributing to improve 
their cooperation and mutual assistance;

    - a code of conduct devised to resolve ques-
tions of waste disposal,electromagnetic disturbance, the use 
of drinking water, aspects of land-use and related transport 
facilities, and to prevent multiple uses from developing into 
conflicts;

    - the possibilities and opportunities for fur-
ther coordination of scientific and/or logistic facilities within 
the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System.

Another aspect of the chapter Additional Meas:
res must apply to tourism and non-governmental activities in An-
tarctica.
12)

It is clearly necessary to regulate these 
activities, which are useful and important, by strengthening 
the provisions of the Code of Conduct applicable to the behavior 
of those that visit Antarctica.

In this sense,it would seem useful to address 
the regulations of these activities from the point of view of 
access including its modalities, insurance of a personal nature and 
also with regard to environmental damage and the responsibility 
of the enterprises.

There could also be a need to analyze the con-
venience of establishing some kind of sanctions applicable to enter 
prises responsible for environmental damages. This is without prej-
dice to responsibility that may fail upon the State, in accordance with international law.

Furthermore, consideration should be given to 
the establishment of areas of special tourist interest, in order 
to concentrate these activities in one place, where they would be 
conducted subject to strict preservation criteria. This would avo:
the scattering of tourists and reduce, in general, polluting con-
sequences of the activity.

Consideration should be given to the approval 
of a new code of conduct on the expansion of the existing one in 
order to include these and other specific provisions that may be 
needed.

There should be some reference to specially pro-
tected areas and areas of a special scientific interest. In this 
regard, it could be useful to elaborate a new concept in order 
that it notonly serve to fulfillscientific objectives but also ser-
ve as an instrument of environmental protection.

./...
13)

That would require an analysis of the protected 
areas, their degrees and measures of protection and re-
examine the decision making process for the establishment 
of protected areas and their levels of enviromental protection

With all this in mind, consideration could be given 
to the convenience for widening considerably the areas of 
special scientific interest, adjusting them to the new con-
cept.

There may be a need to include in the comprehensive 
measures those applicable to the Antarctic ice, bearing in 
mind what is contained in the Final Act of the IV Special 
Consultative Meeting, in order to preserve its function in 
the ecosystems.

Likewise, particular attention should be 
given to the need to adopt specific measures with regard to 
widening considerably the areas of special scientific inte-
rest, adjusting them to the new concept.

It may be useful to include in the Compreh 
sive Measures a set of activities which are contrary to them an 
others which are prohibited, in order to strengthen the environ 
mental protection and assist in the observance of the provision

./...
14)

IV) ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

The Comprehensive Measures should be formulated in a
mandatory nature and the State-Parties should assume the obli-
gation to fulfill them. In order to do this there may be a need
to establish some monitoring schemes which should include an"early
warning system" and follow-up procedures of the activities that
are being conducted in Antarctica.

The State-Parties should report annually to the other Consul-
tative Partias on the way they are fulfilling the Comprehensive Mea-
sures. This should be enhanced by a system of inspections applied
to the observance of the Comprehensive Measures. Likewise, the
obligation to circulate in a timely manner the Environmental Impact
Assesment reports should be established, particularly when they re-
fer to activities that may have a considerable impact. To this end,
there may be a need to revise the format and content of those re-
ports. Every Consultative Meeting should have on the agenda the item
"Comprehensive Measures", and should consider, among other matters,
these reports.

Likewise, there is a need to foresee the compatibility of
the Comprehensive Measures with the separate instruments of the An-
tarctic Treaty System but different from the Treaty itself, and
agree on modalities to enhance this.

Chile is still of the opinion that the best way to instrume-
the proposed Comprehensive Measures is by the adoption of "Agreed
Measures". This is an authoritative Recommendation, solemn and man-
datory, endowed with the necessary juridical precision.

This approach has the benefit of allowing the attaiment of
the objective of compulsoriness and precision with the maximum
attachment to the Antarctic Treaty itself, permitting the outmost
expedition and lesat possible delays.
15 )
V) OPERATIONAL ADJUSTMENTS

It may well be necessary to consider the appr:
val of some operational adjustments in the Antarctic Treaty
System to provide for the observance of the Comprehensive
Measures.

These adjustments would be of a double nature.
Consideration should be given to the possibil-
ity of holding an annual Consultative Meeting, at least for
the consideration of the Comprehensive Measures, as of the
conclusion of the Special Consultative Meeting  proposed to
elaborate the Comprehensive Measures.

Furthermore, if there is agreement in the fut:
re regarding the possibility of an infrastructure of a limi-
ted nature, it should be endowed with the capabilities to coc
perate in the environmental impact assessment.

In the mean time, and without prejudice to
their respective autonomies it may be useful to consider the
role that could be played by SCAR, the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Marine Living Ressources, and the Managers of Natic
nal Antarctic Programmes (MNAP'S) in cooperating with the mo-
nitoring of the ecosystems. Consideration should be given
to the possibility of assisting Es tates  in the observance
of the Comprehensive Measures.
