TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                ANTARCTIC TREATY
XV· CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE            XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                           PARIS
                  9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/65 Rev.1
Point 10 (d) (iv) de l'ordre du jour
original : anglais

REPORT LANGUAGE AND RECOMMENDATION
FOR NEW CATEGORIES OF PROTECTED AREAS
(submitted by the delegation of United States)
Report language and recommendation for agenda item 10(d)(iv) :
new categories of protected areas

Establishment of a new, single purpose category of Antarctic
Protected Area

During XIV ATCM the delegation of the United States and
other treaty parties called attention to the desirability of
identifying and protecting areas of outstanding geological,
recreational, scenic and wilderness value in Antarctica. There
were differing views as to whether protection could be provided
such areas under existing provisions of the Agreed Measures.
The United States delegation therefore proposed establishing a
new category of protected area, tentatively called "special
Reserves", to provide a clear means for protecting such areas.
time was insufficient to fully consider this proposal and
further consideration was deferred until XV ATCM.

The United States delegation submitted a working paper on
the subject ( ANT/XV ) for consideration by XV ATCM. The
meeting agreed that provision should be made for protecting
areas of outstanding geologic, glaciologic, geomorphic,
aesthetic, scenic and wilderness value as well as areas of
outstanding ecologic, scientific and historic value in
Antarctica.  Recommendation XV-     was adopted.  During
considerations of this recommendation, it was affirmed that
measures adopted in the recommendation were not entended to
interfere with the possibility of a non-Consultative Party
establishing a station in Antarctica.
Recommendation XV

THE ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM:  ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIALLY
RESERVED AREAS (SRAs)

The Representatives,

Recognizing that the increasing number and scope of activities
in the Antarctic Treaty Area may reduce the unique scientific
and other values of Antarctica;

Noting  that  the  Agreed  Measures  for  the  Conservation  of
Antarctic flora and Fauna established a mechanism to designate
"specially Protected Areas" to preserve the unique natural
ecological systems of areas of outstanding scientific interest;

Noting  also  that  neither  the  Agreed  Measures  nor  other
Recommendations adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Parties  provide  a  specified  mechanism  for  identifying  and
protecting  areas  of  outstanding  geologic,  glaciologic,
geomorphic, aesthetic, scenic, or wilderness value;

Recalling that Recommendation VII-2 calls upon the Antarctic
Treaty Parties to include in thes series of Specially Protected
Areas listed in Annex B of the Agreed Measures:

    (a) representative examples of the major Antarctic land
and fresh water ecological systems;

    (b) areas with unique complexes of species;

    (c) areas which are the type locality or only known
habitat of any plant or invertebrate species;

    (d) areas which contain specially interesting bree-
ding colonies of birds or mammals; and

    (e) areas which should be kept inviolate so that in
the future they may be used for purposes of compa-
rison with localities that have been disturbed by
man;

Recommend to their Governments that :

1.  They undertake a continuing review of the geographic
features and uses of Antarctica and, as appropriate
propose designating areas of outstanding geologic,
glaciologic, geomorphic, aesthetic, scenic, or
wilderness value as Specially Reserved Areas;
2. Proposals for designation of Specially Reserved Areas
       include :

           a. a clear description of the location and the 
              key features of the proposed SRA,
              including a description of the markers and/
              or natural features that delineate the
              area

           b. a map and/or photographs showing the boun-
              daries and key features of the proposed
              SRA;

           c. a discussion of the rationale for the pro-
              posed listing;

           d. descriptions of the types of activities
              that could be conducted in or near the
              proposed Specially Reserved Area without
              jeopardizing the special values intended
              to be protected;

           e. descriptions of the types of activities
              (including activities outside the SRA
              ve) that could adversely affect the special
              values intended to be protected;

           f. descriptions of steps that should be taken
              to minimize impacts in cases where access
              to the Reserve is authorized;

       3. In due course, they include in the series of
          Specially Reserved Areas representative examples of
          the major geologic, glaciologic,and geomorphical,
          features of Antarctica, and representative examples
          of areas of outstanding aesthetic scenic, and
          wilderness value.

       4. Entry into Specially Reserved Areas be prohibited,
          except for the purposes authorized in the approved
          management plan for the area or in accordance
          with a permit issued by the appropriate national
          authority for a compelling scientific purpose which
          cannot be served elsewhere, and which will adversely
          affect the natural features intended to be protected
          by the SRA.

       5. They invite SCAR, through their national committees,
          the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
          Marine Living Resources, and other, as appropriate
          components of the Antarctic Treaty system to review
          and comment on proposals before they are considered
          by the Treaty Parties; and
6. They annually advise SCAR and the Antarctic Treaty Parties of activitities that they authorized to be conducted  in Specially Reserved Areas during the preceding year, and that they expect to authorize in the upcoming year.
