TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
Ve CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                                XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/4

Item 7, on the provisional
agenda
Original : English

WORKING PAPER ON THE PROTECTION OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
(Submitted by the New Zealand Delegation)

****
Item 7 on the provisional agenda

ATCM XV

NEW ZEALAND

WORKING PAPER ON THE PROTECTION OF THE
ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

INTRODUCTION

Since the adoption of the Antarctic Treaty thirty years
ago, the Antarctic Treaty Parties have taken a series of
steps in recognition of the special nature of Antarctica
and its importance to the global environment. They have
adopted a range of measures to minimise the impact of
human activity on the Antarctic environment, usually
through the mechanism of Recommendations adopted pursuant
to Article IX of the Treaty.

The nature of the measures has varied according to the
matters under consideration. Some measures have set out
general controls, such as the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and
Recommendation XIV-2 on the application of environmental
impact assessment procedures to scientific and logistic
support activities. Others have stated general principles
such as the Recommendations on human impact on the
Antarctic environment that preceded Recommendation XIV-2.
Yet others have dealt with particular issues such as waste
disposal or the effects of tourism.

In addition, the Treaty Parties have adopted a number of
separate legal instruments to control and minimise the
impact of particular forms of activity; i.e. the
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, the
Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources and the Convention on the Regulation of
Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities.

It has become increasingly apparent, however, that
notwithstanding the breadth in coverage of the instruments
already in place, there are some significant gaps in the
system and that the implementation of some of the
instruments previously adopted has not always been up to
the required or desired standards. It has also been
recognised that the various elements of the system need to
be more integrated and a greater degree of coordination
achieved.

These facts, together with the recent and rapid growth in
global environmental awareness, have alerted the Treaty
Parties to the need to take a more comprehensive look at
the protection and conservation of the Antarctic
2

environment. This is shown by the inscription of the item on Comprehensive Measures for the Protection of the Antarctic Environment and its Dependent and Associated Ecosystems which is to be considered for the first time at the Fifteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

The New Zealand Government has recently reviewed its approach to environmental protection in Antarctica. A White Paper on the Antarctic Environment was presented to the New Zealand House of Representatives by the Prime Minister and Minister for the Environment, the Right Honourable Geoffrey Palmer, on 9 August. The White Paper sets out the elements of an integrated and binding environmental protection regime for Antarctica that is to be promoted by New Zealand. A process of consultation with interested non-governmental organisations in New Zealand was also undertaken. A measure of agreement was reached and is reflected in the proposals set out in this paper.

It is against this background that the New Zealand delegation puts forward the following proposals for the consideration of the Antarctic Treaty Parties. New Zealand believes that this Consultative Meeting should agree that a further Consultative Meeting should be held in 1990 to consider detailed measures of environmental protection for Antarctica within an integrated framework.

OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES

In New Zealand's view, the Treaty Parties need to review the measures that have already been put in place and identify and fill the gaps in the coverage of those measures. But in order to ensure a properly integrated, comprehensive and internally consistent regime of environmental protection, it is desirable that there be elaborated a series of basic standards that must be met by all forms of human activity in the Treaty area. Such a set of principles would ensure that the protection of the Antarctic environment is a fundamental consideration in the planning and performance of all human activity in Antarctica.

As a first step it would be appropriate for the Recommendation of the Fifteenth Consultative Meeting that calls for the convening of a further Consultative Meeting on environmental protection next year to set out basic principles of environmental protection as part of the mandate for next year's meeting. There is a good deal of material in measures that have already been adopted within the Treaty system that provide a basis for the elaboration of these principles; e.g. the Agreed Measures for the
3

Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and the
Recommendations leading to the adoption of Recommendation
XIV-2: In addition, some of the separate treaties that
have been adopted by the Treaty Parties might be drawn
upon. For example, Article 4 of the Convention on the
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities
provides a number of criteria, cast in the form of
prohibitions, that must be met by all activities covered
by that Convention. Principles of more general
application, however, would have to be framed rather
differently.

The principles should take account of the following
considerations:

-   a recognition of the importance of Antarctica to the
    global environment;

-   a recognition of the vulnerability of the Antarctic
    environment to adverse impacts from human activity;

-   a recognition that activities in Antarctic must not
    affect global or regional climate or weather patterns;

-   the need to guard against unacceptable impacts on the
    atmospheric, ice, fresh water and marine environments
    of Antarctica and their associated and dependant
    ecosystems;

-   the need to conserve the ecosystems and physical
    processes of the region and to protect threatened and
    endangered species or populations of such species;

-   the need to preserve the genetic diversity of species;

-   the need to protect areas of special biological,
    scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness value;

-   the need to ensure continuation of scientific
    research and cooperation;

-   the need to ensure that all decisions about
    activities likely to have an impact on the
    environment are taken on the basis of adequate
    information.

It follows from the above that New Zealand believes that
the integrated regime of protection for the Antarctic
environment should build on and strengthen what has
already been achieved by the Treaty system. New Zealand
does not seek to duplicate or replace the work of the past
thirty years of successful international cooperation.
Clearly, the existing arrangements taken as a whole are
not yet sufficient in scope or implementation to provide 
the protection that Antarctica warrants, but they do 
provide a solid foundation on which to build.

MEASURES OF GENERAL APPLICATION

This paper does not attempt to address in detail the whole 
range of issues that need to be considered in an 
integrated approach to environmental protection for 
Antarctica. The following is intended to highlight a 
number of measures of a general nature that apply to all 
human activity in Antarctica as well as a series of 
specific issues which, in New Zealand's view, need 
attention at the XV Consultative Meeting and at the 
Consultative Meeting on Environmental Protection proposed 
for next year.

Pollution

Pollution is one of the most obvious adverse impacts on 
the Antarctic environment and is an issue that must be 
considered by every visitor to the Antarctic Treaty area. 
A range of steps to minimize pollution of the Antarctic 
environment have been taken over the years but, as the 
events of recent sessions have shown, more needs to be 
done to prevent pollution of the continent and its 
surrounding waters. Pollution issues can be considered 
under the following headings:

Waste Management

In the past, waste disposal practices have not been 
satisfactory. Improvements have been made but it is clear 
that wastes from human activities have the potential to 
despoil parts of Antarctica, particularly where permanent 
facilities have been set up in or near sensitive areas. A 
number of measures have been adopted to deal with this 
issue, in particular the Code of Conduct for Antarctic 
expeditions and station activities adopted pursuant to 
Recommendation XIII-11.

New Zealand supports the adoption of the Revised Code of 
Conduct that has been prepared by the SCAR Panel of 
Experts on Waste Disposal and which is to be considered at 
the Fifteenth Consultative Meeting. The revised Code 
represents a major step forward in controlling the impact 
of human activity in Antarctica. At the same time New 
Zealand believes that the provisions of the revised Code 
should be strengthened in a number of respects by:

-   removing some of the exceptions to its provisions to 
    make it more binding on Antarctic operators;
WPPLGL 559

            5


-   providing for stronger provisions to monitor waste 
    disposal procedures;

-   ensuring that the Code is applied to all activities 
    in Antarctica, including tourist operation.

In addition, New Zealand believes that the Treaty Parties
should give a stronger commitment to increasing the amount
of  waste removed from Antarctica and returned to the
country of origin for final disposal.

Marine Pollution

New Zealand supports the proposals put forward by the
United States at the Preparatory Meeting for the Fifteenth
Consultative Meeting in May in Document PREP/WE/2 for the
adoption of measures to minimise the dangers of the
pollution of Antarctic waters, especially from
vessel-sourced pollution.  In particular, the Treaty
Parties should agree to take the following series of steps:

-   undertake a common commitment to adhere to the
    relevant international Conventions dealing with
    marine pollution, particularly the International
    Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
    1973 and its Protocol and Annexes (MARPOL) and the
    Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by
    Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 1972 (the London
    Dumping Convention);

-   work for the designation of the waters around
    Antarctica as "special areas" under MARPOL;

-   agree to apply as far as possible the MARPOL
    standards to all vessels operating in the Treaty
    area, including naval and other government vessels;

-   work for the adoption of agreed standards for vessel
    design and operation, including the promotion of an
    appropriate ice classification;

-   develop procedures, as envisaged in Recommendation
    XIV-10, to ensure the availability of more up to date
    data and information on weather and ice conditions
    and ensure the widespread availability of charts and
    maps showing hazards, protected and other vulnerable
    coastal areas, and navigational aids;

-   cooperate in the application of appropriate risk
    assessment procedures for vessel operation in
    Antarctic waters.
6

Hazardous Materials

The increasing level of operations in Antarctica has 
inevitably led to an increase in the storage of 
hydrocarbons and other hazardous materials on land. It 
has brought with it the increased risk of spills and 
potentially serious damage to the local terrestrial and 
marine environments. New Zealand believes 
should be given to the establishment of agreed procedures 
for the safe storage and handling of hydrocarbons and 
other hazardous materials on land, and the development of 
contingency plans, including international cooperation, to 
contain and clean up spills which should include the 
identification of coastal and other areas at greatest risk 
and the storage of equipment to contain and clean up 
spills.

Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures

The concepts and principles of environmental impact 
assessment have developed steadily since the 1970s and 
have been applied in stages in the Antarctic since that 
time. A landmark in this process was achieved with the 
adoption of Recommendation XIV-2 at the Fourteenth 
Consultative Meeting which provides for the application of 
standard Environmental Impact Assessment procedures or 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations to scientific 
research and associated support activities. The adoption 
of this Recommendation marked a recognition by the Treaty 
Parties of the considerable benefits of EIA procedures. 
These include:

-   providing a means for weighing the advantages 
    expected to be derived from a proposed activity 
    against the likely environmental impacts;

-   ensuring due account is taken of cumulative impacts 
    on the environment and on other uses of Antarctica;

-   providing a means for outside advice to be utilized 
    into the planning process.

The full benefits of EIA, however, have not yet been 
realized in Antarctica. At present, Recommendation XIV-2 
applies only to scientific research and support 
activities, whereas the nature, extent, duration and 
probability of impacts need to be assessed regardless of 
the type of activity e.g. science or tourism. 
Accordingly, New Zealand proposes that the scope of 
Recommendation XIV-2 should be broadened to cover all 
activities in Antarctica or, as an alternative, that
arrangements worked out in respect of particular 
activities (e.g. tourism) must include the application of 
EIA procedures. It is also important that the procedures 
should apply to all stages of an activity. In this 
respect, New Zealand endorses the comment by SCAR that EIA 
procedures should be applied to the decommissioning of 
facilities.

Even within the parameters of the current scope of 
Recommendation XIV-2, there is room for a considerable 
enhancement of the benefits of EIA. For example, useful 
work could be done in identifying the measures envisaged 
in paragraph (v) (f) of Recommendation XIV-2, particularly 
in developing programmes to monitor impacts and to 
evaluate the effectiveness of procedures adopted to 
minimize or mitigate environmental damage. In this way 
compliance with project approvals, measures to protect 
special areas and other controls could be monitored to 
assist proposers of projects to ensure that their 
activities are environmentally acceptable in practice as 
well as principle.

Advantage could also be taken of comments on Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluations offered by other Treaty Parties, 
as well as interested intergovernmental and 
non-governmental organisations and other experts. Giving 
due weight to such comments in the final decision making 
process is one way of making environmental impact 
assessment an integral and indispensable part of a 
comprehensive environmental protection regime for 
Antarctica.

Protected Areas

Establishment of areas within Antarctica to be given 
special protection is an effective way of ensuring the 
preservation of unique wildlife and vegetation sites and 
other outstanding natural, cultural, historic and 
scientific features.

Existing measures under the Antarctic Treaty system 
provide for six categories of protected area; viz, 
Specially Protected Area, Site of Special Scientific 
Interest, Seal Reserve, Historic Monument, Tomb, and 
Marine Sanctuary. Under active consideration is an 
additional category, Antarctic Protected Area, which would 
extend the 'scope of existing protection to cover also 
areas of scenic beauty and areas critical for the ecology 
of exploitable living resources, and would provide for 
management planning and zoning in multiple-use areas of 
diverse values.
8

Although there has been a concerted and commendable effort 
to meet the needs of special protection in Antarctica, 
New Zealand believes  a comprehensive review of  the 
protected area network and policy is required.  This 
review should build on existing measures and put in place 
comprehensive arrangements providing for  a range of 
categories sufficient to accommodate the required range of 
protection objectives. It should extend representation of 
geographical and ecological diversity, improve site 
protection for historic monuments, promote a management 
planning process which would allow for public 
participation and cover the selection and establishment of 
sites and the adoption of management policies and 
programmes. It should ensure active management of 
protected areas and enforcement of protection regulations, 
and improved information especially to assess the 
effectiveness of protected areas in meeting management 
objectives.

Response Action and Liability

Another major issue for consideration is that of liability 
for damage to the environment as a result of human 
activity. Specific arrangements have been made or are in 
contemplation in respect of response action and liability 
for damage arising out of mineral resource activities. 
Consideration should now be given to the best means for 
dealing with this fundamental issue with regard to other 
activities in Antarctica. The questions that need to be 
addressed include:

-   obligation to take response action in the event of 
    actual or threatened damage;

-   compensation for damage, including costs of response 
    action;

-   nature and levels of liability;

-   defences;

-   tribunals for adjudicating claims.

Monitoring and Inspection

Monitoring of ongoing activities to determine their impact 
on the environment is a standard environmental protection 
technique, but it has not been given a great deal of 
attention to date in measures adopted under the Treaty 
system.  The Treaty Parties should agree to apply 
effective and open monitoring and reporting procedures to
all major activities in Antarctica such as the operation
of  stations and substantial field operations.  These
procedures should also be applied to other significant
activities such as in areas where tourist activities are
concentrated.

The inspection provisions of the Treaty are often cited as
one of the strengths of the system.  In fact, until recent
years they have been used infrequently. There has been a
marked increase in numbers of inspections undertaken and
in the range of countries performing them in the last few
years, but the coverage is uneven and there are no
consistent criteria to be applied by the inspection
teams.  Moreover, there are at present no standard
procedures to be applied by inspection teams to inquire
into compliance with environmental protection requirements
agreed to by the Treaty Parties.

Attention should also be given to the development of
standard criteria to be applied by all inspection teams
including the development of procedures, such as agreed
guidelines, to verify the consistent application of
environment protection standards.

Joint inspections by two or more Treaty Parties would be
one way of ameliorating the logistic and financial
constraints that limit the ability of Treaty Parties to
undertake inspections.  The joint New Zealand/United
Kingdom inspection that was carried out in January this
year is an example of a successful pooling of resources.
Greater cooperation in this area should lead to the
development of a more systematic programme of inspection
visits.

Dispute Settlement Procedures

At present the Treaty system has only minimal procedures
for ensuring compliance with mandatory measures that have
or will be adopted to protect the environment.  The
exception is to be found in the procedures agreed in
respect of mineral resource activities under the
Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource
Activities.  That Convention contains a comprehensive set
of dispute settlement provisions, some of which are
optional, but a number of which (e.g. those dealing with
actual or potential damage to the environment) are
compulsory for all Parties.

Following the example of the Minerals Convention, the
Treaty Parties should develop a set of binding dispute
settlement procedures that would apply to damage or
potential damage to the Antarctic environment or its
associated or dependent ecosystems arising out of
activities not covered by other legal instruments.  These
procedures should include:
- the identification of agreed categories of disputes 
to be covered by the procedures;

- a mechanism for the convening of a tribunal or panel 
of arbitrators to hear and decide the disputes;

- a mechanism to enable the rapid hearing of and 
decision on any dispute involving serious or 
potentially serious damage to the environment.

Such procedures would considerably strengthen the Treaty 
system and would be a major advance in the protection of 
the Antarctic environment.

Information Requirements

Fundamental to any environmental protection regime is the 
requirement for accurate and authoritative information to 
enable informed judgments to be made. Much of the 
necessary information comes from the scientific research 
programmes that are the cornerstone of activities in 
Antarctica. There are, however, new initiatives which can 
be taken to expand the environmental information base and 
make it more accessible.

It is essential at least to maintain the present level of 
basic research, particularly into ecological and physical 
processes. These are the studies which, in the long term, 
will provide the information needed to understand the 
structure and functioning of the Antarctic environment and 
its relationships with the rest of the globe.

There remains a needs for a broad spectrum of other 
research. Experience suggests that environmental impact 
assessment requires site and project specific information, 
the nature of which is hard to predict in advance.

There is also a need for applied research and for 
monitoring of ecosystems to establish what constitutes a 
significant impact and what jeopardises systems. In 
particular, there is a need to identify a full range of 
environmental markers, or change indicators.

Greater attention should be given to inventory and 
environmental baseline monitoring to build up knowledge 
about the distribution of plant and animal communities in 
order to aid identification and protection of important 
natural areas. Mechanisms should be developed to 
standardise the collection and presentation of data. 
Above all, procedures must be instituted to ensure that 
information generated, regardless of source, is readily
11

accessible  and  is  publicly available.  It  is  essential 
that such information is provided promptly in order that 
its full benefits can be realized.

In addition, consideration should be given to:

-   supporting  and  fostering  international 
    interdisciplinary Antarctic studies, such as those 
    associated with the International Geosphere Biosphere 
    Programme;

-   requesting SCAR's ad hoc group on Environmental Data 
    Management to report to the Consultative Meeting 
    proposed for next year on the data needs for 
    planning, managing and evaluating activities;

-   requesting SCAR report to next year's Consultative 
    Meeting on appropriate environmental indicators and 
    long term monitoring programmes;

-   considering  the  establishment of  Antarctic 
    environmental data centres;

-   considering ways in which the annual Exchanges of 
    Information can be coordinated with the annual 
    reports of the National Committees constituting SCAR.

SPECIFIC ISSUES

Measures Specific to the Conduct and Support of Scientific 
Research Activities

Since the adoption of the Antarctic Treaty, scientific 
research has been the major human activity in Antarctica. 
It is likely to continue to be so for the foreseeable 
future.  Its results, made freely available in accordance 
with the Treaty, are probably the most valuable 
contribution arising from human activity in the continent. 
They are essential to any efforts to understand and to 
protect Antarctica.  Nevertheless, it has long been 
recognised that science and scientific support activities 
can themselves cause adverse impacts on the Antarctic 
environment.  Such impacts can be minimized, and the 
scientific results maximized, through the use of 
appropriate technologies and by increased cooperation in 
scientific and logistic activities.

A wide range of measures to control the environmental 
impacts of science programmes in Antarctic has already 
been established through codes of conduct elaborated by 
SCAR and in Recommendations adopted by the Treaty 
Parties.  Particularly relevant in this regard is
Recommendation XIV-2 providing for the application of
environmental impact assessment procedures to the planning
of decisions about scientific research programmes and
their associated logistic support facilities. Attention
needs now to focus on ensuring compliance with the
measures already adopted and to discouraging practices
that can result in avoidable impacts; e.g. through
unnecessary duplication of activities or the use of
inappropriate technologies or methodologies.

Accordingly, New Zealand proposes that consideration be
given to:

-   developing of incentives for greater sharing of
    facilities and resources, and disincentives to the
    establishment of new station facilities unless
    required for the performance of substantial new
    scientific research;

-   developing, with SCAR, of means to encourage greater
    coordination of scientific endeavour and cooperation,
    the identification of research priorities and the
    promotion of multi-disciplinary and international
    studies;

-   encouraging, in cooperation with the Council of
    Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (MNAPs), of
    greater sharing of information and advice on
    operational procedures and appropriate technologies
    for the benefit of those undertaking and those
    contemplating scientific research activities in
    Antarctica;

-   requesting SCAR to advise on appropriate monitoring
    procedures for station operations and other
    significant scientific research activities;

-   requesting SCAR and the Council of Managers of
    National Antarctic Programmes to review and propose
    any additions that may be necessary to Recommendation
    XIV-3 on scientific drilling, taking into
    consideration drilling codes of conduct such as those
    used by the Deep Sea Drilling Programme (DSDP).

Tourism

Tourism, including commercial flights and ship cruises
with paying passengers, as well as privately-sponsored
expeditions, is a well-established and growing part of
Antarctic life. When considering the effects of tourism
it is also necessary to take into account the numerous non
commercial activities that can have an impact on the
environment i.e. goodwill and VIP visits, the recreational
activities of scientists and support personnel such as
station staff and ship and air crews.
13

Properly regulated and managed tourist activities may have minimal environmental impact and can benefit Antarctic conservation by increasing public awareness of the special values of the region and engendering wider international support for environmental protection.  Unregulated tourism, however, could cause serious environmental damage through overcrowding during short visits to sensitive areas, disruption of scientific activities, accidents resulting in costly rescue and clean-up operations, and construction of hotels, airfields and port facilities.

New Zealand believes that comprehensive arrangements to regulate tourism are required. These should consolidate existing Treaty Recommendations and establish policies aimed at minimising harmful environmental impacts of tourism, avoiding conflicts between tourist and other uses of the region, and fostering safe and responsible tourist operations. Regulatory measures should address, in particular, the application of environmental impact assessment procedures to tourism proposals, the setting of conditions for visits to sensitive or vulnerable wildlife sites, and also for visits to scientific stations and sites of field parties operations, the establishment of safety standards, and the provision of codes of conduct, operation manuals, information and educational materials, visitor handbooks and guides.

Uses of Antarctic Ice

Although New Zealand is not convinced that this is a matter that warrants priority attention, it was raised at the Twelfth and Thirteenth Consultative Meetings and at sessions of the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting on Antarctic Mineral Resources. As noted in the Final Act of the Fourth Special Consultative Meeting, if harvesting of ice, including icebergs, were to become a possibility in the future, there could be impacts on the Antarctic environment and its dependant and associated ecosystems. That Meeting agreed that the question of harvesting Antarctic ice should be considered at the Fifteenth Consultative Meeting.

New Zealand proposes that, since there is at present no serious commercial interest in the harvesting of Antarctic ice and in order to avoid the possible environmental impact referred to above as well as potential legal difficulties, the Treaty Parties should agree to a moratorium on the commercial uses of Antarctic ice.
14

INSTITUTIONS

A Secretariat

There has been a growing recognition among the Treaty
Parties, particularly as the membership has grown, of the
need for some form of permanent infrastructure or
secretariat for the Antarctic Treaty to increase its
efficiency and to assist the Parties in dealing with the
increasing complexity of the Treaty system. The issue was
considered in some detail at the Thirteenth and Fourteenth
Consultative Meetings. A substantial level of agreement
was reached among a majority of Treaty Parties as to the
advantages that a small secretariat would bring,
particularly in providing a mechanism for servicing Treaty
meetings, for ensuring continuity and for servicing the
growing need for dissemination of information.

New Zealand believes that in addition to the arguments
that have been made in the past in support of a Treaty
secretariat, can be added a number of environmental
considerations. In particular, a secretariat could play
an invaluable role in assisting the Treaty Parties in:

-   facilitating the exchange of information on
    environmental questions including such matters as
    reports on the preparation of Comprehensive
    Environmental Evaluations and the development of
    consistent environmental protection standards;

-   coordinating the gathering of information, including
    environmental data, for example in compiling a
    register of areas of particular environmental
    sensitivity;

-   acting as a central contact point for exchanging
    information with people outside the Treaty about
    measures adopted for the protection of the Antarctic
    environment.

For these reasons New Zealand supports the establishment
of a small cost-efficient secretariat that would have, in
addition to its other functions, specific environmental
responsibilities and expertise.

Standing Working Group on the Antarctic Environment

New Zealand further believes that in order to address
adequately the important policy issues involved in an
integrated environmental protection regime, the Treaty
Parties should agree to establish a Standing Environmental
15

Working Group. The Working Group would be able to give 
advice on environmental issues to Consultative Meetings 
and thus ensure that Consultative Meetings are used 
efficiently for policy decision making.

Furthermore, such a Standing Environmental Working Group, 
if  it were authorised to meet between Consultative 
Meetings, would allow progress to be made on developing 
environmental policies or addressing environmental issues 
that may arise between Consultative Meetings.

It should be noted that it is not intended that the 
proposed Working Group should supplement or substitute in 
any way for the work being undertaken by SCAR in providing 
expert advice on environmental and other matters to the 
Treaty Parties.

Environmental Monitoring on Behalf of an Institution     

As noted above, at present the Treaty system has only 
minimal procedures for ensuring compliance with mandatory 
measures that have or will be adopted to protect the 
Antarctic environment.  A number of measures have been 
suggested in this paper for improving the availability of 
information on environmental issues, for more effective 
procedures to monitor activities likely  to cause 
environmental impacts, for building up the operation of 
inspection provisions of the Treaty and for providing a 
dispute settlement mechanism to strengthen the compliance 
machinery of the Treaty system.

In addition to those measures, consideration might also be 
given to the precedent established by the Convention on 
the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities 
for inspections to be carried out on behalf of an 
institution. This precedent could be considered for 
application to the broad range of activities not covered 
by the Convention and which may impact on the 
environment. New Zealand believes that such consideration 
is necessary because of the growing recognition of the 
importance of the protection of the Antarctic environment 
and the need for the Treaty Parties to establish an 
effective environmental protection regime.
