TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/71 revision 3
Original : English

DRAFT FINAL REPORT OF THE FIFTEENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

(Items 6a, 6b, 6c, 11, 12a, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19 of the agenda)
OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

(Agenda item 6)

"White Book"
(Agenda item 6a)

The question of producing a "White Book" on the history and achievements of the Antarctic Treaty system (see paragraphs 13-
14 of the Final Report of the XIVth Consultative Meeting) was further discussed.

The Chilean delegation submitted a working paper which outlined the elements which might be included in a "White Book" commemorating the 30th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty, under the broad headings of "The history of international scientific cooperation in Antarctica", "The Antarctic Treaty System and its operation", "information about the Antarctic Treaty System", "the Antarctic Treaty System and the public", and "the future of the Antarctic Treaty System".

While delegations agreed that there was a need for wider dissemination of information about the Antarctic Treaty System and that it would be desirable for a "White Book" to appear, views were expressed on the practical problems of producing such a publication. These included problems relating to editing, compilation of available information, finance and the audience at which the book should be aimed.

The Meeting suggested that the Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty might use the elements suggested by the Chilean delegation for publication of relevent information individually.
Organizational aspects
(Agenda item 6b)

A working paper was submitted by the United States delegation 
on requirements for support of the Antarctic Treaty System,
which included a proposal to establish a permanent
infrastructure to support the consultative mechanism in the
form of a small secretariat. It was noted that this proposal
had been the subject of previous discussion, most recently at
the XIV ATCM to which reference had been made as recorded in
paragraphs 24-38 of the Final Report of that Meeting.

In support of the proposal it was stressed that Consultative
Parties should begin paying attention to the problems of
effectively supporting the Antarctic Treaty System and that
steps should be taken now to address the problem. Any
infrastructure which was established would be purely
supportive. There was a growing need for Treaty parties to
communicate rapidly with each other; a data base mechanism
might be established; it was necessary to have an early warning
system for adopting new measures. It was pointed out that many
items on the agenda of the current Meeting indicated the need
for quick exchange of information between Treaty members. This
illustrated the need for better data management and information
sharing. All those points had been highlighted in the working
paper under consideration. The establishment of a permanent
secretariat would inevitably take time and would need to be the
subject of further consideration. It was suggested that initial
steps be taken to establish some form of interim mechanism. The
initial steps that might be taken were outlined in the Working
Paper. In conclusion it was said that it was necessary to carry
on the dynamism of the Antarctic Treaty system by establishing
the correct supportive infrastructure.

Some delegations expressed the view that there was no need for
a permanent secretariat. There were a number of reasons for
this. There were already many institutions within the Antarctic
Treaty System including CCAMLR, CCAS and CRAMRA. Full use could
also be made of SCAR and the Depositary Government. It was
suggested that the success of the Treaty was due in a large
part to its flexibility and absence of an international - type
organisation which would tend towards politisation and form
groups within itself. It was further suggested that the list of
jobs which might be done by a secretariat as outlined in the
working paper was already being done adequately. For example
the system of Preparatory Meetings to ATCM's worked well;
documents were circulated through diplomatic channels;
communication between Treaty members had always flowed
smoothly. Host countries of ATCM's had always been able
successfully to arrange Meetings and meet all costs without the
help of a permanent secretariat.

Some delegations considered that with the inevitable expansion
of the system and the increased international awareness of the
Antarctic, there was a need for a focal point for the Antarctic
Treaty System. This task could effectively be performed by a
small, cost-effective infrastructure. It was also suggested
that  a  modest infrastructure would be able effectively to
manage the considerable number of papers now being produced by
the system and to undertake the synoptical work on papers
submitted to Consultative Meetings.

Other delegations considered that more time was needed to
reflect on the various arguments for and against the proposal
and to analyse them. They were unable to agree that a
secretariat was necessary.

In view of the differing arguments that had been expressed, the
meeting was unable to reach a consensus on this issue.

It was agreed to take up the organizational aspects of the
Treaty System again at the XVIth Consultative Meeting.

Public availability of the documents of Consultative Meetings
(Agenda item 6c)

It was noted that the documents of the IVth to VIIth
Consultative Meetings became publicly available at the
conclusion of the XIVth ATCM. The Meeting considered whether to
make publicly available:

        (a) the documents of the VIIIth to XIVth Meetings
inclusive;

        (b) the minutes of the meetings held in Brussels in 1964
leading to the adoption of the Agreed Measures on the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora

        (c) the Final Report of the Special Preparatory Meeting
held in Paris in 1976.

In the ensuing discussion the meeting agreed that these
documents could be made publicly available. It was pointed out,
however, that ATCM documents relating to issues still under
negotiation should not be released. In reply, it was pointed
out that lists of documents are circulated for consideration as
to whether an individual document should be released or not.
All documents should be released unless otherwise
identified. It was also considered that any ATCM information
papers which had been produced by an outside organisation and
which are not in the public domain should only be released with
the permission of the author of the document.

The Meeting agreed that, with the above considerations in
mind, all documents from the VIIIth to the XIVth ATCM's could
be made publicly available. It was also agreed that the minutes
of the meetings held in Brussels in 1964 and the Final Report
of the Preparatory Meeting held in Paris in 1976 could be made
publicly available.
4

It was further suggested that the Information and Working 
Papers from the IInd and IVth Special Consultative Meetings 
establishing CCAMLR and CRAMRA might be made publicly 
available. The Depositary Governments of both Conventions 
(Australia and New Zealand) were asked to produce lists of 
documents from the IInd and IVth SCMs for consideration.

The Meeting agreed that, following the receipt by all 
members of these lists of documents, the question of public 
release would be considered at the next Consultative Meeting.

PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC COOPERATION

(Agenda item 11)

The meeting considered working papers from:

- The Federal Republic of Germany and France; and
- The United Kingdom

It was noted that the United Kingdom paper was directed towards 
a broad declaration of the commitment of the Treaty Parties to 
scientific research and cooperation in scientific research in 
Antarctica. It was also noted that the Federal Republic of 
Germany and France paper was action oriented and aimed at 
avoiding duplication, improving efficiency and identifying 
scientific projects which countries may wish to undertake.

The meeting agreed that it would be appropriate to proceed with 
the development of separate recommendations covering a broad 
declaration and more specific action.

There was a agreement on the value of a strong declaration of 
the commitment of the Treaty Parties to scientific research and 
cooperation and in this context Recommendation XV was adopted.

In relation to more specific action there was agreement on the 
importance of taking account of the work of SCAR in planning 
Antarctic activities. Special mention was made of the 1991 SCAR 
Antarctic Science Conference and the guidance it could provide. 
It was further agreed that there would be value in providing 
countries with less experience and fewer resources with access 
to information on how they might best contribute to knowledge 
of Antarctica and assisting them through the provision of 
advice and training and opportunities to participate in 
Antarctic programs. Some delegations expressed the view that 
the value of having such information is such that SCAR should 
be specifically invited to prepare advice. Others felt it would 
be preferable to leave the question up to SCAR as whether it 
would be useful to prepare such information. In order to 
assist the debate, the United Kingdom delegation prepared a 
revised version of the Federal Republic of Germany/France draft 
recommendation. Following consideration of a wide range of 
suggestions by various delegations Recommendation XV- was 
adopted.
5

One delegation drew attention to the value of encouraging
cooperative use of stations' logistics and scientific
facilities. Delegations felt this proposal should be held over
for further study.

MEASURES FOR THE FACILITATION OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC
COOPERATION

(Agenda item 12)

Comparability and accessibility of scientific data
(Agenda item 12a)

The United States delegation introduced a draft Recommendation
recalling the actions of ATCM XIII and XIV and the Report of
SCAR XX and calling for Parties to develop data listings,
the compilation of an Antarctic Scientific Data
Directory, as well as the identification of other future steps
in the creation of an Antarctic Scientific Data System.

The draft was generally welcomed and several suggestions for
changes were made. Several delegations suggested that
government efforts be closely coordinated with those of SCAR
and that a more detailed programme of work be included.

Based on informal discussions in a small group, the items were
addressed by amending several paragraphs in the Recommendation.

These changes are intended to assure that consideration of how
to create an Antarctic Scientific Environmental Data System
with SCAR occurs in close cooperation with government data
management experts, so as to assure the production of a
practical plan of action. Another mechanism to assure this
outcome is the convening of a group of Experts meeting to
consider the SCAR draft report.

Recommendations XV-____ was adopted.

METEOROLOGY AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

(Agenda item 14)

The meeting was provided with a report of the activities of WMO
since the presentation of definitive data on the Antarctic
observation and telecommunication network at ATCM XIV. WMO has
carried out monitoring test of the ability of the observation
/communication system to deliver timely and accurate data for
short periods in both 1987 and 1988 and these continue to
indicate considerable scope for improvement in technology and
detailed procedures. WMO further intends to hold a meeting of
telecommunications experts in December 1989 to define problems
and seek remedies. The WMO Working Group on Antarctic
Meteorology will hold its quadrennial meeting in September 1990
and will further consider these problems and the progress of
the WMO Long Term Plan for the World Weather Watch in Antarctica.

The full text of the WMO report to ATCM XV is reproduced as Appendix...

The Meeting therefore agreed to:

. note the continuing efforts of WMO to improve the availibility of Antarctic meteorological data via improved communication systems and practices;

. invite WMO to provide through its national Permanent Representatives the report of the special meeting of experts on Antarctic Telecommunications to the appropriate operators of national Antarctic programmes;

. note the WMO intention to proceed with its Long Term Plan for Antarctic meteorological services in the light of relevant decisions of ATCM XV concerning Air Safety and Marine Meteorological Services and related meetings which have been held with SCAR and IOC; and

. invite WMO to provide further information on this matter following the 5th session of EC-WGAM to ATCM-XVI.

HYDROMETEOROLOGY SERVICES

(Agenda item 15)

The meeting was informed of the activity carried out pursuant of Recommendation XIV-10, aimed at the improvement, and development of an operational marine meteorological and information services for the Antarctic Treaty area. For the review of this matter the meeting had been provided (as Appendix 9 to the SCAR report) with the report on the results of a SCAR/WMO/IOC meeting of experts held in Leningrad in February 1989. The Leningrad meeting had further developed the possible scientific background to continue to improve international cooperation on marine meteorology and sea-ice information services in the Antarctic region.

In the course of discussion of this matter it became clear that there could be value in more detailed analysis of the report of the Leningrad meeting by the WMO Working Group on Antarctic meteorology which would have available to it the invididual national plans which were not available to the experts in Leningrad. The Meeting also agreed that COMNAP in association with SCAR should consider the WMO Working Group's comments and provide proposals on possible future actions to the following ATCM. The meeting expressed its desire that these proposals be prepared within the two year period before the 1991 regular ATCM.

The USSR delegation had submitted WP/24 which contained its views on possible further steps to be taken by the international Antarctic community in order to develop and
improve marine meteorological and. information services as 
initiated by Recommendation XIV-10. The draft recommendation of 
this paper was referred to a working group, revised by them and 
referred back to the Meeting which adopted it as Recommendation 
XV.

COOPERATION IN THE HYDROGRAPHIC CHARTING OF ANTARCTIC WATERS

(Agenda item 16)

This item was included in the agenda on the initiative of the 
Spanish delegation. Two working papers were submitted to the 
Meeting, by the Spanish and United Kingdom delegations, 
containing draft Recommendations.

In consideration of this item the Meeting was greatly assisted 
by the expert advice provided by Mr. Adam Kerr of the IHO, to 
whom the Meeting expressed its appreciation.

Following subsequent discussion it was agreed that,as the two 
draft Recommendations were broadly similar in nature, it should 
be possible to merge them into one taking into account 
suggestions proposed by some other delegations.

Accordingly, a small working group was convened. The two draft 
Recommendations were combined and a new draft was referred back 
to the Meeting and adopted as Recommendation XV-.

AIR SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA

(Agenda item 17)

The Meeting noted that the meeting of experts on air safety in 
Antarctica had taken place in Paris from 2 - 5 May 1989. The 
Final Report of that meeting was circulated. It contained ten 
specific proposals relating to air safety.  A draft 
Recommendation was submitted by the United Kingdom delegation 
based on the proposals contained in the Final Report of the Air 
Safety Meeting.
The meeting agreed to amend proposal number 1 and a new draft was referred back to the Meeting and adopted as Recommendation XV-.

INSPECTIONS

(Agenda item 19)

The United States delegation submitted to the Meeting a checklist of points to be considered for the conducting of inspections under the Antarctic Treaty System.  Delegations expressed their appreciation of this checklist as well as of the Inspection Reports submitted by the delegations of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America, Australia, the United Kingdom and New Zealand, and Chile. It was noted that no violations of the Treaty had been found during inspections but that stations could improve efforts to ensure that there be as little pollution as possible.
wp/72
                                                 1

Corr. 1

Comprehensive Measures for the Protection of the Antarctic
Environment and Dependent and Associated Ecosystems

Recommendation I

The Representatives,

Convinced of the need to preserve the Antarctic Treaty system
so as to ensure that Antarctica does not become the scene or
object of international discord;

Bearing in mind the special legal and political status of
Antarctica and the special responsibility of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties to ensure that all activities in
Antarctic are consistent with the purposes and principles of
the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling  the designation of Antarctica as a Special
Conservation Area;

Recognising the vulnerability to human interference of the
Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated
ecosystems;

Recognising further the unique opportunities Antarctica offers
for scientific research on processes of global as well as
regional importance;

Taking into account international concern for the environment
and the importance of Antarctica for the global environment;

Bearing in mind the substantial body of measures adopted by the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in recognition of their
special responsibilities for the protection of the Antarctic
environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems;

Recalling in this context Articles V and IX (1) (f) of the
Antarctic Treaty and Recommendations setting out general
principles for the protection of the Antarctic environment;

Recalling also:

i   the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
    Antarctica Fauna and Flora and associated
    Recommendations,

ii  the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic
    Seals (which entered into force on 11 March 1978),

iii the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic
    Marine Living Resources (which entered into force 
    7 April 1982),
iv      the Convention.on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral
Resource Activities (which has not yet entered into
force),

v       Recommendations relating to

-       the Antarctic Protected Area system concerning
Specially Protected Areas, Sites of Special
Scientific Interest and Historic sites and
monuments,

-       the Code of Conduct for Antarctic expeditions
and station activities,

-       the effects of Antarctic tourism and non-
governmental expeditions,

-       the use of radio-isotopes,

-       oil contamination,

-       the prohibition on the disposal of nuclear
waste, and

-       environmental impact assessment procedures,
as well as work undertaken in relation to the uses of
Antarctic ice;

Taking note of proposals made at ATCM XV by France and
Australia for a comprehensive Convention for the Protection of
the Antarctic Environment which would establish Antarctica as a
natural reserve, land of science; by the United States for
comprehensive measures building on the components of the
Antarctic Treaty System; by Chile on comprehensive measures,
which include the development of the concept of Antarctica as a
Special Conservation Area; by New Zealand for comprehensive
measures constituting an integrated and binding environmental
protection regime; and by Sweden relating to common elements
for environmental protection.

Welcoming the futher substantial progress made on the
protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and
associated ecosystems through the work of this Consultative
Meeting including the adoption of Recommendations     (Waste
Disposal),   (Marine Pollution) and       ;

Acknowledging the need, in the light of the unique qualities of
Antarctica and increasing human activities there, to ensure the
effective implementation, coordination and further elaboration
of the system of protection of the Antarctic environment and
its dependent and associated ecosystems;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1       They undertake as a priority objective the further
elaboration, maintenance and effective implementation of a
comprehensive system for the protection of the Antarctic
environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems
aimed at ensuring that human activity does not have
adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or its
dependent or associated ecosystems or compromise the
scientific, aesthetic or wilderness values of Antarctica;

2       To contribute to this objective, a Special Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting be held in 1990 to explore and
discuss all proposals relating to the comprehensive
protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent
and associated ecosystems;

3       In addressing the requirements of such a comprehensive
system, they:

        i       have regard to the principles for the protection of
the Antarctic environment and its dependent and
associated ecosystems already established under the
Antarctic Treaty system and shall consider the need
to elaborate further, expand and supplement those
principles;

        ii      review the existing body of measures for the
protection of the Antarctic environment and its
dependent and associated ecosystems in order, inter
alia, to:

                a       identify those measures which should be updated,
strengthened or otherwise improved;

                b       identify areas where the existing measures
should be supplemented;

                c       consider the nature of the legal obligations
contained in existing measures and the need, as
necessary, to state those obligations with
greater precision;

                d       make provision for the promotion of research
related to environmental management decisions;

                e       promote the establishment of procedures for
assessing the possible impact of human
activities on the Antarctic environment and its
dependent and associated ecosystems in order to
provide for informed decision-making as to their
acceptability;

                f       promote the establishment of procedures to
monitor the effectiveness and adequacy of
environmental protection measures;

                g       consider the role of an information and data
base for the effective implementation, revision
and extension of environmental protection
measures;

        iii    consider if and to what extent institutional
arrangements may be necessary and the form or forms 
of the legal or other measures needed to ensure the 
maintenance, integration, consistency and 
compre#he'siveness of the system of protection of the 
Antarctic environ#mt and its dependent and 
associated ecosystems.
5

Recommendation II

The Representatives,

Recalling the adoption on 2 June 1988, by the Fourth Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on Antarctic Mineral Resources, of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities and the importance of the issue of liability;

Recommend to their Governments that:

A meeting be held in 1990 to explore and discuss all proposals relating to Article 8 (7) of the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities.
Annex


Draft Principles Put Forward By the Chairman of Working Group I

1     The protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent 
      and associated ecosystems must be a fundamental 
      consideration in the planning and performance of all human 
      activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.

2     Human activities in Antarctica must avoid and minimise 
      adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent 
      and associated ecosystems.

3     Activities in Antarctica must avoid:

      i      significant adverse effects on global or regional 
             climate or weather patterns;

      ii     significant adverse effects on air and water quality;

      iii    significant changes in atmospheric, terrestrial or 
             marine environments;

      iv     significant changes in the distribution, abundance or 
             productivity of populations of species of fauna ex-and 
             flora;

      v      further jeopardy to endangered or threatened species 
             or population of such species;

      vi     degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of 
             special biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic 
             or wilderness significance.

4     Activities in Antarctica must be based on sufficient 
      information to enable informed judgements to be made about 
      their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment and 
      dependent and associated ecosystems.

5     Such judgements must take full account of:

      i      the cumulative impacts of activities both by 
             themselves and in combinaiton with other such 
             activities and other uses of Antarctica;

      ii     whether any activity in Antarctica will detrimentally 
             affect any other activity;

      iii    whether technology and procedures are available to 
             provide for safe operations;

      iv     whether there exists the capacity to monitor key 
             environmental parameters and ecosystem components so 
             as to identify any adverse effects of such activity 
             and to provide for the modification of operating 
             procedures as may be necessary in the light of the 
             results of monitoring or increased knowledge of the 
             Antarctic environment or dependent or associated
ecosystems; and

v       whether there exists the capacity to respond 
        effectively to accidents, particularly those with 
        potential environmental effects.

6       Continuous and effective monitoring should take place to 
        verify the predicted effects and to detect the possible 
        unforeseen effects of activities on the Antarctic 
        environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.

7       Encouragement should be given to scientific research, 
        including cooperative research, in Antarctica and in 
        particular to research directed to acquiring a greater 
        understanding of the Antarctic environment and dependent 
        and associated ecosystems.
wp/73                                 1

Paragraphs for the Final Report as approved by Working Group I.

Item 7: Comprehensive measures for the protection of the
Antarctic environment and dependant and associated ecosystems.

This item was first considered in a general debate in plenary
and was then referred to working group 1 for further
consideration. The discussion focussed in particular on working
papers submitted by France and Australia, Chile, New Zealand,
United States and Sweden. These papers are annexed to this
report.

France and Australia introduced  XV ATCM/WP/2 and XV ATCM/WP/3
containing joint proposals for the establishment of
comprehensive environmental protection in Antarctica and the
holding of a Special Consultative Meeting in 1990 to begin its
elaboration.

France referred to the opening address by the Prime Minister of
the French Republic, Mr Michel ROCARD, on 9 October which had
mentioned the antecedents of the comprehensive approach in
initiatives taken at the Preparatory Meeting and the joint
position reached between the Prime Ministers of France and
Australia in August and gave a general outline of the
proposals. France described in detail the possible components
of a framework convention which in the French-Australian view,
was the best and fastest means of dealing with current
shortcomings ensuring comprehensive environmental protection
and strengthening the Antarctic Treaty System by establishing
Antarctica as a Natural reserve. It was stressed that the
proposal would provide more coherent, responsive and efficient
environmental protection arrangements but would be fully
consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Antarctic
Treaty and would not, in any way, establish a parallel system
nor detract from the special responsibilities of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties in respect of environmental
management.
2

France and Australia tabled a draft recommendation (XV
ATCM/WP/2) after consultations with ATCP through diplomatic
channels.

This provided for a Special Consultative Meeting to be held in
1990 with very broad terms of reference to encompass all points
of view.

Australia also spoke to the joint papers concurring entirely
with France and underlining that the French-Australian draft
recommendation provided for all proposals to be considered in a
frank and fair way at a Special Consultative Meeting for
comprehensive environment protection to begin its work in 1990
which should have clear broad terms of reference and be open to
all Treaty Parties.

The main thrust of the Chilean paper contained in document
XV ATCM/WP/7 is to record the work of the Antarctic Treaty
System on the protection of the environment, which is one of
its essential features and quote the milestones in 28 years of
its existence. Starting from the existing system of
environmental protection, it suggests ways and means to
consolidate and perfect that system.

To that end, the paper postulates the convenience of
consolidating and expanding the set of principles designed to
apply to all human activities in Antarctica. It then suggests
that an evaluation be made of existing measures in order to
systematize them, perfect where necessary the obligations
contained therein, and detect possible gaps. The paper
envisages that all forms of activities present or foreseeable
should be covered.

For such purposes, the Chilean paper goes on to suggest that a
Special Consultative Meeting should be called for in 1990 in
order to complete the set of principles referred to above and
the aforementionned evaluation. The results of the meeting
should be expressed in a comprehensive set of Agreed Measures
which would be an appropriate form because of its closeness to
the Antarctic Treaty, its legally binding nature and the comparative facility of its negotiation and approval.

The New Zealand working paper contained in document XV ATCM/WP/4 also recalls the different measures that have been adopted under the Treaty System for the protection of the Antarctic environment. It notes that there are gaps in the system that need to be addressed, that implementation of some measures previously adopted has not always been up to the desired standards and that there is a need for greater integration and coordination within the treaty system.

In order to ensure a properly integrated, comprehensive and internally consistent regime of environmental protection, it proposes the elaboration of a series of basic standards or principles for all forms of human activity in Antarctica. The environmental protection regime should build on and strenghthen previous achievements and should not seek to duplicate or to replace existing measurse. The paper also addresses a number of measures of general application for environmental protection as well as proposing a series of measures specific to particular activities in Antarctica and suggests some institutional measures to enhance environmental protection. The New Zealand paper also proposes the convening of a meeting on environmental protection in 1990.

The paper introduced by the United States Delegation in XV ATCM/WP/8 was based on its view that the Antarctic Treaty Parties have a commitment to ensure that there is an effective, integrated and comprehensive set of measures governing activities in Antarctica to ensure the protection of the environment. These measures should be cast to establish clear and enforceable obligations, and should be based on the Antarctic Treaty System and all its components. It was the United States view that Antarctic Treaty consultative Meetings are the proper forum for elaboration of these measures.

The main focus of the United States paper was a program of work to ensure that comprehensive measures may be considered and
adopted. This included a delineation of individual standards,
procedures and activities which should be addressed, and a list
of criteria which should be used when considering these various
elements. The paper recommended that Parties establish concrete
objectives to assist in their work.

The Swedish paper in XV ATCM/WP/14 sought to identify the
common element of the other papers in order to find possible
elements of a recommendation for further work. It was suggested
that the preambular paragraph should state the need for further
protection of the Antarctic environment in the framework of the
Treaty System and that therefore a Consultative Meeting on
environmental issues should be called in 1990. The operative
paragraphs should be based on the need to define more exactly
the environmental concerns relating to activities in
Antarctica, the need to define human activities that cause such
concerns, the need to develop further basic standards for all
forms of human activity and to consider proposals for action in
the short and the long term.

All delegations welcomed the inscription on the agenda of this
item at the initiative of Chile during the Preparatory Meeting
in May, and expressed appreciation for the working papers that
had been presented.

There was widespread support for the convening of a
Consultative Meeting in 1990 to consider comprehensive measures
of protection for the Antarctic environment. There was also a
strong view that the XVth Consultative Meeting should make as
much progress as possible on all items on its agenda relating
to the protection of the environment.

A common theme of the debate on item 7 was that there is
already a substantial body of measures for the protection of
the Antarctic environment adopted under the Treaty System and
support for moving forward within that System. The point was
made, however, that the item provided an opportunity for a more
comprehensive look at the overall question of environmental
protection.
5

It was noted that there were a number of common elements in the 
papers. It was also noted that a major difference between the 
various approaches was over the means best designed to enhance 
further protection for the Antarctic environment. In this 
regard, some delegations expressed a preference for the Franco-
Australian approach including the proposal to elaborate a 
comprehensive convention for the protection of the Antarctic 
environment.

Other delegations could not support this approach. They 
expressed concerns about the relationship between the proposed 
new convention and existing measures including the Convention 
for the Conservation of Antarctic seals and the Convention on 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, as well 
as the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral 
Resource Activities. These delegations stressed the need to 
build on the existing achievements of the Treaty System.

During the course of discussions a number of delegations also 
referred to the protocol on liability, which would be designed 
to enhance the protection of the Antarctic environment, called 
for in Article 8 (7) of the Convention on Regulation of 
Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities. They proposed that a 
meeting should be convened in 1990 to begin work on the 
elaboration of the protocol as called for in the Final Act of 
the IVth Special Consultative Meeting.

The United Kingdom tabled a draft Recommendation recalling 
measures which had been taken in the Antarctic Treaty System 
for protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent 
and associated ecosystems, setting out terms of reference for a 
meeting in 1990 to work on "Comprehensive Measures for the 
Protection of the Antarctic Environment and its dependent and 
associated ecosystems". The draft also included a proposal for 
a meeting, also to be held in 1990, to begin the negotiations 
for the liability protocol.
6

This draft recommendation, together with that proposed by 
France and Australia, was considered in consultations convened 
by the Chairman of Working Group 1 with the objective of 
securing an agreed recommendation on this item.

As result of these consultations, the Chairman of Working 
Group 1 presented the text of two draft recommendations which 
were subsequently adopted by the meeting as recommendations XV- 
and XV- (I and II) .

As reflected in the first recommendation, the meeting agreed 
that there should be a special consultative meeting held in 
1990 to explore and discuss all proposals relating to the 
protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and 
associated ecosystems.

The Chairman of Working Group 1 put forward as a contribution 
to the discussion of this item, a set of principles which are 
annexed to this report. The meeting did not have sufficient 
time to consider these principles, although a number of 
delegations expressed reservations about some aspects of the 
draft principles.

It was also agreed that a meeting should be held in 1990 to 
explore and discuss all proposals relating to Article 8 (7) of 
the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource 
Activities, as reflected in Recommendation XV- (II).

The meeting noted with appreciation the offer of the Government 
of Chile to host the meetings called for in the above 
Recommendations, subject to confirmation through diplomatic 
channels.

With reference to Recommendation XV- (II), some delegations 
noted that they would have prefered the initiation of 
negotiations aimed at the conclusion of an agreement on 
liability for all ongoing activities in Antarctica that might 
cause damage co the Antarctic environment. Some other 
delegations also underlined the importance of reinforcing the
current" moratorium" on mineral resource activities. Other
delegations pointed out that this "moratorium" derives from the
IVth Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting which
adopted the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral
Resource Activities.

As reflected in papers presented under item 7, most of the
items on the agenda of the ATCM cover aspects of comprehensive
environmental protection in Antarctica. They encompass a range
of considerations on how to prevent, reduce and mitigate
adverse impacts on Antarctic terrestrial, marine and
atmospheric environments. These range from specific regulation
of waste disposal and marine pollution control, to integrating
prior assessment of potential adverse environmental impacts
into the planning stages of Antarctic activities. They also
address the value of Antarctica for scientific research. On the
one hand they consider the need to preserve the relatively
pristine nature of Antarctica as a baseline from which to
determine contamination of local and global environments. On
the other hand, they seek to promote international cooperation
in carrying out the research and monitoring programs that will
contribute to the understanding of human impacts on local and
global environments.

In respect of the scientific research issues, the meeting
considered several inter-related issues and adopted related
Recommendations. These include the declarations adopted
pursuant to agenda items 8 et 11 on the role of Antarctica in
understanding and monitoring global change, including the ozone
layer, and promotion of international scientific cooperation
Recommendation XV- on environmental monitoring in Antarctica
Recommendation XV- on improving the comparability and
accessibility of scientific data on Antarctica; and
Recommendation XV- on cooperation among national Antarctic
programs and through SCAR to promote Antarctic research of
benefit to all that most efficiently utilizes scarce resources.

Closely related to promoting scientific cooperation in
8

Antarctica is the concern over increasing concentration in the
siting of research stations in Antarctica and how to avoid
mutual interference among different national Antarctica
research programs, unnecessary duplication of research, and the
potential for cumulative adverse environmental impacts. This
issue was considered under three agenda items and resulted in:
Recommendation XV- , on concentration of stations, which urges
consultations and the preparation of environmental impact
assessements in relation to the establishment of new stations,
as well as the provision of assistance to Non-consultative
Parties in locating them and assessing their impacts;
Recommendation XV- , on scientific cooperation, noted above;
and Recommendation XV-  on the adoption of a new category of
Multiple-Use Planning Areas. The implementation of
Recommendation XIV-2 on environmental impact assessment of
station and logistic facilities, considered at the meeting, is
also relevant to this issue.
WP174

Draft Report language for Agenda item 8 : The role of Antarctica in understanding and monitoring global change, including ozone layer.

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties expressed their concern for the depletion of the ozone layer, which is a phenomena caused by factors originating outside of Antarctica but having consequences for its environment and associated and dependent ecosystems.

The meeting carried out, its discussions on the basis of a proposal made by the delegation of Chile, which received widespread support. Several delegations contributed to improve the final text.

As a result of this exchange of views a Declaration on this issue was adopted.
wp|75                                            1

USES OF ANTARCTIC ICE

(Agenda item 18)

The meeting, taking into account past consideration of the
issue, discussed the question of the uses of Antarctic Ice, the
possible impact of harvesting on the environment and the
desirability that commercial exploitation of Antarctic Ice not
occur.One delegation expressed its preference that the question
of commercial exploitation should have been included in the
operative part of the Recommendation.

The delegation of Chile presented a proposal on the basis of
which the discussion was carried out. After an exchange of
views Recommendation XV-... was adopted.
