TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                     XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                            TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                    XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ACTM/WP/66/Rev2

Item 9 (c) of the agenda

Original : English

IMPLEMENTATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
(submitted by the delegation of New-Zealand)
XV ATCM/WP/66/Rev 2

1

MEETING REPORT

Item 9 (c)
IMPLEMENTATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES

The meeting noted reports of national experiences with respect to Recommendation XIV-2 : "Man's impact on the Antarctic environment : Environmental impact assessment".

The meeting noted the importance of integrating the assessment of environmental impacts into the planning process, leading to decisions about scientific research programmes and their associated logistic support activities in Antarctica. It called upon the Parties that have not already done so to approve Recommendation XIV-2 as soon as possible.

Pending entry into force of the Recommendation, the meeting called upon Parties to abide by its provisions, including the provision that a Party preparing a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) should circulate this to other parties, thus providing the opportunity to comment on CEEs in stages of preparation.

Some delegations expressed the view that environmental impact assessment procedures should be applied to all human activities in the Antarctic, for example tourism and activities by non-Consultative Parties. This view was widely shared. There was insufficient time at this meeting, however, to decide how to extend the obligations set out in Recommendation XIV-2 to activities beyond scientific research programmes and their associated logistic support facilities.

Some delegations pointed out that the procedures of Recommendation XIV-2 should apply to any changes which may impact on the environment at any stage of an operation including, for example, the decommissioning of facilities. This is consistent with the 1986 recommendation of SCAR.

The United Kingdom circulated a draft recommendation (ATCM XV/WP/50) which set out lists of activities which would certainly invoke the preparation of a CEE, or would probably invoke the preparation of a CEE, for logistic/support activities, scientific activities, and other activities. However, there was insufficient time to discuss this paper fully and the matter was deferred for consideration at a subsequent meeting.

Several delegations noted the difficulties of determining when to prepare Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEEs) and when to proceed to the more extensive analysis required in a CEE. Some delegations proposed that there should be agreed criteria to determine whether an IEE or CEE is required. Some delegations suggested CEEs should necessarily be prepared for new stations and for landings sites for fixed-wing aircraft.
2

The  delegates noted that Recommendation XIV-2 establishes
guidelines for determining the possible significance of
environmental impacts of potential or planned Antarctic
activities through an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE).
The content of that document is determined by the circumstances
concerning each specific activity.  In that context some
delegates pointed out that consideration of lists of activities
causing significant environmental impacts could be helpful in
guiding national decisions in this regard, but that the use of
lists and criteria should be limited to aiding decisions
concerning level of impact and not substitute for the analysis
required in the IEE. Other delegates expressed doubts about the
usefulness of such lists, because they may be arbitrary and if
applied strictly may lead to wrong decisions.

The meeting was informed that the Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) had considered these
issues at their meeting in Cambridge, England, on 5-6 October
1989 and had proposed that a workshop on environmental impact
assessment be held in the near future.

The delegates welcomed this initiative and asked that in
planning the workshop, the Managers of National Antarctic
Programmes give due consideration to Recommendation XIV-2 and
the guidelines for environmental impact assessment procedures
set forth therein. Some delegates considered that it would be
particularly helpful if the workshop would :

(a) include persons with first hand knowledge of environmental
impact assessment requirements and procedures ;

(b) review environmental impact assessment procedures presently
being used by various governments; and

(c) consider what additional steps could be taken by operators
to integrate environmental impact assessment procedures into
their planning processes.

Some delegations proposed that agreed procedures should be
developed to ensure :

(a) that timely notification is given to other Treaty Parties
that a draft CEE is to be prepared ; and

(b) that documentation prepared for a draft CEE is given timely
circulation to other Treaty Parties to ensure adequate
opportunities for comments to be made ; and

(c) comments provided by other parties are addressed in the
final CEE.

Some delegations emphasised that exchange of information should
also include :

(a) a list of IEEs undertaken, and

(b) a list of CEEs in process, and approximate dates of
circulation.

It was noted that some parties have national legislative 
requirement concerning environmental impact assessment that 
they must meet in preparing CEEs.

The Federal Republic of Germany presented information paper XV 
ATCM/INF/37 describing the implementation, on a trial basis, of 
a national procedure for conducting environmental impact 
assessments in accordance with Recommendation XIV-2. It invited 
other Parties to informally exchange information experiences 
with environmental impact assessment procedures with a view to 
increasing the comparability of results by different Treaty 
Parties. Delegates welcomed this proposal, noted that such 
exchange of information would assist states to further develop 
national law and parctice inr relation to environmental impact 
assessment and encourged such development.

Finally, the delegates expressed the view that monitoring is an 
integral part of environmental impact assessment and that 
monitoring requirements should be incorporated into national 
environmental impact assessment procedures promulgated under 
Recommendation XIV-2, and in this context took note of 
Recommendation XV (Environmental Monitoring).
