TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/20
Item 9 b) of the
provisional agenda
Original : English

11

MARITIME SAFETY
(submitted by the Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany)
Maritime Safety

Working paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany

1.    At the preparatory conference for the XVth ATCM the delegation of 
      the Federal Republic of Germany circulated an information paper 
      (PRE/IP/9) containing proposals for the construction of ships used in 
      polar waters.

      The technical requirements set out in that information paper are in-
      tended to avoid shipping accidents which may cause damage to persons 
      and property, but which may also pollute the seas. This applies espe-
      cially to oil escaping into the sea.

      Experience has shown, however, that such accidents cannot be ruled 
      out with absolute certainty. Technically and financially feasible precau-
      tions for avoiding such accidents would be an effective complement to 
      other measures to protect the sea.

      Research and other vessels operating in Antarctic waters should there-
      fore have basic oil-fighting equipment which will enable them to take 
      immediate and effective steps to prevent oil pollution in the ship's 
      immediate vicinity.  The proposals for ship construction and basic 
      oil-fighting equipment are set out in detail in annexes I and II to this 
      working paper.

2.    Since this matter is of great practical significance for the environment, 
      it should be given high priority. The delegation of the Federal Repub-
      lic of Germany therefore suggests that a working group deal with this 
      question. The subjects of ship construction and oil-fighting equipment 
      could also be discussed in detail at meetings of experts.
Annex I

Maritime safety in Antarctic waters is a subject of major concern 
to Antarctic Treaty Parties. The Federal Republic of Germany is of 
the opinion that in this connection attention must be given not 
only to the necessary improvement of hydrometeorological and sea-
ice services but also to the characteristics of ships designed for 
navigation in polar waters. At the request of the Federal Ministry 
for Research and Technology, the Germanischer Lloyd, an organiza-
tion with longstanding experience in maritime safety, has given 
the following comments:

"Ships intended for service in arctic or antarctic waters should 
be provided with adequate ice strengthening, which should, if pos-
sible, be specially tailored to the needs of navigation in ice in 
arctic waters. Our Rules, which have been harmonized with the cor-
responding Canadian Regulations, provide for different strengthe-
nings for 9 Arctic Ice Classes. In order for the ships to be ca-
pable of withstanding large lateral ice pressures, which may occur 
in the event of the ship being frozen in, it is advisable to de-
sign the mid-body with a flare of the ship's sides not less than 
8°. For certain ship types, such as icebreakers, the flare should 
be increased to approx. 12° - 15°. This reduces the risk of cru-
shing the hull and causes the hull, when exposed to large lateral 
ice pressures, to be lifted. Our load concept for lateral ice 
pressures is based on a minimum angle of flare of 8°. For the pur-
pose of avoiding damage to the environment caused by collision, it 
is strongly recommended that ships navigating in arctic waters be 
also strengthened in order to resist collision impacts of all 
kinds. In this context, we refer to Chapter 2, Section 35, of our 
Rules. In our opinion, a twin-hull vessel would be the most favor-
able solution, both as regards dimensioning for ice pressure and 
for collision impacts, since the twin hull provides the most ef-
fective collision protection. Anti-collision strengthening in ac-
cordance with the requirements contained in our Rules for at least 
class notation COLL 2 appears to us to be an essential prerequi-
site; however, COLL 3 should be aimed at. The COLL 2/COLL 3 nota-
tions imply that, e.g., leakage of cargo or fuel oil is to be ex-
pected only if the deformation energy absorbed during the colli-
- 2 -

sion process of the non-strengthening ship is exceeded by more than 200 percent and 300 percent respectively.

Increased resistance to collision impacts, of course, automati-
cally entails increased resistance of the ship to loads due to 
ice, which are comparable to collision impacts (e.g. lateral ram-
ming of an iceberg).

To sum up, we should like to state the following:

1) Ships intended for service in arctic/antarctic waters should be 
provided with adequate ice strengthening in accordance with our 
Rules for the navigation in ice in arctic waters, e.g. with an 
ice strengthening corresponding to our arctic ice class Arc. 3. 
Such ships should at least be assigned GL Ice Class E4 (Fin-
nish-Swedish Ice Class I A Super), which may be compared with 
the lowest Arctic Ice Class Arc. 1 and is appropriate for ser-
vice for limited periods of time and in limited geographical 
areas.

2) For ships intended to operate in the aforementioned service 
areas additional lateral collision protection as provided for 
by the GL notation COLL 2 and/or COLL 3 is recommended, so as 
to ensure optimum protection of ship, crew and environment du-
ring navigation in arctic/antarctic waters.

3) For ships which may be exposed to large lateral ice pressures 
under conditions of freezing in, the aforementioned flare of 
the ship's sides as per the GL Construction Rules should under 
all circumstances be provided for. The alternative mentioned in 
our Rules of assuming higher design pressures where no flare is 
provided, should not be considered in this case.
- 2 -

Annex II

Research and other vessels operating in Antarctic waters should carry 
equipment enabling them to take immediate and effective steps to prevent 
pollution of the sea by escaping oil in the ship's immediate vicinity.

The authorities concerned with these matters in the Federal Republic of 
Germany suggest the following basic equipment:

- 1 hydraulically operated emergency bilge system for lightening damaged 
tanks, consisting of a submersible pump and tubes.

- 300 m high-sea oil-boom tubing on a hydraulically operated drum for 
the purpose of encircling a damaged ship. Such booms work at temper-
atures down to -40° C and can be stored at temperatures as low as 
-60° C. !!

- 2 hydraulically operated skimmers for escaped oil. The hydraulic 
system normally operates at temperatures as low as -20° C. If it is 
needed for work at lower temperatures the hydraulic oil or skimmer 
manufacturers would have to be consulted.

- Power packs (external diesel engines to drive the hydraulic generating 
sets, though the latter must be designed for low-temperature opera-
tion). The fuel should be gas oil/diesel oil, which, for temperatures 
below the normal winter level of -15° C or the severe winter level of 
-21° C would require special additives to raise the setting point.

- Possibly special facilities on the vessel for storing lightened oil, espe-
cially if it has been skimmed off the surface (oil-water mix).
