TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA


                                  PARIS
                            9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/70 revision 1
Item 22 of the agenda
Original : French

DRAFT FINAL REPORT OF THE FIFTEENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

(Items 1 to 5 of the agenda)
1

FINAL REPORT OF THE FIFTEENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY

CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1. Pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty,
representatives of the Consultative Parties (Argentina,
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Finland, France, the German Democratic Republic,
India, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland , the
Republic of Korea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay)
met in Paris from 9 to 20 October 1989, for the purpose of
exchanging information, holding consultations, and considering
and recommending to their governments measures in furtherance
of the principles and objectives of the Treaty.

The meeting was also attended by delegations from Contracting
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty which are not Consultative
Parties (Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Greece, Hungary, the
Netherlands, the People's Democratic Republic of Korea and
Romania).

The Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the President of
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) were
invited to attend the Meeting as observers in accordance with
Article 2 of the revised Rules of Procedure of 1987.

At the Preparatory Meeting held in Paris in May 1989, the
Consultative Parties, pursuant to Article 35 of the revised
Rules of Procedure of 1987, had invited several international
organizations to appoint experts to assist in examining
specific agenda items were being discussed. The following
organizations took part in the proceedings:

- the International Hydrographic Bureau,(IHB),
- the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, (IOC),
- the Intergovernmental Panel on Climatic Changes (IPCC),
- the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
- the International Maritime Organization (IMO),
- the World Meteorological Organization (WMO),
- the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, (IUCN),
- the International Hydrographic Organization, (IHO),
- the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, (SCAR),
- the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources, (CCAMLR).

2. Mr. Michel Rocard, Prime Minister of France, pronounced the
official opening of the meeting in the presence of Mr.Brice
Lalonde, Secretary of State for the Environment,and delivered
an opening address.
2

3. At the suggestion of the Head of the Delegation of Brazil, 
Mr. Michel Combal, Head of the French Delegation, was elected 
Chairman of the XVth Consultative Meeting. After thanking the 
delegations for having elected him Chairman, Mr. Combal 
welcomed the States admitted as Consultative Parties at the 8th 
Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Paris in 
September 1988 (Spain and Sweden), and at the 9th Special 
Consultative Meeting (Finland, Peru, and the Republic of 
Korea), as well as Canada and Colombia, which was a new Party 
to the Antarctic Treaty.

4. The Chairman proposed that Mrs. Brigitte Girardin, of the 
French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be appointed Executive 
Secretary of the XVth Consultative Meeting; this proposal was 
adopted.

5. In order to save time, in accordance with the wishes of 
several Consultative Parties, he proposed that the delegations 
should hand in the text of their opening statements, which 
would not be delivered but would be included in the Final 
Report. This proposal was adopted.

6. The following agenda was adopted:

1. Opening of the Meeting.
2. Election of Officers.
3. Opening Addresses.
4. Adoption of the agenda.
5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports 
(Recommendation XII-6, paragraph (a) and (b) and 
Recommendation XIII-2, paragraphs 1) and 3);

6. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
 
(a) "White Book" (paragraphs 13-16 of the Final Report 
of the XIVth ATCM);

(b) Organizational aspects (paragraphs 24-38);

(c) Public availability of the documents of 
Consultative Meetings (paragraphs 61-67).

7. Comprehensive measures for the protection of the 
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems.

8. The role of Antarctica in understanding and monitoring 
global change, including the ozone layer.
9. Human Impact on the Antarctic environment:
    (a) Waste disposal (paragraphs 71-74 and SCAR's response to Recommendation XIII-4);
    (b) Marine pollution;
    (c) Implementation of procedures to measure the impact of human activity on the environment (Recommendation XIV-2).

10. The Antarctic Protected Area System:
    (a) Proposals for new Sites of Special Scientific Interest;
    (b) Status of Sites of Special Scientific Interest;
    (c) Additional protective measures (paragraphs 75-97);
        (i) Reports of visits to SPA's, SSSIs and HMs (paragraphs 77-81);
        (ii) Publication of visit reports and data base mechanism (paragraphs 82-84);
        (iii) Management plans for SPAs (paragraphs 85-87);
        (iv) New categories of protected area (92-97);
        (v) Historic monuments (paragraphs 137-146).

11. Promotion of international scientific cooperation.

12. Measures for the facilitation of international scientific cooperation:
    (a) Improving the comparability and accessibility of scientific data in Antarctica (paragraphs 98-102 and SCAR's response to Recommendation XIII-5 (ii));
    (b) Concentration of siting of stations (paragraphs 106-112).

13. Effects of tourism and non-governmental expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty Area (paragraphs 120-127).

14. Antarctic meteorology and telecommunications (paragraphs 128-136)

15. Marine hydrometeorological services to navigation in the Southern Ocean (paragraphs 151-152).

16. Cooperation in the hydrographic charting of Antarctic waters.

17. Air safety in Antarctica (paragraphs 147-150).

18. Uses of Antarctic ice (Final Act of the IVth Special Consultative Meeting, eighth paragraph).

19. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty.

20. Date and place of the XVIth Consultative Meeting ATCM.

21. Any other business.

22. Adoption of the report.

23. Closing of the Meeting.

7. The Chairman suggested that the Meeting's work be organized as follows:

a)  in addition to items 20, 21, 22 and 23, items 5 and 7 (for general debate only) would be discussed in plenary session.
b) the remaining items would receive initial consideration by working groups:
-    the first Group would discuss item 7 (outside the general debate) and items 8, 9, 10, 12b, 13 and 18.
- the second Group would discuss.items 6, 11, 12 a, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 19.

This proposal was adopted.

After consultation, the Chairmen of the two Working Groups were elected as follows:

- the Head of the Delegation of New Zealand, Mr. Chris Beeby, was elected to chair Working Group I,

- the Head of the Delegation of Uruguay, Mr. Ricardo Galarza, was elected to chair Working Group II.

THE OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM: REPORTS
(Agenda item 5)

8.  Pursuant to Recommendation XIII-2, the Chairman of the XVth Consultative Meeting invited the following to present their reports:

- a representative of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) ;
- a representative of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) ;
- the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for the Conservation of Anatarctic seals;
- the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his capacity as representative of Depositary Government of the Washington Treaty;
- the Chairman of the IVth Special Consultative Meeting;
- the Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations in New York in his capacity as spokesman for the Consultative Parties at the United Nations;
- the Chairman of the Expert Meeting on Air Safety.

9. The report of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources, was presented by the Head of the Delegation of Brazil, on behalf of its Chairman, on the work of the Commission during the last years (cf. annex).

10. The report of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) was presented by its President, Mr Claude Lorius (cf annex).

11. The Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom, in his capacity as representative for the Depositary State of the
5

Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, presented a 
report (cf annex).
12. The Head of the Delegation of New Zealand, in his capacity as Chairman of the IVth Special Consultative Meeting, presented a report on the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities.

13. The Head of Delegation of the United States, in his capacity as a representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty, presented a report. The table covering the status of the recommendations adopted in compliance with Article 9 of the Treaty annexed.

14. The permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations, Ambassador Peter Wilenski, in his capacity as Chairman of the informal group of Treaty Parties in New York, presented an oral report on the handling of the Antarctic item at the UN general assembly which was received with much interest. The Meeting reaffirmed the determination of the Antarctic Treaty Parties to maintain unity.

15. The report of the Chairman of the Meeting of Experts on Air Safety in Antarctica, held in Paris from 2-5 May 1989, was submitted to the Meeting.

16. A large number of delegations took part in the debate on each report and thereafter on the comprehensive picture they presented as to the current state and developments in the Antarctic Treaty System.

17. The wish was expressed that, in future, the reports presented under item 5 be circulated in advance of the Consultative Meeting, so that they could be studied and thereby be given all the attention they warranted.

18. In accordance with paragraph 1 and 2 (a) of Recommendation XII-6, the Meeting agreed to request France, in its capacity as host Government to the XVth Meeting, to send a copy of the Report of the Meeting in all four Treaty languages to the Secretary-General of the United Nations as soon as possible after the conclusion of the XVth Meeting. Also in accordance with Recommendation XII-6, paragraph 2 (b), the Meeting considered drawing the attention of the Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and other international organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica, to those parts of the Report of the Meeting, as well as to information documents submitted to the Meeting and made available to the public, relevant to the scientific or technical interest which such agencies and organizations have in Antarctica.
