TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFÉRENCE CONSULTATIVE     XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ    XV REUNION CONSULTIVA


PARIS
9-19 OCTOBRE 1989


XV ATCM/WP/19
Item 9 b) of the
provisional agenda
Original : English


MARTIME POLLUTION
(submitted by the
Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany)
Marine Pollution

Working paper submitted by the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany

The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany fully supports the pro-
posals and demands expressed in the preparatory conference preceding this
Consultative Meeting, particularly in Working Paper 2 on the subject of
marine pollution. We would welcome a recommendation by this Consultative
Meeting to the effect that all States parties to the Antarctic Treaty which
have not already done so should accede to the international agreements
specified in the Working Paper and that these agreements should also be
strictly applied in the Antarctic Treaty.

The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany would like to submit the
following comments and proposals supplementing Working Paper 2 of the
preparatory conference:

1.      Working Paper 2 proposes that the States parties to the Antarctic
Treaty which are members of the International Maritime Organiz-
ation (IMO) jointly take the appropriate steps to declare the areas
south of 60° South Latitude special areas under Annex I and V to
MARPOL 73/78. The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany is
of the opinion that the Contracting Parties should at the same time
commit themselves to also declaring the areas south of 60° South
Latitude special areas under Annex II to MARPOL 73/78.

2.      By classifying the Antarctic waters as a special area as proposed
above, ships would be required to carry oil residue and oily mixtures
as well as other waste products from ships to the nearest port in order
to dispose of them in the proper manner. It is therefore particularly
important for ports from which ships leave for the Antarctic to possess
adequate reception facilities for the disposal of such waste products.

The Contracting Parties should therefore examine ways of guaranteeing
that all ports which play an important role in Antarctic traffic possess
the necessary reception facilities for the different kinds of waste
- 2 -

products from ships, and of ensuring that non-Contracting Parties also
acquire the appropriate reception facilities.

3.  Declaring the areas south of 60o South Latitude special areas under
Annex I, II and V to MARPOL 73/78 entails amending the MARPOL
Convention, and the procedure involved will require a certain period
of time. In order to pursue the objective of these agreements without
delay, namely to protect the Antarctic waters from pollution, the
States parties to the Antarctic Treaty should give an immediate and
unqualified undertaking to refrain from disposing of waste products
from ships in the waters south of 60o South Latitude.

The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany proposes that this
obligation become subject of a recommendation and that the final report
of this Consultative Meeting should include the provision that the
recommendation will be applied by all Contracting States until such
time as th[e] amendment to MARPOL 73/78 comes into effect.

4.  Furthermore the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany consid-
ers it particularly important to prohibit as. a matter of principle the
dumping and incineration of wastes at sea as regulated by the Conven-
tion on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and
other Matter, 1972 (London Dumping Convention) in areas south.of 60o
South Latitude. We therefore strongly support the proposal put for-
ward by the United States of America that all States parties to the
Antarctic Treaty should accede to the London Dumping Convention, if
they have not already done so. The delegation of the Federal Republic
of Germany proposes that the States parties to the Antarctic Treaty
jointly take the appropriate steps in the Consultative Meeting of the
London Dumping Convention in order to achieve the prohibition of
dumping and incineration in the areas south of 60o South Latitude.

5.  The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany will submit a sepa-
rate working paper on the subject of special requirements relating to
the construction of ships used in Antarctic waters.
