TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE          XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ         XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  PARIS
                            9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/57
Item 8 of the Agenda
Original : English

STATEMENT OF FINLAND
Statement of Finland, Agenda Item 8

Since joining the AT one of the main emphases in the Finnish research strategy has been the environmental studies ranging from biology to marine and aptmospheric physics. As a vital element to this end is the monitoring of changes in the Antarctic environment:

1. The climatic change

1.1. Continuous recordings of the weather and climate on Aboa station have started in January 1989 and will contribute to the knowledge of the climatically poorly known Queen Maud Land. The data of the first austral winter has proved to be highly interesting.

1.?. The studies of marine physics concentrate on the complex problems of the atmosphere - ocean - ice interaction. Based upon the decades long experience on similar problems in the Arctic and sub-arctic studies, the mass balance of the sea ice, heat exchange between atmosphere and ocean, as well as the development of the seasonal surface stratification of the ocean, will be an object of continuous studies.

2. Biogeochemical cycle

2.1. The flux of matter, in particular the flux of antropogenic trace elements in the Weddell Sea will be monitored during the Finnish Antarctic expeditions. These studies include measurements of horizontal as well as vertical fluxes in water phase, their interaction with the sediment surface, and the analysis of historical records as seen in the bottom sediment layer.

2.2. The marine biology program includes measurements of the concentration of trace elements of different kind, eg. heavy metals and hydrocarbons in the biota. These complete the studies described above in chapter 2.1.
2.

3. Ozone

In November 1988, an ozone monitoring station was established jointly with
Argentine authorities on Marambio research station. This station will carry
on regular all the year round soundings of the ozone content of the
atmosphere.  A similar sounding station was established earlier into
Northern Lapland in Finland (68 N) These stations enable comparative
studies of the development of Ozone content in both polar regions.

The above mentioned studies, all partly monitoring, partly process
oriented, enable a comparison of the high latitude response of climate and
environmental change at both hemispheres. With duly arranged international
cooperation they will also add to improve the regional coverage of
monitoring of the global change. Combined with the ongoing theoretical and
mathematical modelling of the processes involved they will contribute to a
better understanding of changes occurring on the globe.
