TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/31
Item 9 h) of the agenda
Original : English

DEVELOPMENT OF AN OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY
PLAN FOR THE ANTARCTIC REGION
(working paper submitted by South Africa)
DELEGATION OF SOUTH AFRICA

WORKING PAPER

DEVELOPMENT OF AN OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLAN FOR THE ANTARCTIC REGION

The environmental impact of the oil spilled as a result
of the stranding of the "Bahia Paraiso" in January 1989
highlighted the need for the development of an effective
oil spill response strategy for the Antarctic region.  The
remoteness of the region, its severe climatic conditions
and unique and fragile ecosystem, and the strong desire
to protect and conserve this valuable area as a common heritage
all dictate the need for the development of such a strategy.
The following points are raised with a view to promoting
the establishment of a coordinated plan aimed at minimizing
any environmental impact resulting from the discharge of
oil in the coastal region.

1.  A working group should be appointed for the purpose
of establishing an organisational structure for responding
to oil spills and of compiling an oil spill contingency
plan for the Antarctic region.  This Group should comprise
representatives from nations with significant commercial
and research interests in the area.  Individual rep-
resentatives should have an intimate knowledge of
the Antarctic system and its environment as well as
some knowledge/experience in oil spill response activities.
A model plan could be used for the basis of this work,
with specific information being developed for the areas
in question.  The plan should take into account the
following information:

    (a)  Identification of the nature and size of the threat

         What are the likely sources and types of oil that
         could be spilled in the area?  What quantities
         could be expected?  Is the likelihood of oil being
         spilled in certain areas greater than in others?
         What are these areas?  How would oil behave once
         it had been spilled in these areas?  What are
         the seasonal differences?  All these questions
         will have to be addressed by the Group before
         any plan can be compiled.
- 2 -

(b) Sensitive resources at risk

What Antarctic resources are most sensitive to 
oil pollution?  Where do these occur?  How would 
they be affected seasonally?  Can a commercial 
value be placed on these resources?  How would 
priorities for protection be established for these 
resources?  A type of Sensitivity Atlas could 
be developed which could depict this information 
and which would form the basis for recommended 
response activity contained in the contingency 
plan.

(c) Areas of responsibility

Who is responsible for responding to an oil spill?  
It is suggested that the owner of the vessel which 
spilled the oil is ultimately responsible for 
the oil spill clean up.  It is also suggested 
that the nation with a base station closest to 
the spill should be directly involved in any clean 
up measures as they would probably have the most 
comprehensive information on the affected area 
and the greatest interest in preserving it.  If 
this is accepted then it should be decided which 
areas each nation would become involved in during 
a spill situation.  These areas should be clearly 
indicated on a map contained in the plan.

(d) Liability

The plan should address the liability aspect of 
damage, clean up and preventative costs.  Who 
is responsible for these costs and how are they 
claimed?  What liability regimes operate under 
these circumstances?

(e) Organisation

An organisational structure should be developed 
which would come into effect in the event of an 
oil spill.  It is suggested that an oil spill 
response coordinating group should be appointed 
to receive initial reports of oil spills in Antarctica 
and to coordinate the response activities.  It 
must be decided where this group should operate 
from, for example the offices of the Manager of 
National Antarctic Programmes or any other suitable 
body that could be appointed.  This group could 
comprise an appointed coordinator who would call 
in a representative of the State whose vessel
- 3 -

is involved in the spill, a representative from
the State whose base is closest to the spill,
as well as previously identified salvage, oil
spill response and environmental experts.  These
individuals or organisations would have to be
identified and listed in the plan. An operating
procedure for this group would have to be estab-
lished and clearly described in the plan. Similarly,
contractors who could do the actual salvage/clean
up would have to be identified and a modus operandi
of how they would operate under the coordinating
group would have to be established.

(f)  Reporting procedures

A reporting procedure would have to be established
to define the manner in which oil spill reports
are transmitted to the coordinator's office, the
type of information required, etc.  Similarly,
alerting procedures between the coordinator's
office and the technical experts and other involved
parties would have to be established.

(g)  Specific action

Specific response actions for particular areas
and times of the year would have to be developed.
The feasibility of these would have to be assessed
and the details clearly spelled out in the plan.

(h)  Logistics

The logistics of the availability and transport
of suitable equipment would have to be addressed
and included in the plan.  The availability of
suitable transport aircraft/vessels, landing strips,
access points, etc. would have to be identified.
On- and off-site communication systems also need
to be established and listed.

(i)  Manpower/Equipment lists

The plan should contain a list of salvage, oil
spill response, legal and environmental experts
who could play a part in response activities.
Lists of suitable equipment available to combat
oil spills, for example  BP Oil Spill Response
Base in Southampton, should be included.  Availability
of manpower/labour should be covered.
- 4 -

( j ) Contact lists

Contact numbers for any parties who could play 
a role in response activities should be included.

( l ) Appendices

Appendices covering the principles of oil spill 
clean up procedures in Antarctic conditions, disposal 
of oil and oily waste and procedures for dealing 
with contaminated seabirds should be attached 
to the plan.

The above is a very broad description of how an oil spill 
contingency plan could be formulated for the Antarctic region 
and is presented as a basis for discussion.  Further details 
would have to be developed by a working group if the concept 
is accepted.
