TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                         PARIS
                                                         9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/54

Item 10(a) (i)

Original: English

REPORT LANGUAGE AND RECOMMENDATION RE:

AGENDA ITEM 10 (a) (i) - REDESIGNATION OF SPA No 11
Report language and recommendation re: Agenda item 10 (a) (i) - redesignation of SPA No. 11

A draft recommendation was tabled jointly by Chile, the United Kingdom  and  the United States, proposing that specially 
Protected Area N° 11, Cape Shirreff, be redesignated as a Site 
of Special Scientific Interest.

Cape Shirreff was designated as SPA No 11 by Rec.  IV-11 "on 
the grounds that the Cape supports a considerable diversity of 
plant and animal life, including many invertebrates, that  a 
substantial population of elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) and 
small colonies of fur seals (Arctocephalus sp.) are found on 
the beaches and that the area is of outstanding interest."
Since the SPA was designated, the fur seal colony has grown to 
a size at which non-invasive research can safely be undertaken 
without threatening the existence and continued growth of the 
colony.

The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Li[?]ing 
Resources (CCAMLR) recognises that harvesting of species such 
as Antarctic krill could have adverse effects on krill-
consuming species, such as fur seals, as well as on the target 
species. To provide a means of detecting and avoiding possible 
adverse effects on dependant as well as on target species the 
Scientific Committee of CCAMLR has established an ecosystem 
monitoring programme. A Working Group established by the 
Scientific Committee notes that predator species, including 
Antarctic fur seals, might be useful indicators of the possible 
indirect effects of krill harvesting. It recommended that 
populations of these predators be studied and monitored at a 
network of sites throughout the Antarctic.

During the 1986/87 austral summer, researchers from the 
United States surveyed areas in the South Shetland Islands and 
the Antarctic Pennisula. This survey suggested that the Cape 
Shirreff-Telmo Islands area would be the best site for long-
term monitoring of fur seal colonies that could be affected by 
fisheries around the South Shetland Islands.

Safely and effectively to carry out a long-term monitoring 
programme, a multi-year field camp for 4-6 researchers would 
have to be established within the area currently designated as 
Specially Protectid Area No 11. This might be considered 
inappropriate and hence the proposal was made to re-designate 
Cape Shirreff as a Site of Special Scientific Interest. 
Additionally, it was proposed substantially to enlarge the site 
by the inclusion of the Telmo Islands group, presently the 
location of the largest fur seal colony in the Antarctic.

Recommendation XV-     was adopted with the understanding that 
SSSI N°32, Cape Shirreff, should be redesignated an SPA (in its 
enlarged form) if and when the long-term monitoring of fur 
seals and sea birds in the site should be ended.
RECOMMENDATION

Facilitation of scientific research:
Redisignation of Specially Protected Area, No 11, Cape
Shirreff, as site of Special Scientific Interest N°32

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations III-8, VIII-3 and VIII-4;

Conscious of the need to facilitate research into important
aspects of the Antarctica marine ecosystem;

Noting that there are certain long-term research programmes
involving support activities which may not be appropriately
provided in a Specially Protected Area, but which need not
endanger the Antarctic ecosystem or its components;

Noting further that the degree of environmental protection
specified in the management plan of a Site of Special
Scientific Interest need not be less than that provided in a
Specially Protected Area;

Aware that a management plan for a Site of Special Scientific
Interest at Cape Shirreff has been prepared and approved by the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

Recommend to their Governments that :

1. The inclusion in Annex B, Specially Protected
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora of Recommendation IV-11 ( 
Specially Protected Areas : Cape Shirreff) be
terminated;

2. The number 11 in Annex B of the Agreed Measures
should not be used for another Specially Protected
Area;

3. They voluntarily take account of the management
plan, annexed to this Recommendation, for Site of
Special Scientific Interest N°32, Cape Shirreff,
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands.
SSSI N°32

CAPE SHIRREFF, LIVINGSTON ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS

1.  GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

Cape Shirreff is a low, ice-free peninsula towards the western 
end of the north coast of Livingston Island, situated at 
latitude 62°27'S, longitude 60°47'W, between Barclay Bay and 
Hero Bay. Telmo Island is the largest of a small group of ice-
free rock islets, approximately 2 km west of Cape Shirreff.

2.  MANAGEMENT PLAN

i)  Description of site

The site includes the entire area of the Cape Shirreff 
peninsula north of the glacier ice tongue margin, and most of 
the Telmo Island group (see map).

ii)  Reason for Designation

The presence of both Antarctic fur seal and penguin breeding 
colonies, and of krill fisheries within the foraging range of 
these species, make this a critical site for inclusion in the 
ecosystem monitoring netword being established to help meet the 
objectives of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources. The purpose of the designation is to 
allow planned research and monitoring to proceed, while 
avoiding or reducing, to the greatest extent possible, other 
activities which could interfere with or affect the results of 
the research and monitoring programme or alter the natural 
features of the site.

iii)  Outline of research

Long-term studies are being planned to better assess and 
monitor the feeding ecology, growth and condition, reproductive 
success, behaviour, vital rates, and abundance of pinnipeds and 
seabirds that breed in the area. The results of these studies 
will be compared with environmental data, offshore sampling 
data, and fishery statistics to identify possible cause-effect 
relationships.

iv)  Date of expiry of designation

31 December 1999

v)  Access points

The Cape Shirreff part of the site may be entered at any point 
were pinniped or seabird rookeries are not present on or near 
the beach. Access to the islands in the Telmo group is 
unrestricted but should be at the least densely populated areas 
and cause minimal disturbance to the fauna. Access for other 
than the aforementioned types of research should avoid 
disturbing pinnipeds and seabirds.
vi)     Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Boats,  helicopters,  fixed-winged  aircraft  and  land  vehicles 
should avoid the site except for operations directly supporting 
authorized  scientific  activities.  During  these  operations, 
boats and aircraft should travel routes that avoid or minimize 
disturbance of pinnipeds and seabirds. Land vehicles should not 
be used except to transport needed equipment and supplies to 
and from the field camp to be established. As far as possible, 
establishment  and resupply of the field camp should be done 
before  or  after  the  pinniped  and  seabird  breeding  seasons. 
Pedestrians should not walk through wildlife population areas, 
especially during the breeding season, or disturb other fauna 
or flora except as necessary to conduct authorized research.

vii)  Other kinds of scientific investigations which would not 
cause harmful interference

Geological,  glaciological,  and other studies which can be done 
outside of the pinniped and seabird breeding seasons, and which 
will not damage or destroy pinniped or seabird breeding areas, 
or  access  to  those  areas,  would  not  adversely  affect  the 
planned  assessment  and  monitoring  studies.   Likewise,  the 
planned assessment and monitoring studies would not be affected 
adversely by periodic biological surveys or studies of other 
species which do not result in killing, injuring or disturbing 
pinnipeds  or  seabirds,  or  damage  or  destroy  pinnipeds  or 
seabird breeeding areas or access to those areas.

viii)  Scientific sampling

Killing,  capturing  handling,  photographing,  and  taking  eggs, 
blood, or other biological samples from pinnipeds and seabirds 
should be limited to that necessary to characterize and monitor 
individual  and  population  parameters  that  may  change  in 
detectable  ways  in  response  to  changes  in  food  availability  or 
other  environmental  factors.  Sampling  should  be  done  and 
reported  in  accordance  with:  1)  the  Agreed  Measures  for  the 
Conservation  of  Antarctic  Fauna  and  Flora,  and  2)  the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals.

ix)   Other restraints

a)  Only  structures  directly  supporting  authorized  scientific 
research and monitoring programmes may be built within the site 
to house research personnel and/or their equipment, and shall 
be occupied only within the period 1 September to 1 June.

b)  All non-burnable or non-biodegradable materials brought to 
the  site  should  be  removed  when  no  longer  in  use.  Landfill 
disposal  of  non-biodegradable  materials,  and  the  burning  of 
non-organic materials, is not permitted.
