TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE                               XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                     TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                              XV REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  PARIS                                   
                          9-19 OCTOBRE 1989                                


XV ATCM/WP/59
Original: Engl.sh

FUTURE WORK
Future Work

Appropriate Technologies: There was discussion of the desirability of exploring further the utilization of low-impact waste management technologies and practices, including those that conserve energy and water. Attention was drawn in particular to the need for further study of the advantages and disadvantages of incineration technologies.

Dumping of Wastes at Sea: In addressing a future program of work, the meeting agreed to consider further restrictions on dumping of wastes at sea, and in particular the dumping of chemical wastes and ash from incineration, bearing in mind applicable international agreements for the protection of the marine environment.

National Waste Management Plans and A System of Classification of Wastes: Representatives took note of the reference in paragraph 4 of Recommendation XV- to the development of standardized formats for national waste management plans. They agreed that it would be useful to pursue this objective together with the elaboration of a classification system for wastes and their sources as called for in paragraph 3 of the Recommendation, as means to facilitate waste management planning and the evaluation of the impacts of waste storage and disposal. Such plans might take into account projected growth in activities and the resulting volume of wastes generated, including fuel consumption by vehicles and aircraft; methods for recording and keeping track of materials taken to and removed from Antarctica, such as labeling or the application of a system of manifests; and the characteristics of wastes and their potential hazards. In the elaboration of a waste classification system, the meeting noted that care should be taken to avoid inconsistencies with classifications employed in other relevant international agreements. In this regard specific mention was made of the 1972 International Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by the Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter and the 1989 Basel Convention on the Control
of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal.

Ships: Consideration will also be given in the future to 
agreement on standards for shipboard equipment to manage ship-
generated garbage in all vessels engaged in or supporting 
Antarctic programs, both in regard to existing ships and the 
design and construction of new ships.

Storage an Handling of Wastes: The meeting took note of the 
conclusion in the report of XI ATCM on the appropriateness of 
setting up protective walls around oil storage tanks to reduce 
oil contamination of the marine environment, and agreed to 
undertake further work on storage and handling of wastes.

Environmental Monitoring: In outlining future work on these 
issues, the meeting took note also of Recommendation XV- 
Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica and of the need for 
means to keep under continuing review waste reduction and waste 
management practices in Antarctica in light of new information 
on environmental impacts.
