TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVe CONFERENCE CONSULTATIVE             XV th CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XV КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            XV REUNION CONSULTATIVA

                                  PARIS
                           9-19 OCTOBRE 1989

XV ATCM/WP/11/REV 2
Items 8 and 11 of the Provisional agenda
Original : English

- The role of Antarctica in understanding and monitoring global change, including the ozone layer.
- Promotion of international scientific cooperation.

(Working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE PARTIES,

Deeply aware of the role that Antarctica and the Southern 
Ocean play in interactive physical, chemical and biological 
processes that regulate the total Earth System;

Recognizing that,

- The Antarctic region has a high negative radiation budget 
and so acts as one of the Earth's "refrigerators". Any changes 
in the budget will have global consequences on atmospheric and 
oceanic circulation.

- Conditions beneath the ice shelves and the girdle of sea ice 
promote the formation of cold bottom water that drains 
northward.

- Polar seas play an especially important role in the 
exchange of CO between ocean and atmosphere since they may 
be large sinks for CO . These processes are controlled by 
the sea-ice formation, thermohaline convection and biological 
productivity.

- Antarctica provides unique conditions for investigating the 
impact of man-made pollutants on atmospheric ozone.

- A detailed record of past global climate and atmospheric 
chemistry extending over hundreds of millennia is preserved 
within the Antarctic ice sheet, and in the sediments of the 
Southern Ocean and the Antarctic continent.

- Because climate change is predicted to be largest at high 
latitudes, detection of such change above the background of 
high natural variability is best sought in the polar regions.

- Plant communities existing under polar conditions are 
sensitive to changes in temperature, and may be good 
indicators of climate change.

- The Antarctic ice sheet contains enough water to raise 
global sea level world-wide some 60 metres. Any green-house 
climate warning which makes even a small change to this volume 
of ice will have a significant impact on sea level.

Recognizing, with appreciation, that the contribution that 
Antarctic science can make to these scientific questions is 
the subject of intensive work within the Scientific Committee 
on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and that they have identified the 
following four major, interconnected, interdisciplinary 
research thrusts for the purpose of defining and encompassing 
research priorities :

- Detection of Changes of Global Importance Best Observed in 
Antarctica;
- Processes Linking Antarctic Ice and Biological Systems to the Global Ocean and Atmosphere;

- Antarctic Sources of Palaeoenvironmental Information;

- Ecology in the Changing Antarctic Environment;

- Monitoring Changes in Antarctica;

Recognising, moreover, that other scientific programmes which are not so directly relevant to issues of global change are of no less value to science;

Conscious of the need to ensure that all Antarctic activity is based on information adequate to ensure that informed judgements can be made about their environmental consequences;

Renew their commitment to the pursuit of scientific research in the Antarctic; and

Declare their intent:

1. vigorously to pursue scientific research programmes in Antarctica in a manner which makes the most productive use of the resources available;

2. to ensure that their scientific endeavours contribute as much as possible to programmes of global significance being undertaken or being prepared by the International Council of Scientific Unions and by other international organisations;

3. to ensure that research results and observations are, in accordance with Article III of the Antarctic Treaty, made freely available and that the results of Antarctic programmes of global significance are brought to the attention of the international scientific community as rapidly as possible;

4. to ensure that activities in the Antarctic take full account of the global importance of the Antarctic as a scientific laboratory and as a place where aspects of global changes can most readily be monitored; and

5. to ensure, in confirmity with the declaration in recommendation IX-5 on the Antarctic environment, that all Antarctic activity is based on information adequate to ensure that informed judgements can be made about their environmental consequences.
