ANTARCTIC TREATY                     
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ               
ДЕВЯТОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
NEUVIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       
TRATADO ANTARTICO                   
NOVENA REUNION CONSULTATIVA         

LONDON                                

                                  AU-ATADD-3-BB-AQ-300

Agenda Item 3                       

ANT/IX/86                             
19 September 1977                    

OPENING STATEMENT BY DR J A HEAP     
DELEGATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM
573

Mr Chairman:

I would like to add my words of congratulations to those of
others on your élection to the Chair.
It gives me and our delegation particular pleasure to welcome
the Delegation of Foland to this meeting. We are grateful to them
for the help and co-operation that they have given us in the
procedures which led to their presence here.

I should like also to refer to the kind words of the Belgian
Delegation in referring to my predecessor in this position, Dr
Brian Roberts, whose wisdom I, for one, sorely miss. And perhaps
I might also refer to the thanks that I was given by the New Zealand
Delegation, but turn that into thanks to all the representatives of
Embassies and High Commissions in London who have been so very
helpful and forbearing during the preparations for this meeting.

For some time, Mr Chairman, it has been a commonplace thought
between us that the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
might turn out to be the most important since the Antarctic Treaty
Conference in 1959, where the foundations were laid for this unique
organisation. This thought has been very much in our minds
during the preparations for this meeting.

In the case of the two main items on our agenda, concerning
Antarctic resources, our task, I believe, is not to reach final
decisions but to lay the foundations for the conclusion of such
agreements in the future. To achieve this, however, we have to face
one fundamental issue. It relates, as previous delegations have
suggested, to the question of jurisdiction. Up to the present time,
Mr Chairman, we have for the most part taken the line that either
this question does not need to be resolved or perhaps that its
resolution is too difficult to contemplate.

This presence on our agenda of these resource issues does not
allow us to continue avoiding the question of jurisdiction in this
way any longer. We have to decide whether as partners in the
Antarctic Treaty we are in one boat, and if so, whether we can agree
530

on the necessity of rowing in one direction. In the view of the 
British Delegation we do not need at this meeting to reach a final 
destination. But we do need to decide on the destination we shall 
try to reach.

The question seems to us to be more important in connection 
with living resources than it is for mineral resources.

Fisheries activities have already begun in the Southern Ocean; 
operations to explore the practical problems of krill exploitation 
are under way. And several countries, including some from outside 
the Treaty forum have become active in this field. If we delay, 
we risk allowing the development of the same situation that occurred 
with the rapid expansion of whaling operations between the Wars, 
where massive investment had already been made before anyone had 
devised a regulatory framework in which rational exploitation could 
take place. I need not, I think, here refer to the consequences 
of that order of events.

We must not throw away our opportunity to ensure that the 
other marine living resources of the region are not so abused. 
Stocks must be conserved, both for the protection of the unique 
ecosystem and for the benefit of future generations.

The question of Antarctic mineral resources is, we think, 
of a slightly lower priority than that of marine living resources. 
But here, too, progress is needed. Exploitation of Antarctic minerals 
may not be imminent; no economically exploitable minerals have been 
found. But we should show that we are formulating a rational 
plan for the years leading up to the day, perhaps still decades 
distant, when those resources are needed.

In laying the foundations for future agreements on both 
living resources and mineral resources we need to ensure that we 
continue to take into account the interest of all mankind in the 
Antarctic in the same way as was done in the preamble to the 
Antarctic Treaty. We need to show to the outside world the fact 
that our special role in the administration of the Antarctic is 
neither selfish nor harmful to their interests.
53

There is an English proverb, Mr Chairman, that "a stitch in 
time saves nine." Translated into the context of this meeting we 
understand this proverb to mean that we should find solutions, or 
in the case of living and mineral resources, lay the foundations 
for those solutions, before our problems grow to unmanageable 
proportions.

Though we have much to do and only three weeks to do it in, 
the British Delegation is confident that we can achieve real 
agreement to row in the same boat, in the same direction, towards 
the same destination.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

ls
