AU-ATADD-4 -BB-AQ-282

ANTARCTIC TREATY                      
SPECIAL PREPARATORY MEETING                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                   REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                      
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ . ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ             TRATADO ANTARTICO
СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                  REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL

                                          1

PARIS 28 JUIN 1976

FINAL REPORT OF THE SPECIAL PREPARATORY MEETING FOR THE
NINTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

PARIS, 28 JUNE TO 10 JULY 1976

1.  In accordance with Recommendation VIII-14 of the Eighth
Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty, the representatives
of the Consultative Parties (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile,
France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Republic of South Africa,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America)
met in Paris from 28 June to 10 July 1976 to consider the subject
"Antarctic Resources - the Question of Mineral Resource Exploration
and Exploitation" in all its aspects in relation to the Treaty.

2.  The Meeting was officially opened by Mr. Bernard DESTREMAU,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

3.  Mr. Stéphane HESSEL, Minister Plenipotentiary (France),
was elected President and Mr. Patrick HENAULT, Counsellor at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, was elected Secretary-General.

4.  Opening statements were made by the Heads of all Delegations.
All the meetings were held in closed session.

5.  The Agenda presented to the Meeting was considered and, in
view of certain reservations, was accepted as a basis for discussion.
The Agenda so accepted is presented in Annex 1.

6.  The Meeting was not empowered to take decisions but was
to report to the Governments of the Consultative Parties in
order to facilitate preparation of the Ninth Consultative Meeting.
- 2 -                                                         2

7. The Meeting set up two Working Groups, together with select 
drafting groups. The Working Group on Scientific, Ecological,
Technical and Economic Aspects was chaired by Ambassador Juan
Carlos BELTRAMINO, representing Argentina, and Dr. Raymond GARROD,
member of the Australian Delegation, acted as rapporteur. The
Working Group on Legal and Political Aspects was chaired by
Ambassador Edvard HAMBRO, representing Norway, and Mr. Alfred van
der ESSEN, Minister Plenipotentiary, representing Belgium, acted
as rapporteur.

8. The conclusions reached by the Working Groups and the main
ideas and suggestions contained in the two reports unanimously
adopted by the Meeting and appended to this report may be used
in future work and, in accordance with Recommendation VIII-14,
will be submitted to the Ninth Consultative Meeting for conside-
ration in their deliberations.

9. The Meeting made a point of reaffirming the will of all Con-
sultative Parties fully to shoulder the responsibilities incumbent
upon them under the terms of the Antarctic Treaty and, for that pur-
pose, to prepare with special care the Ninth Consultative Meeting.
That meeting should have the necessary time to examine the whole
of its agenda.
ANNEX 1

Agenda of the Special Preparatory Meeting

1 Introduction by the Head of Delegation of the Host 
   Country.

2 General comments submitted by delegations.

3 Study (subject to the conclusions of SCAR) of the 
   problem of location and of the qualitative and 
   quantitative aspects of the mineral resources of 
   Antarctica, taking particular account of the 
   differences between the continent and the continental 
   shelf in this respect.

4 Study of the ecological consequences of any exploration 
   and exploitation of the mineral resources of the area 
   covered by the Treaty, including those resulting from 
   any "wild-cat" activities.

5 Economic effects and prospects for investigation and 
   exploitation of mineral resources, with special 
   reference to technological factors.

6 Study of compatibility with the Antarctic Treaty and 
   the Recommendations of the Consultative Meetings of 
   the Antarctic Treaty of any prospection or exploitation 
   of mineral resources carried out by States signatories 
   to the Treaty (or by companies under the jurisdiction 
   of such States) and by other States (or by companies 
   under their jurisdiction).

7 Study of whether or not it would be useful to establish 
   precise regulations concerning such activities, study 
   of the length of time required for the establishment 
   of such regulations and consideration of conservation 
   measures which might be proposed during the time 
   required to draw up such regulations.

8 Study of the compatibility of existing mining regula-
   tions in individual countries with any mining regula-
   tions designed for Antarctica.
- 2 -

9 Study of the problems raised for the States signatories to the Antarctic Treaty in connexion with exploration and exploitation of mineral resources by the control of the sea-bed envisaged by the Conference on the Law of the Sea.

10 Study of the problems which might be raised by the possible establishment of regulations on prospection and exploitation of the mineral resources of Antarctica (without prejudice to the decision taken as to the usefulness of establishing such regulations).
        - Who would draw up such regulations?
        - What form would the regulations take?
        - What would they cover?

11 Adoption of the general report of the meeting for submission to the Ninth Meeting of the Consultative Parties concerning prospection and exploitation of the mineral resources of Antarctica and, in the first place, the compatibility of such activities with the Antarctic Treaty and the Recommendations of the Consultative Meetings, together with any ecological consequences of such activities.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SPECIAL PREPARATORY MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ
СОВЕЩАНИЕ


TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL

PARIS 28 JUIN 1976                                  ANNEX 2

REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP CONSIDERING THE SCIENTIFIC, ECOLOGICAL,
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF EXPLORATION AND EXPLOITATION OF
THE MINERAL RESOURCES IN ANTARCTICA

INITIAL DISCUSSION :

Early in the meeting of the Working Group it was agreed
that the SCAR document "Antarctic Resources - Effects of
Mineral Exploration  (Document RPS-9), which was the preliminary
response by SCAR to Recommendation VIII-14, was a very useful
document and could form the basis of a significant part of the
Group's discussions.  In that context, delegations generally
expressed their warm appreciation of the assistance given to
the Consultative Parties by SCAR.

2. Since the terms of reference of the Working Group involved
a consideration of geological, ecological, technological and
economic aspects, the SCAR document and its recommendations and
conclusions were examined initially in the light of these factors.

GEOLOGICAL ASPECTS

3. Delegations agreed that the paper "Mineral occurrences
and mineral exploration in the Antarctic" prepared by the
SCAR Working Group on Geology, which was appended to the SCAR
document, was a useful contribution which confirmed that little
was known about the detailed nature of mineral resources in
Antarctica.  It was agreed that it would be necessary to pursue
efforts over several years to improve significantly our knowledge
in this field.
-2-
6

4. Without prejudice to the question of whether or not exploitation of Antarctic mineral resources might occur in the future, the Working Group agreed that there were indications of mineral resources in the Antarctic. In so far as any on-shore deposits are concerned, almost all the land mass is under a permanent ice sheet up to several thousand metres in depth. For this and other reasons it is unlikely that the greater part of deposits on land would be exploited for many years, if ever. The potential for exploiting off-shore hydrocarbons was viewed as somewhat less than favourable and the Working Group felt it could not be established whether and when such exploitation might become economically feasible.

ECOLOGICAL ASPECTS

5. A paper (RPS-6) from one of the delegations on the "Effects of Exploration and Exploitation of Mineral Resources on the Antarctic Environment" focused particularly on the negative effects of oil exploitation and the possible consequences in a very cold climate when biodegradation processes cease or are minimal.

6. All delegations agreed as to the vital importance of protecting the Antarctic environment and adjacent regions. Mention was made of the precautions already taken by some countries in the scientific Dry Valley Drilling Program.

TECHNOLOGICAL ASPECTS

7. In view of the specialized nature of this matter, it was recognized in discussion that technological aspects required detailed examination at a subsequent time (see paragraphs 17-20). Informative papers outlining current knowledge in various areas of minerals technology were tabled by one delegation for information purposes at different times during the Group's discussions (see paragraph 22).

8. The Working Group noted that there had been rapid development of technology for the exp[?]citation of hydrocarbon resources in deep water and under adverse conditions. The extent to which
- 3 -                                 7

these technologies were transferable to the special conditions of 
Antarctica and when, if ever, exploitation might become economically 
feasible could not be established.

ECONOMIC ASPECTS

9. Although the terms of reference for the group included a 
mandate to examine economic issues concerning mineral exploitation, 
with special reference to technological factors, the Group was 
unable to give attention to this matter. It was felt generally 
that in the absence of the background documentation and study there 
was little profit in exploring the subject apart from informal 
preliminary exchange of views.

SUGGESTED FURTHER TASKS FOR SCAR

10. It was agreed that there would be considerable merit in 
defining what further issues SCAR should be invited to study in 
relation to the protection of the environment in case mineral 
exploration and/or exploitation should occur in the Antarctic. 
Accordingly a drafting committee was established to prepare a 
paper on this matter for the consideration of the Working Group.

11. The Drafting Committee had before it as a basis for its 
considerations two working papers. A small sub-group was appointed 
to weld the two papers into a single document, which after 
discussion and some amendment was approved by the Working Group 
and became Conference Document RPS-8. Whilst the document 
deals essentially with the possible effects of any mineral 
exploitation in the future, the Group in its discussions agreed 
that environmental damage in relation to living resources 
should also receive special attention.

12. In submitting this document to Plenary, the Working Group 
has focused attention on the further tasks which it suggests 
SCAR should be invited to undertake in relation to assessment 
of the possible effects of mineral exploitation on the Antarctic 
environment. Other questions which arose during discussion, 
such as restraint on commercial exploitation pending the results 
of further scientific studies, were political and outside the
-4-                                                                 8

terms of reference of the Group.

13. The text of the document RPS-8 approved by the Working 
Group follows in paragraphs 14-16 below.

14. "The SCAR document 'Antarctic Resources - Effects of 
Mineral Exploration" (Conference Document No. RPS-9),
submitted by the Secretariat of SCAR to National Committees on
Antarctic Research for onward transmission to their Governments,
was welcomed by the Scientific Working Group as a helpful basis
for discussion and for continuing consideration by their
Governments.

15. The Working Group noted that the SCAR document was a
preliminary assessment of the possible effect on the Antarctic
environment if mineral exploration and/or exploitation were to
take place there and concluded that a more detailed assessment
based on existing knowledge should be undertaken for consideration
at the Ninth Consultative Meeting.

16. In this connexion the Working Group concluded that SCAR
should be invited through National Antarctic Committees to
consider at its Fourteenth General Meeting further action along
the following lines:

    (a) to continue, in accordance with Recommendation VIII-
14, paragraph 3 (ii), to co-ordinate national geological
and geophysical research programs in the Antarctic
Treaty area with the aim of obtaining fundamental
scientific data on the geological structure of Antarctica;

    (b) to make a more detailed assessment, in relation to
both on-shore and off-shore resources, of the extent
to which environmental characteristics specific to the
Antarctic required environmental protection measures
that would be significantly different from those
generally adopted in temperate regions;
-5-                                  9

(c) to draw up for the guidance of National Antarctic 
Committees a list of research projects, based on 
paragraphs 3 to 7 of the "Research Requirements" section 
of the SCAR document, the results of which would be 
beneficial to further refinement of the assessment 
contemplated in the preceding sub-paragraph;

(d) to comment in more detail on the sensitivity of the 
Antarctic to different forms of pollution if mineral 
exploration and/or exploitation were to occur there and 
to identify the reasons why some terrestrial and marine 
environments might require special protection;

(e) to assess the extent to which mineral exploration and/or 
exploitation, were it to occur in the Antarctic, might 
have an environmental impact beyond the Antarctic with 
special reference to adjacent regions."

TECHNOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

17. A delegation circulated a paper entitled "Establishment 
of Environment Protection Arrangements for Antarctica", (RPS-11) 
which appears as Attachment "A". and it was given some preliminary 
consideration.

18. Delegations considered that it would be desirable to 
study the impact that activities such as those listed below 
would have on the environment of the Antarctic Treaty area and 
on other dependent ecosystems, it being recognized that an 
adequate understanding of these matters would be one of the 
requirements for the preparation of specific measures for the 
protection of the Antarctic environment if mineral exploration 
and exploitation were to occur there :

    (a) seismic and other geophysical operations;

    (b) placement of temporary or permanent off-shore 
structures and equipment on the sea floor related 
to the exploration for or exploitation of mineral 
resources;
- 6 -

(c) drilling, storage, transportation and processing 
of mineral resources;

(d) techniques for the prevention of accidents and 
remedial and restorative techniques.

19. The Working Group suggested that the Governments of the 
Consultative Parties should study the possibility of including 
experts on their delegations for the IXth Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting in order to examine and report upon the 
questions listed in sub-paragraphs 18 (a) - (d) above. The 
examination of these questions should be arranged so as not 
to prejudice the normal work of that meeting.

20. The Working Group agreed that a detailed outline for this 
examination should be drawn up well in advance to facilitate 
the study of the impact on the Antarctic environment and its 
dependent ecosystems along the lines listed in sub-paragraphs 
18 (a) - (d).

21. Some doubts were expressed about the documents referred 
to in paragraph 17.

INFORMATION PAPERS

22. At various stages during the discussions "Information 
Papers" were submitted to the Working Group by one 
delegation to assist the Group. These papers, which were not 
discussed, were:

(i) "Ocean drilling and production technology" - 
Attachment B (RPS-7)

(ii) "Antarctic mineral resources" - Attachment C 
(RPS-10).
ANTARCTIC TREATY                              
SPECIAL PREPARATORY MEETING                                          
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                                                   
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ                                            
СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                                               


TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                                
REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE                                           
TRATADO ANTARTICO                                                       
REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL                                           

                        PARIS 28 JUIN 1976                              

                                  ANNEX A                               
                                  RPS-11                                

DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION                              

ESTABLISHMENT OF ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION ARRANGEMENTS FOR ANT?R?CTICA     

1.                                                                       
and its proper protection has long been accepted as a                    
basic responsibility of the Treaty Powers.  However the                  
present Agreed Measures are not sufficient to protect the                
environment from the effects of resources exploitation.  The             
Specially Protected Areas (SPA's) and Sites of.Special                    
Scientific Interest (SSSI's) do not necessarily cover all                 
areas requiring full protection.  The areas outside the                  
SPA's and SSSI's are not satisfactorily protected from the                
disturbances which might arise from exploration and                       
exploitation activities.                                                 

2.                                                                       
With the likelihood of greater activity in the                           
region, in particular exploration for and exploitation                   
of mineral resources, it is now necessary to initiate the                
consideration of wider arrangements for protection of the                
Antarctic environment.  The task might be considered at                  
two levels namely                                                        

    (a)    the mechanism for and the means of ensuring                   
           that broad knowledge on the Antarctic                          
           environment is available to all concerned, and                
    (b)    assessment, regulation and monitoring of the                  
           environmental impacts of specific proposals.                  

3.                                                                       
Much work of a background nature has alre??y been                        
undertaken by the Consultative Parties on (a) but more is                
required if broed scale management plans are to be developed.            
SCAR has been the focus of scientific advice and has                     
offered continuing assistance, which the technical working               
- 2 be        12

Group has recommended be taken up.

4.      These continuing basic scientific studies provide 
the foundation upon which overall environmental protection 
arrangements may be built.  However such arrangements call 
for data resources, planning capabilities, management and 
administrative functions that are not presently available.

Some of the more important functions to be covered might 
be

(a)     the development and harmonisation of regional 
environmental studies and management plans

(b)     the prompt servicing of the interests of 
treaty members individually and collectively

(c)     the provision of information to interested 
third parties and undertaking liaison as 
appropriate with other international environmental 
organisations.

5.      There are a number of options for providing this 
capability; e.g. one would be a standing technical 
secretariat to the Treaty Powers.

6.      With respect to the administration of the 
environmental impacts of individual proposals one is 
entering into areas of more specific legal (or contractual) 
arrangements as distinct from the wider data gathering and 
information activities so far discussed.  The relationship 
is one between proponents wishing to undertake an activity, 
such as mineral exploration, and the appropriate administering 
authority.  This is a normal relationship within most 
countries.

7.      In Antarctica one is faced with a similar 
situation to that faced in other continents or major 
sub-continental areas where it is highly desirable to have 
harmonisation of environmental standards and criteria as
- 3 -                                          13

between different environmental administering authorities 
to minimise conflict and uncertainties for proponents.
Thus the preparation of such environmental standards and 
criteria might well be an additional function of the 
coordinating group discussed in paragraphs 4 and 5.

8.      Within the framework of such standards and criteria 
it would be possible to set out suitable administrative 
procedures as would apply between the appropriate administer-
ing authority and any proponent.  The process of preparation 
and assessment of the environmental impact statement as has 
been commended by international agencies, would be a suitable 
mechanism (see attachment).

9.      The concepts outlined in paragraphs 5 to 8 might 
well be taken up by the Legal and Political Working Group.
The drafting of the general environmental administrative 
framework for Antarctica could be an appropriate task for 
a group of governmental experts meeting as soon as 
convenient.
ATTACHMENT
                                          14

INDICATIVE PROCEDURES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN ANTARCTICA

1.      Detailed environmental statements should be prepared
by the proponent prior to any exploration or exploitation
operations. Statement should supply sufficient data to
ensure that any exploration or exploitation proceeds only
after a full assessment of its potential environmental impact
and appropriate approval conditions have been determined.

2.      The impact statement should

        (i)     examine the suitability and reliability for
Antarctic conditions of any proposed
process or equipment, including environmental
protection mechanisms.

        (ii)    be sufficient to

                (a)     identify significant breeding, nesting,
feeding, roosting, pupping and haulout
areas of native birds and seals.

                (b)     identify significant areas of flora
including micro-flora and micro-fauna,
and lakes of significant scientific value.

                (c)     identify the physical characteristics
of the area likely to influence or be
influenced by the activity.

                (d)     establish those areas in which disturbance
of any kind is totally prohibited.

                (e)     establish whether any special
environmental protection conditions
should be applied to any activity.
15

(iii)    Emission of solid, liquid, gaseous, or aerosol 
pollutants, by-products, wastes or waste heat 
into the atmosphere or water should be strictly 
controlled within defined limits.

(iv)   Disposal of wastes, both onshore and offshore, 
should be strictly controlled within defined 
limits such that:

        (a)     no areas of particular environmental value 
                are polluted by any waste matter.

        (b)     disposal areas are confined.

        (c)     volume of waste material is minimised.

        (d)     toxic and noxious wastes are removed from 
                the Treaty area or treated in an approved 
                fashion.

3.      All specifications for limits such as those of 
acceptable emission levels, noise levels, waste control 
procedures and times when human entry is permitted into 
significant areas, should be set by the assessment of the 
environmental impact or some other means, within a code 
established by the Treaty parties.

                RESTORATION

4.      After exploitation is completed, the area affected 
should be restored where required to approximate the original 
conditions as nearly as possible.
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SPECIAL PREPARATORY MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ
СОВЕЩАНИЕ





PARIS 28 JUIN 1976

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL

                                  16

ANNEX B
RPS - 7

DOCUMENT SUBMITTED BY
THE DELEGATION OF
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

OCEAN DRILLING AND PRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY

NOTE : This paper was prepared in 1974 by the
National Petroleum Council (NPC), an official
advisory body to the United States Government,
composed of representatives of the petroleum
industry. NPC reports are normally produced by
panels of experts from industry. This report
was reviewed by industry experts in the spring
of 1976 and is still considered valid. Although
the technology described is for use in ocean
areas in general, some of it could be appropriated
for Antarctic purposes.

1976
17

OCEAN DRILLING AND PRODUCTION TECHNOLOGY

In the five years since the NPC 1969 report entitled Petroleum Resources Under the Ocean Floor was completed, much progress has been made in offshore drilling and production technology. Substantial, active and growing offshore petroleum industries now exist on all of the six inhabited continents. Offshore construction, operating and support facilities have sprung up all over the world. In addition to the larger organizations involved, numerous smaller, specialized and highly technically oriented enterprises have been established. As a result, there is a very large worldwide base of technical expertise and competence.

Progress has been made in technology over a wide spectrum of operating conditions. More important, industry has demonstrated the ability to continue to extend its operational capabilities at a rapid rate. New developments appear to be imminent in several areas of drilling and production technology.

Petroleum search and recovery operations fall into a number of phases. First, geological and geophysical surveys are conducted to identify areas favorable for accumulation of hydrocarbons in the earth's sedimentary rock strata. Next, "exploratory" wells must be drilled to determine the actual presence of oil or gas. Offshore drilling equipment used for exploratory wells must be moved frequently and hence typically is mounted on a ship or other movable structure. Development wells used to extract from a reservoir its contained oil or gas are typically drilled from fixed platforms which also serve as sites for the installation of production equipment. Production equipment includes devices to control and measure fluids produced, vessels to separate gas from the hydrocarbon liquids and treaters to remove water and impurities. Storage tanks and pumping or compressing facilities must also be provided.

Present and prospective technological capabilities in various phases of offshore operations are briefly discussed. For convenient reference, Appendix C presents a summary of present and projected water depth drilling and production capabilities for various North American offshore areas. This is somewhat less optimistic than was forecast in the 1969 NPC report, due in part to industry's efforts to develop the many shallow water discoveries which have been made around the world in the past five years.

Offshore Drilling Technology

The JOIDES project, noted earlier, has conducted exploratory drilling in the deep ocean for the purpose of sampling the crust and oceanic sediments where the water depth was 6,207 meters (20,355 feet), and holes have been reentered where water depths are 5,757 meters (18,888 feet).

Petroleum exploration and development drilling operations, beside needing reentry capability, require a means of controlling well pressure and assuring the return of the drilling mud or other
5
18

fluids to the drilling rig. This is accomplished by means of a 
tubular connection between the rig and the ocean floor called a 
"riser." Drill pipe runs through the riser into the well bore 
and drilling mud returns from the well bore to the rig through 
the riser. Pressure control lines for remote operation of blowout 
preventers at the ocean floor are an integral part of the riser. The 
risers must be kept in tension to compensate for wave and current forcs 
along with mud weight loading and other forces which can induce 
undesirable high-binding stresses and cause helical buckling. Con-
ventional devices can be employed for this purpose to water depths 
of about 300 meters (990 feet) to 450 meters (1,485 feet). Below 
this depth, buoyant sections must be used to reduce peak working 
stress levels in the riser.

Significant improvement in the development of riser systems has 
occurred within the past five years and one system is currently 
being used in about 650 meters (2,145 feet) depth and has a water 
depth capability of more than 1,000 meters (3,281 feet). Riser 
systems capable of use in up to 1,800 meters (5,906 feet) water 
depths are on order and are currently being designed. This, however, 
is by no means the maximum limitation. Blowout preventers and con-
trol systems have been designed and tested for use in water depths 
of about 3,000 meters (9,900 feet). Mobile drilling vessel position-
ing systems have also been significantly improved. Mooring systems 
currently having a capability to 1,000 meters (3,281 feet) water 
depths have been designed, and capability to dynamically position 
drilling vessels at water depths in excess of 6,000 meters (19,686 
feet) has been demonstrated.

Platforms

Conventional or "fixed" platforms offer the best solution to 
offshore development drilling and producing operations where water 
depths and climatic conditions permit their use. Although platforms 
have not yet been installed in water depths exceeding 150 meters 
(495 feet), engineering and planning have been completed for in-
stallations intended for water depths of over 300 meters (990 feet). 
Current technology suggests that fixed platforms could be employed 
in waters as deep as 450 meters (1,485 feet). Other types of 
structures are being designed or tested for greater water depths. 
Among these the buoyant or bottom-anchored platform, sometimes 
called the "tension leg" platform, has been tested in Europe and 
another of somewhat different design will soon be tested in off-
shore California waters.

Other variations include the so-called articulated design and 
the guyed tower. These appear to be applicable in water depths 
of 600 meters (1,969 feet) to 1,000 meters (3,281 feet) or more.

A recent development is the concrete "gravity" bottom-founded 
platform which rests upon and depends on the sea floor for most or 
all of its support. Five of these are being constructed for 
installations in the North Sea at depths to 140 meters (459 feet). 
While these platforms may see wide usage, they will probably be 
confined to relatively shallow water.
Offshore Capability: The Polar Seas.                                  19

Part of the ocean floor potentially productive of oil and gas 
occurs under the polar seas. In these areas, ice poses special 
problems to petroleum operations. Nevertheless, the problems do 
not appear insurmountable. In the shallow margins of the Beaufort 
Sea, wells have been drilled from artificial islands composed of 
gravel and ice. Two other exploratory wells have been drilled 
from specially prepared ice islands.

Pipe-laying technology is being developed and improved, and 
specific design studies are under way for a pipeline to bring 
Canadian arctic gas to market. A newly announced French drilling 
rig is designed to withstand flow ice, and a feasibility study 
underway contemplates the use of a combination drill ship/ice breaker 
with two support vessels. Consideration has also been given to 
the protection of ocean floor wellhead, production and pipeline 
installations from icebergs, and viable solutions appear possible.

Subsea Production Systems

A number of subsea production systems adapted to deepwater 
applications are being developed. Conventional subsea installations 
presently require the use of divers and are limited to relatively 
shallow water application. Some of the new systems utilize sub-
mersibles for installation and maintenance. Others are remotely 
controlled. Another system under development is being designed 
to use either divers or remote control, depending upon water depth. 
Two of these systems are being tested for water depths of 360 meters 
(1,181 feet), and either of these should be ready for use at about 
1,000 meters (3,281 feet) water depths within five years. One 
system is currently under test in a water depth of 114 meters (376 
feet). This system is intended for use in about 350 meters (1,155 
feet) of water and can be modified for about 1,000 meters (3,300 feet 
depth today with respect to wellhead and manifold center. Further 
work on the separation and pump station for greater depths is in 
the design stage at present. It is expected that 1,000 meter (3,281 
feet) water depth capability will be developed within five years. 
Another system is designed to be assembled and operated by a re-
motely controlled manipulator system. A test of this 600 meter 
(1,969 feet) water depth capacity installation is to be made in 
the Gulf of Mexico in about 50 meters (165 feet) of water this 
summer. Its depth capability is expected to extend ultimately 
well beyond 1,000 meters (3,281 feet). Another system, which 
incorporates a wellhead hemisphere and work chamber designed 
initially for 300 meters (984 feet) water depth is expected to be 
ready for testing in the North Sea during 1975.

These developments indicate that systems can be designed for 
use in increasingly deeper waters as demand for them develops.

Storage and Transportation

Pipeline, storage and off-loading capability may present the 
most difficult problems to solve in the production of deep-sea 
7
20

petroleum resources. However, submarine pipelines have been laid 
for distances of several hundred miles, and currently a project 
is underway to develop techniques for laying large-diameter lines in 
1,000 meters (3,281 feet) water depth. Research and testing are 
underway on several approaches to the laying of pipe in 2,000 meters 
(6,562 feet) water depth or greater, and other approaches are under 
consideration. In addition, two underwater pipeline maintenance 
units have been designed.

Where sea bottom conditions permit and within reasonable depths 
platforms resting upon the seabed provide a solution to the 
petroleum storage problem. Several units now in service provide 
capacities of up to 1 million barrels each. Where conditions for 
either platforms or pipelines are not suitable, buoyant structures 
incorporating off-loading capabilities are required.
21

APPENDIX C

PRESENT AND FUTURE WATER DEPTH CAPABILITIES AND EARLIEST DATES FOR
EXPLORATION DRILLING AND PRODUCTION FOR OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF AREAS

Area/Province                    Maximum Water Depth Capabilities              Earliest Dates
                                 Exploration Drilling*         Production          Exploration Drilling     Productiont

1. North Atlantic                At present, jack-ups 300 - 350               At present, fixed platforms   Now                  Fixed 24 well platform in
                                 feet. Drillships and semi-sub-               600 feet. Under water com-   pletion 4 to 5 years after   600 feet ready for produc-
                                 mersibles 1,000 - 1,500 feet.                pletions (UWC) 1,200 - 1,500   field discovery and delinea- tion. Pipelines or barges re-
                                 Sedco 445 type drillships                    feet. In the future, platform   tion.                        quired for production.
                                 (dynamically positioned) cap-               capability 1,000 feet by 1979 -
                                 able 2,600 - 3,000 feet. In                  1980 UWC 3,600 feet by
                                 the future, forecast capabili-               1978 - 1980.
                                 ties up to 6,000 feet by 1980.

2. Middle Atlantic               Same as North Atlantic                       At present, fixed platforms   Now                  Same as North Atlantic
                                                                  800 feet. UWC 1,200 - 1,500
                                                                  feet. In the future, platform
                                                                  capability 1,600 feet by 1979 -
                                                                  1980. UWC 3,600 feet by
                                                                  1979 - 1980.

3. South Atlantic                Same as North Atlantic                       At present, fixed 24 well     Now                  Same as North Atlantic
                                                                  platform in 400 feet ready
                                                                  for production 3 to 4 years
                                                                  after field discovery and de-
                                                                  lineation. Fixed 60 well
                                                                  platform in 1,000 feet
                                                                  ready for production 6 to
                                                                  8 years after field discov-
                                                                  ery and delineation. In
                                                                  the future, production
                                                                  from UWC in 1,000 - 3,000
                                                                  feet by mid-1980's be-
                                                                  cause of special treating fa-
                                                                  cilities required, sour (H S)
                                                                  hydrocarbon production in
                                                                  Area 4 may add 1 to 7 years.

4. East Gulf                     Same as North Atlantic                       Same as Middle Atlantic       Now

5. Central Gulf                                                                      
6. West Gulf                    

7. Southern Cal.                 Same as North Atlantic                       For Areas 7 and 8, same as    Now                  For Areas 7 and 8, same as
Borderland                                                                               Gulf of Mexico. For Areas                                Gulf of Mexico. For Areas
8. Santa Barbara                                                                 9 and 10, same as North                                  9 and 10, same as North
9. North & Central Cal.                                                                  Atlantic. Earthquake                                     Atlantic. Earthquake
10. Washington - Oregon                                                                 zones require special sur-                               zones require special sur-
                                                                                         veys and engineering con-                               veys and engineering con-
                                                                                         siderations.                                             siderations.

11. Cook Inlet                   Jack-ups 300 - 350 feet.                     Platforms 600 feet for ice-   Now                  At present, fixed 24 well
Shelf                            Drillships and semi-                        free areas. For seasonal         platform for ice free areas   platform in 600 feet ready
                                 submersibles 1,200 -                         ice areas such as Bristol Bay    in 600 feet ready for pro-   for production 4 1/2 to 5
                                 1,500 feet.                                  and Lower Cook Inlet, plat-      duction 4 1/2 to 5 years af- years after field discovery
                                                                  forms to 200 feet feasible.      ter field discovery and de- and delineation; in 200 feet
                                                                                                   lineation; in 200 feet ready   ready for production 4 to 5
                                                                                                   for production 4 to 5 years.   years. Earthquake zones re-
                                                                                                   Earthquake zones require        quire special surveys and en-
                                                                                                   special surveys and engin-      gineering considerations that
                                                                                                   eering considerations that      could cause delays. Subsea
                                                                                                   could cause delays. Subsea      UVC could extend depth 100 -
                                                                                                   UVC could extend depth           200 feet in most areas. In
                                                                                                   100 - 200 feet in most areas.    the future, production in
                                                                                                   In the future, production       1,500 feet feasible 1980 -
                                                                                                   in ice-free areas in 1,500      1985. Production
ANTARCTIC TREATY
SPECIAL PREPARATORY MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
СПЕЦИАЛЬНОЕ ПРИГОТОВИТЕЛЬНОЕ
СОВЕЩАНИЕ                                       TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                 REUNION PREPARATOIRE SPECIALE
                                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                 REUNION PREPARATORIA ESPECIAL

PARIS 28 JUIN 1976

ANNEX C
RPS - 10


ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES

Document presented by the
United States Delegation


This informal assessment was prepared for
internal use within the U.S. Government.
It brings together information from a
variety of sources. Comments would be
welcome.

1976
23

ANTARCTIC MINERAL RESOURCES

1. Summary and Conclusions

a. Land Areas

Geological theory and scientific findings indicate 
a strong likelihood that significant deposits of hard 
minerals are present in the Antarctic land mass, but a 
small likelihood that this is true for petroleum.  Although 
hard mineral occurrences have been discovered, the mag-
nitude and quality of the occurrences have not been determined,
so they should not be thought of as mineral resources.  In 
addition, the economics of exploration, extracticn, and 
transportation in the land areas are such that no industrial 
exploitation of most hard minerals appears likely in the 
foreseeable future.  It is possible that if large high-
grade deposits of rocks containing high value metals such as 
platinum or chromium were discovered in relatively accessible 
areas, it might be economically feasible to exploit them.  
Among the mincial occurrences discovered, only iron and 
coal have actually been found in quantity.  However, the 
low grade and remote location of the iron and coal have 
made exploitation economically unfeasible, even in the 
case of coal for local use.

b. Offshore Areas

(1) Manganese Nodules.  The valuable metal content 
of manganese nodules declines progressively with distance 
from the equator, and those on the Antarctic seabed have 
significantly less valuable metal content than nodules 
found elsewhere.  They are considered, therefore, not to 
be of commercial interest for the foreseeable future.

(2) Hydrocarbons.  Interpretation of the geologic 
and geophysical data so far accumulated indicates a good 
probability that quantities of oil or gas or both are 
present in the Antarctic continental shelf.  At the same 
time, these data are insufficient to establish the prob-
abilities of occurrence of economically recoverable 
deposits of petroleum.  The combination of water depth, 
ice conditicus, severe weather, transportation costs, and 
short annual working time imply production costs of such 
magnitude that other areas will be more attractive to 
industrial exploitation for some time, given current 
assumptions on the economics of hydrocarbon development.
Industrial mineral resource activities that normally 
precede industrial exploitation could commence at 
almost any time with little forewarning.

2. Stage of Antarctic Mineral Resource Development

No significant steps have been taken in Antarctica 
to develop its mineral resources, although the geologic 
and geophysical studies so far carried out will be useful 
to such an effort. The various papers on mineral resources 
(Potter, 1969; Nansen Conference report, 1973; Wright 
and Williams, 1974; Splettstoesser, 1975) have been treat-
ments of existing knowledge of mineral resources. They 
have not addressed the problem of the magnitude, character, 
and regional location of any of the undiscovered mineral 
resources. The data and analyses available from the basic 
research programs are insufficient for a reliable resource 
assessment.

3. Onshore Mineral Resources in Antarctica

Minerals of possible commercial interest in the Antarctic 
land mass may include hard minerals, coal, and petroleum. 
A number of general considerations appear to reduce the 
likelihood that the Antarctic land mass will be considered 
an area of interest for most types of commercial mineral 
activity in the foreseeable future. First, approximately 
98 percent of the land mass is covered by a permanent 
ice sheet of varying depth. While this still leaves a 
substantial area ice-free and it is in these areas that 
mineral occurrences have been noted, by and large the 
technical difficulties and expense of overland transport 
through the surrounding ice and snow to possible ports of 
export could be immense. Second, it is generally agreed 
among geologists that there is little likelihood of petro-
leum deposits on the land mass, which reduces the potential 
finds to hard minerals. However, virtually all hard min-
eral production requires large quantities of fresh water, 
and to keep it liquid in the Antarctic during processing 
would, of course, place a greater processing expense on 
such operations than in most other mineral-producing 
regions. Third, current experience in land-based mining 
in Northern Canada indicates that it may be difficult to 
obtain or to keep an adequate labor force at a reasonably 
competitive wage scale.

The following statement of the Technical Working Group 
of the Expert Meeting on Antarctic Resources, which was 
held in Oslo in June 1973 under the auspices of the Nansen 
Foundation, is also of interest in connection with the 
assessment of the relative economic potential of the 
Antarctic land mass:
25

"In relation to the land area it was noted that, 
although there have been a large number of mineral 
occurrences in the Antarctic, none of these appeared 
likely to be commercially attractive within the 
present century.  The Working Group had available 
to them less geological and geophysical information 
about the continental shelf area than about the land 
area.  An opinion was expressed, however, that the 
continental shelf is inherently more accessible to 
investigation."

Despite the foregoing pessimistic appraisal, it may 
nevertheless be desirable to consider the possible develop-
ment of deposits for particular minerals of outstanding 
interest, discussed below.

4.  Overview of Specific Onshore Minerals

Occurrences have been noted by scientific expeditions 
of the following:

                                  Nonmetals
Metals                            Coal           
Beryl             Manganese        Graphite       
Chromium          Molybdenum       Marble         
Cobalt            Nickel           Mica           
Copper            Platinum         Optical quartz
Gold              Silver           Phosphate rock 
Iron              Tin              Sand and gravel
                  Uranium          

The U. S. Geological Survey has published a compilation 
and analysis of reports of Antarctic minerals (Circular 705).  
The mineral occurrences are described in this circular as 
". . . occurrences that could constitute a resource if 
present in sufficient quantity but that have not been 
studied adequately to determine quantity."  In terms of 
likelihood of discovery, the report states that the best 
discovery probability in any part of Antarctica is in the 
Andean orogen, where it is estimated to be 0.075 ( 75 chances 
in 1000).  Should advances in technology permit a cheaper, 
more precise search through the ice, exploration might be 
more effective in the future.  Prediction of such advances, 
however, is purely speculative.  Two metals appear of 
notable interest: chromium and platinum.  In addition to 
these, there is strong current interest in manganese nodules 
from the deep seabed, and the energy minerals, coal and 
petroleum.  Each of these minerals is discussed below.

a. Chromium and Platinum

The Dufek intrusive complex is one of the world's
largest layered complexes. Other such complexes are the 
Bushveld in South Africa and the Sudbury in Ontario, both 
of which rank among the most valuable mineral districts in 
the world. It is possible that the Dufek intrusive complex 
is also highly mineralized, although available data are in-
adequate to make an accurate appraisal of its potential. 
If it is mineralized it should contain deposits of platinum 
nickel, copper, and chromium. Platinum and chromium in 
particular would be of interest as they are relatively 
scarce world wide resources.

The mineral chromite is essential as refractory 
linings of high temperature furnaces, and for the produc-
tion of chromium metal, which is used as a steel-alloying 
element or a corrosion-resistant plating. All known 
chromium ores are mixtures of chromite and other minerals, 
and generally must be concentrated through flotation or 
other processes using fresh water before being marketed. 
Any activity requiring large quantities of fresh water 
in the Antarctic would be highly energy-intensive and not 
competitive in this respect with current sources of 
chromite.

Platinum is essential in many industrial processes as 
a catalyst. Recently, platinum and associated platinum 
group metals have seen an expansion of demand for catalytic 
converters on automobile engines.

b. Coal

According to the Geological Survey, coal deposits are 
known at many places around the perimeter of East Antarctica. 
Available information, although by no means conclusive, 
suggests that coalbeds are present from coast to coast under 
most of the great central ice mass. The Geological Survey 
suggests that the known Antarctic coal deposits could 
perhaps bc used locally for heating and power production. 
However, this has not been done to date, and there has been 
no evidence of commercial interest in these deposits, nor 
is there likely to be as the value of coal is too low to 
consider for export from Antarctica.
27

c. Land-based Oil and Gas

U. S. Geological Survey Circular 705 states:

"The onshore part of Antarctica, for all practical 
purposes, can be eliminated from a discussion of 
petroleum resources, although large basins have 
been inferred by geophysical sounds '(for example, 
Wilkes basin and Polar basin). The land is 
covered by a very thick cap of ice that is in 
large part moving, and the sedimentary rocks that 
do stick out through the ice are largely meta-
morphosed, highly fractured, and intruded by 
igneous rocks. These conditions are not con-
ducive to the preservation of oil and gas."

5. Offshore Mineral Resources

a. Manganese Nodules

The only hard mineral identified as potentially 
mineable offshore in the Antarctic consists of manganese 
nodules. With respect to this mineral, Wright and Williams 
(U. S. Geological Survey Circular 705) state:

"Nodules that accumulate near the equator are metal-
rich, whereas those that accumulate farther from the 
equator are leaner in metals. For this reason, the 
manganese nodules of the Antarctic environment repre-
sent the least desirable segment of the nodule re-
sources of the oceans. This is not to say, however, 
that they could not be considered for mining at some 
later date."

This opinion conforms to those of representatives of 
the companies known to be interested in harvesting manga-
nese nodules. The area of current interest is generally 
stated as the Pacific Ocean near the equator. Considering 
the greater distance and more more limited access to the 
Antarctic waters, because of the presence of ice, the 
above-quoted statement and conclusions appear reasonable.

6. Offshore Oil and Gas

As in the case of neighboring continents, the Antarctic 
continental shelf may be expect to be made up in part by 
thick, unmetamorphosec sedimentary rocks. This is confirmed 
by the fragmentary data so far collected by marine geologic 
surveys.
28

Several years ago methane and ethane were encountered 
in stratigraphic drilling in the Antarctic continental 
shelf under the Ross Sea. However, the information from 
various scientific projects studying the geologic origins 
of Antarctica, as well as some geophysical surveys, is 
insufficient to determine the existence of hydrocarbons 
in commercially interesting quantities. The necessary 
seismic, magnetic, and gravity tests have not been run. 
Such tests would have to be done before any drilling would 
be justified to test areas of promise. Lacking this work, 
assessments can be derived from public information generated 
by scientific research in the area, and would necessarily 
reflect a conservative view of resource potential so as 
not to raise unrealistic hopes as to resource potential 
or industry capacity to produce in the area.

Given the dearth of information on the area, any 
numerical estimates would be considered only as order of 
magnitude guesses and not as hard figures without further 
research. Specific evaluation will have to await results 
of extensive seismic, magnetic, and gravity surveys to 
determine the location of possible oil-bearing structures. 
Following that, exploratory drilling would be necessary 
before a decision could be taken concerning commercial 
production opportunities.

With these caveats in mind, it appears that the Antarctic 
continental shelf could contain potentially recoverable oil 
in the order of magnitude of tens of billions of barrels, 
but it is less likely that no potentially recoverable 
resources occur or that even larger amounts exist. The 
most prospective areas indicated by present knowledge are 
the Mesozoic section of the Weddell Sea Basin, the Cenozoic 
portions of the Ross Sea Basin, the basin underlying the 
Amery Ice Shelf, the Bellingshausen Sea, and the Scotia Sea.

Weddell Sea

Geological characteristics of the Weddell Sea continental 
shelf are little known, but possibly can be inferred from 
nearby on-land exposures. Folded Paleozoic sediments of 
great thickness occur in the Pensacola and Ellsworth 
Mountains, and great thicknesses of folded Paleozoic(?)- 
Mesozoic marine sediments make up the 1,500 km-long Antarc- 
tic Peninsula adjoining the western part of the sea. On 
James Ross Island, 5,000 m of Upper Cretaceous continental 
to marine clastic sediments are exposed and are overlain 
by a thick Tertiary sequence. This section contains good 
reservoir and cap rocks as well as shales that might be 
good source rocks. Slight folding might provide structural
traps. Upper Cretaceous continental to marine clastic 
sediments may underlie much of the shelf.

Water depths over the Weddell Sea continental shelf 
are not well-known because of the difficulty of ship 
access.  Nevertheless, depths over nearly all of the 
shelf are believed to range from 600 to 1500 feet.  The 
permanent ice pack extends over most of this area to beyond 
the 3000 feet depth line.  The only exceptions are narrow 
belts along the coasts of Coats Land and near the tip of the 
Antarctic Peninsula where some open water forms in February.

Ross Sea

The Ross Sea continental shelf is underlain mostly by 
glacio-marine sediments of Oligocene to Holocene age.  
This section, which is about 5,000 feet thick, contains some 
permeable sandy horizons.  Broad folds occur and may provide 
structural traps.  Showings of methane were obtained from 
three of the four drill holes in the central part of the 
sea and near McMurdo Sound, and ethane was obtained in one 
drill hole; however, the significance of these gas shows 
is not known, and they do not necessarily indicate the 
presence of larger amounts of hydrocarbon.  Basement 
materials below the Tertiary section are poorly known, 
having been sampled at only one site where they are 
crystalline metamorphic rocks.  Elsewhere, older sediments 
similar to those in the nearby Transantarctic Mountains 
may occur.  Sedimentary sections of great thickness and 
ranging in age from late Precambrian to Mesozoic charac-
terize the mountain area, but no hydrocarbon occurrences 
are known or expected there.

Most of the continental shelf in the Ross Sea has water 
depths between 600 and 3,000 feet.  Only very small areas 
are shallower than 600 feet, and less than half is shallower 
than 1,500 feet.  Although the entire sea is covered by 
pack ice throughout most of the year, open water forms over 
most of the area for a month or more during summer.  Even 
the discontinuous pack ice is typically present in a belt 
separating the ice-free area from the open sea, and icebergs 
remain a problem in the entire area.  Furthermore, surface 
currents would put strong pressure on any surface installa-
tions that did not move with the ice.

Bellingshausen Sea

The sea is normally covered by pack ice for the entire 
year except for a narrow band along the coast (Ellsworth 
Land) that is ice-free, or nearly so, in February.  The 
depth over the shelf is almost exclusively between 600 and 
3,000 feet.
30

Tertiary sediments similar to those of the Ross Sea area 
can be expected to underlie the continental shelf of the 
Bellingshausen Sea. Drilling to date has penetrated only 
about 700 feet of Pliocene and younger clay and silty 
clay offshore from Thurston Island and 2,000 feet of 
Oligocene to Pliocene terrigenous clastic sediments 
offshore from the Antarctic Peninsula.  No gaseous hydro-
carbons were apparent in the cores.  The geology of onshore 
regions includes mainly Mesozoic and Tertiary and sedimentary 
and volcanic materials similar to those of the South American 
Andes.

Scotia Sea

Only a small part of the southern end of this sea is 
south of 60°s. The marine geology of the Scotia Sea is 
very poorly known, in large part probably due to the 
typically inclement weather and heavy seas. Weather forced 
early abandonment of :he one attempted drill hole. The 
geology of continental shelf areas is probably similar to 
that of the Bellingshausen Sea.

Amery Ice Shelf

The Amery Ice Shelf is partially restricted to a fjord. 
Seismic data indicate the presence of 3,500 meters of 
sediments. Onshore outcrops include 500 meters of Permian 
sandstones.  This section of Antarctica is analagous to 
the coastal basins of India, West Africa, and Brazil.  The 
presence of reefoidal limestones and black shales indicates 
the possibility of oil source rocks.

While a relatively narrow zone of pack ice remains along 
the coast adjacent to the Amery Ice Shelf during the warmest 
two to three months, much of this East Antarctica Continental 
Shelf has ice conditions that are considerably less difficult 
than in the areas discussed previously.  A few shore areas 
become completely open to the sea for a short period, and 
in some other areas the pack ice margin retreats shoreward 
of the 1,500 feet depth line.
