ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                    SEOUL
                                    May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 119
May 18, 1995
Original: English

STATEMENT BY IUCN TO XIX ATCM

Agenda Items 7 a and c

(Submitted by IUCN)

We enclose a copy of our statement. We are sorry that, because of limited availability, we can 
only provide one copy for each delegation.
Statement By IUCN - The World Conservation Union
To XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting (ATCM)
from 8 to 19 May, 1995
Seoul, Republic of Korea
The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 is commonly regarded as one of the most successful international regimes of recent decades. Based upon four simple concepts, namely the "freezing" of territorial claims, international scientific cooperation, conservation of the Antarctic environment and demilitarisation of the region, the Treaty has proven capable of adaptation to meet new needs and circumstances. Nothing could better illustrate this point than the rapid negotiation between 1989 and 1991 of the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, commonly known as the Madrid Protocol. Yet the existence of this document is a salutary reminder that the management of Antarctica is an ongoing requirement and that a substantial agenda of issues remain to be addressed.

To assist this process IUCN -- The World Conservation Union, has established an Antarctic Advisory Committee, charged with a number of functions identified at the 19th Session of the General Assembly of IUCN, held at Buenos Aires, Argentina, from 12-26 January 1994. The programme endorsed by the 1994 General Assembly is attached as Annex A. The wider policies of IUCN in Antarctica were the subject of two separate resolutions of the General Assembly, one dealing with conservation in Antarctica itself and the other with Sub Antarctic Islands. These are at Annexes B and C.

Amongst the priorities agreed in the IUCN Programme for 1994 - 1996 were the following:

(a)    the need to promote rapid ratification of the Madrid Protocol;

(b)    the need for IUCN to network its extensive expertise on environmental affairs and protected areas, to help establish and improve a comprehensive environmental protection regime for Antarctica;

(c)    to assist in developing a more comprehensive and systematic approach to protected area management within the Treaty region;

(d)    to encourage establishment of an effective environmental monitoring programme in Antarctica, with special emphasis on cumulative human impacts, including tourism activities; and

(e)    to provide appropriate legal and other advice during negotiation of a liability annex to the Madrid Protocol.

It is in response to this agenda that IUCN now makes the following observations about matters to be discussed at the 19th ATCM in Seoul, Republic of Korea, May 1995:

1.      Ratification of the Madrid Protocol:

Although some of the Antarctic Treaty nations have commenced implementation of provisions of the Madrid Protocol (the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty), the need for formal ratification of the agreement remains a matter of urgency, in order that the instrument becomes legally binding. IUCN urges more focused attention to ensure this is accomplished by 1996 at the latest. The final report of the 19th ATCM should lay great emphasis on this target.

2.      Institutional Arrangements: The Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP):

IUCN notes with approval the considerable period of time allotted to TEWG (the Transitional Environmental Working Group) at the 19th ATCM meeting to determine details of the role and activities of the proposed Committee on Environmental Protection. Care should be exercised to clarify the working relationships between the CEP, SCAR and GOSEAC (the Group of Specialists on Environment and Conservation). All are needed and all can make a substantial contribution to effective implementation of the Madrid Protocol. Representation in the CEP should be allotted to
-- 2 --

individuals with proven experience and expertise in science, environmental management, 
environmental impact assessment and auditing and systems design. Observers and experts should 
be included.

3.      Secretariat:

Given the need for improved communication between Antarctic Treaty meetings and the increasing 
level of activity within the Antarctic Treaty system, action to establish a Treaty Secretariat should 
receive prompt attention. There is a need to bring this administrative support into existence as 
soon as possible; certainly no later than commencement of operations of the CEP.

4.      Mining Ban in Offshore Antarctica:

IUCN considers that the current mining moratorium in Antarctica should be considered binding on all 
Antarctic Treaty Parties over the entire Treaty jurisdiction, from 60° South, including offshore 
Antarctica and including the deep sea bed. In ratifying the Protocol, Antarctic Treaty Parties should 
follow the practice of those countries which have made the mining ban apply in their own domestic 
law to all areas from 60° South, including the deep sea bed.

5.      The Liability Annex:

IUCN considers that discussions of the content and potential operations of the draft Liability Annex 
need to be undertaken in a more open manner. There should be more open negotiation between all 
parties, with the admission of observers and experts. To date discussions have largely focused on 
legal aspects, with only limited opportunities for discourse on scientific aspects or lessons of 
experience in environmental management . While there is a need to finalise the text of the draft 
annex, more opportunities should be provided for input on environmental aspects. IUCN considers 
that negotiation should commence immediately.

6.      Protected Areas:

Proceedings of the SCAR-IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas, June 1992, are now in 
print and contain a number of recommendations previously transmitted to Treaty nations. IUCN 
strongly urges implementation of these recommendations, which emphasise the need for improved 
data systems and a more systematic and comprehensive protected areas system throughout the 
Treaty region.

7.      Environmental Education and Training:

It is anticipated that Proceedings of the SCAR-IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Environmental 
Education and Training, conducted in April 1993 will shortly be released as a monograph. IUCN 
considers there is a need for a more strategic approach to Antarctic environmental education and 
training, especially in fields relevant to implementation of the Madrid Protocol.

8.      Tourism Activities:

IUCN welcomes adoption of a code of practice for visitors to Antarctica, but suggests there is a 
need for clearer identification of the appropriate national authorities for tour operators to contact. 
Monitoring and management would also be aided if there was agreement about standardised forms 
for both operators and visitors to complete.

9.      Marine Pollution Prevention: MARPOL Provisions:

Under MARPOL provisions, Antarctica is designated as a special area, with respect to marine 
pollution prevention measures, including oil, chemical and garbage discharge aspects. It is 
understood that the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) has proposed amending the boundary 
of the Special Area from 60° South to the CCAMLR boundary (i.e, the southern convergence). 
IUCN would recommend adoption of the extension to the CCAMLR boundary.
-- 3 --

10. Environmental Monitoring and Human Impacts:

IUCN commends the SCAR proposal to conduct two international environmental monitoring 
workshops in late 1995. The outcomes are likely to be most timely and useful in further 
strengthening the Madrid Protocol by providing consistent and reliable data on human impacts in 
Antarctica. While IUCN is happy to contribute its particular expertise to the SCAR workshops, there 
is an associated need to commence scoping needs and possible methodologies for cumulative 
impact assessment. IUCN has assembled funds for this purpose and following further discussions 
with SCAR, intends to mount such a workshop in late 1995 or early 1996. Comments as to the 
structure of the workshop and appropriate experts will be welcomed. IUCN emphasises its desire to 
work with and through Treaty mechanisms to collectively improve environmental management and 
ensure retention of the unique values of the Antarctic region.

IUCN wishes participants every success in their endeavours at the 19th Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting.

Annex A:     Conservation in the Antarctic - Programme 1994 - 1996

Annex B:     IUCN Resolution - Antarctica and the Southern Ocean

Annex C:     IUCN Resolution - Improved Protection for Wildlife in Subantarctic island ecosystems
ANNEX A

IUCN - THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION

Conservation in the Antarctic - Programme 1994-1996

Background

IUCN policy in Antarctica has been spelled out in a number of Resolutions of the IUCN General Assembly, most recently in Resolution 18.74 adopted at the 18th Session held in Perth, Australia, on the subject of the Antarctic Conservation Strategy, and Recommendations 17.52 and 18.75 on the subject of Antarctica, adopted at the 17th and 18th Sessions of the Assembly respectively. These decisions provide the authority for the work of the Secretariat on Antarctic affairs.

Since the last Session of the General Assembly, IUCN has maintained a programme of activities relating to Antarctic conservation. These are summarized in the first part of the attached paper, which also deals with the proposed programme of the Union in 1994-1996.

At its meetings in 1993, the IUCN Council noted the need for a review of the work of the Union on Antarctic matters, and in particular for a thorough discussion of the balance and approach of the proposed programme. Such a review is timely because no detailed mandate has been agreed by the IUCN members since they adopted Recommendation 17.52, six years ago, and in that period there have been major changes at international level, especially through the adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties of the Environmental Protocol to the Treaty.

The attached programme for 1994-1996 was approved by the 1994 General Assembly in Argentina.

 
1
on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and from NGOs such as the World Wide Fund For Nature (WWF) and the 
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) to respond to the General Assembly's call for the preparation 
of a strategy for Antarctic conservation. The resulting document was discussed at a workshop held during the 
18th Session of the General Assembly in Perth, Australia at which further Recommendations were adopted, 
especially calling for the exclusion of mineral exploration and exploitation from the Antarctic regions. The 
Union's Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991, after revision in the light of the discussions 
held at the General Assembly. This is the most comprehensive exposition available of Antarctic conservation 
problems and requirements. It has been widely distributed, in all three IUCN official languages, and extremely 
well received, including by the Antarctic Treaty Governments.

5. Since 1990, IUCN has maintained a small Secretariat programme on Antarctic conservation. It was originally 
established under the personal leadership of the Director General, himself an Antarctic biologist. The initial task 
was the completion of the Strategy for Antarctic Conservation, but following its publication and the adoption of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, work has focused on specific aspects, notably:

    (a) discussion of protected areas policy and practice in Antarctica;

    (b) discussion of conservation management and research priorities in the circum-Antarctic islands;

    (c) discussion of the environmental implications of Antarctic tourism;

    (d) discussion of the needs for information in order to educate and train those working in or visiting Antarctica in 
        practices compatible with good Antarctic conservation.

Output in 1990-1993

6. The Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991. In that year IUCN's efforts were concentrated 
   on contributing to the negotiations of the Environment Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol). 
   Subsequently, IUCN promoted the Strategy recommendations through regular attendance at Antarctic Treaty 
   Consultative Meetings (ATCMs), and recently at the Scientific Committee under the Convention on the 
   Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

7. In 1992, two workshops were held:

    (a) on conservation management and research in the sub-Antarctic islands, at Paimpont in France;

    (b) on protected areas in, and protected area policy for Antarctica, held in Cambridge, United Kingdom.

8. In 1993, a workshop on environmental education and training in the Antarctic region was held in Gorizia, Italy.

9. All these workshops were held in partnership with the SCAR Group of Specialists on Antarctic Environment and 
   Conservation. All are leading to substantial publications. More than 20 recommendations from the Cambridge 
   Workshop were presented to the XVII ATCM in 1992, and most were adopted.

The 1994-1996 Programme

10. It is proposed that in 1994-1996, IUCN's contribution to Antarctic conservation reflect IUCN's greatest area of 
    expertise, namely:

    (1) Protected Areas;

    (2) Environmental liability issues (through the Commission on Environmental Law); and
                                                     3
General provided valuable overall guidance. It is proposed that such machinery be re-established in the shape of 
an IUCN Advisory Committee on Antarctic Conservation. The group would be established by the Director 
General in consultation with IUCN members, and the special meeting on the occasion of the 19th Session of the 
General Assembly will permit such consultation. The Committee will need to balance governmental and non-
governmental expertise, and reflect the range of views within IUCN, although members will serve in a personal 
capacity.

Budget

17. Current resources for the Antarctic Programme will be exhausted by the end of 1993 with the exception of funding 
available for a workshop on the Impacts of Human Presence in Antarctica.

18. The implementation of this Programme is subject to the location of available resources.

                                                                                                                      5
19.96    Antarctica and the Southern
          Ocean

RECALLING Recommendations 18.75, 17.52 and 17.53
and Resolutions 15.20, 16.8, 18.9 and 18.74 of the 15th,
16th, 17th and 18th Sessions of the General Assembly;

RECOGNIZING the critical role played by Antarctica
in global climate and oceanic circulation, the import-
ance of the Antarctic environment and its dependent
and associated ecosystems, its vital role in the world's
biophysical and biochemical systems, its great value as
the world's largest remaining wilderness area, its
intrinsic and inspirational values, and its importance
for monitoring and other research directed to under-
standing the natural environment and global processes,
including those modified by human activity;

NOTING that world opinion has now turned firmly
against the exploitation of minerals in Antarctica and
expects impeccable standards of environmental perfor-
mance by all who operate there;

WELCOMING the Protocol on Environmental Protec-
tion to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted by the Antarctic
Treaty Parties in Madrid, Spain, in October 1991, which
commits the Parties to the comprehensive protection of
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associ-
ated ecosystems, designates Antarctica as a nature
reserve devoted to peace and science and, inter alia,
prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources
other than scientific research;

APPRECIATING that the Governments of Argentina,
Spain, France, Peru, Ecuador and Norway have now
ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

AWARE that the Subantarctic Islands support distinc-
tive ecosystems and many endemic species, that know-
ledge of these islands and their ecosystems remains
inadequate and that it is important that conservation
measures in these island groups are strengthened;

EMPHASIZING the importance of the conservation of
the ecosystems of the circum-Antarctic seas, and the
need to ensure that any use of their living resources is
sustainable;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty
who have not already done so to ratify the Protocol
on Environmental Protection as a matter of
urgency, so ensuring its early entry into force;

2. URGES Parties to the Protocol:

(a) to revise their domestic legislation and proce-
dures promptly to comply with the Protocol;

(b) to negotiate the Annex on liability for damage
mandated by the Protocol as soon as practicable
to ensure that clear, legally binding obligations
are imposed on Parties who administer or
conduct activities in the Antarctic;

3. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty
and all organizations active in Antarctica to pay
particular attention to:

(a) minimizing environmental impact;

(b) establishing and safeguarding a comprehens-
ive network of protected areas, including
adequate representation of the principal habi-
tats and the biological diversity of the Antarctic
region;

(c) preventing the deposition of wastes and facili-
tating the removal of wastes which have
already been deposited;

(d) establishing and enforcing stringent regula-
tions governing the conduct of all persons visit-
ing Antarctica, whether scientists, logistic and
other support personnel or tourists;

(e) otherwise according priority to conservation in
Antarctica as a whole;

4. ENCOURAGES Treaty Parties to establish the
Committee for Environmental Protection on an
interim basis promptly so that it may function prior
to the entry into force of the Protocol;

5. CALLS for a permanent ban on all minerals activity
in Antarctica throughout the area south of 60
degrees South latitude;

6. ENCOURAGES Treaty Parties to establish a Secre-
tariat to ensure inter alia an effective implementa-
tion of the Antarctic Treaty including the Protocol;

7. CALLS ON Parties to the Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
to take all steps necessary to conserve the marine
ecosystems of the Southern Ocean;

8. ENCOURAGES Parties to the Protocol to build
upon the inspection provisions in the Antarctic
Treaty and Protocol and to develop and implement
an environmental inspection system to assist in the
effective protection of the Antarctic environment;

9. REQUESTS the Director General, within available
resources:

(a) in consultation with Antarctic Treaty Parties
and IUCN members, Commissions and Coun-
cil, to work for:

(i) the establishment and management of
Antarctic specially protected or managed
areas;

(ii) the development of an Annex to the Ant-
arctic Protocol on liability for environ-
mental damage;
19.95    Improved Protection for 
          Wildlife in Subantarctic 
          Island Ecosystems

AWARE of the inadequate knowledge of subantarctic 
island ecosystems and the need to improve protection 
of their biodiversity and ensure their full conservation;

AWARE also of the ongoing review by IUCN of the 
status of the Subantarctic Islands in relation to their 
possible World Heritage status;

NOTING that the conduct of activities such as tourism 
constitutes a danger to the maintenance of the equili-
brium of such ecosystems, which are among the 
world's most fragile;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994;

1. STRONGLY RECOMMENDS that the international 
specialized agencies, as well as all States and Gov-
ernments exercising responsibilities and super-
vision over these areas, should fully protect the 
priceless environmental asset constituted by the 
species these islands contain, many of which are 
threatened with extinction;

2. CALLS UPON the governments concerned to 
adopt, as rapidly as possible, all necessary 
measures to ensure the conservation of these 
ecosystems;

3. REQUESTS the Director General, within available 
resources and in consultation with IUCN members, 
Commissions, relevant governments and NGOs, to 
produce an integrated strategy for conservation in 
the Subantarctic Islands and to offer assistance with 
management plans for individual islands or 
groups.
