ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                       TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
SEOUL              
May 8-19, 1995              
              
XIX ATCM/INF 105              
May 15, 1995              
Original: English              


                                   OPENING ADDRESS              
                                BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF RUSSIA              

                                Agenda Item 3
1

Mr. Chairman,

Let me congratulate you on your election as Chairman of 
the 19th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Through you, Mr.Chairman. I would like to express our 
gratitude to the Government of the Korean Republic for the 
opportunity to meet in the beautiful city of Seoul.

Dear Chairman,

As one of the initiators of the Antarctic Treaty, Russia 
remains an advocate of strengthening the Treaty System, the 
continuous implementation of its basic objectives and 
principles, through which the Southern Polar Region of the 
planet has become a zone of peace, fruitful research and 
constructive international cooperation.

The Antarctic Continent and surrounding seas, which are 
free from intensive economic activities, have a fundamental 
impact on global change, and that field of research still has 
a high priority within our National Antarctic Programme.

The 36-year-old history of the Antarctic Treaty is marked 
by many remarkable events reflecting the joint efforts of the 
Parties to preserve the pristine Antarctic nature. Signing the 
Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty (1991) is the most recent event of that kind. At the 
preceding ATCM in Kyoto the Russian Delegation stated that our 
country had started preparation for Protocol ratification. 
Over the past year significant work has been done to prepare 
national legislation and resolve the financial problems which 
will inevitably occur in Russia when the Protocol enters into 
force. The work is now being completed. In accordance with the 
decision of the Russian Government, the Protocol will be 
submitted for ratification in the nearest future.

Deeply aware of the importance of the Protocol for the 
enhancement of the Antarctic Treaty System and its efficiency,
2

Russia did not wait for the formal entering of the Protocol into force and has been steadily implementing a broad range of environmental activities at its Antarctic stations and seasonal field bases, using both its own resources and international cooperation. A joint Russian-German Environmental Project to clean up the Schirmacher Oasis is a good example of such cooperation.

Russia continues to support the earliest possible establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, which will undoubtedly allow to coordinate on a large scale measures taken by the Parties on various activities under the Treaty, primarily on the functioning of structures envisaged by the Protocol; to ensure the enhancement of the required effect on the third parties; to improve the awareness of the world community with regard to measures taken in the Antarctic to preserve its unique ecosystem, and to improve the efficiency of information exchange between the Parties.

A serious debate took place at the last ATCMs when the issue of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica was discussed. The issue is sure to become one of the focal points at this Meeting. In this context. Russia still believes that the increasing tourist activity in Antarctica is a natural process. At the same time, it certainly needs to be regulated within the framework of generally accepted principles of international law and the standards established under the Antarctic Treaty. It is only necessary to create an enforcement mechanism for such standards.

National Antarctic expeditions are most active in implementing practical activities of the Antarctic Treaty Parties. It is these expeditions that are to carry out major work to implement and monitor basic provisions of the Protocol, contacts with tourists and other organizational aspects inevitably related to research programmes and logistic operations. Therefore, the Russian Delegation supports the
idea of establishing a Committee for Science, Technology and 
Logistics within the ATCM structure.

This year is the 175th anniversary of the discovery of 
the Antarctic Continent by the expedition headed by Faddey 
Bellingshausen and Michael Lazarev. Our Delegation sincerely 
hopes that such a historic date will be commemorated by 
further strengthening and improved efficiency of the Antarctic 
Treaty System for the benefit of international science and 
environmental protection in the interests of mankind.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
