ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING    XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE   XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                              SEOUL
                              May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 94
May 12, 1995
Original: English


OPENING STATEMENT

BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF SOUTH AFRICA

Agenda Item 3
OPENING STATEMENT BY DR FRANCOIS HANEKOM
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF SOUTH AFRICA

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the South African delegation, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the XIXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I am confident that under your guidance we will achieve the results we expect from this Meeting. I would also like to extend our appreciation and gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Korea for hosting this Meeting in the city of Seoul.

South Africa acknowledges the substantial progress made in identifying the issues pertinent to the establishment of a Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. We commend the work accomplished thus far by the Group of Legal Experts under the able leadership of Professor Rüdiger Wolfrum. We would like to see that every effort is made during this Meeting to ensure that set objectives are achieved within a reasonable period of time. The fact that South Africa is currently considering the inclusion of a provision on liability in our proposed draft legislation on Antarctica is a reflection of the importance we attach to the question of liability.

Mr Chairman, South Africa is committed to the early entry into force of the Madrid Protocol. I have pleasure in informing the Meeting that both Houses of Parliament have recommended its ratification. We are confident that South Africa will deposit its instrument of ratification with the Depository State within the next couple of weeks.

Pending the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol we particularly welcome the establishment of the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) as an interim arrangement. Under the able guidance of its Chairmen it will essentially pave the way for the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) to be constituted in terms of the Protocol.

South Africa regards the development of a standardized Environmental Health and Safety Management System as an important priority and proposes that this be included in the objectives of the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG). Such a system will serve the purpose of integrating environmental and management concerns. This particular proposal is contained in Information Papers 37 and 55 which have been submitted for discussion at the TEWG meeting.

Mr Chairman, South Africa wishes to reconfirm its commitment to the fulfilment of the objectives of the Madrid Protocol. Apart from the CEE which was conducted on the planned construction of our new SANAE IV base, independent audits of the entire building process were done during the 1993/94 and 1994/95 summer seasons. Due to the mechanical failure of several vehicles and severe adverse weather conditions, progress with the construction of the new base during the 1994/95 summer season did not proceed as planned, and we hope that the construction work will be completed during the 1995/96 season.
In accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendation XV-17,
I have pleasure in extending an invitation to Treaty Parties to engage with us in finding
ways to share this new facility. Cooperation of this nature will not only advance
international scientific cooperation but will also result in a more cost-effective
management of scientific programmes in Antarctica.

Mr Chairman, this Meeting will reflect on the organization and effectiveness of Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings. The effectiveness of our collective work could be
considerably enhanced by preserving and strengthening the role of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting as the central policy making body of the Antarctic Treaty System.
In this sense, my delegation is of the opinion that Working Paper 12 (submitted by
Belgium, France, Germany and the United Kingdom) may be a starting point in
addressing this issue.

● The operation of the Antarctic Treaty System could further be improved by an
examination of the status and legal position of measures/recommendations adopted in
terms of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. This delegation therefore supports the
proposal put forward in Working Paper 1 (submitted by Belgium, Chile, France,
Germany and the United Kingdom) and would welcome a decision by the Meeting on
this important matter. Clearly, much work lies ahead fur all of us, but the need exists to
increase the efficiency of Consultative Meeting decision-making processes.

● We are confident that this Meeting will prepare the way for our approaches to new and
emerging challenges. One of these is the question of the establishment of an Antarctic
Treaty Secretariat. South Africa believes that the organizational aspects necessary for
setting up the Secretariat need to be further considered. It must be brought to a stage
where an arrangement, acceptable to all Parties, could be arrived at. It is our
submission that Working Paper 13 (submitted by Australia, Italy and South Africa)
which, to a large extent, has drawn on the experience of the CCAMLR model, as well as
our deliberations during the past two Consultative Meetings, could serve as a basis for
continued discussions. The South African delegation is therefore looking forward to a
fruitful and constructive debate on this matter which we all agree is of utmost
importance for the effectiveness of our future work, particularly in view of the imminent
entry into force of the Madrid Protocol.

● Naturally, we are also anxious to see that the outstanding issue on the location of a
Secretariat be resolved by reaching consensus in due course.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
