ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                            XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                             XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 88
May 12, 1995
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF CHINA

Agenda Item 3
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR XU GUANGJIAN
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHINA

Mr Chairman,

First of all, my delegation and I wish to congratulate you on your election to the Chair of the XIX-th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. May I, through you, Mr Chairman, convey our thanks to the Government of the Republic of Korea for hosting the Meeting in Seoul and making available these wonderful facilities. The Chinese delegation is particularly pleased to come to Seoul, which is much closer from Beijing than many of the Chinese cities. This makes us much feel at home.

Mr Chairman,

The adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty constitutes a milestone in the development of the Antarctic Treaty System. The Protocol is a living evidence for the whole international community that the Treaty Parties are able to fulfill their responsibilities in the protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystem.

I am pleased to inform the Meeting that the Chinese Government has approved the Madrid Protocol last June, and the instrument of approval has been deposited with the Depositary last August. This is a clear indication of China's commitments to the effective implementation of the Protocol.

We attach great importance to the prompt implementation of the Protocol. The establishment in Kyoto of the Transitional Environmental Working Group is a significant step in this direction. We are ready to cooperate fully with the Chairman and other members of the Working Group so as to assist the Group in playing its fundamental role in bringing the Protocol to a real life in a quick manner.

This Meeting will also continue the consultations on the Liability Annex to the Protocol. We should like to extent our heartfelt appreciation to Professor Rudiger Wolfrum for his thoughtful guidance over the consultations and for his admirable ability to accommodate different opinions. Our task is a hard one. The legal difficulties facing us are unique and need to be overcome with more energy and wisdom.

While we are convinced that the Annex will contribute considerably to the protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems, we should not let the

1
rope tightened too much to suffocate scientific activities, which is given top priorities by the Antarctic Treaty.

There is no need, Mr Chairman, to reiterate our shared concerns about the creation of the Secretariat. This is becoming an urgent matter, because a Secretariat is needed to facilitate the operation of the Treaty System, when more and more Treaty Parties have ratified or approved the Protocol, and the date is drawing closer when the conditions for the Protocol to take effect are met.  We can not but appeal again to the Parties concerned to find a solution through consensus as soon as possible.

Mr Chairman,

There are other issues this Consultative Meeting is going to address. The Chinese delegation looks forward to contributing to the deliberation of these issues and joining in the concerted endeavour to make this Meeting a great success.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

 
2
