ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XIX REUNION CONSULTATIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 109
May 15, 1995
Original: English

KOREAN CONTRIBUTION TO THE INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC
AND LOGISTIC COOPERATION IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA AREA

                        Agenda Item 14

                        (Submitted by the Republic of Korea)
Korean Contribution to the International Scientific and Logistic Cooperation in the Antarctic Peninsula Area

under Agenda Item 14
(Submitted by the Republic of Korea)

The importance of Antarctic science is growing rapidly in a sense of understanding the global environment. Large size research program dealing with global scale problem demands increased financial and logistic support. At the same time scientific research in Antarctica should be carried out in a manner that makes the most productive use of the available resources. To pursue this goal, efficient planning of scientific and logistic activity was stressed in the XVth ATCM. Also the value of international scientific and logistic cooperation was fully addressed in the previous ATCM reports and well reflected by Recommendations VII-8, VIII-7, IX-4, XV-14, XV-15 and XVII-4.

Korea fully appreciates the importance of international cooperation in the Antarctic and makes every effort to comply with the recommendations made by previous ATCMs. Korea also recognizes the concerns made by many Contracting Parties on the concentration of scientific stations, its environmental consequences and the need for cooperation especially in the South Shetland Islands. For instance in the field of geosciences, many places of geologic interest were re-visited and sampled by geologists of many different nationalities even in the same field season. To avoid unnecessary duplication of research programs in the northern Antarctic Peninsula area, information exchange among scientists conducting scientific programs in the area should be facilitated.

International Antarctic Science Symposium

An informal group, Collaborative Geosciences in the South Shetland Islands (COGS) was constituted within SCAR. Its aims are to promote scientific and logistic collaboration and coordination in an area where there is substantial multinational activity. Three meetings of COGS were held already in conjunction with 6 ISAES in Tokyo, Japan, XXII SCAR in Bariloche, Argentina and XXIII SCAR in Rome, Italy. Many productive discussions were made in the meeting, however no place has been provided yet for presenting research achievement of each scientist group to full extent.

In this context, Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute sponsors an international Antarctic science symposium during May 22-25, 1995 which especially deals with the geological problem of the South Shetland Islands.  A total of 35
presentations is scheduled by more than 30 geoscientists from five countries conducting 
active research in the area. Wide range of topics will be presented at the symposium 
including geological evolution, marine sedimentation and glaciation of the South Shetland 
Islands and its vicinity.

 An informal COGS meeting is also planned during the symposium period to 
provide ground for geologists to exchange the most updated research plans and promote 
joint field programs.

Logistic Cooperation in King George Island

Korea acknowledges the benefit of logistic cooperation with other Contracting 
Parties especially in the area where stations are situated in proximity to one another. By 
means of reducing routine operations, more resources can be diverted to scientific activity 
and less environmental impact can be expected.

 In King George Island, there are seven countries that have research stations 
running all the year round. They have shown an excellent example of logistic 
cooperation in maintaining their stations in the Antarctic. For instance, a part of cargo to 
the Chinese station was transported by Korean supply vessel in 94/95 season. For the 
coming 95/96 season, a way of transporting Korean cargo by Chinese supply vessel is 
under discussion. Korea also appreciates the cooperation with Argentina, Brazil, Chile 
and Uruguay in transportation of personnel and logistic supply for the last few years.

 This type of coordination and cooperation in logistics proved to be an efficient 
way of maintaining stations and consequently reducing environmental impact. Korea will 
make every effort to continue and expand this type of cooperation with other Contracting 
Parties in the future.
