ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                    SEOUL
                                    May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 24
May 11.1995
Original: English

 
LIABILITY ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Agenda Item 6 b

(Submitted by Germany)
504-390.20 SB 4

Information Paper

(submitted by Germany)

Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(No. 6 b of the preliminary agenda)

Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty obliges
the Parties to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising
from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol.

The XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (October 7-18, 1991 in Bonn)
discussed the need for early consideration of an annex on liability and considered that
the XVIIth ATCM should decide when and how this matter should be addressed (final
report of the XVIth ATCM No. 33).

The XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (November 11-20, 1992 in Venice)
agreed to convene a meeting of legal experts under German chairmanship.

The German Government designated Prof. Dr. Rüdiger Wolfrum, Director of the Max-
Planck-Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law in Heidelberg, as
chairman of this meeting and entrusted him with the legal preparation for it.

After adequate preparation through diplomatic channels a first meeting of legal experts
took place from November 18-20, 1993, in Heidelberg.

The XVIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (April 11-22, 1994: Kyoto) ex-
tended in accordance with Recommendation IV-24, the mandate of the Group of Legal
Experts. It organised a meeting in Kyoto and agreed to convene a further meeting of
that group in the period before the XIX ATCM in 1995. This meeting took place from
November 7-9, 1994, in The Hague/Netherlands.

In December 1994 the German Foreign Office transmitted the transcripts of Prof.
Wolfrums introduction and summary of the meeting in The Hague to the Parties of the
Antarctic Treaty (see Annex 1).

In February 1995 the German Foreign Office transmitted to the Parties the Chairman's
Third Offering based on the suggestions of the previsions meetings (see Annex 2).

The next meeting of the Legal Working Group is scheduled for May 8-12, 1995, in
Seoul.
PROF. DR. RÜDIGER WOLFRUM
DIREKTOR AM MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT
FÜR AUSLÄNDISCHES ÖFFENTLICHES RECHT
UND VÖLKERRECHT                                              D-69120 HEIDELBERG
                                                             BERLINER STRASSE 48
                                                             TELEFON 06221/482-1
                                                             Durchwahl 06221/482255/256
                                                             TELEFAX  06221/482288

December 5, 1994

Dear Colleagues,

Enclosed I send you
-   the transcript of my introduction to the meeting of the Working Group of Legal Experts and
-   the summary for this meeting.

I first intended to send you each paper under separate cover, however, I assume you will not mind receiving them together.

May I reiterate what I have suggested for the meeting of the Working Group of Legal Experts at Seoul. As agreed in Kyoto, this meeting will be an informal one like in The Hague. I intend to convene the Working Group of Legal Experts on 8 May (Monday) 1995 at 10 a.m. and I am planning to meet from 8 to 12 May in the morning as well as in the afternoon. I would highly appreciate if you would make your travel arrangements with a view of participating right from the beginning.

With all my best wishes for the forthcoming holiday season

Yours sincerely,

Rüdiger Wolfrum

Encl.
1

Answers of the States to Professor Wolfrum's letter of 25th April,
1994 concerning the Annex on Environmental Liability in Antarctica

I. Article 1 of the Second Offering - Purpose

Only one State explicitly referred in its response to the purpose
of the liability regime. According to its view, the liability
regime is meant to support the objective of the Protocol (i.e. the
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems). In particular, the liability
regime should support States' obligations under article 15 of the
Protocol and should encourage them to exercise care to avoid
damage to the Antarctic environment, by making them financially
responsible for the environmental damage they cause. It was
further emphasized that a corollary of this objective was that the
regime should provide for compensation to those States which carry
out response action and restoration with respect to damage caused
by other States.

II. Article 2 of the Second Offering - Scope

By referring to article 16 of the Protocol, some States used the
formula that the Annex should cover all activities taking place in
the Antarctic Treaty area. This would accordingly exclude
activities conducted outside that area, even if their effects
extended to the latter.

Most of the States suggested that the Liability Annex should apply
to all activities conducted in the Antarctic Treaty area covered
by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty. In this context, explicit reference was made to those
activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area for which
advance notice is required under article VII para. 5 of the
Antarctic Treaty, including scientific research programmes,
tourism, governmental and non-governmental activities as well as
associated logistic support activities.
2

It was further emphasized that the Annex should not cover 
activities conducted under other conventional regimes organized by 
already existing instruments of international law applicable in 
the Antarctic Treaty area (e.g. fishing). In this respect, it was 
suggested to list the activities not covered by the Protocol. It 
was also argued that the Protocol should not cover damage caused 
by actions undertaken in response to emergencies relating to the 
safety of human life.

Many States also explicitly argued that the Annex should not be 
interpreted as derogating from the obligations of the States 
Parties under other international instruments concerning 
environmental liability in force and applicable in the Antarctic 
Treaty area. The strictest standard should apply.

Although most States favoured the approach pursued by article 2, 
several suggestions for modifications were made.

It was suggested to limit the Liability Annex - possibly as a 
first step - to a restricted number of typical incidents of 
environmental damage caused in Antarctica such as
-   non-performance of mandatory reinstatement and clean-up 
    measures after the termination of legitimate and approved 
    activity in Antarctica (such as maintaining a research 
    station);
-   oil spillage in Antarctic waters;
-   excessive littering caused by tourist groups or individual 
    visitors.

It was also argued that, whilst the same principles should apply 
to all activities, it should be possible for such a regime to 
accommodate differences between activities or actors. In this 
context, it was emphasized that scientific research activities 
should be treated more favourably.
It was, finally, suggested to establish differenciated regimes on 
the basis of 
(a) the risks carried by the activity or by the means used; and 
(b) the usefulness of the acitivity for the international 
community at large (scientific research).

III. Article 3 para. 1 of the Second Offering - Definition of 
damage 

1) With respect to the definition of damage, most States 
emphasized the relationship between the environmental impact 
assessment (article 8 Protocol) and the damage to be covered by 
the Annex. It was suggested that damage embread by the Annex 
should include more than minor or transitory impacts unless they 
had been assessed in accordance with the Protocol and violated any 
of the Protocol's provisions. Under this approach the damage 
itself would have had to be assessed to avoid liability; it would 
not be enough to have assessed the activity without foreseeing the 
damage. This approach would limit damage to activities in 
violation of the Protocol and accidental (unplanned) activities. 
Activities that would be consistent with the Protocol and properly 
assessed would not give rise to liability.

In this context, it was emphasized that complying with the 
assessment requirements was not a shield to liability in itself; 
such compliance did not avoid liability for actions inconsistent 
with the Protocol. However, it was not pointed out what were the 
criteria to be applied in order to assess the inconsistency of an 
action with the Protocol.

Others took a more far-reaching approach. They suggested that 
there should be no link between the definition of damage and the 
phrase "more than a minor or transitory effect". It was also 
proposed that the effects which were foreseen by an environmental 
impact assessment should not be excluded in advance from the 
liability regime.
1) One group of States argued that the liability regime should not only cover the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent or associated ecosystems, but also the loss or damage to persons or property caused by, or in the connection with, an environmental damage.

A second group followed a more restricted approach, i.e. the Annex should only cover damage to the Antarctic environment. All but one States taking this approach were in favour of including environmental damages to the dependent or associated ecosystems of Antarctica. It was argued, however, that before agreeing to a liability regime also covering such harm, the Parties should discuss the special problems such coverage raises, particularly with respect to harm falling within the jurisdiction of a State.

With respect to the loss of scientific uses it was suggested that this kind of damage could be considered part of the environmental damage itself.

A third group followed the approach of the second one, however was in favour of limiting the geographical scope of the Annex with respect to damage to the environment to the area south of 60 degrees south latitude.

IV. Article 4 of the Second Offering - Response action (taken by the operator)

Although this question was not explicitly addressed, it seemed to be generally accepted that the operator undertaking activities in the Antarctic Treaty area should be obliged to take the necessary and timely response action. In case the activity should have resulted in damage, the operator should undertake reasonable removal and possibly restoration action.
V. Article 5 of the Second Offering - Liability

1. Liability of the operator
Many States took the approach that the primary liability should 
fall upon the operator that had undertaken the relevant acticitiy 
in Antarctica. The standard to be applied in this context should 
be the standard of strict liability.

A divergent opinion suggested that liability should exclusively 
fall upon States Parties that could have recourse against 
individuals having caused the damage. Those individuals should 
have a genuine and substantive link to the State Party concerned. 
Under this approach, a State Party would be liable for any adverse 
impact on the environment which would not have occurred or 
continued if that State Party had complied with its obligations 
under the Protocol and its Annexes. Such a non-limited liability 
regime based on fault or negligence of a State Party might coexist 
with a strict liability regime, whereby some limits and excuses 
could be admitted.

2. Assessment of liability
As far as the calculation of compensation is concerned, everybody 
seemed to see the response action and restoration costs as an 
appropriate means of calculating the amount of compensation.

As far as it was explicitly referred to, the answers given agreed 
with the approach taken by the Second Offering in article 5 para. 
1 subpara. 1 according to which the costs incurred by a State 
Party under article 15 of the Protocol of reasonable response 
action should be part of the compensation owed by the operator 
that has caused the damage.

Divergent views were expressed concerning the problem of 
irreparable damage. Although most of them were in favour of 
introducing the concept of compensation for irreparable damage 
into the Annex, the view was brought forward that dealing with 
irreparable damage was first of all a very complicated issue. It 
was argued that the Parties should agree on guidelines for
assigning a value to such damage to prevent the sum of potential 
liability from being completely speculative. These guidelines 
could also cover loss of scientific use. It was argued that until 
such guidelines were sufficiently developed for a fact-finder to 
use, the amount of damage should be determined by diplomatic 
mechanisms. As the developing of such guidelines would be 
extremely difficult, the Parties should not wait to bring the 
liability regime into force until they had agreed on the 
guidelines.

Furtheron it was suggested to explore whether it would be possible 
to finance a fund with compensation payments made in case of 
irreparable damage. With respect to the assessment of the amount 
which should be paid into such a fund by way of compensation, the 
Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) could play a certain 
role. On the other hand, it was argued that a system of liability 
applying to irreparable damage would contain punitive elements. 
Insofar, it was pointed out that a punitive sentence of civil 
liability might not be able to be executed under the national 
legal system.

VI. Article 6 of the Second Offering - Exemptions/excuses

All States referring to this issue favoured a limitation of 
excuses, restricting them to "an exceptional natural catastrophe, 
an armed conflict or a terrorist act, if it is not reasonably 
predictable or unavoidable ..." (excuses laid down in article 8 
para. 4 CRAMRA). It was added that a willful or negligent act of a 
third party should represent an excuse for the operator concerned. 
It was also argued that the number or scope of the excuses could 
vary with the nature of the activities concerned; they could, for 
instance, be more numerous or broader in matters of scientific 
research than for touristic activities. Finally, it was suggested 
to identify the admissible excuses through a comparative study of 
the available treaties.

The most restrictive approach taken was to exclude excuses 
altogether.
VII. Article 7 of the Second Offering - Obligations of States 
Parties

Nearly all States emphasized that primary liability should fall 
upon the operator whose activity has caused the harm. This would 
consequently also include the liability of a State acting as an 
operator. This kind of primary liability of the operator has to be 
separated from the liability of a State Party resulting from the 
non-fulfilment of the obligations laid down in the Protocol 
including the Annexes. Under this approach, a State Party could be 
held liable for a damage that would not have occurred if the State 
had complied with the Protocol/Annexes and that is not compensated 
by the responsible entity. As to the standard of liability of 
States Parties, it was generally referred to the due diligence 
test which is accepted under existing international law. However, 

 it was emphasized that before accepting a residual State 
liability, the responsibilities of the States Parties under 
articles 13 and 15 of the Protocol had to be clarified, since 
violation of those responsibilities might give rise to State 
liability.

 It was even argued that the State from which the acticity having 
caused the harm was undertaken will have to guarantee 
compensation, possibly also up to a certain amount; this would 
emphasize the responsibility vested by the Protocol in every Party 
for the activities undertaken from its country. Before instituting 
such a residual State liability, it would have to be decided which 
factor should be the determining one with respect to liability: 
nationality of the operator, residence or seat or only the 
expedition's point of departure, etc. A quite similar approach was 
suggested, namely that - taking into account the special role of 
the States Parties within the framework of the environmental 
impact assessment - it would be appropriate to allow claims to be 
brought against the State responsible for a private operator if 
effective recovery from a private operator is not possible, e.g. 
if the operator is no longer in existence or is a shell without 
substantive assets, or fails to meet its obligations. Such kind of
residual State liability would be necessary to ensure effective 
protection of the Antarctic environment.

As already mentioned above, it was argued that the liability 
regime should only entail obligations among States Parties whereby 
individuals should in principle be excluded. Liability of a State 
Party should come in if there was a genuine or substantive link 
between the State Party concerned and the private entity or 
person. The State Party paying the compensation could have 
recourse against the individuals having caused the damage.

VIII. Article 8 of the Second Offering - Compulsory insurance or 
other financial security

Many States argued that the States Parties should require non-
governmental entities to demonstrate financial capability adequate 
to meet their potential liability before undertaking activities in 
Antarctica. Some States taking this approach explicitly referred 
to a compulsory insurance system. It was suggested that the 
responsibility for introducing such a system falls upon the State 
Party executing the environmental impact assessment according to 
the Protocol. As to the level of the compulsory insurance or of 
equal financial guarantees, it was added that it should be fixed 
in consideration of the ability and willingness of markets to 
offer such guarantees.

A rather far-reaching approach was taken by those suggesting that 
a State should be held residually liable for any costs incurred 
which were beyond any insurance cap and not otherwise met by a 
private operator.

A quite new idea argued in favour of an obligation to large 
financial security in advance. Additionally, a compulsory 
insurance system for the operator concerned should be introduced.
IX. Article 9 of the Second Offering - Limits

One group of States argued that there was a necessity of providing for limits so as to obtain the necessary financial guarantees (insurance). Some States of this group suggested that in addition one might consider the establishment of a general compensation fund which could defray all or part of the restorations costs beyond those limits.

Furtheron, it was argued that considering the fact that the restoration cost for environmental damage might be tremendous, and in order to ensure predictability of the costs falling upon the Parties concerned in case of a damage, it would be better to set up the limit of liability beforehand.

In this context, it was also suggested that the amount of compensation should be limited to the restoration costs. Other costs beyond reimbursement, as well as irreparable environmental damage, should be covered by a general compensation fund.

Another approach suggested not to apply limits to damage caused by tourism, unless the Parties could agree on caps that would cover any damage the tour operators might cause. It was added that the liability regime should not apply limits to environmental damage as measured by the costs of response action and restoration. If the Parties agreed to continue to work on the question of guidelines for evaluation of other environmental damage, then that work should include the question of placing reasonable limits on liability for such damage.

The most far-reaching approach did not want to accept limits at all.

X. Article 10 of the Second Offering - Response action and restoration measures by others than the operator

In accordance with the question raised in my letter of 25th April, 1994 the answers concentrated on the relationship between
liability and response action according to article 15 of the 
Protocol. In general, the answers and suggestions on this issue 
were quite preliminary.

It was highlighted that the organizer of the activity which had 
caused the damage should be responsible to undertake reasonable 
measures to restore the status quo ante, including, if components 
of the Antarctic environment were irreparably damaged or 
destroyed, the introduction of equivalents into the Antarctic 
environment. If the operator concerned undertook the necessary 
measures, there would be no need for additional action and 
therefore no basis for compensation. Under this approach, article 
15 of the Protocol would only come in if the organizer did not or 
could not undertake the necessary measures in reasonable time. In 
this case, the State Party which had assessed the activity should 
undertake emergency response action according to article 15 of the 
Protocol. The State Party concerned could undertake the necessary 
measures itself, through an authorized person or entity or in 
collaboration with another State Party. If the State Party which 
had assessed the activity was unable to undertake the necessary 
measures in adequate time, it should be obliged to request another 
State Party to undertake these measures. Additionally, it was 
proposed that, if the activity had been undertaken without the 
assessment according to article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol, the 
State Party where the activity had been organized should be 
obliged to undertake the necessary measures as provided for in 
article 15 of the Protocol.

Another group of States emphasized that the obligation of States 
Parties to take response action under article 15 of the Protocol 
arose quite independently of the question whether an operator 
could be held liable for the damage or not. The failure to provide 
for prompt and effective response action might consequently give 
rise to secondary State liability, if the failure had caused 
environmental damage.

Another group of States emphasized that the Liability Annex needed 
to reinforce the possibility of response action by ensuring that 
such action was compensated. According to another proposal, the
Parties should ensure that their work on response action and 
contingency plans (article 15 of the Protocol) was carried out in 
accordance with their work on the liability regime. In particular, 
the Parties should work together to develop contingency plans to 
provide for response action by Parties to damage caused (and not 
cleaned up) by another Party. In addition, the Parties should work 
together to develop restoration plans that should include 
guidelines for determining which restoration is reasonable. It was 
pointed out that an issue that would have to be coordinated 
between the liability regime and the response and restoration 
plans was what entity might carry out the action. Under the 
liability regime, the entity that carried out the action should be 
able to recover damages from the responsible Party; how such an 
entity might be chosen, and in particular whether some kind of 
State approval would be necessary, would therefore raise important 
questions for the liability regime as well as for the work on 
contingency and restoration plans. In order to create an 
additional incentive to Parties to provide for response action in 
accordance with article 15, it was suggested to explore the 
feasibility of punitive damages for Parties that did not comply 
with article 15.

XI. Article 11 of the Second Offering - Environmental protection 
fund

Divergent opinions were expressed as to the function an 
environmental protection fund could assume. One group suggested to 
establish an international fund in order to pay for a damage not 
compensated otherwise. For example, the fund could finance 
restoration operations in cases where the operator liable for a 
damage could not be identified. Those which argued in favour of 
introducing limits of the compensation owed occasionally suggested 
the establishment of a fund which could defray all or part of the 
restoration costs beyond the limits of compensation. Another group 
of States wanted the fund to play a role in emergency cases.

Most of the States which referred to the establishment of a fund 
suggested that it should be financed with payments for
environmental damage not restored (as to the proposals for the
calculation of such payments see V.2.).

XII. Article 12 of the Second Offering - Claims tribunals

1. Potential plaintiffs

With respect to the question who could be the proper plaintiff in
case of a damage to the Antarctic environment, different answers
were given. It was suggested that the proper plaintiff should be
the person or entity who undertook or commissioned the restoration
operation, regardless of whether the defendant is an individual
operator or a State agency.

According to another group, potential plaintiffs should include:

(a) States that have incurred costs themselves or on behalf of
persons who with their authority have taken response action,
including containment, clean up, restoration and pre-emptive
action to prevent damage;

(b) States on behalf of themselves or individuals for loss of life
or property arising out of environmental damage.

As to irreparable damage, it was suggested to provide for a
mechanism that would represent the Parties as a whole and
therefore be suited to perform the role of a "trustee" of the
Antarctic environment, bearing in mind that the funds recovered
would be paid into an international fund to be established under
the Annex. As plaintiffs in such cases were suggested the ATCP as
a whole, respectively one or more ATCPs, the Environmental
Committee or the Secretariat.

On the other hand, doubts were expressed whether the existing
institutions like the Committee would be well-suited to play this
role. It was suggested that a minimum number of Parties (perhaps
including parties from specified groups) should be required to
bring the complaint. Another position as to the potential
plaintiffs was to establish a namelist which could include lawyers
and scientists recommended by each Consultative Party. Whenever a
damage would occur, a group whose members would be chosen from the 
list might serve as plaintiff.

2. Resolution of disputes
One group of States argued that as long as the Parties had not 
made progress on the scope of the liability regime, the type of 
damage covered etc., it would be premature to attempt to develop a 
dispute resolution regime, or even to decide whether the regime 
should involve domestic courts or an international tribunal. 
Accordingly, the answers given were rather preliminary. The 
following proposals were made:
-   There should be a special court, politically independent with 
    full competence and adjudication powers.
-   Claims against States should be resolved by conciliation or 
    arbitration between the State responsible for the operator 
    causing the loss and the injured State on behalf of itself or 
    persons under its control. To this end use should be made of 
    the arbitral tribunal already provided for under the Protocol. 
    However, this approach did not necessarily rule out the use of 
    domestic courts to sue private operators in circumstances 
    where they were the appropriate defendant. For such cases, 
    States may need to have an obligation to facilitate access to 
    their courts in implementing the Annex.
-   The forum for claims concerning the primary operator's 
    liability should be the national courts of the State of the 
    operator's domicile or residence. As to the question which 
    national court should be competent, it was also proposed that 
    the national courts of that State Party should have 
    jurisdiction which had assessed the organizer's activity and 
    thus undertaken the necessary response action under article 15 
    of the Protocol in case that the operator had not fulfilled 
    its obligations. Some States highlighted the difficulties 
    which a national court regime could produce: First, it would 
    be difficult to decide which national courts could hear a 
    claim against an entity undertaking an activity in Antarctica. 
    If suit could be brought only in the State of the entity, 
    there would be a risk that judiciary would not be impartial, 
    particularly when the claim was against the State itself. In
addition, some States might have laws and procedures that 
would limit the rights of action against the government and 
its instrumentalities. On the other hand, a national court 
mechanism that would permit suits in courts other than those 
of the entity's State could be complicated by claims of 
foreign State immunity. An approach that would rely on 
national courts would also have to address the possible 
multiplicity of law suits. As the judicial systems of the 
State Parties vary tremendously, the resort to national courts 
could also imply an inconsistent application of the Protocol 
standards.

- Another group wanted to limit the competences of national 
courts to claims involving the primary liability of a private 
operator. If a State was directly acting as an operator or if 
the proper responsibility of a State arising from the 
violation of its obligation to supervise the operator was 
involved, according to this approach competence should be 
given to the arbitral tribunal constituted under the Protocol 
or to the International Court of Justice.

XIII. Damage caused by entities not subject to the regime

This issue was only addressed by few States. It was argued that 
the liability regime would only be completely effective if it 
covered all States and non-governmental entities carrying out 
activities in Antarctica. For the foreseeable future, such 
entities would primarily be tour operators which might attempt to 
move to States not Party to the Protocol to avoid the liability 
regime. However, as long as the tour operators advertised in the 
jurisdiction of States Parties, such Parties had legislative means 
to require the operators to assume primary liability, at the risk 
of being denied access to the market. It was suggested that the 
Parties should consider whether and how the liability regime might 
authorize or require Parties to take such actions.
1
Summary of the Chairman of the Working Group of Legal Experts on 
the Meeting held in the Hague from November 7 to 9, 1994

It has been agreed that our group shall meet again the first week 
of the Consultative Meeting in Seoul next year. Our colleague from 
Corea was good enough to assure that we will have the possibility 
of meeting for five days. In this respect, I have one request. It 
would be really helpful if we had amongst us scientists with 
Antarctic experience, who know the climate, the environment etc. 
and who are familiar with the real needs of Antarctica. In 
consequence, I recommend, and this I would like to emphasize, that 
the delegations to the Legal Working Group include scientists, as 
they did in the Hague. I am aware that due to the other meetings 
taking place in the first week at Seoul this may be a problem, but 
it is perhaps not necessary that each single delegation has 
scientists included, but at least we should have several 
scientists joining us and staying with us permanently. I would be 
grateful if you would be kind enough to convey this message to the 
ministries concerned at home, particularly to those who have to 
subscribe to the travel expenses. You should emphasize that this 
is one of the decisions already taken at the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting in Kyoto. At the same time I would like to 
thank the scientists for their valuable contributions to the 
deliberations in the Hague.

As to the preparations for the forthcoming meeting in Seoul, I 
believe it would be a waste of the efforts we have undertaken if I 
did not try, on the basis of all the valuable information and 
suggestions received, to redraft, on a personal basis, the Second 
Chairman's Offering. However, this will be done in a different 
manner than on the previous occasion.

I will attempt to submit a Third Offering by the mid of February, 
so that sufficient time will be given to prepare for Seoul. Unlike 
on previous occasions, I will not formally ask you to send me 
further information. However, if any delegation would like to 
furnish me with some supplementary information, suggestions or 
even specific wording improving the Second Offering, I would be 
happy to receive and to include it in the forthcoming Third
2

Offering. The suggestions should be made by the end of January 
1995, at the latest. Otherwise, I would not be in a position to 
send you a Third Offering by the mid of February, as I have just 
suggested.

The Third Offering will be transmitted to you via diplomatic 
channels. This means that in future you will receive three 
different letters: First my introduction which will be sent to you 
within the next weeks, secondly the summary of this meeting which 
will hopefully reach you within the next four weeks, and thirdly 
the Third Offering which will be forwarded to you by the mid of 
February. I do not expect any responses to the Third Offering. We 
will have the opportunity of discussing it at Seoul.

After having dealt with the procedural issues, the substantial 
questions are to be addressed next. During the deliberations the 
Group of Legal Experts has used the Second Offering as a guideline 
and as a means of focusing discussion. In this respect it has 
served its purpose and I hope that the Third Offering will do the 
same. Therefore, in summarizing the discussion, I will follow the 
sequence of the Second Offering.

As to article 1, we have only had a very limited discussion 
thereupon, which I had suggested myself. To talk about the purpose 
of the Annex is premature given that we have not achieved a full 
understanding of its content. Nevertheless, the reference to 
article 16 and in particular to article 15 of the Protocol seems 
to be mandatory. I would like to emphasize in this respect that 
one of the major purposes of the Third Offering will be, although 
I have made an attempt to improve it, to more clearly establish 
the link between article 15 of the Protocol on the one side and 
the Annex on Liability on the other side. Both are meant to form 
an integrated system although the Annex is not conceived just to 
implement article 15. The necessity to improve the connection 
between article 15 of the Protocol and the Annex on Liability is 
particularly true with respect to article 10 - article 10 deals 
with preventive and restoration measures - and article 4 and 5 of 
the Second Offering.
3

Article 2 of the Second Offering deals with the scope of the 
Annex. So far this article simply refers to all human activities 
taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area. Some participants have 
suggested that already the scope should refer to damage. Others 
have argued that this would not be appropriate, since it would 
narrow the impetus of the Annex. In my view, the prevailing 
tendency has been to continue speaking about all human activities 
in the Antarctic Treaty area. However, a further idea has emerged 
today, namely that one might appropriately exclude actions to save 
human life, etc., i.e. emergency actions, and that probably one 
might not exclude them under the notion of damage, but rather 
under the notion of the scope. In this respect, it is impossible 
to identify a prevailing view, but at least it is an idea which 
has been raised and which merits further consideration.

● As to article 2, para. 2, the general objective of this provision 
has seemed to be accepted by the group. However, most have said 
that it does not really or properly reflect this objective and 
that the wording needs improvement. What article 2 para. 2 means 
is that fishing, sealing or whaling as such shall not be included 
into the Annex on Liability, and this has been the consensus 
which, by the way, reflects the Protocol. However, damage caused 
by activities undertaken in connection with or incidentally to 
fishing, sealing and whaling, e.g. dumping, would come under the 
scope of the Annex. And perhaps the mistake of article 2 para. 2 
is to use the wording "explicitly regulated by" and to refer then 
to the conventions concerned. That is perhaps not the appropriate 
way of putting it. It will be necessary to find out whether a 
wording exists which better reflects what seems to be the emergent 
consensus in this respect.

● As to article 2 para. 3., we have had a very brief discussion. 
Here again, the objective of this provision has been more or less 
consented, however, it has been pointed out that one should 
establish more clearly that the strictest standard should apply. I 
will undertake to look into the relevant agreements in order to 
bring to your attention whether there is an overlap in this 
respect. We will also have to consider whether all Antarctic 
Treaty members are members to the relevant agreements. This may
pose another problem, but I believe that a wording which would 
explicitly refer to the application of the strictest standard in 
force would be appropriate in this respect. It seems to me that 
this solution could be consented.

Regarding article 3, it has been emphasized that the definition of 
damage in article 3 is a crucial one. Unless we have a clear-cut 
understanding on the notion of damage and on the follow-up costs 
or compensation of a damage occurred, it is not possible to 
properly address the issue. Therefore, concentrating thereon is 
going to be the main task of the deliberations to come. Damage 
under the present definition means any impact on the Antarctic 
environment or dependent or associated ecosystems caused by human 
activity (in the Antarctic Treaty area) which is of more than 
minor or transitory nature. So far, there seems to be a 
willingness to accept the link with the environmental impact 
procedure (EIP). However, if one looks at the wording of article 
3, one has to confess that some of the terms are rather ambiguous. 
These are the words "minor" and "transitory". Is it possible, 
given the fundamental nature of this definition, to define more 
precisely what is meant to be "minor" or "transitory"? In future 
it should be considered whether it is possible to define the term 
"damage" by consulting an expert body consisting of scientists. 
Probably only scientists are in a position to establish whether 
the Antarctic environment has been damaged and whether this damage 
is of more than minor or transitory nature. Further, if we could 
provide for a procedural mechanism for a better understanding of 
the notion of damage, we would be rather flexible in this respect. 
This flexibility is provided for under national law systems, 
either by courts or, like in my country, by technical experts. For 
example, in the German law of emissions - that is the equivalent 
to the U.S. Clean Air Act - the damage is defined with the help of 
technical and other experts. They help to establish the standards. 
Probably a similar approach has been taken in other countries. 
Members of this group are encouraged to look into their national 
legal systems whether any models exist there to be introduced into 
our work. With respect to damage, we have spoken about a set of 
scenarios and finally established three or two of them. Either - 
first approach - there was an impact upon the Antarctic
5

environment which had been foreseen (in the framework of the EIP)
and it happened as foreseen. There has been the understanding that
this would not be qualified as damage, even if lateron the impact
was qualified as damage. Secondly, there had been a risk foreseen,
however the probabilility of the risk had been regarded as minor,
but, unfortunately the risk materialized. In this respect, the
prevailing view has been that this would be a damage, if it was
more than minor or transitory, for the assessment procedure does
not assess the activitiy, but the impact. The third scenario has
been that there had been no risk or no impact foreseen, and
nevertheless there was a negative impact. This kind of impact, if
more than minor or transitory, has been considered as damage. One
may combine the second and the third scenario.

Let me now come to the second part of article 3, namely the
question what damage means, whether it should include only the
impact or whether it should include the loss of or impairment of
scientific use or the loss of or impairment of established use or
additionally the loss of or damage to property or loss of life or
personal injury of a third party. There have been quite some
participants arguing that at least the loss or impairment of
scientific use should be covered by the notion of damage. But this
view certainly has not been unchallenged. There have been others
who have favoured including loss or impairment of established use
arising directly out of environmental damage, but here there have
also been some voices calling for caution in this respect. I am
certainly somewhat tempted, although I know that this is a very
controversial issue, to try to include at least loss or impairment
of scientific use into my next drafting of the definition of
damage. However, I will leave the other options as alternatives in
the Offering, because this issue needs and deserves further
consideration. I would also like to point out at this moment that
there has been a strong view within the group arguing that at
least loss of or damage to property and loss of life or personal
injury should be covered in another Annex, for it requires
different mechanisms. We will have to look into that.

As to article 3 para. 2, two more suggestions have been made.
First of all, it has been pointed out that the term "operator" is
a questionable one, it should be reconsidered whether the term 
should be used at all. Secondly, apart from what I listed in my 
definition, it has been suggested to include the permanent 
resident of a State who, however, does not have the nationality of 
the given State. There exist quite some precedents in this 
respect.

Further, we have had a rather significant discussion on the 
suggestion to include international organisations as put forward 
by ASOC. If this suggestion referred to international 
organisations properly speaking, this would be a highly 
complicated issue. We should be reluctant to include them, since 
under the present Antarctic regime international organisations 
have no standing, so far. It would be rather problematic to 
include them as long as they cannot become a party to the 
Antarctic Treaty. However, non-governmental organisations could be 
included, since a non-governmental organisation has a link so-to-
speak with one State and hopefully with one Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Party.

One further suggestion has been made that should be mentioned. It 
has been said - and I believe there is much merit in it - that 
parts of what has been discussed under the term of damage should 
be dealt with in article 5 of the Second Offering on liability. 
The question of what kind of damage will be covered by the 
compensation owed would then be only addressed in article 5. I 
believe that this suggestion merits further consideration.

The other four notions in article 3 of the Second Offering - 
preventive measures, removal, response action and restoration - 
have only been given a very cursory discussion. There is one 
problem: To a certain extent they overlap. Partially this was 
intended, but one has to look into the substance of the following 
articles to see whether this is still necessary. Therefore, these 
four definitions should only show up in the Annex if substantively 
used in the following text. A problem arises with respect to 
restoration. Two things have been put forward in this context: 
Undertaking restoration in Antarctica may be difficult and may 
even be a violation of the environmental standards applicable to
Antarctica, but, on the other side, there are some areas where 
"restoration" may play a useful role. In this respect it has been 
clearly emphasized by the scientists that much of what has been 
referred to as restoration should properly come under "removal". 
Having this in mind, it would perhaps be better to eliminate the 
term restoration. In this context I would appreciate if those 
members of the group who apply this principle under their national 
law would look into the matter. Perhaps it might be helpful not to 
speak about removal, but about remedial measures which have a 
slightly broader version and would cover that part of restoration 
which is still needed. Here again, I would appreciate if you could 
look into your national law in order to assess whether I am not 
mistaken in this respect.

 
It has been pointed out that preventive measures always refer to 
"reasonable" measures. So does the definition of removal action 
when referring to the "necessary" measures. It has been argued 
that such words should appear in the substantial part of the 
Annex, rather than in the part of definitions. At least the use of 
terms throughout the Annex should be done in a consistent manner. 
In this respect, the text has to be streamlined.

 
As to article 4, there has been some confusion concerning its 
interrelationship with article 10 which deals with the question 
who is in a position to step in, i.e. to take response 
action/restoration measures in case the operator does not fulfill 
its obligations under article 4. The confusion flowing from 
article 10 has been due to the fact that the provision was 
misplaced. Therefore, I will intend either to combine 4 and 10 in 
one article or to have 4 followed by the present 10 which would 
then be 5. Article 4 is meant to deal with the operator's 
obligation. In this respect, a problem has evolved at the 
beginning and the discrepancy of views has not yet been overcome. 
There has been a view arguing that response action as such has no 
place in this Annex, whereas others have said it has to be 
included. Those in favour of the first view have argumented that 
this question should be dealt with in the framework of defining 
the compensation. I believe this is more a question of semantics 
than of substance. The reason for the uncertainty in this respect
is that the link between article 4 and 5 has not yet been established clearly enough. I will try to cure this part.

Further, it has been said that article 4 has no need to reiterate the definition of operator and can accordingly be shortened. This is correct. However, as I understand it, it has been accepted or at least there has been no sincere objection against it that first of all the operator has to do the first step to respond to any negative impact or damage in Antarctica. Whether he does it himself or within the framework of the emergency plans is another matter. Our colleague from the Netherlands has just pointed to that today on a different occasion, and here again I am bringing to your attention the Draft Articles of a Protocol on Liability and Compensation to the Basle Convention which have just been circulated. Perhaps they may help us to more clearly establish this tripartite system which we may follow, too.

Further, there is one fundamental problem involved in article 5, and it has been frequently expressed that no liability regime will be really complete if one cannot find a way of including the damage incurred by a third State. How this could be properly reflected is another matter, but the U.S. paper gives us, at least for a special type of categories, a certain guideline.

It has been pointed out that not all the categories of damage to be compensated listed in article 5 are properly worded. It has been asked why we could not use the language of CRAMRA, which with respect to compensation refers to the costs by "whomsoever incurred". I believe the problem can best be cured by the way which I have already indicated, i.e. by moving article 10 forward to article 4 and establishing a close link with article 5. In article 10 which would then be the provision following article 4, article 15 of the Protocol should be reflected and the notion of restoration should be deleted. It has been said that response action in emergency cases is something different from restoration. The one is an emergency reaction which has to be done very quickly, and the other one is a long-term or mid-term undertaking which needs a different procedure. It was a mistake to combine the two in one provision.
One final point, that is the third category of compensation costs, 
concerns the costs for providing increased additional public 
services: This provision has not been very well liked and unless I 
do not hear anything to the contrary, I am rather inclined to 
delete it.

Let me now come to the issue of irreparable damage. This 
constitutes less of a problem than the discussion may have 
indicated. Basically, all national legal systems have established 
accurate procedures how to assess a damage in complicated cases. 
Therefore, speaking about irreparable damage more or less is 
nothing more than a problem of proper assessment. If we look at 
that, and treat it as such, then we should find the means how to 
cope with that problem. I was highly convinced by one remark 
having said that irreparable damage may occur quite frequently in 
Antarctica or at least more often than perhaps under national 
systems. Therefore, we cannot discard this problem. If, however, 
it is a problem of properly assessing the amount to be paid for 
compensation, then the problem can only be solved by procedural 
means. So far, I have provided for a diplomatic mechanism. I 
believe I can conclude from the discussion that having resort to 
experts would be more promising. Or perhaps one can have a two 
step- or three step-procedure, going from diplomatic channels to 
experts and to adjudication. Perhaps one could call upon the 
experts to establish parameters and guidelines which would help do 
the assessment. I would very much appreciate if you could look 
upon this matter, which is a very important one, not as something 
very new but as something we are quite used to, namely the problem 
of assessing damage which is complicated to assess and of having 
to find appropriate procedures to deal with that issue.

As to article 5 para. 3, we have had only a limited discussion, 
and I believe there has been no real disagreement on that point.

Let me now procede to article 7, which deals with the obligations 
of States Parties. Damage, definition of damage, the assessment of 
the compensation to be paid, and article 7 are the four 
cornerstones upon which this Annex will be built.
10

The wording suggested in my Second Offering has not been that well 
received. Therefore, I should try to find a different one. One 
suggestion has been the wording used in article 4 of Annex 3 of 
the Law of the Sea Convention, although some voices have 
questioned whether we can really rely on this provision. However, 
one should clearly distinguish between three different aspects of 
article 7; only two of them are properly reflected in the wording 
of the Offering so far.

• First, one has to deal with State liability in the case the State 
acts as an operator. In this respect, and here I believe I can 
identify the common view, the State does not deserve specific 
treatment. If the State works on the same level as a private 
entity, it has to be treated as a private entity. What is the 
problem of the residual liability of States? Before I deal with 
this question, I would like to deal with the third aspect of 
"State-related" liability. It is well established under 
international law that the violation of international law by a 
State entails the latter's international responsibllity. This 
principle would apply in our context, too, and perhaps this should 
be properly reflected either in the way it was done in CRAMRA or 
in the way it was done in the German non-paper referring to 
"without prejudice to international law". I will look into this 
matter and amend article 7 which has given rise to a couple of 
misunderstandings.

• As to the residual liability, it is to question when it comes into 
place and when it is going to be materialized. The question is 
under which circumstances a State has done enough to comply with 
its international obligations. Has it done enough when having 
enacted all the necessary laws and regulations or has a State to 
do more? I do not believe that in this point we are ready to agree 
on anything yet. Nevertheless, I will try to improve article 7 by 
using the German draft as well as the CRAMRA reference and by 
invoking the general international responsibility.

Let me then come to article 8 and 9. I would conclude from the 
discussion that everybody has been in favour of a compulsory
insurance or an equivalent rather than other financial security. 
In this context I will reword article 8 which was perhaps a little 
bit too loosely drafted. Most participants would be in favour of 
not leaving it to the States whether to establish such a scheme or 
not. Further, I shall make clear that this obligation will cover 
only private operators and not the State. I believe that it has 
been very clear that the States should not come under this 
regulation.

The next question would be the limit and the insurance scheme. It 
is certainly premature for the time being and without the 
expertise from insurance experts to say anything about adequate 
limits. Here again I would call upon you to furnish me with 
information on your national legal systems, as far as you have 
compulsory insurance schemes. I believe the limits provided for 
should be flexible ones.

As far as limits are concerned, we have had a very intensive 
discussion, which has conveyed a slightly, but not totally, 
different message to me than that I had received in Heidelberg and 
by writing. If we are in a position to define the costs flowing 
from damage mainly by the costs of the adequate response action, 
it might be inconsistent to pose a limit which is lower than the 
costs for adequate response actions. In case limits are 
nevertheless introduced one needs to establish who will pay these 
extra costs. This should not be the one which undertook the 
necessary response action. This is one of the problems one should 
look at. However, irreparable damage may be treated differently. 
One could argue that with respect to irreparable damage an upper 
limit might be invoked. However, in this respect one could also 
calculate the compensation by relying on the costs for potential 
response action. Then again we would not need an upper limit. In 
this respect I am dependent on your guidance and I would 
appreciate if you could look into that matter.

Let me now come to article 6 which deals with exemptions. There 
have been the following suggestions. First of all, one should 
consider whether instead of the words "to the extent that it has 
been directly caused by an event constituting in the circumstances
of Antarctica a natural disaster" (art. 6 (a)) we should use the 
formula "force majeure". Others have objected to that. It has been 
pointed out that there is quite some caselaw dealing with force 
majeure in the Atlantic and the Pacific, and that incidents which 
are normally qualified as force majeure are regarded to be normal 
in Antarctica. Therefore, it was perhaps not without wisdom that 
CRAMRA found this formulation just cited; which, however, could 
still be improved, perhaps by omitting the words "which could not 
reasonably have been foreseen", etc. This would be an option which 
might streamline article 6 and, apart from that, would take into 
account that information in Antarctica is quite good.

I have already spoken about the emergency action. If it is not 
excluded from the scope (article 2), then it would fit here. But I 
see some merit to exclude it from the scope.

Thirdly, I would like to refer to the suggestion I have offered in 
Heidelberg. There it was rejected that only the victim of an 
aggression should be excluded under this exemption, not the 
aggressor. Perhaps one can introduce this aspect.

Finally, we have had a very interesting discussion on State ships. 
I believe we have come to a more or less common view on that, 
namely that it is not a problem. The reference to article 11 of 
Annex 4 of the Protocol does not mean that one could exclude from 
this Annex negative impacts resulting from activities undertaken 
by State ships. Several statements have been made in this context 
and they have all come to the same conclusion and have been highly 
convincing.

Finally, I would like to refer to the Fund (article 11), which has 
been the last point we have addressed. Here we have had a 
preliminary discussion only which is due to the fact that as long 
as we do not have any clear-cut view about the whole system, one 
can hardly envisage the position of the Fund in the system. 
Therefore we have concentrated our discussion only on the question 
of how to finance the Fund. Theoretically there are the following 
options: State contribution, taxing the departure for Antarctica, 
taxing or having a levy upon the impact assessment, strict impact
13

assessment, or a taxation on tourism. It is easy to include 
voluntary contributions, but that will not suffice, and perhaps 
one may consider as one possible solution that the compensation 
paid for irreparable damage should go into the Fund. So far, no 
convincing alternative has been suggested. I therefore would like 
to conclude my summing up of the discussion on the Fund by 
pleading everybody to look into his national legal system. In this 
respect I particularly call upon our French and United States 
colleagues to investigate whether they can draw some experience 
from the funds they have, although I am fully aware of the fact 
that these funds serve activities which have an economic character 
the benefits of which you can tax more easily. However, we cannot 
really argue that tourism is an activity of a scale comparable to 
the transport of oil, and certainly not the tourism activities 
undertaken in Antarctica.

• I certainly have not repeated every single argument put forward in 
our discussion during these three days, but I hope to have given 
you` a broad idea of how I evaluate the discussion and I have 
further indicated in which direction I intend to move when 
drafting the Third Offering. As on the previous occasion I shall 
submit this summary in my personal capacity to the Nineteenth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
PROF. DR. RÜDIGER WOLFRUM                                           D-69120 HEIDELBERG
DIREKTOR AM MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT                                   BERLINER STRASSE 48
FÜR AUSLANDISCHES ÖFFENTLICHES RECHT                              TELEFON 06221/482-1
UND VÖLKERRECHT                                                    Durchwahl 062 21/482 255/256
                                                                  TELEFAX  06221/482288

                                                         February 7, 1995

Dear Colleagues,

Enclosed I send you, as already indicated, the Chairman's
Third Offering. Since the meeting of the Legal Working Group in
The Hague, I have received no further comments or suggestions. I
took this as an incentive to work on the basis of the suggestions
made at that or previous meetings.

May I remind you that we agreed to start with the deli-
berations of the Legal Working Group in Seoul at the place indica-
ted by the host government on Monday, May 8, 1995 directly fol-
lowing the Opening of the Meeting, Election of Officers and the
Adoption of the Agenda. The Legal Working Group will meet twice a
day for the first week. It is intended to concentrate the delibe-
rations on articles 1 to 9; like on previous occasions we will use
the Third Offering as a guidance for discussion.

With all my best regards and
looking forward to seeing you in Seoul

Encl.
Chairman's Third Offering

Annex on Environmental Liability

Article 1
Purpose

The purpose of this Annex is, in accordance with the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
(Protocol), to induce those active in Antarctica to exercise 
care with a view to avoiding or minimizing damage to the 
Antarctic environment and thus to contribute to its 
comprehensive protection
- by implementing article 16 of the Protocol and
- by supporting the implementation of States Parties' 
obligations under article 15 of the Protocol. In that respect 
the Annex aims at ensuring adequate compensation to those 
States Parties that carry out response action with respect to 
damage caused by other States Parties or natural or juridical 
persons thereof.

Explanations:
The wording of article 1 was based on the First Offering, 
however one further aspect had been added.

The liability regime must support the objectives of the 
Protocol, namely the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. In this 
respect, the Protocol is meant to compel operators to exercise 
care with a view to avoiding damage to the Antarctic 
environment by making them financially responsible for 
environmental damage they cause. Further, account has to be 
taken of the fact that in accordance with article 15 of the 
Protocol States Parties are under an obligation to "provide 
for prompt and effective response action to such emergencies 
which might arise in the Antarctic Treaty area". A corollary 
of this objective is that the regime should provide for 
compensation to those States that carry out response action 
and restoration in respect to damage caused by others.

The precautionary principle and the compensation of States 
Parties - both already inherent aspects of article 1 of the 
Second Offering - have been emphasized in the Third Offering.

1
Article 2
Scope

(1) This Annex shall apply to all activities taking place in 
the Antarctic Treaty area covered by the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) 
except for actions undertaken purely for humanitarian reasons.

(2) The Annex does not apply to fishing, sealing or whaling in 
the Antarctic Treaty area if undertaken under the Convention 
on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, or 
the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, or the 
International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. This 
does not preclude the application of this Annex to damage 
caused by activities undertaken in connection with or 
incidently to fishing, sealing or whaling. Nothing in this 
Annex shall be interpreted as derogating from the rights and 
obligations of Parties under the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the 
International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling.

(3) Nothing in this Annex shall be interpreted as derogating 
from the obligations of the Parties under other international 
instruments concerning environmental liability in force and 
applicable in the Antarctic Treaty area.

Explanations:
As already indicated in the explanations of the First 
Offering, most of the responses to the questionnaire were in 
favour of a comprehensive liability regime covering all the 
activities addressed in the Protocol (scientific research, 
tourism, logistic and support activities, including building 
and provisioning, passage of ships, overflying of aircraft). 
The same is true with respect to the answers I have received 
in preparation of the meeting in the Netherlands. In my 
summing up of the Heidelberg discussion I suggested a wording 
which was slightly different from the one of the First 
Offering. This suggestion was reflected in article 2 paragraph 
1 of the Second Offering. In the Third Offering I have 
included a reference to activities undertaken for humanitarian 
reasons. At The Hague meeting many delegations have suggested
2
their exemptions from the scope of the Annex.

At the Heidelberg meeting the view had been expressed that, 
according to the Final Act of the Protocol, the Protocol was 
not meant to cover fishing, since fishing was fully covered by 
the regime of CCAMLR. The same would apply to sealing. This 
has, again, been made clear by several participants in Kyoto 
and at The Hague meeting. Article 2 paragraph 2, first 
sentence of the Third Offering tries to formulate this idea, 
more clearly taking into account suggestions made orally or in 
writing.

Article 2 paragraph 2, third sentence should be self-
explanatory and is, in my view, necessary as a counterbalance 
to the first sentence.

Paragraph 3, the incorporation of which has been suggested 
several times in the responses to the questionnaire, although 
with a different wording, is meant to ensure the application 
of the strictest standard in force. As far as I can see it, 
there were no serious objections in the discussion insofar to 
have such a provision included. In this context, account has 
to be taken of the fact that different Conventions already 
exist concerning the liability of ships. This latter aspect 
needs further consideration and I was promised a paper for the 
deliberations in Seoul.

                                  Article 3
                            Definitions

For the purpose of this Annex,

(1) "damage" means any impact on the Antarctic environment or 
dependent or associated ecosystems caused by human activity, 
as referred to under article 1 of this Annex, which is of a 
more than minor or transitory nature unless the impact had 
been assessed previously according to article 8 of the 
Protocol. The notion of damage also includes loss of or 
impairment of scientific research facilities in Antarctica of 
a third party arising directly from a damage to the Antarctic 
environment.

(2) the Committee on Environmental Protection on the basis of 
past experience on the environmental situation of Antarctica 
shall establish non-exclusive lists identifying activities or 
impacts which are not to be regarded to cause or constitute a 
3
damage. These lists shall be reviewed every second year. In 
drawing up these lists particular consideration shall be given 
to the need of research activities.

Alternative A for paragraph 1:

"damage" means

    (a) any impact on the Antarctic environment or dependent or 
associated ecosystems caused by human activity, as referred to 
under article 1 of this Annex, which is of a more than minor 
or transitory nature unless it had been assessed previously 
according to article 8 of the Protocol,

    (b) loss of or impairment of established use of a third party 
arising directly out of damage as described in subparagraph 
(a) above,

    (c) loss of or damage to property of a third party or loss of 
life or personal injury of a third party arising directly out 
of damage as described in subparagraph (a) above,

    (d) liability of an operator for any loss of life, personal 
injury or loss of or damage to property other than that 
governed by this Annex shall be regulated by applicable law 
and procedure.

(3) "operator" means any State Party or natural or juridical 
person established under the law of a Party or having the 
nationality of a State Party or being resident in the 
territory of a State Party or being domiciled or habitually 
resident in the territory of a State Party which organizes or 
undertakes activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.

(4) "preventive measure" means any measures as may be 
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the Antarctic 
environment or dependent or associated ecosystems.

(5) "removal" means clean up, containment and other measures 
as may be necessary to eliminate, minimize or mitigate damage.

(6) "response action" means any preventive or removal measure 
as may be necessary to prevent, eliminate, minimize or 
                                                            4
mitigate damage.

(7) "remedial measure" means, additionally to removal, any 
measure aiming to restore damaged or destroyed components of 
the Antarctic environment.

Explanations:

The First Offering did not provide for an article on 
definitions. The Heidelberg meeting had clearly indicated that 
it is preferable to include such an article into the draft. 
This view was inherent to most of the answers received in 
preparation of the meeting in The Hague.

Paragraph 1 tries to define the notion of "damage". Article 16 
of the Protocol refers to "damage" but gives no guidance as to 
what it should include. Two different questions arise: What 
degree of harm should give rise to liability and what types of 
harm should be covered? For the purpose of environmental 
impact assessment, article 8 of the Protocol distinguishes 
between activities that have less than a minor or transitory 
impact, a minor or transitory impact, and more than a minor or 
transitory impact. According to article 1 Annex I of the 
Protocol activities having less than a minor or transitory 

impact may proceed without further assessment; activities 
having a minor or transitory impact may proceed after an 
Initial Environment Evaluation provided appropriate procedures 
assessing and verifying the impact are put in place. I believe 
it would be only consistent if only more than minor or 
transitory impacts are to be included into the notion of 
damage. Otherwise, this would result in an inconsistency 
between the Protocol and the Annex. I believe that this was so 
far the common denominator in the discussion in Heidelberg. At 
the meeting in The Hague several questions were raised in this 
respect. The controversial discussion which has to be 
continued at the meeting in Seoul identified three cases:

- activity assessed (within EIP), impact foreseen, impact 
happened as foreseen - no damage;

- activity assessed (within EIP), risk (more than minor or 
transitory) foreseen, however, the probability of the risk had 
been regarded as minor, risk materialized - accident - damage;

- activity assessed (within EIP), no risk (more than minior or 
transitory) foreseen - damage.

The Third Offering attempts to reflect this approbach.

Further, the Third Offering introduces the idea to involve 
experts in the definition of damage. Perhaps this could 
already be done within the framework of article 8 of the 
Protocol. This might meet the precautionary principle.
However, care has to be taken not to modify article 8 of the 
Protocol by introducing such an idea.

Finally, I have included damage to scientific research 
facilities into the first definition of damage.

The Final Act of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
that adopted the Environmental Protocol stated that "it was 
understood that the liability for damage to the Antarctic 
environment should be included" in the liability regime. There 
is no doubt, therefore, that damage should include harm to the 
Antarctic environment. However, many States Parties have 
emphasized that the Annex should also cover that damage to 
property or personal injury and loss of scientific use which 
resulted from damages to the Antarctic environment. This 
approach had been taken by article 8 of CRAMRA. Obviously, two 
divergent views exist in this respect. Hence, I felt it 
appropriate to have this second view reflected under 
alternative A for paragraph 1 so as to focus the discussion 
properly. The idea was voiced to refer to damage resulting 
from environmental damage not in the definition but rather in 
article 5. This merits further consideration:

The definition of the terms "operator", "preventive measure", 
"removal", "response action" and "remedial measure" is meant 
to make the drafting of the Annex easier. The definitions have 
been changed to reflect the deliberations in The Hague.

Article 4
Response Action

(1) An operator shall take necessary and timely response 
action, if the activity resulted or threatens to result in 
damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated 
ecosystems. In case the activity has resulted in a damage the 
operator, if the response action proves to be insufficient, 
shall undertake remedial measures as far as environmentally 
advisable, technically feasible and economically reasonable. 
Remedial action shall, however, be undertaken by the operator 
after appropriate consultation with the Committee on 
Environmental Protection.

If the damage is attributable to more than one operator, the 
operators will be liable jointly and severally.

6
(2) In the case of damage the operator having caused such damage does not take necessary and timely response action, with due regard of article 15 of the Protocol,
(a) any State Party, private entity or person may take immediate preventive measures;
(b) any State Party, acting in accordance with article 15 of the Protocol, may take timely response action; it may entrust private entities with such an undertaking.

(3) In the case response actions are not sufficient, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall consult with a view of taking adequate remedial measures.

Explanations:

The First Offering did not contain a separate article on response action. However, the whole idea was already enshrined in that draft (article 4). This concept has not yet received any significant discussion. However, several answers in preparation of the meeting in The Hague have pointed out that there should be an explicit obligation to take preventive and restoration measures and that, if such an obligation was properly fulfilled, it would forestall liability action in many cases. In any case, I believe it is within the objective of the Antarctic treaty as well as the Protocol that operators are under an obligation to take all necessary and timely response actions in the case the activity resulted or threatens to result in damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems. A similar wording was contained in article 8 of CRAMRA. In practice the question of who will decide whether the actions of the operator were sufficient and timely raises a significant problem. It cannot be left to arbitration alone. This might be a role of the Committee on Environmental Protection.

The Second Offering had caused some confusion as to the relationship between article 4 and 10. As indicated in my summary I have amalgamated the two provisions. This is meant to underline that the operator is the first called upon to take response or even remedial action.

Paragraph 2 (former article 10) constitutes an attempt to provide for a procedure regulating response action or even remedial measures undertaken by another State or entity than the one having caused the damage. A distinction has been made between preventive measures, response and remedial measures. The former may be taken at once and without undue delay in waiting for the one having caused the impact to react. The reason for that lies in the limited nature of preventive measures and the objective pursued therewith.

7
It is, in my view, up to each single State Party acting under article 15 of the Protocol to entrust private entities to undertake appropriate response action. This has now been explicitly mentioned since there was some uneasiness in this respect at the meeting in The Hague.

Article 5
Liability

(1) Operators undertaking activities in the Antarctic Treaty area are strictly liable in the first instance for damage caused by their activities. Such a measure of damage includes:
- the reasonable costs by whomsoever incurred of reasonable response action actually undertaken, in accordance with article 4 paragraph 2 of this Annex;
- the reasonable costs of remedial measures as agreed upon in accordance with article 4 paragraph 3 of this Annex.

(2) In the case where for physical or technical or other reasons a restoration of the Antarctic environment to the status quo ante is not possible or is not reasonable in view of ensuring an equitable result, the operator is under an obligation to provide contributions to the Fund. The amount of such compensation shall be commensurate with the significance of the damage to the environment, particular account being taken of the loss of or impairment to potential future uses and impairment of Antarctica's aesthetic and wilderness values. If, however, no such contribution has been deposited or the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are not satisfied with the amount deposited in the Fund, they shall enter into consultations. With a view to proposing an appropriate amount, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting will base its proposal upon respective guidelines to be developed by the Committee for Environmental Protection. If no agreement can be reached by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the case may be submitted by any of its members to arbitration as provided for under the schedule of the Protocol.

8
(3) When compensation has been paid other than under this 
Annex, liability under this Annex shall be offset by the 
amount of such payment.

Explanations:
Article 5 addresses the issue of liability, strictly speaking. 
Paragraph 1 gives expression to the principle that the entity 
undertaking the activity which caused the damage should be the 
one primarily liable. This is the approach taken by all 
existing international liability regimes, with the partial 
exception of the Convention on the Liability Caused by Space 
Objects. Since the term "operator" includes private entities 
as well as States undertaking activities in the Antarctic 
Treaty area directly, it is clear that in this respect States 
and other entities are treated equally.

The remaining part of paragraph 1 refers to the assessment of 
environmental damage. This assessment causes some problems in 
practice. One measure to assess environmental damage is the 
cost of response actions. I take it that all Parties will 
agree on this approach which is gaining acceptance in national 
as well as international law. Since remedial actions pose 
different problems, they are treated separately.

Paragraph 2 was already enshrined in the First Offering. Its 
original wording caused a considerable discussion, divergent 
opinions were expressed concerning this problem. Further 
clarification was at least reached in the discussion which has 
followed. A damage may be irreparable for physical, technical 
and perhaps even for economic reasons. Furthe[?]ron, it was 
pointed out that irreparable damage would need different 
treatment as far as damage to the Antarctic environment on the 
one side, and damage to property, lost interests etc. on the 
other side was concerned. Finally, it was argued that damage 
occurring outside the Antarctic Treaty area, especially in 
areas under coastal State jurisdiction, might be treated 
differently as well. There was, so far, no in-depth discussion 
on this point.

Many have pointed out that "punitive damages" are inacceptable 
under national law. The present version cannot be regarded to 
be punitive in nature. At the beginning the view was expressed 
that dealing with irreparable damage was a very complicated 
issue and that one could hardly rely on any precedent; now the 
view seems to prevail that a State Party or person having 
damaged the Antarctic environment with no removal or remedial 
action being possible should not be in a better position, as 
far as the obligation to provide for compensation is 
concerned, than a State Party or a person having damaged the 
Antarctic environment to a lesser degree. In the meeting in 
The Hague was further emphasized that irreparable damage might 
occur in Antarctica more often than in other places. Finally,
it was pointed out that the issue was a matter of finding proper means of assessment. All States have mechanisms to decide upon the amount of immaterial damage.

The Third Offering tries to make use of the various suggestions made at the meeting in The Hague.

Article 6
Exemptions

(1) Without prejudice to the exemptions provided for in the Protocol and the other Annexes, an operator shall not be liable pursuant to article 5 above if he proves that the damage has been caused directly by, and to the extent that it has been directly caused by:

    (a) an event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an exceptional character; or

    (b) armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism directed against the activities of the operator against which no reasonable measures could have been effective.

(2) Paragraph 1 is not to be interpreted to detract from the obligation under article 4, paragraph 1, first sentence, as far as technically feasible.

Explanations:

The question of exemption has already been addressed in the First Offering, although in a somewhat different wording. Nearly all of those having responded to the questionnaire have argued that the excuses set down in article 8 paragraph 4 and 6 CRAMRA with the qualification specified in this provision are the most that should be permitted. This position was confirmed in the discussion although it was pointed out that even the CRAMRA provisions did not satisfy everybody, especially as far as armed conflict was concerned. It was proposed that only the victim of an armed conflict should be entitled to rely on the armed conflict as an excuse. On this very basis I have redrafted the wording of the previous Offerings so as to better reflect the discussions we had so far. The last point in the discussion, since there was no clear understanding on it yet, should not be lost out of sight. It has not yet found a place in the wording of the

10
draft.
Paragraph 2 contains provisions for the obligation of 
operators to provide for response action even in cases of 
exemptions. This reflects the fact that even in these 
situations a State Party or entity concerned is in the best 
position to take preventive or removal measures. However, the 
failure to do so should not automatically entail liability, 
otherwise the exemption would be meaningless. The obligation 
to provide for prevention and removal and the obligation to 
provide for compensation should thus be kept separately. 
Perhaps one could even think of a system of financial 
incentives to encourage the operators or State Parties or a 
State Party concerned. The whole complex will need a very 
careful further consideration.

            Article 7

Residual liability of States Parties

(1) Without prejudice to the rules of international law on 
State responsibility, damage caused by the failure of a State 
Party to carry out its responsibilities under the Protocol 
including all its Annexes shall entail liability.

(2) Without prejudice to paragraph 1, a State Party shall not, 
however, be liable merely for the reason that a damage has 
been caused by an operator under its jurisdiction, if that 
State Party has adopted laws and regulations and taken 
administrative measures which are sufficient for securing 
compliance by persons and entities under its jurisdiction.

(3) Liability shall be limited to that portion of liability 
not satisfied by the person or entity having undertaken the 
activity in question.

Explanations:

In the discussion it became quite clear that two different 
systems of responsibility exist, namely operator liability 
arising from damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent 
or associated ecosystems, on the one hand, and residual State 
liability arising from the failure of a State Party to fully 
implement the Protocol and its Annexes, especially to control 
operators, on the other.

11
As to the former, the respective rules are to be found in 
article 5. I hope by referring to "residual liability", it has 
become evident that article 7 deals with the latter. In this 
second case, international law uses the due diligence test, 
and I have included that into the wording of the text.

Distinguishing between these two systems, one has to take into 
account that State responsibility is already provided for 
under general international law. Hence, the suggested wording 
of article 7 constitutes a clarification.

As far as residual State responsibility is concerned, I have 
changed the approach followed in the Second Offering by 
introducing two ideas voiced in the meeting in The Hague. 
Firstly, I clearly spelled out that, as far as the Protocol 
and its Annexes refer to States' obligations, a violotation 
thereof entailed international responsibility in accordance 
with customary international law. Secondly, I disconnected 
private acts from State responsibility to the extent that 
liability of the State only arises where the State has not 
done everything on the national level to ensure compliance.

                                  Article 8
                  Compulsory Insurance or Other Financial Security

Each Party shall ensure where appropriate, taking due account 
of the risks of the activity, of the financial capacity of the 
operator, private operators conducting activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty area be required to have and maintain 
insurance or an equivalent up to an adequate limit and of such 
type and terms as specified by national law, to cover the 
liability under this Convention.

Explanations:
During the discussion in Heidelberg and Kyoto many 
participants have expressed the idea of providing for 
compulsory insurance. On this very basis I have made an 
attempt to draft a respective provision. The changes 
introduced in the Third Offering reflect the suggestions made 
in The Hague.

                                  12
Article 9
Limits

Explanations:
The First Offering did not directly refer to limits, although
the necessity of providing for limits was highlighted by some
participants and rejected by others in the discussion. As long
as no clearer picture has been gained as to the whole
structure of the liability regime, is seems to me premature to
try any drafting in this respect. Therefore I resorted to the
procedure once applied in the former deliberations just to
highlight the issue without giving any wording. It emerged
from the meeting in The Hague, however, that upper limits will
be necessary as far as liability for irreparable damage is
concerned. I do not believe that it would be appropriate to
provide for limits where the response and the remedial action
are limited to reasonable measures.

Article 10
Environmental Protection Fund

(1) An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established
with the following aims:

(a) to provide compensation for damage upon the Antarctic
environment as referred to in article 3 to the extent that the
protection afforded under articles 4 and 5 was proved to be
inadequate;

(b) to provide for compensation, on an interim basis, in cases
a response action has to be undertaken on an emergency basis.

(2) For the purpose of fulfilling its functions under
paragraph 1 the Fund shall pay compensation to those having
undertaken response action,

(a) because no liability arises under the Protocol;
(b) the cause of the impact in accordance with article 3
cannot be established.

(3) The Fund shall provide for the necessary financial means
expeditiously with a view to enabling timely action under
13
article 15 of the Protocol.

(4) Contributions to the Fund shall be made
(a) in accordance with article 5 paragraph 2 of this Annex;
(b) on the basis of taxes levied on the departure for
Antarctica. These taxes shall be collected by the State Party
in which the environmental assessment procedure has been
undertaken and shall be transferred to the Fund.

(5) The Fund has the right to receive voluntary contributions.

Explanations:
This draft article on the Fund at this stage is of a very
preliminary nature. I felt it nevertheless necessary to draft
such a provision since some references were made to a Fund and
without it the picture of a liability regime would remain
incomplete.

I am fully aware that the establishment of a Fund and its
funding are still controversial.

Article 11
Claims Tribunals

(1) Disputes between States Parties concerning the obligation
to pay compensation shall be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal
constituted under the Schedule to the Protocol.

(2) If such disputes involve private entities or persons, the
State Party in which the Environmental Impact Assessment in
accordance with article 8 Protocol and Annex I has been
undertaken or should have been undertaken shall represent the
private person or entity in the proceedings. This State shall
ensure that the arguments of the private entity or of persons
concerned are properly introduced into the proceedings.

Explanations:
Some referred to such claims tribunals. Their structure and
function may depend upon the damages covered by this annex.

14
The draft tries to tie the claims tribunals to the arbitration 
provided for in the Protocol to avoid a duplication of 
institutions.

It was the common view that to deal with this issue was 
premature. Therefore, I have reiterated the wording of the 
First Offering so as to provide everybody with a full picture 
of the provision which might become part of the future Annex.

Article 12
Amendment or Modification

(1) This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted 
in accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. 
Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or 
modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall 
become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless 
one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties 
notifies the Depositary, within that period, that it wishes an 
extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the 
measure.

(2) Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes 
effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall 
thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice 
of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

Explanations:
This provision has been copied from the Protocol. There is no 
need to consider it now.

 
                                              15
