ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  SEOUL
                            May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 68
May 12, 1995
Original: English

 
AREAS OF GEOLOGIC INTEREST IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA,
AND TOURISM: A CASE FOR COMPATIBILITY

Agenda Item 7

(Submitted by IAATO)
AREAS OF GEOLOGIC INTEREST IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA, AND TOURISM:
A CASE FOR COMPATIBILITY

By John Splettstoesser

The following extended abstract is modified from a paper accepted for presentation at a Symposium on "Geology of the South Shetland Islands, following the XIXth ATCM in Seoul.  This paper explains the methods of operation of tourism in Antarctica currently in use, practices of environmental guidelines, and brief overviews of geologic and other areas visited by tourists.

As a geologist, the author has been active in the U.S. Antarctic Research Program for many austral summers in the last 35 years, and also has been a naturalist-lecturer on more than 50 cruises to Antarctica.  He is the author of numerous articles and editor of books on Antarctic geology, as well as on Antarctic tourism.  He has represented the Antarctic tour operators association (IAATO) at Antarctic Treaty meetings, conferences, and has testified at Hearings for U.S. legislation that deals with tourism in Antarctica.
The Fourth
Seoul International Symposium
on
Antarctic Science

'Geology of
the South Shetland Islands'

 
Ansan, Korea
May 22-25, 1995

Polar Research Center
Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute (KORDI)

Sponsored by
Korean National Committee on Antarctic Research
AREAS OF GEOLOGIC INTEREST IN THE ANTARCTIC PENINSULA, AND TOURISM:
A CASE FOR COMPATIBILITY

John Splettstoesser
1 Jameson Point Road, Rockland, Maine 04841 U.S.A.

The onset of tourism in Antarctica in the 1960's went mostly
unnoticed for many years afterward.  A single tour operator, and
then two, conducted visits to sites of mainly wildlife interest,
and mainly in the Antarctic Peninsula region.  By the 1980's,
however, and well into the mid-1990's, the numbers of tour vessels
and visitors increased.  During the 1994-95 austral summer 15 tour
ships and about 8,000 passengers visited Antarctica in the months
of November to March.  Some 80 different sites have been visited in
the Peninsula over the last decade or so, with several sites
hosting perhaps 2,000 or more visitors in a single austral summer
as a result of repetitive stops by different operators.  The
number of shore stops in an individual itinerary of a single tour
vessel averages 5 to 15, depending on the length of the cruise,
weather, ice conditions, and the ingenuity of staff.

The potential impact of tourist (and non-tourist) visits to
wildlife sites has yet to be determined, although some baseline
studies are underway by U.S., Australian, and other Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Party (ATCP) researchers.  It has long been
recognized that Antarctica has been "dedicated to science," the
result of decisions made by 12 nations in the International
Geophysical Year, 1957-58, with the 1959 Antarctic Treaty
specifying that continuation of scientific investigations shall
take priority in one of the "Global Commons" on this planet.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
reaffirms Antarctica as a reserve devoted to peace and science,
stating explicitly the protection of its wilderness, scientific and
aesthetic values as an overriding goal.  This emphasis on science
has never been challenged by any other visitors to Antarctica (i.e.
tourist, e.g.), but instead it can be shown that "science" and
"tourism" are compatible in their individual operations
(Splettstoesser, in press).  Tourism, in fact, can be shown to be
less stressful than some ATCP activities because the tour vessel is
the "station" for all activities, and no shore facilities are
required.  Most Antarctic visitors spend little time ashore.

As tour operators have widened their base of shore locations in
Antarctica, more areas are being visited that include not only
sites of wildlife interest (e.g., penguin breeding sites), but also
areas with geologic significance.  Inasmuch as the latter are often
those included in sites of current study by ATCP investigators, it
is imperative that tour operators be made aware that unauthorized
or improperly managed visits to such sites have the potential to
disrupt continuing investigations, and possible loss of valuable 
field specimens, primarily paleontological.

A first attempt at setting aside such an area as a Reserve is 
Specially Reserved Area No. 1 (82 36'S, 53 30'W to 82 26'S, 50 
30'W), which has been designated by ATCPs in the North Dufek 
Massif, Pensacola Mountains, on the basis of its "geological, 
geomorphological, aesthetic, scenic, and wilderness values,"
requiring an approved management plan and a permit for entry. 
Because of the remoteness of the area, it is unlikely that anyone 
but scientists would have an interest there or access to it, but 
SRA No. 1 represents the concern that ATCPs have shown in 
attempting to protect unique areas from unauthorized entry.

Tour operators in Antarctica have exercised great care in 
protecting the environment as a result of self-imposed Guidelines 
of Conduct that were initiated by the operators in the 1980's. 
These Guidelines became formalized when the International 
Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) was founded in 
1991 as a means of pooling common resources and acting as a single 
body for purposes of standardizing operations, and advising 
regulatory organizations (such as Antarctic Treaty Parties) and 
others with regard to environmental protection.

IAATO has taken on more visibility since its founding because of 
its practice of standardizing methods of operation in Antarctica 
among the various tour companies and increasing numbers of 
tourists.  The IAATO Guidelines for Visitors was incorporated into 
the recently enacted Recommendation XVIII-1 (Tourism and Non-
governmental Activities) at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in April 1994.

Recommendation XVIII-1 has several specific statements about 
tourism that relate to ATCP science programs, namely to obtain 
advance permission before visiting Antarctic science and support 
facilities; noninterference of scientific equipment or markers, 
study sites, field camps or supplies; and the prohibition against 
collection of "biological or geological specimens or man-made 
artifacts as a souvenir, including rocks, bones, eggs, fossils, and 
part of contents of buildings."  IAATO formally adopted 
Recommendation XVII-1 at its July 1994 meeting.

The enforcement of this "Guidance" is left to the professional 
expedition staff, many of whom have also had prior experience with 
ATCP science programs (including this author), and are aware of the 
importance of non-interference with science programs.  The 
Antarctic Peninsula, in particular, contains several areas that 
require special consideration with regard to visits by tourist 
vessels. Many of these sites are visited because of wildlife, and 
many others are off-limits because of their designations as 
protected areas, as enacted by ATCPs (e.g., Special Protected 
Areas, Sites of Special Scientific Interest).

Others such as the following examples, have geologic significance
as well, in addition to wildlife or other attractions.  The sites 
do not require designation as protected areas, but are listed to 
mainly illustrate areas where tourist visits are not interfering 
with geologically significant sites.

(1) Hannah Point (62 39'S, 60 37'W), Livingston Island, which has 
fossil plant material found in glacial moraines, as well as 
striking minerals in the volcanic rocks.  As a means of educating 
tourist passengers about these materials, a small collection has 
been made at Hannah Point and placed on a boulder for all to see 
while a naturalist explains each specimen (a sort of outdoor 
museum).  This display has been there for two austral summers 
without being disturbed, even though different tour vessels visit 
here.

(2) Mount Flora (63 25'S, 57 01'W), Hope Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, 
where fossil plants are found, both in outcrop and in scree and 
glacially deposited material, near Esperanza Station (Argentina).

(3) Penguin Point (64 19'S, 56 43'W), Seymour Island, where fossil 
plants are found.  The collecting sites of field researchers on 
other parts of the island are specifically avoided so as not to 
introduce disturbance to strata or fossil specimens.

(4) Snow Hill Island, specifically visits to the hut of Otto 
Nordenskjold (64 21'S, 57W), Swedish geologist who wintered here in 
1902 and 1903.  This area has considerable variety of Cretaceous 
invertebrate fossils and worm borings.

Tour operators and their naturalist staff practice responsible 
management of passengers while ashore (an important aspect of the 
"Guidance"), while also providing an educational program designed 
to inform the passengers about what they are seeing and 
experiencing.  In this way, passengers gain an awareness of the 
fragile environment of Antarctica, the science programs being 
conducted there, and the need to leave everything as it was found. 
Passengers become "Antarctic ambassadors," as it were, thus 
communicating to others after their return as to the fragileness of 
Antarctica's wildlife, and the need to exercise appropriate 
management for all visitors, scientists and tourists alike.  
Geologist staff naturalists are also in a position to contribute to 
overall geologic information by data collection and observations in 
areas difficult to reach by investigators from ATCP research 
programs.

The appropriate transfer of information from the scientific 
community to expedition staff is key to the continued protection of 
sites of geological interest.  Expedition leaders must be aware of 
ongoing research and sensitive sites in order to manage site visits 
properly and avoid potential disruption.
With the succesful record by tour operators of environmental
practices to date, there is good reason to believe that tourism and
science programs are compatible and can operate on a non-
interference basis. The recently adopted Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty designates the Antarctic as a
natural reserve, and applies to tourism and non-governmental
actdivities, as well as governmental (ATCP) activities in the
Antarctic Treaty Area. Geologic environments in Antarctica will
thus remain undisturbed for authorized investigators to pursue
their research without interference.

Reference:

Splettstoesser, John, in press (1995), Antarctic tourism:
Successful management of a vulnerable environment. (For a
volume on "Development of Tourism in the Critical Environments"),
Tourism Recreation Research (Lucknow, India).
