ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                       TRATADO ANTARTICO              
                                                                      XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
                                                                      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
                                                                      XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


SEoul              
May 8-19, 1995              

                                                                      XIX ATCM/INF 81              
May 12, 1995              
Original: English              


CENTER FOR ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING              

Agenda Item 10              

(Submitted by Japan)
Information Paper submitted by Japan
to XIX ATCM - Item 10

Center for Antarctic Environmental Monitoring
National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Japan

The Antarctic is a unique and vulnerable system, consisted of the atmosphere,
cryosphere, ocean-geosphere and biosphere, and any processes in the Antarctic have strong
interaction among them. Also, natural phenomena occurring in the Antarctic are not
independent of those of the global system.

Following the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty as for the long term environmental monitoring, the "Center for Antarctic Environment
Monitoring (CAEM)" was established in April 1995 under NIPR. The Center is aiming
- to monitor decadal variability of the Antarctic systems,
- to study processes and mechanisms of variability,
- to assess the impact of human activity on the Antarctic systems,
- to determine the impact of global change on the Antarctic systems and
- to understand the role of the Antarctic in global change.

To achieve these goals, the Center will focus on three areas:

1. Atmospheric environments: To monitor the Antarctic atmosphere as a whole, from the
troposphere and stratosphere to the ionosphere and magnetosphere, including interactions
between the sun and earth, auroral physics, trace gases and material cycling, for a better
understanding of the role of the Antarctic atmosphere in global change.

2. Oceanic-Geophysical environments: To monitor the interactions between the linked ocean -
ice sheet - atmosphere system with the underlying crust to clarify the role of marine-
geophysical dynamics in influencing global change.

3. Biospheric environments: To monitor ecosystem changes, and then to evaluate the impact of
human activity and global change on the Antarctic biosphere and to observe any biogenic
feedback to the climate.

In order to undertake these programs, the Center will consist of about 10 scientists. The
Center is developing a network within NIPR, and cooperating with other institutions including
international organizations. The Center is also responsible for the processing, management,
storage and distribution of data as well as for developing necessary instrumentation and
methodology for monitoring.
