ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 112
May 16, 1995
Original: English

 
OPENING ADDRESS
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NETHERLANDS

Agenda Item 3
Mr Chairman,

Let me begin by congratulating you on behalf of the Netherlands delegation on your election to your present high office.
I am convinced that your chairmanship will make for a productive meeting. I should in addition like through you to thank
the government of South Korea for its offer to host this year's Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Seoul, a fine
city which was over six hundred years old when the first explorer reached the South Pole.

A year ago the Protocol on Environmental Protection had been ratified by eight countries; the Netherlands was the ninth
country to ratify it as last year's meeting was taking place. As my government considers it vital that the Protocol enter in-
to force at the earliest possible opportunity, it is gratifying to see that it has now been ratified by a further five
countries, although a total of 26 would have been even nicer than 14. In this respect this Consultative Meeting is a speci-
al occasion in that we have for the first time divided up the agenda as though the 26 countries to which I have just refer-
red had already given their approval: the Transitional Environmental Working Group has been set up pending the establish-
ment of the Commission for Environmental Protection, which is set to take place after the Protocol's entry into force. Let
us hope that this is not long delayed! The Dutch implementing legislation is now on its way to Parliament. In this connect-
ion I think it is worth mentioning that the information which we received at the ATCM in Kyoto concerning the content of
such legislation in other states has proved influential.

Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection brings us automatically, as it were, to the liability annex. My gov-
ernment is pleased to have had the privilege of helping to bring the annex into being by organising a meeting of the lia-
bility working group in November 1994. This meeting proved highly successful. However, the credit must go not to the org-
anisers but to the participants and, in particular, to the chairman, Professor Wolfrum. His inspiring chairmanship will
certainly have ensured that further steps have now been taken.

The establishment of a liability annex and the enforcement of its provisions will help to ensure that Antarctic tourism,
which was the subject of a Recommendation made by last year's Meeting, develops along the right lines. This Recommendation
is now being applied by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, which in the Netherlands is the government department
responsible for tourism. Furthermore, the Netherlands Government is still of the opinion that the Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas (ASMAs) are a suitable instrument for the management of the problems connected with tourism.

1
Mr Chairman,

In making the preparations for what is to all appearances a su-
perbly organised Consultative Meeting, there has been no Ant-
arctic Secretariat to support you. We all know why that is,
but there is no point in dwelling any longer on the background
to this unfortunate affair. I would not call it a minor affair
but it is certainly a transitory one. May it soon be over!

Let me end my opening address on a high note. At the previous
ACTM the funding of the Dutch Antarctic Research Programme
gave rise to considerable problems. To these was added the
need for an increase in the Antarctic research budget, and
with good reason. Many of you will remember that the Nether-
lands was the first and, thus far the only, country to be ac-
corded the status of Consultative Party without having its own
infrastructural facilities in Antarctica. Our aim was to spare
the Antarctic environment by cooperating with other countries
and using their facilities wherever possible. This principle
was subsequently reflected in article 6e of the Protocol on
Environmental Protection. Needless to say, we believed that
one good turn deserved another and that a budget increase
would constitute appropriate compensation. From my remark
about ending my address on a high note, you will by now have
deduced that matters have reached a satisfactory conclusion.
We are pleased to be able to show that, even if we do not have
our Antarctic facilities, it is possible to be a full Antarct-
ic partner without sponging off others. We are also gratified
to note that in a long period of uncertainty occasionally
tinged with anxiety, the continuity of Dutch Antarctic re-
search has aroused interest at the very highest level within
the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

Thank you.

 
2
