ANTARCTIC TREATY                   
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                                  SEOUL               
                                  May 8-19, 1995      

TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION CONSULTATIVA         
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ   

XIX ATCM/INF 116
May 17, 1995
Original: English

NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTICA
(ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION) ACT

Agenda Item 6 a

(Submitted by New Zealand)

We enclose a copy of our Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act. We are sorry that, because of
limited availability, we can only provide one copy for each delegation.
1994                     Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                     No. 119


ANALYSIS


Title

PART I
Preliminary

1. Short Title and commencement
2. Application
3. Exception in respect of members of 
   official expeditions of other Con-
   tracting Parties
4. Exception in respect of ships or aircraft 
   supporting official expeditions of 
   other Contracting Parties
5. Exception in respect of observers and 
   exchanged scientists of other Con-
   tracting Parties
6. Consent of Attorney-General required 
   for certain proceedings
7. Interpretation
8. Act to bind the Crown
9. Purpose and principles
10. Ministerial directions

PART II
Prohibition of Mineral Resource
Activities

11. Prohibition of mineral resource 
    activities
12. Additional prohibition of mineral 
    resource activities by New Zealanders
13. Additional prohibition of mineral 
    resource activities in Ross 
    Dependency
14. Meaning of "mineral resource 
    activities"
15. Penalties

PART III
Environmental Impact Assessment

16. Purpose
17. Preliminary environmental evaluation
18. Initial environmental evaluation
19. Draft comprehensive environmental 
    evaluation
20. Final comprehensive environmental 
    evaluation
21. Joint environmental evaluation

22. Supply of further information
23. Exemptions from this Part
24. Offences

PART IV
Measures for Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora and
Protected Areas

25. Purpose
26. Interpretation
27. Respect for protected areas
28. Acts prohibited except in accordance 
    with permit
29. Application for permits
30. Restrictions on permits in respect of 
    Antarctic Specially Protected Areas
31. Restrictions on permits to take native 
    fauna and flora
32. Restrictions on permits to introduce 
    non-indigenous animals, plants, or 
    micro-organisms into Antarctica
33. Offences

PART V
Waste Disposal

34. General principles of waste disposal and 
    waste management
35. Waste disposal
36. Disposal of waste, etc. unlawful
37. Offences

PART VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
Emergencies in Antarctica

38. Emergencies in Antarctica

Inspectors

39. Appointment of inspectors
40. Provisions relating to appointment
41. Inspectors' general power of entry and 
    inspection
42. Search and seizure by special inspectors 
    with warrant
43. Search and seizure by special inspectors 
    without warrant
44. Obligations of inspectors

Public—119                                                             Price Code: 70—E
2
Antarctica (Environmental Protection) 1994, No. 119

45. Arrest by special inspectors without 
warrant                                  |     Miscellaneous Provisions
46. Custody of property seized          |  51. Service of documents
47. Offence to obstruct inspectors      |  52. Evidentiary certificates
48. Observers                           |  53. No derogation from certain enactments
49. Inspectors, etc., protected from    |  54. Application of Maritime Transport Act 
    proceedings                            |      1994
50. Liability for causing inspector to incur |  55. Regulations
    expense                                |  56. Amendments to other Acts
                                           |  57. Repeal and revocations
                                           |      Schedules

                                         1994, No. 119

An Act to provide for the comprehensive protection of 
the Antarctic environment and to recognise Antarctica 
as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science and 
to implement the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty      [6 December 1994

BE IT ENACTED by the Parliament of New Zealand as follows:

1. Short Title and commencement—(1) This Act may be 
cited as the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, this 
Act shall come into force on the 1st day of February 1995.

(3) Section 12, Parts III to V and sections 56 and 57 of, and 
the First Schedule to, this Act shall come into force on a date or 
dates to be appointed by the Governor-General by Order in 
Council.

                                  PART I
                               PRELIMINARY

2. Application—Except as otherwise provided in this Act, 
this Act shall apply—

(a) To any person in the Ross Dependency:

(b) To any New Zealand citizen and to any person ordinarily 
resident in New Zealand:

(c) To any person who is for the time being a member of, or 
responsible for organising, any expedition to 
Antarctica which is organised in New Zealand or 
which proceeds from New Zealand as its final point of 
departure for Antarctica:

(d) In respect of any act or omission occurring on board any 
ship or aircraft, to any person on board any ship or 
aircraft that is—

   (i) A New Zealand ship or a New Zealand aircraft;

or

  (ii) Any other ship, whether registered or not and of 
whatever nationality, which proceeds from New 
Zealand as its final point of departure for Antarctica.
1994, No. 119 Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                        3

3. Exception in respect of members of official 
expeditions of other Contracting Parties—
Notwithstanding section 2 of this Act, this Act (except as 
provided in section 13) shall not apply to any person—
        (a) Who is for the time being a member of, or responsible for 
organising, an official expedition of another 
Contracting Party; and
        (b) Who is not a New Zealand citizen or a person ordinarily 
resident in New Zealand.

4. Exception in respect of ships or aircraft supporting 
official expeditions of other Contracting Parties—
Notwithstanding section 2 of this Act, this Act (except as 
provided in section 13) shall not apply in respect of any act or 
omission of a person that occurs on board any ship or aircraft 
that is for the time being operating, whether exclusively or not, 
in support of any official expedition of another Contracting 
Party unless the person is—
        (a) A New Zealand citizen; or
        (b) A person who is ordinarily resident in New Zealand; or
        (c) A person who is for the time being a member of an official 
New Zealand expedition.

5. Exception in respect of observers and exchanged 
scientists of other Contracting Parties—Notwithstanding 
section 2 of this Act, this Act shall not apply to any person who 
is a national of another Contracting Party and who is an 
observer or exchanged scientist, or a member of the staff 
accompanying any observer or exchanged scientist, while that 
person is in any part of Antarctica for the purpose of exercising 
his or her functions, unless the immunity of any such person is 
waived by the Contracting Party of which the person is a 
national.

        Cf. 1960, No. 47, s. 5

6. Consent of Attorney-General required for certain 
proceedings—(1) Notwithstanding anything in any other 
enactment, proceedings—
        (a) In respect of any contravention of this Act by a person 
who is not a New Zealand citizen or a person 
ordinarily resident in New Zealand; or
        (b) In respect of any contravention of this Act anywhere in 
Antarctica outside the Ross Dependency; or
4                                                   Antarctica (Environmental Protection) 1994, No. 119

(c) In respect of any contravention of this Act on board any 
ship or aircraft that is not a New Zealand ship or a New Zealand aircraft,—

shall not, by virtue only of the provisions of this Act, be 
instituted in any Court except with the consent of the Attorney-
General and on his or her certificate that it is expedient that 
the proceedings should be instituted.

     (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a person 
may be arrested, or a warrant for a person's arrest may be 
issued and executed, and the person may be remanded in 
custody or on bail, but no further or other proceedings shall be 
taken until the Attorney-General's consent has been obtained.

     Cf. 1960, No. 47, s. 3 (3)

7. Interpretation—(1) In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,—

     “Activity” includes—

          (a) Any programme of activities:

          (b) Any change to an existing activity, including—

               (i) An increase or decrease in the intensity of an 
existing activity:

               (ii) The addition of a further activity to an 
existing activity:

               (iii) The decommissioning of a facility:

     “Annex” means an Annex to the Protocol:

     “Another Contracting Party” means a Contracting Party 
to the Antarctic Treaty other than New Zealand:

     “Antarctica” means the area south of 60 degrees south 
latitude, including all ice shelves in that area:

     “Antarctic environment” includes—

          (a) The dependent and associated ecosystems of 
Antarctica and their constituent parts; and

          (b) The natural and physical resources of 
Antarctica; and

          (c) The intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its 
wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an 
area for the conduct of scientific research, in 
particular research essential to understanding the 
global environment:

     “Antarctic Treaty” means the Antarctic Treaty signed at 
Washington on the 1st day of December 1959, a copy 
of the English text of which is set out in the First 
Schedule to the Antarctica Act 1960:
1994, No. 119    Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                    5

"Committee on Environmental Protection" means the 
Committee established in accordance with Article 11 
of the Protocol:

"Consultative Meeting" means a meeting of the 
Consultative Parties held in accordance with Article 
IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

"Consultative Parties" means the Contracting Parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty which are recognised as having 
the right to appoint representatives to Consultative 
Meetings:

"Continental shelf" means the seabed and subsoil of those 
submarine areas that extend throughout the natural 
prolongation of land to the outer edge of the 
continental margin, as determined in accordance with 
international law, or to a distance of 200 nautical 
miles where the outer edge of the continental margin 
does not extend to that distance:

"Contracting Party" means a Contracting Party to the 
Antarctic Treaty:

"Exchanged scientist" means any person who is 
exchanged pursuant to subparagraph (b) of 
paragraph 1 of Article III of the Antarctic Treaty 
(which relates to the exchange of scientific personnel 
between expeditions and stations in Antarctica):

"Inspector" means a general inspector or a special 
inspector appointed under section 39 of this Act:

"Minister" means the Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade:

"New Zealand aircraft" means any aircraft that is 
registered or required to be registered in New 
Zealand under the Civil Aviation Act 1990; and 
includes any aircraft for the time being used as an 
aircraft of the New Zealand Defence Force:

"New Zealand corporation" means a body corporate that 
is incorporated in New Zealand or whose activities are 
carried on principally in New Zealand:

"New Zealand ship" means a ship registered in New 
Zealand, or recognised by the law of New Zealand as 
a ship belonging to New Zealand; and includes any 
ship for the time being used as a ship of the New 
Zealand Defence Force:

"Observer" means an observer designated as such under 
Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty or under Article 
14 (2) of the Protocol:
6                                                   Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                                   1994, No. 119

"Official expedition", in relation to a Contracting Party,
means any part of the Antarctic programme of that
Party:

"Official New Zealand expedition" means any part of the
New Zealand Antarctic programme:

"Protocol" means the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty that was opened
for signature at Madrid on the 4th day of October
1991, a copy of the English text of which is set out in
the Second Schedule to this Act, and includes the
Annexes to the Protocol, including any Annex that
may be adopted by the Consultative Parties
subsequent to the enactment of this Act:

"Ross Dependency" includes all islands and ice shelves
within the Dependency, and the continential shelf of
the Dependency.

(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to
be ordinarily resident in New Zealand if—

(a) His or her home is in New Zealand; or

(b) He or she is residing in New Zealand with the intention of
residing in New Zealand indefinitely; or

(c) Having resided in New Zealand with the intention of
establishing his or her home in New Zealand, or with
the intention of residing in New Zealand indefinitely,
he or she is outside New Zealand but has an intention
to return to establish his or her home in New Zealand
or to reside in New Zealand indefinitely; or

(d) The person is a New Zealand corporation or an
unincorporated body the majority of whose members
are New Zealand citizens or persons ordinarily
resident in New Zealand.

(3) Terms and expressions used and not defined in this Act
but defined in the Protocol shall, unless the context otherwise
requires, have the same meaning as in the Protocol.

      Cf. 1960, No. 47, s. 2

8. Act to bind the Crown—This Act shall bind the Crown.

9. Purpose and principles—(1) The purpose of this Act is
to promote the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment and the value of Antarctica as an area for
scientific research.

(2) In achieving the purpose of this Act, persons exercising
functions under this Act, and persons planning or carrying out
1994, No. 119    Antarctica (Environmental Protection)    7

activities in Antarctica, shall act in a manner consistent with the environmental principles set out in Article 3 of the Protocol.

10. Ministerial directions—(1) The Minister may direct any person carrying out, or proposing to carry out, any activity in Antarctica—

(a) To refrain from carrying out an activity in Antarctica if the Minister is not satisfied that the effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment will be consistent with the purpose and principles in section 9 of this Act:

(b) To abide by such conditions as the Minister considers appropriate in order to avoid or minimise the effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment:

(c) To establish such procedures as the Minister considers appropriate to monitor, assess, and verify the effect of the activity on the Antarctic environment:

(d) To provide such reports as the Minister considers appropriate on the effects of the activity on the Antarctic environment and of any changes to the activity, or on procedures established for monitoring the activity:

(e) To modify, suspend, or cancel the activity in order to avoid effects on the Antarctic environment which are inconsistent with the purpose and principles in section 9 of this Act:

(f) To pay any bond that the Minister considers appropriate in order to ensure that the activity is carried out in accordance with an environmental evaluation or with any directions made by the Minister under this section.

(2) Every person commits an offence who—
(a) Wilfully fails to comply with a direction given by the Minister under this section; or

(b) In any document prepared pursuant to any such direction,—

     (i) Makes a statement that is false or misleading in a material particular knowing it to be false or misleading; or

    (ii) Omits any matter knowing that the omission makes the document false or misleading in a material particular.

(3) Every person  who commits an offence against subsection (2) of this section is liable on summary conviction to
8                                         Antarctica (Environmental Protection)  1994, No. 119

imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to a fine 
not exceeding $100,000.

Cf. 1981, No. 53, s. 13

                    PART II

Prohibition of Mineral Resource Activities

11. Prohibition of mineral resource activities—Every 
person commits an offence who undertakes any mineral 
resource activities in any of the following areas:

   (a) The continent of Antarctica (including all its ice shelves):
   (b) The Antarctic islands, that is to say, islands south of 60 
degrees south latitude:
   (c) The areas of continental shelf that are adjacent to that 
continent or those islands.

12. Additional prohibition of mineral resource 
activities by New Zealanders—Every New Zealand citizen 
and every New Zealand corporation commits an offence who 
undertakes any mineral resource activities in any other area of 
Antarctica than the areas referred to in section 11 of this Act.

13. Additional prohibition of mineral resource 
activities in Ross Dependency—(1) Every person referred to 
in section 3 or section 4 of this Act to whom this Act would not 
otherwise apply commits an offence who undertakes any 
mineral resource activities in the Ross Dependency.

   (2) Section 6, and the provisions of this Part and of Part VI of 
this Act, shall, in so far as they are applicable, apply in respect 
of an offence against this section.

14. Meaning of "mineral resource activities"—In this 
Part of this Act, "mineral resource activities"—

   (a) Means "prospecting", "exploration", and "mining" 
within the meaning of the Crown Minerals Act 1991:
   (b) Includes logistic support activities in connection with 
mineral resource activities:
   (c) Excludes, notwithstanding paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section, bona fide scientific research undertaken by 
any official expedition of a Contracting Party and 
bona fide logistic support activities associated with 
any such scientific research.

15. Penalties—Every person who commits an offence 
against this Part of this Act is liable on conviction on indictment 
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or a fine not
1994, No. 119          Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                    9

exceeding $200,000, and, if the offence is a continuing one, to a
further fine not exceeding $10,000 for every day or part of a
day during which the offence continues.

Cf. 1991, No. 70, s. 101 (1)

                                   PART III

                  Environmental Impact Assessment

16. Purpose—The purpose of this Part of this Act is to give
effect to Article 8 of and Annex I to the Protocol.

17. Preliminary environmental evaluation—(1) Any
person proposing to carry out any activity in Antarctica shall
prepare a preliminary environmental evaluation.

   (2) The preliminary environmental evaluation shall contain—

      (a) A description of the proposed activity, including its
purpose, location, duration, and intensity; and

      (b) A statement as to whether or not the person considers
that the activity has less than a minor or transitory
effect on the Antarctic environment; and

      (c) A statement as to whether or not another Contracting
Party is applying, or has applied, the environmental
assessment procedures set out in Annex I of the
Protocol to the activity; and

      (d) The name and contact address in New Zealand of the
person; and

      (e) The number of persons in the expedition likely to carry
out the activity; and

      (f) The date and place of final departure for Antarctica.

   (3) The preliminary environmental evaluation shall be sent to
the Minister for consideration.

   (4) If the Minister determines that the activity is likely to
have less than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment, the Minister shall notify the person that the
activity may be carried out.

18. Initial environmental evaluation—(1) Any person
proposing to carry out any activity in Antarctica shall prepare
an initial environmental evaluation unless—

      (a) The Minister has determined that the activity is likely to
have less than a minor or transitory effect on the
Antarctic environment; or

      (b) The person decides to proceed directly to the preparation
of a comprehensive environmental evaluation.

   (2) The initial environmental evaluation—
10                                                          1994, No. 119
                                                            Antarctica (Environmental Protection)

(a) Shall contain sufficient detail to enable an assessment to be made of whether the activity may have more than 
    a minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic 
    environment; and

(b) Shall include the matters referred to in Article 2 (1) of 
    Annex I to the Protocol; and

(c) Shall be sent to the Minister for consideration, together 
    with such fee as may be prescribed.

(3) If the Minister, after such consultation as he or she 
    considers necessary, is satisfied that the initial environmental 
    evaluation indicates that the activity is likely to have no more 
    than a minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic environment, 
    then the Minister shall notify the applicant that the activity 
    may, subject to any directions made pursuant to section 10 of 
    this Act, be carried out.

(4) If the Minister, after such consultation as he or she 
    considers necessary, is satisfied that the initial environmental 
    evaluation or other evidence indicates that the activity is likely 
    to have more than a minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic 
    environment, the Minister shall notify the applicant that a draft 
    comprehensive environmental evaluation of the effects of the 
    activity is required to be prepared in accordance with section 
    19 of this Act.

19. Draft comprehensive environmental evaluation—
(1) Any person proposing to carry out any activity in Antarctica 
    shall prepare a draft comprehensive environmental 
    evaluation—
    (a) If required to do so by the Minister under section 18 (4) of 
        this Act; or

    (b) If the activity is likely to have more than a minor or 
        transitory effect on the Antarctic environment and no 
        initial environmental evaluation has been prepared.

(2) The draft comprehensive environmental evaluation—
    (a) Shall include the matters referred to in Article 3 (2) of 
        Annex I to the Protocol; and

    (b) Shall be sent to the Minister for consideration, together 
        with such fee as may be prescribed.

(3) The Minister shall—
    (a) Circulate a copy of the draft comprehensive 
        environmental evaluation to all Parties to the Protocol 
        and to the Committee on Environmental Protection 
        for consideration; and

    (b) Publicly notify the draft comprehensive environmental 
        evaluation by publishing a notice in a daily newspaper
1994, No. 119     Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                        11

in each of the cities of Auckland, Wellington,
Christchurch, and Dunedin stating—

(i) Where the draft comprehensive environmental
evaluation may be inspected; and

(ii) That any person may make comments on that
draft; and

(iii) The closing date for comments, which shall be
at least 90 days after public notification; and

(iv) The address to which any comments should be
sent.

20. Final comprehensive environmental evaluation—
(1) Any person who has prepared a draft comprehensive
environmental evaluation may be required by the Minister, by
notice in writing, to prepare a final comprehensive
environmental evaluation—

     (a) Once that draft evaluation has been considered by the
Consultative Meeting, on the advice of the
Committee on Environmental Protection: or

     (b) If the Minister is of the view that the Consultative
Meeting is unreasonably delaying its consideration of
that draft.

(2) The final comprehensive environmental evaluation—
     (a) Shall address and include or summarise any comments
made by the Committee on Environmental Protection
and the Consultative Meeting, by the Minister, and by
other persons who made comments on the draft
comprehensive environmental evaluation; and

     (b) Shall be sent to the Minister for consideration.

(3) The Minister shall, after considering the final
environmental evaluation, notify the applicant—

     (a) Whether or not the activity may be carried out; and

     (b) Of any directions made by the Minister pursuant to
section 10 of this Act.

21. Joint environmental evaluation—A joint evaluation
may be made under this Part of this Act by the organiser of an
expedition or by any other person on behalf of all or some of
the members of the expedition who may carry out an activity.

22. Supply of further information—The Minister may, if
he or she considers it desirable to do so for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this Act, require any person who
submits any document under this Part of this Act to supply the
Minister with—
12   Antarctica (Environmental Protection)     1994, No. 119  

(a) A list of the names and addresses of every proposed 
member of the expedition; or

(b) Such other information as the Minister may reasonably 
require.

23. Exemptions from this Part—(1) The Minister may, in 
his or her discretion, exempt any person from the requirements 
of this Part of this Act if satisfied that another Contracting 
Party is applying, or has applied, or will apply, the 
environmental assessment procedures set out in Annex I of the 
Protocol to the activity.

(2) No person exempted under subsection (1) of this section 
shall be liable for any offence under this Part of this Act other 
than an offence under section 24 (1) (e).

24. Offences—(1) Every person commits an offence who,—

(a) Being the organiser of an expedition to Antarctica, fails, 
without reasonable excuse, to ensure that the 
provisions of this Part of this Act in respect of 
environmental evaluations have been complied with; 
or

(b) Without reasonable excuse carries out any activity in 
Antarctica before the Minister has given notification 
that the activity may be carried out; or

(c) In the case of an activity that is the subject of an 
environmental evaluation approved under this Part of 
this Act, without reasonable excuse carries out the 
activity in Antarctica otherwise than in accordance 
with the evaluation; or

(d) Being the organiser of an expedition to Antarctica, fails, 
without reasonable excuse, to inform any member of 
the expedition who is proposing to carry out an 
activity that is the subject of an environmental 
evaluation approved under this Part of this Act of the 
manner in which that activity should be carried out in 
order to be in accordance with the evaluation; or

(e) In any document prepared pursuant to this Part of this 
Act—

(i) Makes a statement that is false or misleading in a 
material particular knowing it to be false or 
misleading; or

(ii) Omits any matter knowing that the omission 
makes the document false or misleading in a material 
particular; or
1994, No. 119    Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                    13

(f) Without reasonable excuse fails to supply any information 
required to be supplied under section 22 of this Act.

(2) Subsection (1) (a) and subsection (1) (d) of this section 
apply only to a person—

(a) Who is responsible for organising any expedition to 
Antarctica which is organised in New Zealand or 
which proceeds from New Zealand as its final point of 
departure for Antarctica; or

(b) Who is a New Zealand citizen or a person ordinarily 
resident in New Zealand.

(3) Every person who commits an offence against 
subsection (1) of this section is liable on summary conviction to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to a fine 
not exceeding $100,000.

PART IV

Measures for Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
Flora and Protected Areas

25. Purpose—The purpose of this Part of this Act is to give 
effect to Annexes II and V to the Protocol.

26. Interpretation-In this Part of this Act, unless the 
context otherwise requires,—

"Antarctic Specially Managed Area" means any area 
which the Consultative Parties have designated as an 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area:

"Antarctic Specially Protected Area" means any area 
which the Consultative Parties have designated as an 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area:

"Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals" 
means the Convention done at London on the 1st day 
of June 1972:

"Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources" means the Convention that was 
opened for signature at Canberra on the 1st day of 
August 1980, a copy of the English text of which is set 
out in the First Schedule to the Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources Act 1981:

"Harmfully interfere" has a meaning corresponding to the 
meaning of "harmful interference" in Article 1 of 
Annex II to the Protocol:

"Historic Site" and "Historic Monument" means any 
Historic Site or Historic Monument, as the case may 
be, approved by the Consultative Parties for listing as 
an Historic Site or Historic Monument:
14                     Antarctica (Environmental Protection) 1994, No. 119

"Management plan" means a management plan approved 
by the Consultative Parties in respect of an Antarctic 
Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area:

"Permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by 
the Minister.

27. Respect for protected areas—(1) Every  person 
carrying out activities in any Antarctic Specially Protected Area 
or any Antarctic Specially Managed Area shall act in 
accordance with the requirements of any management plan 
applying to any such Area.

     (2) Every person in Antarctica shall refrain from damaging, 
removing, or destroying any Historic Site or Historic 
Monument or its contents.

     (3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this section, any part of, 
or the contents of, any Historic Site or Historic Monument may 
be removed,—

          (a) In accordance with the written authorisation of the 
Minister, for the purpose of restoration or protection;

          (b) In an emergency, for the purpose of protection.

     (4) Every person commits an offence who does any act in 
contravention of this section.

28. Acts prohibited except in accordance with 
permit—(1) No person shall—

     (a) Enter or carry out any activity in an Antarctic Specially 
Protected Area; or

     (b) Take or attempt to take any native bird or native 
mammal in Antarctica; or

     (c) Remove or damage such quantities of native plants in 
Antarctica that their local distribution or abundance 
is significantly affected; or

     (d) Harmfully interfere with native plants or native mammals 
or native birds or native invertebrates; or

     (e) Introduce onto land or ice shelves or into water in 
Antarctica any species of animal, plant, or micro-
organism not native to that area; or

     (f) Import any non-sterile soil into Antarctica,—
except in accordance with a permit issued under this Part of 
this Act.

     (2) Subsection (1) (e) of this section shall not prevent any 
person introducing food into Antarctica to the extent permitted
1994, No. 119    Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                     15

by, and that is in accordance with the requirements of, the 
Protocol.

(3) No person shall import into Antarctica any dressed 
poultry knowing that an inspection in accordance with the 
Protocol revealed evidence of any disease referred to in 
Appendix C to Annex II to the Protocol.

(4) Every person commits an offence who does any act in 
contravention of this section.

29. Application for permits—(1) Every person who wishes 
to obtain a permit to do any act referred to in section 28 (1) of 
this Act shall make application in writing to the Minister.

(2) Every application shall be accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed.

(3) Every application shall specify—

(a) The full name and address of the applicant; and

(b) The nature and purpose of the activity to which the 
application relates; and

(c) When, where, by whom, and how the activity is to be 
conducted.

(4) A joint application may be made in respect of all or some 
of the members of an expedition to Antarctica, and may be 
issued jointly to all or some of the persons who may at any time 
be members of that expedition.

(5) Subject to the provisions of this Part of this Act the 
Minister, in his or her discretion, may issue a permit or refuse 
to issue a permit, or issue a permit subject to such conditions as 
he or she thinks fit.

(6) Any permit may be revoked or suspended, and the 
conditions attached to it amended, at any time by the Minister.

(7) Subject to subsection (4) of this section, no permit shall be 
transferred to any other person except with the consent in 
writing of the Minister.

30. Restrictions on permits in respect of Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas—A permit to enter and carry out 
any activity in an Antarctic Specially Protected Area shall be 
issued—

(a) Only in accordance with the requirements of any 
Management Plan relating to that area; and

(b) Only in accordance with, and subject to the restrictions 
and conditions set out in, Annex V to the Protocol; 
and
(c) Subject to such other conditions as the Minister considers are appropriate and are not inconsistent with the purpose and principles in section 9 of this Act.

31. Restrictions on permits to take native fauna and flora—A permit to do any act referred to in paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) or paragraph (d) of section 28 (1) of this Act shall be issued—

    (a) Only in accordance with, and subject to the restrictions and conditions set out in, Annex II to the Protocol; and

    (b) Subject to such other conditions as the Minister considers are appropriate and are not inconsistent with the purpose and principles in section 9 of this Act.

32. Restrictions on permits to introduce non-indigenous animals, plants, or micro-organisms into Antarctica—A permit to bring into Antarctica any animal, plant, or micro-organism not native to Antarctica, or to import any non-sterile soil, shall be issued—

    (a) Only in accordance with, and subject to the restrictions and conditions set out in, Article 4 of Annex II to the Protocol and the appendices to that Annex; and

    (b) Subject to such other conditions as the Minister considers are appropriate and are not inconsistent with the purpose and principles in section 9 of this Act.

33. Offences—(1) Every person who commits an offence against this Part of this Act is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, or a fine not exceeding $100,000.

    (2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Part of this Act, any act or omission by any person which occurred—

    (a) In accordance with a permit issued by any Party to the Protocol other than New Zealand; or

    (b) In accordance with a permit issued by a Party to the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals in accordance with that Convention; or

    (c) In accordance with a permit issued in accordance with the Antarctic Marine Living Resources Act 1981; or

    (d) In accordance with a permit issued by a Party to the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in accordance with that Convention,—

shall not be an offence against this Part of this Act.
1994, No. 119 Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                 17

PART V
Waste Disposal

34. General principles of waste disposal and waste management—All persons carrying out activities in Antarctica shall act in a manner consistent with the waste disposal and waste management principles of Article 1 of Annex III to the Protocol.

35. Waste disposal—Articles 2 to 7 of Annex III to the Protocol shall be part of the law of New Zealand.

36. Disposal of waste, etc., unlawful—(1) It shall be unlawful to dispose of waste in Antarctica otherwise than in accordance with Articles 2 to 7 of Annex III to the Protocol.

(2) It shall be unlawful to otherwise contravene Articles 2 to 7 of Annex III to the Protocol.

(3) It shall be unlawful to dispose of waste in Antarctica by open burning.

37. Offences—(1) Every person commits an offence, and is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding $100,000, who acts in contravention of section 36 of this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (1) of this section, no person shall be sentenced to imprisonment for any contravention of section 36 of this Act unless that person acted with intent to cause the contravention or was reckless or negligent as to whether a contravention would result.

PART VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
Emergencies in Antarctica

38. Emergencies in Antarctica—(1) Any act or omission by any person which occurs in a case of emergency relating—
(a) To the safety of human life; or
(b) To the safety of ships or aircraft; or
(c) To equipment or facilities of high value; or
(d) To the protection of the Antarctic environment,—
shall not be an offence under section 10 or section 24 or Part IV or Part V of this Act.

(2) Every person who commits any act or omission to which this section applies shall supply the Minister, within 60 days, with a full explanation of the act or omission and the reasons for it.
18      Antarctica (Environmental Protection)       1994, No. 119

(3) Every person commits an offence, and is liable on 
summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000, who fails 
to comply with subsection (2) of this section.

      Inspectors

39. Appointment of inspectors--(1) The Minister may 
issue a warrant appointing any person as—

     (a) A general inspector to report to him or her whether the 
provisions of this Act, and any regulations made 
under this Act, have been complied with:

     (b) A special inspector to enforce the provisions of this Act.

     (2) No person shall be appointed as a special inspector 
unless—

     (a) The person has exercised, in a professional capacity, 
functions and powers similar to those conferred on 
special inspectors by this Act; and

     (b) The person is an officer or employee of the State services.

40. Provisions relating to appointment—(1) Any 
inspector may be appointed to report either on any specific 
case or on any cases generally.

     (2) Any inspector shall be appointed on such terms and 
conditions as may be approved by the Minister; but, if any 
person so appointed is a full-time officer or employee of the 
State services, the person shall not be entitled to any additional 
remuneration in respect of the appointment.

     (3) Every inspector shall be appointed for such term as the 
Minister thinks fit, and may be reappointed.

     (4) Any inspector may at any time have his or her warrant 
revoked at the discretion of the Minister, or may at any time 
surrender his or her warrant to the Minister.

     (5) Any inspector shall, on the expiration of the term of the 
appointment, or on removal from office, surrender his or her 
warrant to the Minister.

     (6) No inspector shall, by virtue of appointment as an 
inspector under this Act, be deemed to be employed in the 
service of Her Majesty for the purpose of the State Sector Act 
1988.

     Cf. 1981, No. 53, s. 8 (2)–(5)

41. Inspectors’ general power of entry and 
inspection—(1) Any inspector may at any time enter and 
inspect any area of Antarctica, and have access to any things, 
for the purpose of carrying out his or her functions under this 
Act or any regulations made under this Act.
1994, No. 119             Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                        19

(2) In this section, and in sections 42 to 46 of this Act,—
“Area” includes all places, facilities, installations,
“equipment, ships, aircraft, and vehicles:
“Thing” includes any document, plant, or animal.

42. Search and seizure by special inspectors with
warrant—(1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section, a District
Court Judge, a duly authorised Justice, or a Registrar (not being
a member of the Police), who, on application made by a special
inspector, is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that there is on or in any area specified in the
application any thing—

      (a) In respect of which an offence against this Act has been or
may have been committed; or

      (b) That is or may be evidence of the commission of an
offence against this Act; or

      (c) That is intended to be used for the commission of an
offence against this Act—

may issue, unconditionally or subject to conditions, a warrant
authorising the entry and search of the area, at any time on one
occasion within 14 days of the issue of the warrant (or within
such further time as may be specified in the warrant), and the
seizure of any such thing that may be found on or in the area.

(2) The special inspector applying for a warrant under
subsection (1) of this section—

      (a) Shall first make reasonable inquiries as to whether any
other applications for such a warrant have been made
in respect of the place concerned, and (if so) the
following matters:

           (i) The offence or offences alleged in respect of
each application:

           (ii) The results of each application; and

      (b) Shall disclose on the application for the warrant the
results of the inquiries.

(3) Every warrant under subsection (1) of this section shall be
directed to and exercisable only by a special inspector or a
member of the Police.

(4) A person exercising a warrant under subsection (1) of this
section may use such force in entering and searching the area
specified in it (whether by breaking down a door or otherwise),
or in breaking open anything in the area as is reasonable in the
circumstances.
20                     Antarctica (Environmental Protection)         1994, No. 119

43. Search and seizure by special inspectors without warrant—(1) Any special inspector who is satisfied that there 
are reasonable grounds for believing, in respect of any area,—

    (a) That there are grounds for the issue of a warrant under section 42 of this Act; and

    (b) That it is not practicable for the special inspector to obtain possession of a warrant; and

    (c) That there is a real risk that an offence against this Act may be committed, or evidence of the commission of 
an offence may be destroyed, before any such warrant could be obtained; and

    (d) That seizure without a warrant is necessary having regard to the gravity of any such offence—

may exercise the powers of search and seizure contained in section 42 of this Act as if a warrant had been obtained.

    (2) Every special inspector who seizes any thing without warrant shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, send a written 
report to the Minister stating the reasons for the seizure without warrant.

44. Obligations of inspectors—Every inspector exercising any power under any of sections 41 to 43 of this Act—

    (a) Shall have with him or her evidence of his or her identity and warrant of appointment as an inspector; and

    (b) Shall produce them to any person appearing to be in charge of the area entered—

         (i) On entering the area (if such a person is then present); and

        (ii) At any reasonable time thereafter, if asked to do so by the person; and

    (c) If there is no person appearing to be in charge of the area at any time between the time of entry and the time 
the inspection or search concerned has been completed, shall, as soon as is practicable after completing the inspection or search, give an occupier 
or person in charge of the area written notice stating that the area has been entered or searched, and specifying the following matters:

         (i) The time and date of entry or search:

         (ii) The circumstances and purpose of entry or search:

         (iii) The name of every person entering:

         (iv) The principal contents of the warrant of appointment pursuant to which the person is acting:
1994, No. 119             Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                        21

(d) Where the search is pursuant to a search warrant, shall 
     have the search warrant with him or her and produce 
     it if required to do so; and

(e) Where any thing is seized, shall give an occupier or person 
     in charge of the area a written inventory of all things 
     so seized; and

(f) Shall report any offence or suspected offence to the Police 
     as soon as practicable.

145. Arrest by special inspectors without warrant—

(1) Where a special inspector has reasonable cause to believe—

     (a) That any person is committing or has committed an 
         offence against this Act; and

     (b) That there is a real risk that the person may not be able to 
         be served with proceedings under this Act, or may 
         not appear to answer any such proceedings; and

     (c) That arrest without a warrant is necessary having regard 
         to the gravity of any such offence,—

         the special inspector may arrest that person.

(2) Any person called upon to do so by any person referred to 
     in subsection (1) of this section is justified in assisting him or her 
     in good faith to arrest any person.

(3) Every special inspector who arrests any person without 
     warrant shall, as soon as reasonably practicable,—

     (a) Arrange for an information to be laid in respect of the 
         offence; and

     (b) Deliver the arrested person into the custody of a member 
         of the Police; and

     (c) Send a written report to the Minister stating the reasons 
         for the arrest without warrant.

(4) Every special inspector shall release on bail any person 
     arrested under this section.

(5) Every person released on bail shall be released subject to 
     the condition that he or she must attend before such Court at 
     such time as the inspector—

     (a) Specifies at the time of granting bail; or

     (b) Where it is not reasonably practicable to so specify at that 
         time, specifies as soon as possible thereafter.

(6) Sections 49 (2a), 49 (3), 50 (1), 50 (2), 53 (1), 53 (3), and 
     54 (1) of the Summary Proceedings Act 1957 shall apply to 
     every grant of bail under this section as if every reference to a 
     member of the Police, a Registrar, or a Justice were a reference
22                                  Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                                  1994, No. 119

to a special inspector and with any other necessary 
modifications.

Cf. 1989, No. 18, s. 36A; 1991, No. 18, s. 14; 1991, 
No. 100, s. 5

46. Custody of property seized—(1) Any thing seized 
under this Act shall be held in the custody of the Crown until—
    (a) A decision is made not to lay any information in respect 
        of the alleged offence for which the thing was seized; 
        or

    (b) Where such an information is laid, the completion of the 
        proceedings in respect of the alleged offence for 
        which the thing was seized, or such other time as the 
        Court may determine,—

        and shall then be returned to the person entitled to possession 
of the thing.

    (2) The special inspector shall decide whether or not to 
arrange for an information to be laid in respect of an alleged 
offence for which any thing is seized pursuant to this Act as 
soon as reasonably practicable after the thing is seized.

    (3) The person from whom the thing was seized, or the 
owner or person entitled to possession of the thing seized, 
may—

        (a) Apply to the Minister (if no decision has been made 
            whether or not to lay an information); or

        (b) Apply to the Court (if an information has been laid)—

            for the release of the thing to any such person.

    (4) The Minister or the Court, as the case may be, may order 
release of the thing under bond in such sum and under such 
sureties and conditions (if any) as may be specified.

Cf. 1991, No. 18, s. 16, 17 (1), 20

47. Offence to obstruct inspectors—Every person 
commits an offence, and is liable on summary conviction to a 
fine not exceeding $1,500, who wilfully obstructs, hinders, 
resists, or deceives any inspector who is carrying out his or her 
functions under this Act.

Cf. 1991, No. 69, ss. 338 (3) (a), 339 (3)

48. Observers—The Minister may appoint any person as an 
observer for the purpose of carrying out inspections in 
accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty or Article 
14 of the Protocol.
1994, No. 119    Antarctica (Environmental Protection)    23

49. Inspectors, etc., protected from proceedings—No action or proceedings shall be brought against the Crown, or any inspector, or any observer, or any person acting under the instructions of an inspector, in respect of any act or omission of an inspector or observer while carrying out his or her functions under this Act where that person has acted in good faith and with reasonable care.

Cf. 1981, No. 53, s. 10

50. Liability for causing inspector to incur expense—Where any person causes an inspector to incur any expense that the inspector would not otherwise have incurred, by failing to comply with or acting in contravention of any provision of this Act or any regulations made under this Act, or by failing to comply with or acting in contravention of any order or direction or requirement or conditions reasonably and properly given or imposed in accordance with this Act or any such regulations, that person shall, upon conviction, reimburse the Crown for the amount of any such expense that is, in the opinion of the convicting Court, reasonably and properly incurred, and that amount shall be recoverable from that person in like manner as a fine.

Cf. 1981, No. 53, s. 15

Miscellaneous Provisions

51. Service of documents—(1) Any direction given by the Minister or any other document to be sent to a person may be—

    (a) Delivered to that person; or

    (b) Posted to that person's address or delivered to a box at a document exchange which that person is using at the time; or

    (c) Sent by facsimile machine to a telephone number used by that person for the transmission of documents by facsimile; or

    (d) Read to the person via any telecommunication or radiocommunication link if the person is in Antarctica; or

    (e) Served in accordance with any directions as to service given by a court.

(2) Any direction or other document given in accordance with paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section may be sent to—
24                                         Antarctica (Environmental Protection)         1994, No. 119

(a) The person's address in New Zealand (if the person is in 
New Zealand); or

(b) The station in Antarctica at which the person is based; or
(c) The ship on board which the person is.

(3) Any direction or other document may be sent by any 
combination of methods described in subsection (1) of this 
section.

(4) A direction or other document is not deemed to have 
been served or sent or delivered to a person if the person 
proves that, through no fault on the person's part, the 
document was not received within the time specified.

Cf. 1993, No. 105, ss. 391, 392

52. Evidentiary certificates—(1) The Minister may give a 
certificate stating, at any time specified in the certificate,—

(a) That an aircraft or ship was, or was not, a New Zealand 
aircraft or New Zealand ship:

(b) That an expedition was, or was not, an official New 
Zealand expedition or an official expedition in 
relation to another Contracting Party:

(c) That a ship or aircraft was, or was not, operating, whether 
exclusively or not, in support of any official 
expedition of another Contracting Party:

(d) Any fact relevant to any question whether or not any 
person is or was an observer or exchanged scientist, 
or a member of the staff accompanying an observer 
or exchanged scientist, or whether or not any 
immunity has been waived under section 5 of this 
Act.

(2) In any proceedings for an offence against this Act,—

(a) A certificate given under subsection (1) (a) of this section is 
prima facie evidence of the matters specified in the 
certificate:

(b) A certificate given under subsection (1) (b) or (c) or (d) of 
this section is conclusive evidence of the matters 
specified in the certificate.

(3) For the purposes of this section, a document purporting to 
be a certificate under this section shall, unless the contrary is 
proved, be deemed to be such a certificate and to have been 
duly given.

Cf. 1960, No. 47, s. 6; 1981, No. 53, s. 12; 1993, No. 48, 
s. 6

53. No derogation from certain enactments—Nothing in 
this Act shall derogate from the provisions of—
1994, No. 119    Antarctica (Environmental Protection)      25

(a) The Antarctic Marine Living Resources Act 1981:

(b) The Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978:

(c) The Antarctica Act 1960:

(d) The Territorial Sea and Exclusive Economic Zone Act 
     1977:

(e) The Ross Dependency Whaling Regulations 1929, as 
     published in the Gazette on the 31st day of October 
     1929 at pages 2747 and 2748:

Cf. 1981, No. 53, s. 16

54. Application of Maritime Transport Act 1994—
(1) The Governor-General may from time to time, by Order in 
Council, declare, for the purpose of implementing or giving 
better effect to Annex IV of the Protocol, that—

     (a) Any provisions of the Maritime Transport Act 1994; and

     (b) Any marine protection rules made under that Act,—
          as may be specified shall apply in or extend to Antarctic waters 
          in such manner and with such modifications as may be 
          specified in the Order, and the Order shall have effect 
          accordingly.

(2) Nothing in this section limits—

     (a) The provisions of that Act or those rules that apply in 
          Antarctic waters regardless of whether any Order is 
          made; or

     (b) The power to make marine protection rules under that 
          Act; or

     (c) The application of other provisions of this Act in respect 
          of an offence against the Maritime Transport Act 
          1994 or marine protection rules made under that Act 
          to which this section applies.

(3) In this section,—

     “Antarctic waters” means the territorial sea of New 
     Zealand adjacent to the Ross Dependency and other 
     seas south of 60 degrees south latitude:

     “Territorial sea” means the territorial sea of New Zealand 
     as provided for in section 3 of the Territorial Sea and 
     Exclusive Economic Zone Act 1977.

55. Regulations—(1) The Governor-General may from time 
to time, by Order in Council, make regulations for all or any of 
the following purposes:

     (a) Prescribing the manner or content of applications, notices, 
          environmental evaluations, or any other 
          documentation or information as may be required 
          under this Act:
26                                           Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                                  1994, No. 119

(b) Prescribing the fees payable or the methods of calculating 
fees in respect of applications under this Act and the 
submission of environmental evaluations:

(c) Prescribing the procedure to be followed under Part III of 
this Act:

(d) Specifying the areas which are, within the meaning of 
section 26 of this Act, Antarctic Specially Managed 
Areas or Antarctic Specially Protected Areas:

(e) Specifying the sites or monuments which are, within the 
meaning of section 26 of this Act, Historic Sites or 
Historic Monuments:

(f) Prescribing any emission standards and equipment 
guidelines in respect of incinerators:

(g) Giving effect to any measures adopted in accordance with 
the Protocol or the Antarctic Treaty for the 
protection of the Antarctic environment and the 
value of Antarctica as an area for scientific research:

(h) Providing for such other matters as are contemplated by 
or necessary for giving full effect to this Act and for 
its due administration.

(2) The Governor-General may from time to time, by Order 
in Council,—

      (a) Amend the Second Schedule to this Act by making such 
amendments to the text of the Protocol set out in that 
Schedule as are required to bring that text up to date:

      (b) Revoke the Second Schedule to this Act, and substitute a 
new Second Schedule setting out in an up-to-date 
form the text of the Protocol set out in that Schedule.

(3) Any regulations made under subsection (2) of this section 
shall,—

      (a) If made on or before the 30th day of June in any year, 
expire on the close of the 31st day of December of 
that year except so far as they are expressly 
confirmed by Act of Parliament passed during that 
year; and

      (b) If made on or after the 1st day of July in any year, expire 
on the close of the 31st day of December in the 
following year except so far as they are expressly 
confirmed by Act of Parliament passed before the 
end of that following year.

(4) Any regulations made under this section may prescribe 
offences for contravention of, or non-compliance with, their 
provisions and penalties, on the summary conviction of any 
offender, not exceeding in any case a fine of $5,000.
1994, No. 119                 Antarctica (Environmental Protection)                 27

of (5) No Order in Council shall be made under subsection (1) (g)
of this section except on the advice of the Minister given after
consultation by that Minister with the Minister for the
Environment and the Minister of Conservation and such. other
Ministers and persons as the Minister considers appropriate.

Cf. 1990, No. 98, s. 42c (2); 1992, No. 75, s. 22; 1993,
No. 95, s. 151

56. Amendments to other Acts—(1) The enactments
specified in the First Schedule to this Act are hereby amended
in the manner indicated in that Schedule.

(2) The Summary Proceedings Act 1957 is hereby amended
by inserting in Part II of the First Schedule, in its appropriate
alphabetical order, the following item:

"The Antarctica (Environ-     Part II      Mineral resource activities in
mental Protection) Act         Antarctica".
1994

57. Repeal and revocations—(1) The Antarctica
Amendment Act 1970 is hereby consequentially repealed.

(2) The Antarctic (Fauna and Flora) Regulations 1971 (S.R.
1971/278) .and the Antarctic (Fauna and Flora) Regulations
1971, Amendment No. 1 (S.R. 1973/284) are hereby revoked.

(3) The Antarctica (Specially Protected Areas) Order 1971
(S.R. 1971/279) is hereby revoked.
