ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                         XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                         XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

SE[?]UL              
May 8-19, 1995              

XIX ATCM/INF 111
May 16, 1995
Original: English


 
OPENING ADDRESS 
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF JAPAN

Agenda Item 3
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR TOSHIKI KANAMORI
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF JAPAN

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Government of Japan, which hosted the Kyoto Meeting last year, I would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of the Nineteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  I also wish to express my sincere appreciation to the Government of Republic of Korea for preparing this Meeting.

● The Antarctic Treaty System, which has an extended experience in Antarctica, finally found the proper international recognition to its continuous efforts made for Antarctica, which it duly deserves. Namely, it is the consensus resolution achieved at the last General Assembly of the United Nations for the first time in nine years. With this event, the Consultative Meeting has gained importance as a center of policy coordination on Antarctica.

Mr. Chairman,

Let me address briefly on three issues that we think it important to discuss at this Meeting.

● First, concerning the Protocol for the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, I understand that 16 Parties have already ratified the Protocol, and we would also like to follow them soon.  In this context, we highly appreciate that the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG), which is to discuss guidelines for implementing the Protocol, was set up and started its deliberations at this Meeting.  I believe that this Working Group can considerably help us fulfil our task to implement the Protocol.

● Secondly, the liability annex of the Protocol, which is supposed to play an important role for the protection of the Antarctic environment, is under discussion. To create a new system is always difficult, but it is especially difficult to establish a liability system for the environment like Antarctica with special legal status where big industry is not foreseen after the prohibition of mineral resource activities. We recognize the importance of creating the ideal system that
will cover all prevention and restoration cost of damage, however, we should also protect other 
interest, the liberty of scientific investigation, and to avoid the possible situation in which all 
activities by nationals of contracting parties might be virtually excluded. It is important to find 
a point where the protection of environment of Antarctica, the liberty of scientific activities as 
well as the rights of individual who take appropriate measures will meet.

Thirdly, the Antarctic Treaty System definitely needs a small yet efficient Secretariat 
in order to ensure its smooth operation, and we should take further step forward to establish 
it in a consensus manner.

Mr. Chairman,

●	The Japanese delegation expresses its willingness to fully cooperate on the discussion 
under your able leadership in order to make progress - not only on the above mentioned issues 
but also on the other matters. After all, we, members of the Antarctic Treaty System have to 
demonstrate our commitment to the management and conservation of Antarctica.

●
