ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                           TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                                      XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                          XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                SEOUL
                                May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 25
May 12 1995
Original: English

 
OPENING ADDRESS

BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF POLAND
OPENING ADDRESS

Mr Chairman,

Let me begin by extending the sincere congratulations of the Polish delegation upon 
your election as the Chairman of the XIX Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty. We 
would like also to express our gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Korea for all 
the preparatory works and arrangements done here as well as for warm hospitality extended 
to us.

Mr Chairman,

The Polish delegation is convinced that the present Meeting will deal with several 
extremely important issues concentrating at the strengthening and consolidation of the 
Antarctic Treaty System. We look forward to considerable progress on many of the items of 
our agenda.

We attach a great importance to the process of the discussion on an annex on the 
liability for damages caused to the environment of Antarctica, as the future code of the 
obligations of the Parties to prevent negative impact to the environment of Antarctica and to 
take appropriate measures to restore the environmental conditions damaged. We really 
appreciate and strongly support the efforts made by the Chairman of the group of legal 
experts, Professor Rudiger Wolfrum, that aim at the preparation of this document. Poland 
considers it very important to have the draft annex prepared as soon as possible.

While stressing special interest in the protection of the environment of Antarctica, we 
would like to inform that the process of the ratification of the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty has entered in Poland in final and decisive stage.
-2-

The objective of the ongoing consultations amongst the central governmental 
institutions is to present the motion for the ratification to the President of the Republic of 
Poland very soon. There is a great understanding in Poland of the significance of the above 
mentioned international instrument and of the consequences of its ratification. Firstly, but of 
course not exclusively we see it as a strong political commitment of our country to follow 
the universal standards of the environmental protection. It is, in our view, one of the most 
significant criteria determining the level of the environmental consciousness of a State.

● We hope therefore, and I believe this hope is well founded, that the process of the 
ratification of the Protocol may be completed by the end of this month. The Government of 
Poland will inform on this fact the Consultative Parties about it through the depositary of the 
Protocol.

● Even before the ratification of the Protocol, Poland , as our representatives informed 
on several occasions during the Consultative Meeting in Kyoto, has based the activities of 
her scientists in Antarctica on the principles and provisions set forth in that instrument. We 
do promote and support in this regard the non-governmental and private initiatives of our 
nationals and international community to clean up the areas adjacent to the Arctowski Station 
and other related activities.

● We would like to express also the readiness of Poland to contribute as much as 
possible to the task of this Consultative Meeting including the establishment of the Secretariat 
of the Treaty. The Government of Poland is ready to join the consensus on the above 
mentioned matter. Together with the consideration of the question of the establishment of the 
Secretariat it is important, in our view, to evaluate and examine the outstanding issues related 
to the organization and functioning of the Secretariat. Also in relation to the election of the 
chairman of the Environmental Working Group, Poland is ready to go along with other 
delegations in solving this problem during the present Meeting.
-3-

Mr Chairman,

In conclusion, let me express once again, on behalf of our delegation and of the Polish Government, our full commitment to the obligations established within the Antarctic Treaty System. We do trust that the spirit of the cooperation among the Parties represented here in Soul will help us to achieve significant progress in the consideration of the agenda items for the benefit of the Antarctic environment and whole humanity.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.
