ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                             XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                             ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                             XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

SEOUL
May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 7
May 8, 1995
Original: English

REPORT BY THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY
OF THE COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION
OF ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

Agenda Item 5 a

(Submitted by the CCAMLR)
STATEMENT BY THE CCAMLR OBSERVER AT THE XIXTH ATCM

CCAMLR is pleased to attend the XIXth ATCM and welcomes the opportunity to inform
Consultative Parties of recent developments in its work.

2.      CCAMLR continues to be active in conservation and rational utilisation of Antarctic
marine living resources. In the 1993/94 season one workshop, five working groups, the
Scientific Committee and the Commission all met to consider various aspects of resource
management. Throughout these deliberations, CCAMLR continued to develop its pioneering
ecosystem approach to conservation and resource management, the most important elements of
which incorporate safeguards to allow for a sufficient food supply for predators dependent
upon the harvested species, precautionary catch limitations to allow for uncertainties in
estimates of stock sizes of harvested species and a link between resource exploitation and the
acquisition of scientific data.

MEMBERSHIP

3.      Ukraine has become a Member of CCAMLR, thus increasing the total number of
CCAMLR Members to 22. Ukraine conducts fishing operations in the CCAMLR Convention
Area and undertakes a range of scientific programs on Antarctic marine living resources. A
current list of CCAMLR Members and Acceding States is attached (Appendix A).

FISHING IN THE CONVENTION AREA IN THE 1993/94 AND 1994/95 SEASONS

4.      Fisheries for Antarctic krill, several species of finfish and Antarctic crabs were open in
the CCAMLR Convention Area in the 1993/94 season. A map of the CCAMLR Convention Area
is attached (Appendix B).

5.      The decline in catches of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) seen since 1991 has
slowed, with the total catch of 84 000 tonnes in the 1993/94 season being similar to the
88 000 tonnes caught in the 1992/93 season. Fishing for krill was concentrated in the Atlantic
Ocean sector (Statistical Area 48), with about half of the total catch being taken around the
South Orkney Islands (Subarea 48.1).
6. The major finfish species targeted in commercial fisheries in the 1993/94 season was the 
   Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides). Fishing for D. eleginoides was conducted in 
   Subarea 48.3 (South Georgia I.) and Division 58.5.1 (Kerguelen I.). The total catch of this 
   species was 1 739 tonnes from both longline and trawl fisheries. In addition to toothfish, a 
   catch of 114 tonnes of lanternfish (Electrona carlsbergi) was reported for Subarea 48.3.

7. Although the fisheries for mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), grey rockcod 
   (Notothenia squamifrons) and crabs (Paralomis spinosissima and P. formosa) were open in 
   some areas and seasons, no catches were reported from these fisheries.

8. The following fisheries are open in the 1994/95 season in the Convention Area subject 
   to allocated Total Allowable Catches (TACs) and other fisheries regulations:

| Species                | Area              | TAC (tonnes) |
|------------------------|-------------------|--------------|
| Antarctic krill        | 48                | 1 500 000    |
|                        | 58.4.2            | 390 000      |
| Patagonian toothfish   | 48.3              | 2 800        |
|                        | 48.4              | 28           |
|                        | 58.5.2            | 297          |
| Mackerel icefish       | 58.5.2            | 311          |
| Grey rockcod           | 58.4.4            | 1 150        |
| Lanternfish            | 48.3              | 200 000      |
| Antarctic crabs        | 48.3              | 1 600        |

CCAMLR FISHERIES MANAGEMENT REGIME

9. CCAMLR has a well-established fisheries management regime which covers all existing, 
   new and exploratory fisheries, and fishing for research purposes.

10. There are 33 Conservation Measures currently in force which contain a number of 
    provisions critical to the implementation of the Convention. They include:

    • precautionary measures which limit the rate of development of a fishery and 
      require that CCAMLR be notified of new fisheries. In addition, detailed scientific 
      assessments must be carried out while these fisheries are in their developmental 
      stages:

2
- measures which regulate fisheries activities by means of gear restrictions, closed 
areas and seasons, and total allowable catches on targeted species;

- measures which protect non-target species by imposing limits on by-catch during 
fishing for target species;

- measures which prevent the incidental mortality of seabirds and marine mammals 
during fishing operations; and

- measures which provide for comprehensive, detailed data collection and reporting 
from fisheries to enable the formulation of high quality scientific advice.

THE SCIENCE OF ANTARCTIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

11.  Conservation Measures are adopted by the Commission following consideration of the 
advice of the Scientific Committee. Good quality scientific analysis underpins this advice, and 
is critical to the rational management of the Antarctic marine ecosystem and the credibility of 
CCAMLR's management regime.

12. CCAMLR has for a number of years been aware of a degree of uncertainty associated 
with calculations of stock size and sustainable yield. Such uncertainty may arise from a number 
of problems including non-reporting of data, lack of data, or ambiguous results. CCAMLR has 
now evolved mechanisms to deal with this scientifically.

13. The models originally developed for estimation of krill yield, and which have now also 
been used for assessments of other species including myctophids, toothfish and icefish, 
incorporate methods of dealing with uncertainty. They operate in such a way that estimated 
yields and catch limits usually decrease as uncertainty in model parameters increases.

14. CCAMLR's objectives on resource management are set out in the Convention's Article II 
and include an emphasis on the so-called 'ecosystem approach'. In the last few years the 
CCAMLR Scientific Committee has made major steps towards incorporating consideration of the 
ecosystem approach in its analysis and advice to the Commission.

15. Several years ago CCAMLR's consideration of the requirements of dependent and related 
populations, such as seabirds and finfish by-catch species, was limited to the direct technical 
effects of fishing on those populations. This led to the adoption of Conservation Measures 
3
which, for example, prohibited bottom trawling, the use of net monitor cables and provided for 
regulations regarding longline fishing.

16.	Over the last three years the Scientific Committee’s Working Group on Krill has been 
developing a model for the calculation of krill yield. This model is now being used for krill and 
is also being developed for use in other fisheries in a way which provides scientific 
management advice based on some aspects of the ‘ecosystem approach’:

     •	First, two levels of yield are determined from the model: one which protects the 
        harvested species against over-exploitation and one which safeguards food 
        supplies for predators dependent upon the harvested species; and

     •	secondly, the most conservative of these two yields is chosen to calculate the total 
        allowable catch.

17.	These calculations exemplify CCAMLR’s development of the ‘ecosystem approach’ and 
incorporate a precautionary element. At present, however, the calculations are only performed 
on a hypothetical harvested population to calculate a theoretical ‘safe catch limit’, and do not 
incorporate feedback management based on the current status of harvested or dependent and 
related populations.

18.	The Scientific Committee is now embarking on the most difficult stage of the 
development of the ecosystem approach. This involves the incorporation of scientific 
assessments of various parts of the Antarctic marine ecosystem into management advice - the 
feedback management approach.

19.	The CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) was initiated in the 1987/88 
season, and involves monitoring of several parameters of predators, prey and the environment 
selected as indicators of changes in the Antarctic ecosystem. At present up to nine parameters 
of penguin, black-browed albatross and fur seal breeding performance, and sea ice and snow 
cover are monitored at a number of sites on the Antarctic Peninsula, in the South Shetland, 
South Orkney and South Georgia Islands, and on the Enderby Coast (Division 48.4.2). The 
Program produces a number of indices each year, which so far have shown considerable 
potential for integration into management advice.

20.	To facilitate the integrated scientific analysis of predator, prey and environmental data, 
the Scientific Committee has established a new group, the Working Group on Ecosystem 
Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM), which is a combination of the former WG-Krill and

4
WG-CEMP. The new group will meet for the first time in July 1995, in Siena, Italy.

21. Several Conservation Measures ensure that scientific research and monitoring can proceed easily, to enable the Scientific Committee to function efficiently. These include the exemption of research vessels from Conservation Measures combined with a requirement that plans to harvest significant quantities of a species for research purposes are viewed in advance by the Scientific Committee.

22. Of major importance is the development which links harvesting with scientific research. This was initiated in 1993 with the specification of experimental fish stock depletion areas in the fishery for D. eleginoides around South Georgia and Shag Rocks. This continues in the 1994/95 season with an experimental fishing regime for the crab fishery and with the operation of the Observer Scheme.

CCAMLR SCHEME OF INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC OBSERVATION

23. The Scheme of International Scientific Observation has been in force since the 1992/93 season. The Scheme is designed to facilitate the gathering and validation of scientific information essential in the assessment of the population status of Antarctic marine living resources and in assessing the impact of fishing on those populations. The Scheme is applied equally to harvesting and research vessels.

24. Under the Observation Scheme, observers are placed on longline vessels fishing in the Convention Area to collect scientific data on fish stocks, by-catch and incidental mortality of seabirds during longline operations.

25. It is, in fact, a requirement that a scientific observer designated under the Scheme be aboard each vessel fishing for Patagonian toothfish in Subarea 48.3. This requirement has been in place for the last two fishing seasons.

PREVENTION OF INCIDENTAL MORTALITY OF SEABIRDS DURING FISHING OPERATIONS

26. The problem of incidental mortality of seabirds, principally albatrosses and petrels, in longline fisheries was again highlighted at the Thirteenth Meeting of CCAMLR (October-November 1994). Much of this mortality involves birds killed in longline fisheries outside the CCAMLR Convention Area. However, during the past two seasons, scientific 
5
observers placed on longline vessels fishing for D. eleginoides around several sub-Antarctic 
islands within the CCAMLR Convention Area have reported that this fishery also contributes to 
the problem.

27. CCAMLR has had in force a conservation measure aimed at reducing the incidental 
mortality of seabirds in longline fishing since 1993. One of the requirements of this Measure is 
that a streamer line be used to deter seabirds from interacting with baited hooks during setting 
longlines. On the recommendation of the Scientific Committee and its new ad hoc Working 
Group on Incidental Mortality Arising from Longline Fishing (WG-IMALF), this measure has 
been revised to give increased protection to birds, in particular by:

    • ensuring that setting of longlines takes place only at night (i.e., between the 
      periods of nautical twilight);

    • allowing some flexibility in the design and deployment of streamer lines;

    • requesting that every effort be made to ensure that birds captured during 
      longlining are released alive and that wherever possible hooks are removed 
      without jeopardising the life of the bird concerned; and

    • ensuring that, wherever possible, the prohibition on dumping trash and/or offal 
      during longline operations is maintained and any discharge, if necessary, be made 
      as far away as possible from the area of the vessel where longlines are being set or 
      hauled.

28. It is hoped that the set of regulations contained in the revised Conservation Measure will 
reduce incidental mortality of seabirds during longline fishing by up to 80%. However, 
CCAMLR acknowledges that longline fisheries in the Convention Area are only part of the 
problem, and has undertaken to exchange information with organisations in whose areas, 
neighbouring the Southern Ocean, there may be significant mortality of birds in longline 
fisheries.

MARINE DEBRIS

29. This year's reports from Members on the assessment and avoidance of incidental 
mortality and impacts of marine debris on biota in the Convention Area have shown that at 
South Georgia the proportion of fur seals found entangled in packaging bands from bait boxes,

6
such as used on longline vessels, has decreased and was less than one-half that in 1992.

30.  For the first time, packaging bands recovered had all been cut as required in accordance 
with Conservation Measure 63/XII. In addition to the general practice of cutting packaging 
bands, after their removal from packages, this measure prohibits, from the 1995/96 season, the 
use on fishing vessels of plastic packaging bands to secure bait boxes, and, from the 1996/97 
season, the use of plastic packaging bands in general on vessels without on-board incinerators.

CCAMLR SYSTEM OF INSPECTION

31.  The CCAMLR System of Inspection is in its sixth season of operation. Twenty-six 
CCAMLR inspectors were nominated by Members to carry out inspections in the 1993/94 
season, but only three inspections were carried out. All inspected vessels were longline vessels 
fishing in Subarea 48.3 (South Georgia). As required in accordance with the System, the 
inspection reports were considered in detail by the Standing Committee on Observation and 
Inspection (SCOI) and by the Commission. The Commission noted with satisfaction the actions 
which Members were taking in relation to vessels alleged to be in violation of Conservation 
Measures.

32.  An intersessional procedure for notifying CCAMLR Members of infractions of 
conservation measures and sanctions imposed by Flag States under the System of Inspection 
has been modified to allow Members to consider at the earliest opportunity all aspects of alleged 
violations. Early notification of any illegal catches from the Convention Area was also 
important for the work of the Scientific Committee and its Working Groups.

33.  CCAMLR expressed its concern over infringements of conservation measures by vessels 
of some Member countries in the Convention Area. It also expressed its concern over evidence 
that some non-Member states had been fishing in the Convention Area. It has written to the 
Governments of these states with information about CCAMLR and requested information on 
fishing undertaken in the Convention Area.

34.  The Commission recognised that, in order to make the use of deployed inspectors most 
effective, information was required on a continuing basis on all vessels operating in the 
Convention Area. The Convention Area is large and remote and, without this information, it is 
easy for inspectors to miss vessels.

35.  Two schemes under consideration by the Commission to help reduce this problem are a 
                                                                                        7
satellite-linked Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) and a vessel notification system. A 
satellite-based VMS would allow the positions of all fishing vessels in the Convention Area to 
be monitored at any given time. A vessel notification system would require that all vessels 
entering the Convention Area relay their intentions to the Commission via their respective Flag 
States. Further consideration of the applicability of these two systems to the Convention Area 
is to be undertaken at the next meeting of CCAMLR.

COOPERATION WITHIN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

36. The Commission noted that the complementary nature of the objectives of the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCP) and CCAMLR in protecting the marine environment was 
enhanced by the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. This required the 
further strengthening of liaison between CCAMLR and the ATCP and with the Group of 
Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) of SCAR.

37. The Commission noted that the Protocol provided for the establishment of a Committee 
on Environmental Protection (CEP) to which CCAMLR would be an observer. The Commission 
also noted the XIIIth ATCM decision that CCAMLR should participate in the work of the 
Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG), which is to begin its work at the 
XIXth ATCM.

38. It was further noted that, in the future, under the provisions of Annex V of the Protocol, 
CCAMLR would receive draft management plans from the Antarctic Treaty for Antarctic 
Specially Protected and Managed Areas (ASPAs and ASMAs), with requests for advice and 
approval by the Commission.

39. The Commission endorsed the criteria established by the Scientific Committee for the 
assessment of the proposals. Any future assessment was to include an evaluation of whether 
the proposal adequately:

(i) described the breeding distribution of seabirds and seals in the area and, at least 
for colonially breeding species, included points of their entry and departure from 
the sea;

(ii) noted the location of sites where monitoring studies for purposes of direct 
relevance to CEMP were being undertaken. This was irrespective of whether or 
not the sites had been formally protected under CCAMLR Conservation 
8
Measure 18/IX;

(iii) ensured protection for research which contributed to the objectives of CCAMLR;

(iv) described areas in which birds and seals, associated with or breeding in the 
proposed management area, were known to forage; and

(v) drew to the attention of CCAMLR any other matters which might be relevant to the 
implementation of Article II of the Convention.

40. The Commission took note that Articles 5 and 6 of Annex V to the Protocol elaborated a 
formal procedure for considering ASMA and ASPA proposals. The Commission agreed that 
there should be some flexibility in the deadlines for receiving ASMA and ASPA proposals, with 
the most important consideration being their availability for review at the earliest opportunity by 
the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and its appropriate Working Groups.

41. The ASMA proposal for Admiralty Bay was the first made under Annex V to the 
Protocol and submitted to CCAMLR for consideration. The CCAMLR Scientific Committee 
noted that, as certain information - including a report of consultations with other parties known 
to be conducting research in the area - was not included in the proposal, it was to be revised and 
resubmitted for consideration, taking into particular account the criteria listed in paragraph 39, 
above.

42. With regard to changes introduced by Annex V to the procedure for the protection of 
areas under the Antarctic Treaty, the Commission requested that its Members consider to what 
extent it may be appropriate to revise the existing CCAMLR procedure for protecting scientific 
research at CEMP (CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program) sites.

43. At present, the following two CEMP sites are protected in accordance with the existing 
CCAMLR procedure:

 Site              Area                        Protected since
 Seal Islands      48.1 (South Shetland Islands)  1992
 Cape Shirreff     48.1 (South Shetland Islands)  1995

44. The Commission adopted Conservation Measure 82/XII which provides protection to the 
CEMP site at Cape Shirreff and the San Telmo Islands (Livingston Island, South Shetlands) 
where colonies of seabirds and seals are being monitored as part of CEMP. Prior to its 
adoption, and in accordance with CCAMLR procedures, the management plan for the site was 
                                                               9
submitted to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and to SCAR for comments.

COOPERATION WITH OTHER ORGANISATIONS

45. As well as the Scientific Committe on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Observers from 
ASOC, IOC, IUCN and IWC attended the Thirteenth Meeting of CCAMLR.

46. During the 1993/94 intersessional period CCAMLR was represented at meetings of FAO,
ICES, IWC and the UN.

47. CCAMLR Members have agreed to keep under constant review recent initiatives by the
UN and FAO on high seas fisheries, in particular, the flagging of vessels on the high seas, "a
code of conduct" regarding fishing practices, and the UN Conference on Straddling Stocks and
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.

48. The Commission is actively promoting wider awareness of its objectives and work
within relevant international organisations and forums.

49. CCAMLR representatives were nominated to participate in the 1995 meetings of the
UN/FAO, IWC, South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (SPFFA), International Commission for
the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (IOFC), South
Pacific Commission (SPC), Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna
(CCSBT) and Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (I-ATTC).

50. This year, in particular, the CCAMLR representatives were specifically asked to advise
these international organisations of CCAMLR initiatives on the reduction of incidental mortality
of seabirds in longline fisheries and, in return, request information on steps these organisations
had taken and were planning to take to address this topic.

PUBLICATIONS

51. The first issue of "CCAMLR Science", CCAMLR's new peer-reviewed journal, was
published in November 1994.

52. Publications due in 1995 and available on request on a subscription basis, are:
 
10
• CCAMLR Science, Volume 2;
• Report of the 1994 Meeting of the Commission;
• Report of the 1994 Meeting of the Scientific Committee;
• Statistical Bulletin, Volume 7 (1985-1994);
• CCAMLR Scientific Abstracts;
• CCAMLR Basic Documents; and
• Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force.

                                                                                                                                      11
APPENDIX A

MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF ANTARCTIC
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES

Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Chile
European Economic Community
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Korea, Republic of
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

States that have acceded to the Convention but are not Members of the Commission are:

Bulgaria
Canada
Finland
Greece
Netherlands
Peru
Uruguay
CCAMLR

Boundaries of the 
Statistical Reporting 
Areas in the 
Southern Ocean


LEGEND

= STATISTICAL AREA
 ZONE STATISTIQUE
 СТАТИСТИЧЕСКИЙ РАЙОН
 AREA ESTADISTICA

++++STATISTICAL SUBAREA
 SOUS-ZONE STATISTIQUE
 СТАТИСТИЧЕСКИЙ ПОДРАЙОН
 SUBAREA ESTADISTICA

... ANTARCTIC CONVERGENCE
 CONVERGENCE ANTARCTIQUE
 АНТАРКТИЧЕСКАЯ КОНВЕРГЕНЦИЯ
 CONVERGENCIA ANTARTICA

 CONTINENT, ISLAND
 CONTINENT, ILE
 МАТЕРИК, ОСТРОВ
 CONTINENTE, ISLA

 INTEGRATED STUDY REGION
 ZONE D'ETUDE INTEGREE
 РАЙОН КОМПЛЕКСНЫХ ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ
 REGION DE ESTUDIO INTEGRADO


APPENDIX B
