ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                    SEOUL
                            May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 14
May 8, 1995
Original: English

DRAFT GUIDE TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT OF ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
        Agenda Item 11
DRAFT GUIDE TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF ACTIVITIES IN
ANTARCTICA

Background

Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty requires that each party report annually on the
steps taken to implement the Protocol, whilst Article 6(1)
obliges Parties to assist in the provision of information
regarding environmental impact assessment.

In accord with these requirements the UK has circulated the
attached paper on a "draft Guide to Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) of Activities in Antarctica" in the hope that it
might be of some assistance to other Parties.

The Guide sets out the obligations and procedures for EIA adopted
by the UK Government under the Antarctic Act, 1994 and the
Antarctic Regulations 1995, and provides advice on best practice
in carrying out EIA.

The UK intends that the Guide will be provided to all prospective
applicants seeking permits under the Antarctic Act and the
Antarctic Regulations who wish to undertake activities in
Antarctica.
GUIDE TO ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT OF ACTIVITIES
IN ANTARCTICA

Polar Regions Section
South Atlantic and Antarctic Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
London

April
1995
Introduction

1.1 Growing environmental awareness has focussed attention on the environmental impact of human activities in Antarctica. This led to the adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty in 1991. The Protocol requires that activities in Antarctica should be controlled so as to avoid damaging the environment, and provides for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures for proposed activities.

1.2 EIA attempts to identify and predict the potential impact of a given activity on the environment. EIA is essentially a technique by which information about the environmental effects of an activity are collected in an objective and systematic fashion, the significance of those effects are determined, and mechanisms which will minimise adverse impacts are established.

1.3 The United Kingdom has ratified the Protocol. The necessary changes to United Kingdom law have been made by the Antarctic Act 1994 (the Act) and the Antarctic Regulations 1995 (the Regulations). Both the Act and the Regulations will be brought into force progressively. (Similar legislation has been made for British territories abroad, including in particular those in the South Atlantic.)

1.4 The aim of this guide is to provide:
-   a description of the principles of the Environmental Protocol
-   a brief description of the main provisions of the Antarctic Act
-   details of the EIA procedures required by the Antarctic Regulations
-   advice on best practice in carrying out EIA.

Warning

2. This Guide is intended as no more than a simple introduction to EIA and other requirements of the Act and the Regulations; it has no legal status. Anyone considering organising activities in Antarctica should study the Act and the Regulations carefully and seek their own advice as necessary at an early stage.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

3.1 The objective of the Protocol is to ensure the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems. The environmental principles set out in Article 3 require that the protection of the Antarctic environment be a fundamental consideration in the planning and conduct of activities in Antarctica and that they are planned and conducted on the basis of :

"information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgements about, their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment".

3.2 Article 3 also states that activities must avoid
-   adverse effects on climate or weather patterns
-   significant adverse effects on air or water quality
-   significant changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial (including aquatic), glacial or marine environments
- detrimental changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of species or populations of species of fauna or flora

- further jeopardy to endangered or threatened species or populations of such species

- degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance.

The Protocol identifies three stages of EIA to match different levels of predicted impact of proposed activities. These stages are:

i)     Preliminary assessment

ii)    Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE)

iii)   Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE).

The need for a permit

4.1 Under the Act most activities in Antarctica will in future require a permit issued by the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (the Foreign Secretary), and the carrying out of an EIA will be a precondition for the grant of a permit. Such activities include

- British expeditions (i.e. expeditions which are organised in or leave from British territory, including tourist cruises)

- British research stations

- British vessels and aircraft entering Antarctica

- Scientific research on minerals (other minerals activity being prohibited).

4.2 In addition, further permits will be needed by British nationals for the following activities:

- harmful interference with Antarctic fauna or flora

- introduction of non-native animals and plants into Antarctica

- entry into areas protected under the Protocol or under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

Warning

5. If you go ahead without a necessary permit you will commit an offence punishable by up to 2 years imprisonment and an unlimited fine.

Applications for permits

6.1 Applications for permits must be submitted to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO). The applicant must within 7 days of making his application publish notice of it in the London Gazette. The application form will give details as to the form of the notice and the information it must contain, including information about how the public can inspect the application and obtain copies.
6.2 The FCO will provide application forms and general advice and guidance on the likely level of environmental impact assessment that will be required. Prospective applicants are thus urged to contact the Polar Regions Section of the FCO as early as possible to discuss their plans informally before embarking on what might be a time-consuming, costly and, possibly, fruitless exercise. (Full contact details are given at the end of this Guide).

The responsibility and requirement for EIA

7.1 Except for the activities listed in paragraph 4.2 above, all applications for permits will require EIA. The carrying out of EIA, including the cost, is the responsibility of the applicant. The decision on whether a permit will be granted is for the Foreign Secretary.

7.2 The level at which the EIA has to be done will depend on various factors. There are no hard and fast rules. Much will depend on the circumstances of each case. The three main factors which need to be taken into account are as follows:

    i)     The activity itself

       Is the activity a major departure from current operations, principally in terms of physical size, 
       number of personnel or use of equipment?

       For example, the building of a new research station or the construction of a crushed 
       rock airstrip are both likely to have significant environmental effects. In contrast, a 
       small field party travelling over an ice shelf is likely to have a negligible effect.

    ii)    The location

       Will the activity be located in a particularly sensitive location?

       For example, activities located in or adjacent to a bird or seal colony, botanically 
       rich location or a designated protected area. Even small-scale field camp activities 
       could have significant environmental effects in such sensitive areas.

   iii)    The likely effects

       Will the activity give rise to particularly complex, cumulative, adverse, large-scale or irreversible 
       effects?

       For example, the biological systems found in inland saline lakes in Antarctica are 
       unique and are very sensitive to disturbance or pollution. Even very small 
       chemical changes or alterations in water level could result in irrevocable damage. 
       Attention also needs to be given to those effects which on their own are of little 
       consequence but taken together may have a significant cumulative impact. For 
       example, the continual addition of major facilities around a research station (e.g. 
       accommodation blocks, scientific laboratories).

7.3 Figure 1 illustrates how various Antarctic activities might relate to the three stages of assessment identified by the Protocol and reflected in the Regulations.
Preliminary assessment procedure

8.1 The application form for a permit seeks information as to the proposed activity, and in particular the predicted impact on the Antarctic environment. On the basis of this information the FCO will make a decision on whether the proposed activity is likely to have more than a negligible impact on the environment of Antarctica. Activities which are probably likely to have only a negligible impact include:
-   small, light-weight scientific research projects using tents for temporary accommodation
-   scientific research projects operated from permanent or summer research stations
-   aircraft operations using unprepared ice and snow fields or skiways
-   small, light-weight adventure expeditions using tents for temporary accommodation
-   small vessel (e.g. yacht) operations
-   the clean-up and removal of waste and rubbish from abandoned research stations
-   the conservation of historic sites.

8.2 If the Foreign Secretary decides that the proposed activity is likely to have more than a negligible impact, he will require the applicant to submit an Initial Environmental Evaluation ("IEE"). But if he has already determined that the proposed activity is likely to have more than minor or transitory impact he will require a Comprehensive Environment Evaluation ("CEE"). Although a CEE may be required even after an IEE has been done, in most cases this will probably be unnecessary.

Activities likely to require an IEE

9. Activities likely to have more than a negligible impact on the Antarctic environment, and thus requiring an IEE, but probably not a CEE, include:
-   the construction of major, new or replacement facilities at established research stations (e.g. wharves, accommodation blocks, scientific laboratories)
-   the abandonment or removal of research stations
-   major deep ice-core drilling projects using drilling fluids.

Activities likely to require a CEE

10. Activities likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment, and thus requiring a CEE, include:
-   the construction and operation of a new research station
-   the construction and operation of a new crushed rock airstrip or runway
-   major rock or sediment drilling projects, using drilling fluids or muds.
IEE procedure

11.1 The FCO will advise the applicant as to the form in which the IEE must be submitted and the information required. The information must be sufficient to enable the Foreign Secretary to assess:
-   the scale of the impact which the proposed activity may have on the environment of Antarctica
-   whether, in the light of existing and known planned activities, it may have a cumulative impact
-   whether there may be alternative ways of carrying out the proposed activity which might lessen the environmental impact or possible cumulative impact.

11.2 The public have a right to inspect the IEE and to obtain copies. The applicant must therefore make a copy of the IEE available for inspection during normal office hours, and provide copies of it to any person who asks for it in writing. The applicant can make a reasonable charge for this.

11.3 A list of IEEs will be published annually.

11.4 If, after consideration of the IEE, the Foreign Secretary is satisfied that the proposed activity will have only a minor or transitory impact, he will consider whether or not to grant a permit and the conditions to attach to it.

11.5 If the Foreign Secretary determines that the impact is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact, the applicant will be required to submit a CEE.

CEE procedure

12. The procedure for submitting a CEE is in two stages: a draft CEE followed by a final CEE. The FCO will advise the applicant as to the form in which both must be submitted and the information required.

Draft CEE

13. A draft CEE must contain sufficient information to enable the Foreign Secretary to consider or determine:
-   possible alternatives to the proposed activity, including the alternative of not proceeding with it
-   the initial environmental reference state with which predicted changes are to be compared, and the likely future environmental state in the absence of the proposed activity
-   whether the methods and data used to forecast the impacts of the proposed activity are satisfactory for that purpose
-   the nature, extent, duration, and intensity of the likely direct impacts of the proposed activity
-   possible indirect or second order impacts of the proposed activity
-   any cumulative impacts of the proposed activity in the light of existing activities and other known planned activities
- the measures which could be taken to minimize or mitigate impacts of the 
proposed activity, and whether a monitoring programme to verify foreseen 
impacts or detect unforeseen impacts, and provide early warning of any 
adverse effects of the activity, should be provided for

- the measures which could be taken to deal promptly and effectively with 
accidents

- whether there may be any unavoidable impacts of the proposed activity

- the effects of the proposed activity on the conduct of scientific research and 
on other existing uses and values

- whether there are gaps in knowledge or uncertainties with regard to the 
possible impact of the proposed activity.

Procedure between the draft and final CEEs

14.1 The FCO will make the draft CEE available for inspection by the public, who can 
obtain copies. A notice to this effect will be published by the FCO in the London Gazette 
inviting comments within 90 days.

14.2 The draft CEE will also be circulated by the British Government to the Governments 
of other Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) not less than 120 days before the 
next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). At that meeting the draft CEE will 
be considered by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) established by the 
Protocol.

14.3 Thus, in order to meet this timetable, the draft CEE must be received by the FCO at 
least 150 days before the next ATCM (which is usually held in April or May each year). 
The FCO will usually know the exact date a year before.

Final CEE

15.1 Following the ATCM the Foreign Secretary will require the applicant to submit a 
final CEE. The applicant will be advised as to the required form and the number of copies 
which must be provided.

15.2 For this purpose, the FCO will supply the applicant with:
      
- any comments on the draft CEE received from the other ATCPs or the public

- any advice given by the CEP

- an account of the consideration of that advice by the ATCM.

15.3 In preparing the final CEE the applicant must take account of the above material and 
summarize it in the final CEE.

Procedure following the final CEE

16.1 The FCO will make the final CEE available for inspection by the public, who can 
obtain copies. A notice to this effect will be published by the FCO in the London Gazette 
inviting comments within 30 days of publication. The Foreign Secretary will take into 
account these and earlier comments in deciding whether to grant a permit.
16.2 Figure 2 shows a flow chart and timetable covering the whole CEE process. The 
final CEE should be prepared quickly since the Protocol provides that the decision 
whether the proposed activity can go ahead must be taken no longer than 15 months from 
when the draft CEE is circulated to the other ATCPs.

Decision on application

17. The decision of the Foreign Secretary will be taken as soon as possible after all the 
required stages have been completed. If a permit is granted it will be subject to such 
conditions as the Foreign Secretary considers necessary. If the application is refused the 
applicant will be told in writing of the reasons why.

Advice on best practice in carrying out EIA

18. There is no single method or technique for assessing the environmental impact of an 
activity. The methods and techniques applied will depend on the characteristics of the 
activity and of the environment. However, advice can be given on best practice. An 
approach to the preparation of a major EIA in Antarctica, such as an IEE or CEE, is shown 
in Figure 3.

Description of the activity

19. The description of the activity should comprise information about the:
- purpose and need for the activity
- the location of the activity (maps should be used)
- the duration and timing of the activity
- the extent of the activity (include area affected)
- the intensity of the activity (e.g. the number of people involved in 
construction and operation of the activity, the type and quantity of materials 
to be used)
- proposed access and transport arrangements (e.g. types and numbers of 
vehicles or aircraft)
- estimates of the types and quantities of emissions if known (e.g. water, air 
and soil pollution, noise, light, heat)
- estimates of the types and quantities of wastes likely to be produced by the 
activity (non-hazardous and hazardous).

Alternatives

20. An important element of EIA is the analysis of practical alternatives to the proposed 
activity. Such an analysis allows a comparison between options. Examples of alternatives 
which should be examined include the continuation and use of present facilities, the use of 
different locations, joint operations with other operators, or the use of different technology 
or equipment. An alternative which must be addressed in a CEE is that of not proceeding 
with the proposed activity. The applicant should indicate the main reasons for his 
preferred option.
Description of the environment

21.1 Although each locality will be different, an accurate description of the local environment likely to be affected by the activity should be referred to. This should include details of:

-   physical characteristics (e.g. meteorology, oceanography, geology, hydrology)
-   flora and fauna (e.g. mapping of populations and habitats)
-   protected areas or sites
-   human activities (e.g. logistics, scientific research, tourism).

21.3 In addition to the written description, information should, if appropriate, also be presented in the form of maps, charts, photographs and tables.

Identification of impacts

22.1 A first step in the identification of likely impacts of a proposed activity is to examine the effects of similar activities in similar environments elsewhere in Antarctica. Past EIAs can often provide useful information (e.g. NERC (1989), BAS (1994)). However, each activity is unique, with its own set of impacts and so must be assessed individually.

22.2 All significant impacts should be identified in the EIA. This requires a logical step by step approach. There are a number of methods which can help in identifying impacts, ranging from straight forward overlay maps to checklists and matrices. Further information on EIA techniques can be found in Glasson et al (1994). The assessment technique used will depend on the character of the activity, the environment which it is likely to affect and the information available.

22.3 Some impacts are difficult or impossible to quantify or even predict. For example, aesthetic, historical and wilderness values. However, such impacts should not be ignored. Instead, an objective and qualitative determination of such impacts using value judgements should be made. These should be firmly based on past experience, and the input of experienced Antarctic scientists, programme managers and administrators will be required. It is important that the basis on which value judgements are made is clearly stated in the EIA.

Minimising and mitigating impacts

23.1 Appropriate measures should be included in the EIA to minimise and mitigate identified impacts. Although, such measures will vary both with the project and the environment, there are five general types that can be used. These are:

i)  developing on-site control procedures (e.g. recommended methods for waste disposal)

ii) establishing the best time window for the activity (e.g. altering the timing of the clean-up of an abandoned base colonised by penguins so that disturbance occurs outside of the breeding season)

iii) providing environmental education and training to personnel, or contractors, involved in the activity (e.g. briefing personnel on the protection of the Antarctic environment before they leave the UK)
iv)     ensuring adequate on-site supervision of the activity by senior project staff 
        or environmental specialists (e.g. ensuring that pollution levels are kept to 
        the minimum practicable during major construction projects)

v)     producing written contingency plans for emergencies and accidents (e.g. 
        ensuring that written oil spill contingency plans are in place before major 
        rock drilling projects commence).

23.2 Mitigation measures need to be considered at the start of planning for an activity. At 
this early stage, minor changes in specifications or procedures can lead to adverse impacts 
being avoided or minimised.

Environmental monitoring

24.1 Environmental monitoring of key indicators can be used to assess and verify the 
actual impact of the activity, to check the predictions made in the EIA, detect any 
unforeseen effects and to provide useful information so decision-makers can prevent or 
minimise any adverse impacts.

24.2 Monitoring for EIA normally concentrates around the immediate locality of activity. 
But strategies for monitoring will vary with the activity and local environmental 
circumstances. Before embarking on a monitoring programme expert advice should be 
sought from experienced Antarctic scientists.

Further information

25. References in this Guide to the FCO are to the Polar Regions Section mentioned 
below, from which further information and advice on EIA procedures can be obtained:

Polar Regions Section
South Atlantic and Antarctic Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
King Charles Street
London SW1A 2AH

Tel: 0171 270 2617
Fax: 0171 270 2086
References

Antarctic Act 1994 HMSO, London. (£3.30)

Antarctic Regulations 1995 HMSO, London (£4.15)

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Madrid, 4 October 1991. Cm 1960. HMSO, London (£6.25)

Proposed Construction of Airstrip at Rothera Point, Antarctica - Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. NERC, Swindon, 1989, 56 pp. (£3.50)

Initial Environmental Evaluation - Expansion of Rothera Research Station, Rothera Point, Adelaide Island, Antarctica. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, 1994, 37 pp. (£3.00)

Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment. University College London, London. 342 pp Glasson, J., Therivel, R., Chadwick, A. (1994) (£14.95)

Guide to permits:13.2.95
1. PRELIMINARY 
STAGE

REMOTE FIELD CAMP

Negligible 
Impact

2. INITIAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
EVALUATION 
(IEE)

MAJOR NEW FACILITY AT EXISTING STATION

More than 
a negligible 
impact

3. COMPREHENSIVE 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
EVALUATION 
(CEE)

CRUSHED ROCK AIRSTRIP

More than a 
minor or 
transitory 
impact

Figure 1 How various Antarctic activities relate to the stages of EIA identified by the Protocol
APPLICANT SUBMITS DRAFT CEE TO FCO

FCO PUBLISHES NOTE IN LONDON GAZETTE ASKING 
FOR WRITTEN COMMENTS ON DRAFT CEE                                    MAX
                                                                   7 
                                                                   DAYS

FCO MAKES THE DRAFT CEE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION 
BY THE PUBLIC, WHO CAN OBTAIN COPIES IF A WRITTEN 
REQUEST IS MADE TO THE FCO                                         MAX 
                                                                   90 
                                                                   DAYS

FCO CIRCULATES THE DRAFT CEE TO THE ATCPs AND 
FORWARDS IT TO THE CEP

FCO PRESENTS THE DRAFT CEE AT THE NEXT ATCM

FCO PROVIDES THE APPLICANT WITH ANY WRITTEN COMMENTS 
OR ADVICE RECEIVED

                                                                   FCO PUBLISHES 
                                                                   NOTE WITHIN 7 
                                                                   DAYS OF 
                                                                   RECEIVING 
                                                                   DRAFT CEE

                                                                   MIN 
                                                                   150 
                                                                   DAYS

                                                                   COMMENTS ON 
                                                                   THE DRAFT 
                                                                   CEE MUST 
                                                                   BE RECEIVED 
                                                                   BY FCO 
                                                                   WITHIN 90 
                                                                   DAYS OF THE 
                                                                   NOTE BEING 
                                                                   PUBLISHED

                                                                   DRAFT CEE 
                                                                   MUST BE 
                                                                   SUBMITTED 
                                                                   TO FCO AT 
                                                                   LEAST 150 
                                                                   DAYS 
                                                                   BEFORE THE 
                                                                   NEXT ATCM

APPLICANT SUBMITS FINAL CEE TO FCO 
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT AND SUMMARISING 
ANY COMMENTS RECEIVED

FCO PUBLISHES NOTE IN LONDON GAZETTE ASKING FOR 
WRITTEN COMMENTS ON FINAL CEE                                     MAX 
                                                                   7 
                                                                   DAYS

FCO MAKES THE FINAL CEE AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION, 
BY THE PUBLIC, WHO CAN OBTAIN COPIES IF A WRITTEN 
REQUEST IS MADE TO FCO                                             MAX 
                                                                   30 
                                                                   DAYS

FCO DECIDES WHETHER TO GRANT A PERMIT TAKING 
INTO ACCOUNT ANY COMMENTS OR ADVICE RECEIVED

IF A PERMIT IS GRANTED, IT WILL BE SUBJECT TO SUCH 
CONDITIONS AS THE FOREIGN SECRETARY CONSIDERS 
NECESSARY

IF AN APPLICATION IS REFUSED BY THE FOREIGN SECRETARY 
THE APPLICANT WILL BE TOLD IN WRITING OF THE REASONS WHY

                                                                   FCO PUBLISHES 
                                                                   NOTE WITHIN 
                                                                   7 DAYS OF 
                                                                   RECEIVING 
                                                                   FINAL CEE

                                                                   MAX 
                                                                   15 
                                                                   MTHS

                                                                   COMMENTS ON 
                                                                   THE FINAL CEE 
                                                                   MUST BE 
                                                                   RECEIVED BY 
                                                                   THE FCO WITHIN 
                                                                   30 DAYS OF THE 
                                                                   NOTE BEING 
                                                                   PUBLISHED

                                                                   DECISION 
                                                                   CANNOT 
                                                                   BE DELAYED 
                                                                   FOR LONGER 
                                                                   THAN 15 
                                                                   MONTHS 
                                                                   FROM DATE 
                                                                   OF CIRCUL-
                                                                   ATION OF 
                                                                   DRAFT CEE 
                                                                   TO THE 
                                                                   ATCPs

Figure 2  Flowchart and timetable for draft and final CEEs.
DESCRIPTION
OF THE
ACTIVITY

ALTERNATIVES

DESCRIPTION
OF THE
ENVIRONMENT

IDENTIFICATION
AND
PREDICTION
OF IMPACTS

MEASURES TO
MINIMISE OR MITIGATE
IMPACTS

ENVIRONMENTAL
MONITORING

CONCLUSION

Figure 3     A general approach to the production of an EIA for a proposed activity
              in Antarctica.
