ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                SEOUL
                           May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 6 Rev. 1
May 16, 1995
Original: English

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
PREPARED FOR SOUTHERN HERITAGE EXPEDITIONS
                        1994/95

ANTARCTIC CRUISE PROGRAMME

Agenda Item 11 a

(Submitted by New Zealand)

We enclose a copy of our IEE. We are sorry that, because of limited availability, we can only
provide one copy for each delegation.
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL
EVALUATION

Prepared for

Southern Heritage Expeditions

1994/95

ANTARCTIC CRUISE PROGRAMME

POLAR RESEARCH VESSEL

AKADEMIK SHOKALSKI
INDEX

1. Introduction                                              Page 1
2. Background                                                Page 3
3. Proposed Activity, Benefits of Activity and               Page 7
   Alternatives
4. Initial Environmental State                              Page 11
5. Nature and Significance of Impacts and                   Page 12
   Operations
6. Conclusion                                                Page 22

Schedule of Appendices                                      Page 23
SOUTHERN HERITAGE EXPEDITIONS LIMITED

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

1 INTRODUCTION

1.1    Legal Requirements:

The Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill is currently before Parliament.
It is accepted by Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd (SHEL) that, for the
purposes of this Evaluation, the Bill has the effect and force of an Act of
Parliament.

Pursuant to Clause 10 (2) of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill,
any "person" ("person" is accepted by SHEL as including SHEL) proposing
to carry out any activity in Antarctica is required to prepare an Initial
Environmental Evaluation. It is accepted by Southern Heritage Expeditions
Ltd that the activities proposed by it within Antarctica are likely to have a
"minor or transitory impact" on the Antarctic environment. The activities of
the Company are not likely to have more than a minor or transitory effect on
the Antarctic environment so a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
(Section 12 of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill) would not be
necessary. This Initial Environmental Evaluation will, (for the purpose of
completeness) refer to all matters required by a Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (Ref: Article 3, Second Schedule, Antarctica
(Environmental Protection) Bill).

1.2    Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd is a Company domiciled in New Zealand
and incorporated under New Zealand Law. The Company will, throughout
its voyages, comply with New Zealand Law specifically the Antarctica Act,
1960, The Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978 and The Antarctic Marine
Living Resources Act 1981 as well as The Antarctic (Fauna and Flora)
Regulations 1971 and The Antarctica (Specially Protected Areas) Order 1971.
The Company, as an employer, will also ensure that the provisions of the
Health and Safety in Employment Act 1992 and The Accident Compensation
Rehabilitation and Insurance Act (1992) are complied with.

1.3    SHEL also recognises and will comply with The New Zealand Government
Policy on Tourist Private Expeditions and will complete a New Zealand
Antarctic Programme Tourist Visitors Permission (File 16/1/1) or its
-2-

equivalent noting its Schedules and Annexures in accordance with Article IX 
of the Antarctic Treaty and Treaty Recommendations IV - 27, VI - 7, VIII - 
9, X - 8 and XVIII - 1.

1.4 Subantarctic Islands.

The Campbell Islands, The Snares, The Bounty Islands, the Antipodes Islands 
and the Auckland Islands Group are Nature Reserves administered by the 
Department of Conservation for the New Zealand Government and are subject 
to directives issued by the Department of Conservation. Southern Heritage 
Expeditions Ltd will comply with all such directives, protocols and regulations 
established from time to time by the Department of Conservation, particularly 
the Sub Antarctic Islands Minimum Impact Code.  All landings on Sub 
Antarctic Islands are regulated by a permit system. SHEL holds sufficient 
permits from D.O.C. to cover its 1994/95 programme.

1.5 Government Representatives.

It is the requirement of the New Zealand Government (both Department of 
Conservation and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme, (a programme of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade)) that Expedition Cruises taking 
tourists to Antarctica, or to the Sub-Antarctic Islands, have on board at all 
times a New Zealand Government Representative. It is the duty of the New 
Zealand Government Representative to ensure that the tour operator, and the 
passengers responsible to the tour operator, observe all requirements of the 
New Zealand Government for persons visiting Antarctica.  SHEL has 
arranged to have a New Zealand Government Representative accompany each 
Cruise in its programme.
-3-
2    BACKGROUND

SOUTHERN HERITAGE EXPEDITIONS

2.1      DELETED FOR REASONS OF COMMERCIAL CONFIDENTIALITY

The principal of Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd, Rodney Russ, will maintain the position of Expedition Leader on all cruises operated by the Company. Over the past 10 years the Company has conducted more than 50 expedition type cruises within New Zealand and to the New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands. The Company has been awarded the Air New Zealand Ecotourism Award "for high achievement in conservation and public education of the natural environment of New Zealand". It has also won the New Zealand Tourism award for best Natural History operation and has received a "Highly Commended" from the British Airways "Tourism for Tomorrow" Awards. Rodney Russ is a trained naturalist and historian, while Shirley Russ, is a registered nurse with management and office skills.

2.2   Environmental Policy.

The objective of SHEL is to create ambassadors for the continued protection of fragile environments. It is appreciated that in visiting such environments passengers may have impacts. The objective of SHEL is to minimise those impacts by dealing with small groups and maintaining a guiding ratio of no more than 1:10. SHEL places great importance on educating its clients about possible impacts and ways of avoiding them. If it is considered the impact is too great then the particular activity will be reviewed and if the activity can not be operated without these impacts then the activity will be cancelled and an alternative sought.

2.3   Safety Policy.

Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd appreciates the fact that it often operates in regions which are considered of high risk. The policy of the Company is to identify those areas where passengers, staff and ships crew are at greatest risk and introduce a risk management regime including Staff training to minimise those risks. Refer Paragraphs 5.5 hereto.
-4-

2.4   IAATO Membership

Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd is a member of IAATO the International 
Association of Antarctic Tour Operators. IAATO was established in 1991 by 
seven tour operators and has since then been the recognised voice of Antarctic 
Tour Operators to Antarctic Treaty Consultative meetings and as a 
representative of the views and opinions for Antarctic Tour operators 
generally. There are now 17 members of IAATO representing the majority 
of companies involved in Antarctic tourism. As part of its activities IAATO has 
established Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctic Tour Operators, Guidelines 
for Conduct of Tour Visitors to Antarctica and By-laws to conduct its own 
operations and management.  Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd subscribes 
fully to the concept of IAATO and the regulations it has promulgated for 
management of Antarctic Tour operations. See Appendixes 1, 2, & 3 for 
copies of these.

2.5   Staff

5.1   Expedition Leader:

The Expedition Leader is Rodney Russ.

Rodney worked for the New Zealand Wildlife Service, firstly as a trainee and 
then as a protected species officer. After eleven years with the Wildlife 
Service he resigned to pursue studies at Otago University and Knox 
Theological College. He completed a B?chelor of Theology and a degree in 
Pacific and New Zealand History. In 1985 Southern Heritage Tours Limited 
was formed to co-ordinate an increasing number of Guiding / Lecturing 
assignments. The Company headquarters were moved to Waikari in North 
Canterbury in 1987. Rodney's guiding assignments have taken him throughout 
New Zealand on many occasions, and have included numerous trips to the 
Chatham Islands, Stewart Island, Hauraki Gulf, Marlborough Sounds and the 
New Zealand Sub Antarctic Islands. He was guest lecturer and zodiac driver 
on the World Discover? in Antarctic in 1990/91 and more recently he was 
Expedition Leader on the World Explorer during a series of cruises from Fiji 
to Vietnam.

5.2   Lecturers / Naturalists: There will be different Staff on each voyage - the 
Expedition Leader (Rodney Russ) will be the only one that will be on all trips. 
In addition to the Expedition leader each expedition will be accompanied by 
3 other naturalists who will also act as Zodiac drivers. Staff will include:
-5-

Brian Bell - New Zealand leading ornithologist and formerly head of the 
protected species unit of the Wildlife Service. Brian has had extensive 
experience in the Sub-Antarctic and Island work.

Rowley Taylor - Now semi-retired Rowley was a biologist with Ecology 
Division of DSIR. Rowley has also had extensive experience in the Sub-
Antarctic and also Antarctica.

Dr David Given - David is a world renowned biogeographer / Botanist 
who has made numerous trips to the Antarctic and also Sub Antarctic.

Dr Chris Challies - Chris is an ornithologist and biologist with considerable 
experience in the Sub Antarctic. This will be his first trip to the Antarctic.

David Crear -  David is a Lawyer. He was officer in Charge at Scott 
Base and responsible for the NZ programme in Antarctica October 1988 - 
February 1989. David is a member and trustee of NZ Antarctic Heritage 
Trust and has a broad interest in Antarctic History, Politics and Ecology.

Ingrid Visser -  Ingrid is currently completing her PhD on Orca (Killer 
Whales).  Apart from her knowledge of marine mammals, she brings 
extensive small boat skills.

Simon Heppelwaite -  Simon is a botanist and general naturalist and a 
skilled natural history guide. A former fisherman he has extensive small boat 
skills.

Terry Read -  Terry is an employee of the Tasmanian National Parks and 
Wildlife Service.  Terry has spent 16 months as a Ranger on Macquarie 
Island. Terry is a general naturalist with small boat skills.

Dr Mark Norman -  Mark is an Australian Marine Biologist who has 
travelled extensively. In 1985 he spent some time in Antarctica and also at 
Heard Island. He also has extensive small boat skills.

5.3 Staff Training:

All staff have experience in either the Antarctic, the Sub-Antarctic Islands or 
both. Some have taken the opportunity to further their own training by either
-6-

attending Inflatable training courses and others have borrowed a company Naiad to familianise themselves with these craft.

5.4 An important part of each trip will be the regular staff meetings that will be held to discuss daily programmes and activities and also any problems. These meetings will be open to both the Captain and also the New Zealand Government Representative. Staff meetings will be an opportunity to answer questions, discuss areas with which staff may not be familiar  and will reinforce expectations that the Company and Expedition Leader has of them.
-7-

3.    PROPOSED ACTIVITY, BENEFITS OF ACTIVITY AND 
      ALTERNATIVES

3.1   Description of Operational Area
The activities of Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd covered in this Initial 
Environmental Evaluation will be conducted within the area bounded by 
longitude 160 degrees East and longitude 180 degrees East and between 
latitude 45 degrees South and latitude 78 degrees South including a substantial 
proportion of the Ross Sea and the land and seas to the south of New Zealand. 
A map showing the operational area is found in Appendix 4.

3.2   The location, duration and intensity of each of the proposed activities in 
Antarctica is specifically as follows:

The Company, for the coming summer 1994/95 season, proposes three 
Expedition Cruises to Antarctica. These are termed Voyage 1193; "In Search 
of the Emperor and Other Penguins"; Voyage 1195; "In the Footsteps of 
Douglas Mawson" and Voyage 1196; "In the Footsteps of Scott and 
Shackleton".

Voyage 1193: "In Search of the Emperor and Other Penguins"

Passengers on the Expedition will leave Christchurch, New Zealand on a 
charter flight to the Chatham Islands to join the Ship. From day 9 through to 
day 16 the Ship will spend time south of 60 Degrees South in the Ross Sea 
region. The stated purpose of the Expedition is to allow passengers as many 
wildlife experiences as possible. The Expedition will search for Emperor 
penguins and keep a watch for whales and seals. Landings will be made 
where possible. The Expedition intends to visit an Adelie penguin colony. 
From day 17 through to day 26 the Expedition will return to Bluff, New 
Zealand by way of landings at Macquarie Island and Enderby Island in the 
Auckland Islands group, with a Naiad Cruise off the Snares Islands.

Voyage 1195: "In the Footsteps of Douglas Mawson"

From Bluff, New Zealand the Expedition Ship will travel by way of the 
Snares Islands (which will be the subject of a Naiad Cruise) and proposed 
landings at Enderby Island in the Auckland Island group and Macquarie Island 
to the area south of 60 Degrees South off Commonwealth Bay. From day 12 
through to day 23 the Expedition cruise will remain in Antarctic waters with
-8-

plans to visit Douglas Mawson's hut at Commonwealth Bay and to cruise past the Mertz Glacier and the Balleny Islands to a scheduled visit to Borchgrevink's Hut at Cape Adare and its Adelie penguin colony. Time will be spent cruising in the Ross Sea searching for Emperor and other penguins and other wildlife, including whales and seals. On day 19 the Expedition intends to visit Scott Base and McMurdo Station on Ross Island and to inspect Scott's Discovery Hut at Winter Quarters Bay. On day 20 the Expedition is scheduled to visit the hut of Sir Ernest Shackleton at Cape Royds and the hut of Captain Robert Falcon Scott at Cape Evans. From there the Expedition Ship will cruise to Cape Hallet by way of Terra Nova Bay where, if permission is granted, the Expedition members will visit the Italian research base. A landing is planned at Cape Hallet so that Expedition members can visit the penguin rookery there. From days 23 through to 29 the Ship will return to Bluff, New Zealand by way of Campbell Island.

Voyage 1196: "In the Footsteps of Scott and Shackleton"

The Expedition Ship will leave Bluff, New Zealand and travel by way of Campbell Island to reach the Ross Sea (south of 60 Degrees South) on day 8 of the Expedition. In the Ross Sea on day 9 it is intended to make a Naiad landing on Coulman Island and on day 10 visit Terra Nova Bay and the Italian research base, if permission is granted. On days 11 and 12 the Ship will visit Scott Base and McMurdo Station on Ross Island and Expedition members will inspect Scott's Discovery Hut. On day 13 Expedition members will visit the hut of Sir Ernest Shackleton at Cape Royds and the hut of Captain Robert Falcon Scott at Cape Evans. From there the Ship will cruise by way of Cape Hallett (where a landing will be made, if conditions permit, to allow the Expedition members to inspect the penguin rookery) to Borchgrevinks hut at Cape Adare. The Expedition will return to New Zealand from day 15 through to day 21 by way of a landing at Enderby Island in the Auckland Islands group. See Appendix 5 for the SHEL Sales Brochure "Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited Presents Antarctica" giving greater detail. Ref. Article 3.2 (a) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

3.3 SAFETY AND EMERGENCIES

3.3.1 Clothing.

All passengers have been sent clothing lists suggesting the type of clothing they should pack and weather conditions likely to be
-9-

encountered. In addition to this Southern Heritage Expeditions will be providing each member with a Expedition Parka. Refer Appendix 6.

3.3.2 Life jackets.

The wearing of  Life Jackets in the Semi Rigid Inflatables is compulsory at all times. Life Jackets are supplied by SHEL to each Expedition member. Refer Appendix 7.

3.3.3 Radio contact.

Staff are required to be in radio contact at all times with the Expedition Leader and with the Bridge of the Ship, prior to and during landing and on shore excursions. Radios are supplied by SHEL. Refer Appendix 8.

3.3.4 Survival Equipment.

In addition to the equipment carried in each Naiad, safety survival will be landed each time a party is put ashore. This equipment will include sufficient items to enable Expedition members to survive should the party not be able to get back to the ship. Refer Appendix 9. There will be three sets of this equipment - one for each Naiad.

3.3.5 Tag Board.

A special need is seen by Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited to control the numbers of passengers, staff and crew whilst ashore. Each person on the ship is allocated a unique number linked to the cabin number of that person. This is used on a "Tag Board" system. The system allows the tag being reversed on the board to show a different colour whilst that individual is away from the ship or ashore. Upon his or her return to the ship the tag is reversed again on the board. Because the principal of Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited accompanies each cruise immediate and responsible action can be taken in perceived breaches of safety or perceived breaches of environmental protocols.
-10-

3.4   EMERGENCIES

3.4.1 Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited appreciates the fact that it is 
operating in an area that should there be an emergency that SHEL will 
have to deal with emergencies without outside assistance.  SHEL 
attempted to lessen the risks as much as possible by selecting a ship 
that is suitable for the latitudes and conditions intended to be visited 
and by conducting the cruises at a time of the year when conditions 
are most suitable. The Company has attempted to identify those areas 
where the greatest risks are and introduce Risk Management to these

DELETED FOR REASONS OF COMMERCIAL CONFIDENTIALITY
-11-

4. INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL STATE

The open Antarctic landscape and clear atmosphere make any modification by human activities particularly obvious. The impact of tourist visits on the environment however are generally lower than the effects of other Antarctic support and science activities.

The Historic Sites, the focus of a significant portion of the Expeditions of SHEL are already significantly modified by human activities over periods of up to almost 100 years. It is unlikely that any short term visit being of no more than a few hours duration by SHEL Expedition members will affect the land with more than a "minor or transitory impact". SHEL will comply with all AHT impact codes.

SHEL Expedition members will also visit penguin rookeries in the Ross Sea Region. The impact of Expedition members on birds and animals is referred to in 5.3 and 5.4 hereof.

Other sites in Antarctica likely to be visited can be generally described as being open shingle or stony beaches, free of fast ice or other objective danger which could restrict landings by Inflatables.

It is considered unlikely that visits to such land forms would have any lasting effect. Any footprints left are likely to be erased by tide or weathering over a relatively short period. No garbage will be left on shore.

SHEL wishes to be free to select landing sites on an "as available" basis. The relatively small numbers of Expedition members, the enthusiasm and ability of staff, the fact that all passengers can be accommodated at one time in the Inflatables carried on the ship, and the flexibility of having the Expedition Leader as Charterer of the ship on board at all times, will allow decisions to be made as to landings on very short notice on any sites in the Ross Sea Region (as shown on the map Appendix 4) not protect by SSSI or SPA designations.
-12-

5.    NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF IMPACTS AND OPERATIONS

5.1   Purpose:

The purpose of these Expeditions is to create "Ambassadors" by raising the awareness of participants through sharing with them the unique natural history of Antarctica and the Sub-Antarctic, allowing Expedition members to visit historic sites and discussing with them the conservation issues confronting the Antarctic Continent. This will be done in a manner so as to limit the impacts on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.  It is considered by SHEL that there are no viable alternatives to the activities apart from the alternative of not proceeding. Ref. Article 3.2(a) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.2   Monitoring:

The Expedition Leader will cause to be kept a log of the dates, times and duration of each landing by an Expedition Member or specifically the numbers of persons landed and the duration they spend on land. Regular staff meetings will be held, to which the New Zealand Government Representative will be invited, to review procedures and make amendments and improvements where necessary.  Ref. Article 3.2  (d) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.3   Impact on Birds:

Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited consider it unlikely that there will be any direct or second order impact from the proposed activity on the life and breeding cycle of birds likely to be encountered.  The Antarctic Visitor Guidelines will be strictly adhered to minimise the risk of impact. Experienced staff are able to identify stress related behaviour in birds and in the unlikely event that this occurs, the activity causing stress will cease immediately.  See Appendix 11 for list of Species.  Refer Article 3.2 (d) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.4   Impact on Marine Mammals:

The observation of marine mammals is an important aspect of all
-13-

Expedition Cruises. Southern Heritage Expeditions considers it unlikely that there will be any direct or second order impact from the proposed activity on the life and breeding cycle of the mammals encountered. The Marine Mammals Protection Regulations (1992) will be used as a guideline for activities around and involving marine mammals. See Appendix 12 for list of Species. Refer Article 3.2 (d) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.5     Impact on land:

Care will be taken to avoid any garbage, rubbish or other material being left at any of the landing sites. Expedition members will not be allowed to smoke cigarettes or tobacco whilst ashore. No one will be allowed to collect any biological or geological specimens. Landing sites will be carefully chosen to minimise the impact of landings. To prevent the possible introduction of micro-organisms, boots and articles of clothing likely to transfer soil residue from previous landings in Sub Antarctic and or New Zealand will be thoroughly washed before a landing is made in Antarctica. Because of low numbers of Expedition members, no impact is likely from the proposed on land activities. Refer Article 3.2 (d) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.6     Historic Sites:

Southern Heritage Expeditions is aware of the requirements of the Antarctic Heritage Trust and the New Zealand Government Representative relating to visitor numbers and durations of visits to the Historic Huts administered by the Trust.

Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited recognises Commonwealth Bay as an HSM under the Madrid Protocol and will visit Commonwealth Bay in accordance with the rules established by the Australian Government.

All Historic huts in the Ross Dependency (Scott's Discovery Hut - McMurdo, Scott's Hut - Cape Evans, Shackleton's Hut - Cape Royds, Borchgrevink's Hut - Cape Adare) are kept locked and visits to the interiors can only be made subject to the conditions imposed by NZAP.
-14-

5.7    Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest:

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty opened for 
signature at Madrid, Spain in 1991. The Protocol makes provision for the 
establishment of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA's) and Antarctic 
Specially Managed Areas (ASMA's) (Article 3 Annex V Second Schedule of 
the Protocol). The term Antarctic Specially Protected Areas redefines the 
former terms of Specially Protected Area and Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest.

There are only four Specially Protected Areas in the Ross Dependency which 
are likely to be in the vicinity of any of the Expedition Cruises conducted by 
SHEL.

    Specially Protected Area 4 - Sabrina Islet, Balleny Islands;
    Specially Protected Area 5 - Beaufort Island, Ross Sea;
    Specially Protected Area 7 - Cape Hallett, Victoria Land and
    Specially Protected Area 20 - New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape 
    Bird, Ross Island.

There are 4 Sites of Special Scientific Interests designated within the Ross 
Dependency which are likely to be in the vicinity of any of the Expedition 
Cruises conducted by SHEL.

    Sites of Special Scientific Interest  1 - Cape Royds, Ross Island;
    Sites of Special Scientific Interest  2 - Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, 
    Ross Island;
    Sites of Special Scientific Interest  4 - Cape Crozier - Ross Island;
    Sites of Special Scientific Interest 10 - Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross 
    Island;

SHEL is aware of the precise location of each of the above Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest and Specially Protected Area and is fully acquainted with 
all of the Management plans for the areas.

SHEL will ensure that Staff, Passengers and Crew are fully briefed on the 
absolute need to respect the designated areas and will ensure that none are 
trespassed upon.
-15-

5.8  Contact with Research Stations in Antarctica.

Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited recognises that research bases are established by their national Governments for Antarctic research and that the impact of Tourist visits can be significant. Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited undertakes to comply with all requirements of national Governments in respect of tourists visits to such bases and will adhere to all protocols and regulations required by such Government or by base management to ensure that base operations are not unnecessarily impacted upon.

Management of Passenger Visitors to Research Stations.

SHEL will ensure that, prior to commencement of its Expedition Cruise season, procedures and systems for adequate communication with Antarctic bases are established. Final arrangements for any Base visit will be confirmed with Base management between 72 hours and 24 hours prior to expected arrival. All Expedition members, staff and crew will comply with any conditions or restrictions of their movement for safety or operational reasons. A full report will be made by SHEL of each Base visit to the national Government of any Base or Station visited.

5.9  Within three calendar months from the completion of the last of their Expedition Cruises to Antarctica SHEL will provide all relevant and required Authorities with a full written report on the activities of the company in Antarctica.

5.10  VISITOR MANAGEMENT

10.1  The Professor Shokalski will carry a maximum of 38 passengers , 4 Staff and a New Zealand Government Representative.  It is believed that the ship has 24 Crew.

10.1  Briefing of passengers

Passengers for Expedition cruises are first sent by Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited a comprehensive set of briefing documents, specifically including the "Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctic Visitors" established by IAATO. More detailed documentation is also given emphasising the need for passengers to observe strictly the rules about approach to Wildlife and
-16-

emphasising the dangers of interfering with vegetation and geological 
specimens. A copy of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty will be sent to each passenger with further explanatory 
notes. Ref. Second Schedule Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill. 
Article 2.

10.2 Guiding ratio 

Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited has a strict passenger to guide ratio 
which will never exceed 1 Guide for 10 passengers. Any assistance given by 
New Zealand Government Representative is in addition to this ratio. The 
Company also recognises the specific requirements of the New Zealand 
Antarctic Programme and the Antarctic Heritage Trust for even more 
restrictive visitor numbers in the Ross Sea Historic Huts. If Crew land they 
will continue to be supervised by a Guide on a no less than 10.1 ratio.

5.10.3 INFORMATION FOR PASSENGERS

10.3.1 Details of the information given to passengers and copies of the 
documents handed to them pre-departure briefing are noted in 
Appendix 13.
    13.1 Antarctica Visitor Guidelines
    13.2 Guidelines for visits to Cape Dennison Historic Site (Voyage 
         1195)
    13.3 Code of Conduct - A contract with the Passengers
    13.4 Landing Procedures by Naiad
    13.5 Minimum Impact Code Subantarctic Islands
    13.6 IAATO Guidance for Visitors to Antarctica

3.2 In addition to the abovementioned SHEL will ensure that a full copy 
of the Antarctic Treaty and current relevant commentaries and a full 
copy of the Madrid Protocols and Recommendations are available 
to passengers in the Ship's Library.

5.10.4 COMMUNICATIONS WITH PASSENGERS

10.4.1   Recaps/briefings.

A regular recaps session is held as appropriate at the conclusion at each day's 
activities. Such sessions reinforce the instructive and educational aspect of the
-17-

Cruise and allow Staff to comment upon all aspects of landings or cruising 
(specifically safety aspects of landing and member behaviour) and also allows 
the Expedition members  to comment on the day's activities. At a recap 
session a briefing of the likely activities for the following day is also 
undertaken by the Expedition Leader.

10.4.2     Lectures:

The lecturers on board are expected to present at least 6 lectures each 
throughout the course of each cruise. Lecture topics will relate to their sphere 
of interest and expertise. They are informal lectures and provide an ideal 
opportunity to talk about and discuss issues relating to the environment.  In 
addition to these lectures, SHEL will arrange to screen a series of 
documentary videos.

10.4.3     Daily Newsheet:

A daily Newsheet will be prepared and given to each Expedition member each 
night. This will outline the following day's programme and will be an 
excellent medium to communicate with the Expedition member.  It will be 
used to highlight safety and environmental issues.

5.11.1     DESCRIPTION OF SHIP.

The Ship to be used for Voyages 1193, 1195 and 1196 is the "Professor 
Shokalski" chartered by Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited from Quark 
Expeditions Limited.  The name of the Captain of the Professor Sholkalski, 
the Registration of the Ship, its Radio Call signs and the radio frequencies it 
monitors will be confirmed to N.Z.A.P. before departure as will confirmation 
of final numbers of passengers, staff and crew.  A sister Ship of the Professor 
Shokalski, (the Professor Molchanov), has been successfully operated as an 
Expedition cruise ship in the Antarctic during the 1993/94 season.  The 
Professor Shokalski measures 236 feet in length and 48 feet in width.  She 
was built in Finland in 1983 and was designed as a research vessel.  She is 
steel built and ice strengthened being specifications designed for cruising 
waters of the higher latitudes.  The Professor Shokalski has a G.R. tonnage 
of 2,140 and Lloyds ice class of 101A Super.  She is equipped with two 1560 
horse power diesel engines which have an average use of 5 to 6 tonnes of light 
marine diesel per day.  The Ship will be staffed by Russian officers and crew 
with extensive Arctic experience in ice navigation.  Many will have Antarctic
-18-

experience. The Ship will use 3 x 4.8 metre Naiad Semi Rigid Inflatable 
Craft equipped with 40 horsepower Yamaha motors. The Ship will carry 
approximately 8 x 200 litre drums of gasoline for use by Naiads. Ref. Article 
2 Annex IV Protocol. Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.11.2    WASTE MANAGEMENT

11.2.1    Oil and Oily Mixtures.

The Professor Shokalski allows for oil and oil/water mixtures to be collected 
and stored. Oil and water mixtures are separated to reduce oil content to 
below 15ppm. Separated water residue is stored. Waste oil is burnt in the 
incinerator at 800 degrees centigrade and the oil/water residue is released in 
accordance with the MARPOL regulations. The discharge outlet for oil/water 
residue is fitted with a switch which shuts off when the oil content of the 
residue exceeds 15 parts per million. Oil/water residues are only discharged 
at sea when the Ship is underway. Outlet valves are sealed when the Ship is 
within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelf. Southern Heritage Expeditions 
Limited will ensure that relevant inspection certificates are current and valid. 
Ref. Article 3 Annex IV Protocol Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill

11.2.2    Garbage

Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited will negotiate with the Captain, 
management and crew of the Ship before the Expedition cruise season 
commences to ensure that MARPOL requirements and guidelines are met. 
Experience of other charterers of Ships of this class show that the Captain, 
management and crew of Russian Ships are generally aware of their 
obligations. On board incineration of waste is an approved garbage treatment 
process under MARPOL and MEPC 59(33) incorporates specifications for 
Ship board incinerators. The incinerator on the Professor Shokalski is 
designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with this 
standard. Dry garbage is to be incinerated daily at 600 degrees centigrade at 
a rate of 30 kilograms per hour. Medical wastes including sharps and all 
plastics are incinerated with dry garbage. MARPOL totally prohibits the 
discharge of plastics at sea so all plastics are to be burned. Incinerator ashes 
are to be cleaned out weekly and stored in bags for disposal at Port.

IAATO Tour Operator guidelines go beyond MARPOL requirements for the 
disposal of plastics. IAATO Guideline 16 states that all plastics should be
-19-

retained for proper disposal at Port. Although the Professor Shokalski may 
not comply strictly with this requirement, correct incineration is probably a 
better course as otherwise plastics may end up in a poorly managed landfill 
site. Steps will be taken by the Expedition Leader to ensure that plastics will 
not be burned in a situation where incinerator emission would harm the 
environment.  The Expedition cruises of Southern Heritage Expeditions 
Limited will comply with Antarctic Treaty recommendation XV-3(7) in 
removing from Antarctica polystyrene beads and chips. Negotiations will take 
place with the Captain, management and crew to ensure that such packaging 
and other prohibited items are not used.  Southern Heritage Expeditions 
Limited will also comply with Antarctic treaty recommendation XV-3(11) to 
remove all stated items including electrical batteries and publicity will be 
given to this on board Ship. A provision will be made for separate containers 
for these so that they can be returned to Port. Southern Heritage Expeditions 
Limited proposes to encourage consideration of recycling and source reduction 
of waste with an education programme on board the Ship.

Wet garbage, predominately kitchen waste from food preparation and disposal, 
will be macerated and stored in tanks until it can be released into the sea north 
of 60 Degrees South.  Extra attention will be given to the separation of 
poultry waste products, particularly uncooked poultry products. If possible, 
these will be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area. If this is not possible, 
steps will be taken to ensure that all uncooked poultry products are macerated 
and disposed of north of 60 Degrees South. Ref. Article 5 Annex IV Protocol 
Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.11.2.3   Sewage.

The Professor Shokalski complies with MARPOL requirement for sewage 
treatment. All sewage, grey water and kitchen sink water is stored until it can 
be processed. The treatment plant chlorinates and flocculates sewage, 
separating solids and liquids. If possible all treated liquid waste will be held 
in tanks and disposed of when the ship is north of 60 Degrees , if this is not 
possible (depending on capacity) then it will be discharged at a speed of no 
less than 4 knots when the ship is more than 12 Nautical Miles from the coast 
or ice shelves. Sewage sludge is drawn from the treatment plant and 
incinerated. The sewage discharge provision of the Ship will be inspected and 
Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited will ensure that relevant MARPOL 
requirements and relevant inspection certificates are current and valid at the 
time of Expedition cruises. Ref. Annex IV Second Schedule Article 6
-20-

Protocol Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.11.2.4     Ballast

Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited has assured itself that the Expedition ship operators are aware of and comply with international guidelines for preventing the introduction of unwanted aquatic organisms and pathogens from Ship's ballast water and sediment discharges. Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited will require the uptake and release of only clean ballast picked up in the Southern Ocean north of 60 Degrees South and will not allow tank washing water, other oily residues or mixtures to be released in Antarctica. Ref. Annex IV Second Schedule, Article 9 Protocol Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.11.3     Emergency Response to Contaminant, Waste, Fuel or Oil Spill.

If a spill occurs the following steps will be taken by or on behalf of Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited.

(a)     Ensure personal safety of passengers, staff and crew.

(b)     Ensure safety of ship / inflatable and property.

(c)     Assess risk of contaminant.

(d)     Report spill to appropriate authorities including detail of location position (including threats to any particularly sensitive areas) type of contaminant or fuel and any assessed fire or explosion hazard.

(e)     Attempt to clean up small (up to 100 litre) spills as quickly as possible using available equipment with a priority to ensure any spill does not migrate to particularly sensitive areas.

(f)     Recover oiled or contaminated soil, ice, snow, rock or shingle and associated debris and waste including cleaning material, seal and store in strong plastic storage bags pending return to Port in New Zealand. Ref. Annex IV Second Schedule,  Article Protocol Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Bill.
-21-

5.11.4    Landing craft.

The key to successful Expedition Cruising are the very versatile landing Craft used to shift passengers from the ship to the shore. Southern Heritage Expeditions will be placing 3 x 4.8 metre (1x 1994 and 2 x 1995 models) Naiad semi rigid inflatable craft on board the Professor Shokalski for this purpose. These boats will be powered by 40hp Yamaha motors (1 x 1994 and 2 x 1995 models) in addition to these there will be one spare 25hp Yamaha motor (1995 model) on board. To avoid accidental spills all refuelling of these boats will be carried out on deck. The fuel tanks are located into specially designed forward locker with a rigid fuel line running to the motor. This prevents accidental spills due to rupture of tank or fuel line. See Appendix 14 for description of landing craft and appendix 15 for description of motors. Appendix  16 details the safety equipment carried in each of Naiads.

5.11.5    Port facilities

Expedition cruises scheduled for Antarctica will commence and end at Bluff, New Zealand. Southern Heritage Expeditions is co-ordinating the pre-departure of each cruise. South Port Limited have been contracted to dispose of garbage at a landfill site which exceeds MARPOL requirements.

Refuelling at Bluff will be undertaken in accordance with MARPOL and other international requirements. The ship will comply with MARPOL requirements in respect of any "at sea" fuel spill accidents.
-22-

CONCLUSION

It is considered that the within information is sufficient to constitute Initial
Environmental Evaluation.  It is written in non technical terms to comply with
Regulation 2(k) Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

The Author is          Rodney Russ
                      Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited
                      P O Box 22
                      Waikari
                      New Zealand
                      Telephone: (03) 314-4393
                      Facsimile: (03) 314-4137

Copyright is claimed in respect of this document under the Copyright Act and its
considered that (under the Official Information Act) some of the information is
commercially sensitive.
SCHEDULE OF APPENDICES

1.	IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Tour Operators
2.	IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors
3.	IAATO By-Laws
4.	Map
5.	Sales Brochure
6.	Clothing List
7.	Life Jackets
8.	Radios
9.	Survival Equipment
10.	Insurance Copy Policy
11.	Birds
12.	Mammals
13.	13.1	Antarctica Visitior Guidelines
        	13.2	Guidelines for visits to Cape Dennison Historic Site (Voyage 1195)
        	13.3	Code of Conduct - A contract with the Passengers
        	13.4	Landing Procedures by Naiad
        	13.5	Minimum Impact Code Subantarctic Islands
        	13.6	IAATO Guidance for Visitors to Antarctica
APPENDIX 1

                                                
                        INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION               
                     OF ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS           
                          IAATO                                  
                                                                  

Guidelines of Conduct
for Antarctica Tour Operators

1. Thoroughly read the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (U.S. Public Law 95-541), abide by the 
regulations set forth in the Act, and brief your staff accordingly. Comparable legislation for non-
U.S. countries should be adhered to accordingly. Be mindful of your own actions and present the 
best example possible to the passengers.

2. Be aware that under the Act, it is prohibited to enter Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) and Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) unless permits have been obtained in advance. Only those with 
"compelling scientific purpose" are allowed permits to enter SPAs, as any entry could "jeopardize the 
natural ecological system existing in such an area." SSSIs are "sites where scientific investigations 
are being conducted or are planned and there is a demonstrable risk of interference which would 
jeopardize these investigations." Permits to enter SSSIs are only granted if the "proposed entry is 
consistent with the management plan" for that particular site.

3. Enforce the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors in a consistent manner. Please 
keep in mind, however, that guidelines must be adapted to individual circumstances. For example, 
fur seals with pups may be more aggressive than without pups, and therefore passengers need to 
stay farther away; gentoo penguins are more sensitive to human presence than chinstraps; penguins 
on eggs or with small chicks are more easily disturbed than molting chicks.

4. Hire a professional team, including qualified, well-trained and experienced expedition leaders, cruise 
directors, officers, and crew. Place an emphasis on lecturers and naturalists who will not only talk 
about the wildlife, history and geology, but also guide passengers when ashore. It is recommended 
that at least 75% of the staff have previous Antarctic experience.

5. Hire Zodiac drivers who are familiar with driving Zodiacs in polar regions. Zodiac drivers should 
take care not to approach too close to icebergs or other floating ice, or glaciers where calving is a 
possibility, or to steep cliffs where snow or ice may suddenly slip down into the sea. They should 
also use caution not to disturb wildlife, which can be very sensitive to engine noise.

6. Educate and brief the crew on the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors, the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 
1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, and make sure they are consistently enforced. We 
encourage tour operators to give slide illustrated talks to the crew and offer guided tours ashore, in 
order to stimulate the crew's interest in Antarctica and to make sure that they also understand the 
need for the environmental protection of the region. Unsupervised crew should not be ashore.

7. Have a proper staff-to-passenger ratio. Ensure that for every 20 to 25 passengers there is 1 qualified 
naturalist/lecturer guide to conduct and supervise small groups ashore.

8. Limit the number of passengers ashore to 100 at any one place at any one time.

                                                                                                                          1992/93
9. Brief all passengers thoroughly on the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors, the 
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Marine Mammal Protection 
Act of 1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978. It is imperative that passengers and crew 
be briefed about the Acts and Agreed Measures, as well as the specifics about the landing sites, prior 
to going ashore. Make certain that passengers understand both the ethical and legal responsibilities 
outlined in these documents.

10. When approaching whales or seals by ship or by Zodiac, the ship's officer on the bridge, or the 
Zodiac driver, should use good judgement to avoid distressing them.

1 Communicate your voyage itinerary to the other passenger vessels in order to avoid over-visitation of 
any site.

12. Give proper notice to all research stations: 72 hours advance notice and a 24-hour advance 
reconfirmation of the ship's estimated time of arrival at all Antarctic research stations.

13. Respect the number of visits which have been allocated by different stations, for example Palmer and 
Faraday, as agreed with the NSF and BAS, respectively. Comply with the requests of the station 
commander - for example, the commander at Arctowski requests that visits only be made in the 
afternoon.

14. Respect the work the scientists are conducting - do not disturb those working while visiting the 
stations.

15. It is the responsibility of the tour operator to ensure that no evidence of our visits remains behind. 
This includes garbage (of any kind), marine pollution, vandalism, etc. Litter must never be left 
ashore.

16. Follow Annex 5 of the Marpol Agreement. Retain all plastic for proper disposal on the mainland. 
Wood products, glass and metal must be compacted and disposed of well away from land or 
returned to the mainland. Ensure that incinerators, if used, are functioning properly.

17. Refrain from dumping bilges or treated sewage within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelves, or in 
the vicinity of research stations where scientific research is taking place. This might inadvertently 
affect the results of scientific investigations, and could potentially harm the wildlife.

18. Respect historic huts, scientific markers and monitoring devices.

1992/93
APPENDIX 2

Guidelines of Conduct
for Antarctica Visitors

ntarctica, the world's last pristine wilderness, is particularly vulnerable to human presence. Life in 
ntarctica must contend with one of the harshest environments on earth, and we must take care that our 
resence does not add more stress to this fragile and unique ecosystem.

he following Guidelines of Conduct have been adopted by all members of the International Association 
f A rctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and will be made available to all visitors traveling with them to 
antarctica. With your cooperation we will be able to operate environmentally-conscious expeditions that 
rotect and preserve Antarctica, leaving the continent unimpaired for future generations.

Please thoroughly study and follow these guidelines. By doing so, you will make an important 
ontribution towards the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem and minimize visitor impact. It will also 
elp to insure that you will have a safe and fulfilling experience in visiting one of the most exciting and 
ascinating places on earth.

1. DO NOT DISTURB, HARASS, OR INTERFERE WITH THE WILDLIFE.

· never touch the animals.
· maintain a distance of at least 15 feet (4.5 meters) from penguins, all nesting birds and true seals 
(crawling seals), and 50 feet (15 meters) from fur seals.
· give animals the right-of-way.
· do not position yourself between a marine animal and its path to the water, nor between a parent and its 
young.
· always be aware of your surroundings; stay outside the periphery of bird rookeries and seal colonies.
· keep noise to a minimum.
· not feed the animals, either ashore or from the ship.

Most of the Antarctic species exhibit a lack of fear which allows you to approach relatively close; however, 
please remember that the austral summer is a time for courting, mating, nesting, rearing young and 
molting. If any animal changes or stops its activities upon your approach, you are too close!  Be 
especially careful while taking photographs, since it is easy to not notice adverse reactions of animals 
when concentrating through the lens of a camera. Disturbing nesting birds may cause them to expose their 
eggs/offspring to predators or cold. Maintain a low profile since animals can be intimidated by people 
standing over them. The disturbance of some animals, most notably fur seals and nesting skuas, may 
elicit an aggressive, and even dangerous, response.

2. DO NOT WALK ON OR OTHERWISE DAMAGE THE FRAGILE 
PLANTS, i.e. LICHENS, MOSSES AND GRASSES.

Poor soil and harsh living conditions mean growth and regeneration of these plants is extremely slow. 
Most of the lichens, which grow only on rocks, hard-packed sand and gravel, and bones, are extremely 
fragile. Damage from human activity among the moss beds can last for decades.

1992/93
3. LEAVE NOTHING BEHIND, AND TAKE ONLY MEMORIES AND PHOTOGRAPHS.

· leave no litter ashore (and remove any litter you may find while ashore); dispose of all litter properly.
· do not take souvenirs, including whale and seal bones, live or dead animals, rocks, fossils, plants, 
other organic material, or anything which may be of historical or scientific value.

4. DO NOT INTERFERE WITH PROTECTED AREAS OR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.

· do not enter buildings at the research stations unless invited to do so.
· avoid entering all officially protected areas, and do not disturb any ongoing scientific studies.

Areas of special scientific concern are clearly delineated by markers and/or described in official records 
(the expedition staff know these sites). Scientific research in Antarctica is in the interest of 
everyone...visitors, scientists, and laymen.

5. HISTORIC HUTS MAY ONLY BE ENTERED WHEN ACCOMPANIED 
BY A PROPERLY AUTHORIZED ESCORT.

· nothing may be removed from or disturbed within historic huts.

Historic huts are essentially museums, and they are all officially maintained and monitored by various 
governments.

6. DO NOT SMOKE DURING SHORE EXCURSIONS.

Fire is a very serious hazard in the dry climate of Antarctica. Great care must be taken to safeguard against thi[?]anger, particularly around wildlife areas, historic huts, research buildings, and storage facilities.

7. STAY WITH YOUR GROUP OR WITH ONE OF THE SHIP'S LEADERS WHEN ASHORE.

· follow the directions of the expedition staff.
· never wander off alone or out of sight of others.
· do not hike onto glaciers or large snow fields, as there is a real danger of falling into hidden crevasses.

                                                  1992/93
In addition to the Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors adopted by IAATO, all visitors should be 
aware of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. This annex to the 
Antarctic Treaty of 1959 addresses the protection of the environment and conservation of wildlife. 
Citizens of any government that has ratified the Antarctic Treaty are legally bound by the following 
guidelines of conduct in the region south of Latitude 60° South:

Conservation of Wildlife

Animals and plants native to Antarctica are protected under the following five 
instruments outlined in the Agreed Measures:

1. Protection of Native Fauna
Within the Treaty Area it is prohibited to kill, wound, capture or molest any 
native mammal or bird, or any attempt at such an act, except in accordance with 
a permit.

2. Harmful Interference
Appropriate efforts will be taken to ensure that harmful interference is 
minimized in order that normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird 
are protected. Harmful interference includes any disturbance of bird and seal 
colonies during the breeding period by persistent attention from persons on 
foot.

3. Specially Protected Species
Special protection is accorded to Fur and Ross Seals.

4. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
Areas of outstanding scientific interest are preserved in order to protect their 
unique natural ecologic :i system. Entry to these areas is allowed by permit 
only.

5. Introduction of Non-Indigenous Species, Parasites and Diseases
No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area may 
be brought into the Area, except in accordance with a permit. All reasonable 
precautions have to be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of parasites 
and diseases into the Treaty Area.

Additionally, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 prohibits U.S. citizens from taking or importing 
marine mammals, or parts of marine mammals, into the U.S. Both accidental or deliberate disturbance of 
seals or whales may constitute harassment under the Act.

1992/93
Further, the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (U.S.Public Law 95-541) was adopted by the United States Congress to protect and preserve the ecosystem, flora and fauna of the continent, and to implement the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. The Act sets forth regulations which are legally binding for U.S. citizens and residents visiting Antarctica.

Briefly, the Act provides the following:

    In Antarctica the Act makes it unlawful, unless authorized by regulation or permit issued 
under this Act, to take native animals or birds, to collect any special native plant, to 
introduce species, to enter certain special areas (SPAs), or to discharge or dispose of any 
pollutants. To "take" means to remove, harass, molest, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, 
wound, kill, trap, capture, restrain, or tag any native mammal or native bird, or to attempt 
to engage in such conduct.

Under the Act, violations are subject to civil penalties, including a fine of up to $10,000 and one year 
imprisonment for each violation. The complete text of the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 can be 
found in the ship's library.

Our ship's staff will make certain that the Antarctic Conservation Act and the above guidelines are adhered 
to.

By encouraging your fellow expeditioners to follow your environmentally-conscious efforts you will help 
us to ensure that Antarctica will remain pristine for the enjoyment of future generations. Thank you in 
advance for your cooperation.


1992 93
APPENDIX 3

BY-LAWS

ARTICLE I - FOUNDATION, NAME, REGISTRATION, HEADQUARTERS

Section A.  The association was founded in 1991 by seven Antarctica tour operators:
Adventure Network International, Mountain Travel-Sobek, Paquet/Ocean
Cruise Lines, Salen Lindblad Cruising, Society Expeditions, Travel
Dynamics and Zegrahm Expeditions.

Section B.  The name of the association is "International Association of Antarctica
Tour Operators". The abbreviated name "IAATO" will henceforth be used
in these by-laws.

Section C.  IAATO is registered in Olympia, in the State of Washington, USA.

Section D.  IAATO's headquarters are currently located in Kent, in the State of
Washington, U.S.A. There are no affiliated chapters at present but, being
an international association, it is not excluded that foreign chapters may be
established in the future.

ARTICLE II - OBJECTIVES

Section A.  To represent the ship and airborne tour operators and charter companies
providing Antarctic travel opportunities, to the Antarctic Treaty
Organization, member countries and the public at large.

Section B.  To advocate, promote and practice safe and environmentally responsible,
private sector travel programs, including tourism, to Antarctica.

Section C.  To develop, and encourage international acceptance of:
-   Guidelines of Conduct for Tour Operators
-   Guidelines of Conduct for Visitors
-   Certification/Accreditation for field personnel
-   Education programs linked to the certification program

Section D.  To operate within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty and the
Environmental Protocol with Annexes, MARPOL, SOLAS and similar
international agreements, as amended.

Section E.  To foster cooperation between tour operators in the coordination of their
itineraries so that overlapping site visits are avoided.

Office Of The Secretariat
11417 S.E. 215th Street • Kent, WA 98031 • U.S.A.
Tel: (206) 854-7541 • Fax: (206) 850-3167
Section F.     To provide a forum for the international, private sector travel industry 
               involved in Antarctica to share expertise and opinions among members 
               themselves and with prospective members.

Section G.     To enhance public awareness and concern for the conservation of the 
               Antarctic environment and ecosystem, and to better inform the media, 
               governments, politicians and environmental organizations about private 
               sector travel to that region.

Section H.     To foster cooperation between private sector visitors and the international 
               scientific community active in Antarctica.

Section I.     To support science in Antarctica through cooperation with Antarctic 
               National Programs and to provide logistical support for science.

Section J.     To create a corps of ambassadors for the continued protection of Antarctica 
               through offering the opportunity to experience this continent first hand.

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

Section A.     There are two categories of membership:

               1.    Full Members: For-profit companies who operate travel programs 
                     to Antarctica and who have fulfilled the requirements for membership; who 
                     have pledged to abide by IAATO's bylaws; who agree to not carry over 400 
                     passengers per trip to the Antarctic; and whose application has been 
                     formally accepted by at least two-thirds of the standing members.
               2.    Associate Members: Other organizations and individuals who are 
                     interested in Antarctica and wish to support IAATO's objectives.

Section B.     Membership application requirements are set by a standing committee and 
               approved by two-thirds of the full members. These requirements may 
               change from time to time in accordance with the dynamics of the Antarctic 
               Treaty regulations.

Section C.     Membership is non-transferable. In the event a member organization is 
               acquired by another entity, that entity would have to re-apply for 
               membership.

Section D.     Current full members who drop their affiliation but wish to re-instate their 
               membership at a later time, must re-pay the initiation fee.

Section E.     Full members are bound to strictly adhere to and actively support IAATO's 
               objectives as stated in Article II and, particularly, obey and enforce the 
               Guidelines of Conduct for Tour Operators and the Guidelines of Conduct 
               for Visitors, as amended.

Section F.     New full members accept to have an Observer onboard who is appointed 
               by the office of their respective National Antarctic Programs.

P. 2
21894
Section G.     Full members are subject to annual membership dues and fees as agreed 
               from year to year by two-thirds of full members in good standing.

Section H.     Full members in good standing are those who act in compliance with the 
               by-laws and are current with their IAATO dues.

Section I.     Non-compliance with the by-laws and non-payment of applicable dues and 
               fees will subject the full member to reprimand or expulsion, after review by 
               the membership or their appointed committee.

Section J.     Associate members will be subject to payment of annual dues as proposed 
               by the standing committee and agreed by two-thirds of full members in 
               good standing.

Section K.     During their annual July meeting full members will review their Antarctic 
               operations vis-a-vis IAATO objectives and guidelines.

ARTICLE IV - ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

Section A.     Each year, during the annual July meeting a Secretary and a Spokesperson 
               will be appointed for the duration of one year.

Section B.     The Secretary and Spokesperson are elected positions with a remuneration. 
               Responsibilities, time requirements and remuneration will be defined in 
               connection with the proposed program and budget and agreed upon by 
               two-thirds of full members during the annual July meeting.

Section C.     The Secretary's responsibilities include, but are not limited to: 
                     coordinating the annual program, act as a communication center between 
                     full members and with non-members, act as the Treasurer, keep records, 
                     relay and distribute IAATO information to interested parties, nationally 
                     and internationally and submit to the full members a status report of 
                     IAATO activities and finances during each annual meeting. Make 
                     recommendations in regards to organizational and financial matters.

Section D.     The Spokesperson's responsibilities include: to represent IAATO at national 
               and international, official and unofficial meetings as directed by the 
               membership, promote IAATO's objectives, and speak for IAATO at 
               selected forums, make recommendations and present detailed reports on 
               activities carried out on behalf of IAATO.

Section E.     Individuals with relevant qualifications who are thought of as being able 
               and willing to provide guidance to IAATO in its attempts to reach its goals 
               may be invited to sit on the Advisory Board. Such individuals will be 
               named as Associate Members of IAATO. Members of the Advisory Board 
               do not receive an honorarium.

P. 3                                                             2 1894
ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS AND VOTING

Section A.     Elections will be held once every year during the annual meeting.

Section B.     All full members in good standing are eligible for committee positions and 
               other elective offices. Before any election, the Secretary will qualify the 
               candidates.

Section C.     Only full members in good standing are eligible to vote. Prior to any 
               election the Secretary will disqualify any attending full members who are 
               not in good standing.

Section D.     Each qualifying full member will have one vote.

Section E.     Associate Members have no voting right.

Section F.     Full members in good standing who are unable to attend may vote in 
               writing to the Secretariat, provided that the ballots are returned latest one 
               week prior to the meeting.

Section G.     Full members who are not in attendance at the meeting forfeit their voting 
               right on any impromptu issues that require voting during the meeting.

Section H.     Any issue to be voted on will pass with a two-thirds vote in favor of the 
               issue.

ARTICLE VI - STANDING COMMITTEES

Section A.     A 3-member Executive Committee shall be elected at the annual meeting 
               to assist the Secretariat. This committee shall make decisions on behalf of 
               the full membership where deemed appropriate, subject to ratification.

Section B.     Further standing committees, as required, shall be elected by a two-thirds 
               majority of the full members during any annual meeting.

ARTICLE VII - MEETINGS

Section A.     A minimum of one annual meeting will be held in the month of July in 
               Washington D.C. in conjunction with the annual NSF Tour Operator 
               meeting.

Section B.     The Secretary will coordinate the time and venue of the meeting and the 
               agenda and advise full members in writing at least 60 days prior to the 
               meeting.

Section C.     Attendance at the annual meeting is reserved for full members only. 
               Attendance requests by non-members may be accepted by two-thirds of 
               the attending full members.

P. 4                                  2 18 94
Section D.  Meetings will be presided over by .he Spokesperson. In the absence of the 
Spokesperson attending members will elect one member to preside.

Section E.  The Secretary will take minutes during the meeting and distribute them to 
all full members within one month after the meeting.

ARTICLE VIII - FINANCES

Section A.  The Secretary will collect and administer all dues and fees and will actively 
solicit timely payment.

Section B.  The Secretary will manage the finances and submit for review a balance 
sheet prior to each meeting, to be approved during the meeting.

Section C.  The Secretary will make payments within the agreed budget constraints 
and make timely recommendations concerning any short falls in the cash 
flow during the year.

Section D.  Dues and fees are non-transferable and non-refundable. Any overpayment 
will be credited to the member's account.

Section E.  A detailed budget will be proposed by a standing committee 60 days prior 
to the annual July meeting, to be agreed upon during the meeting by two-
thirds of the full members.

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS TO IAATO'S BY-LAWS

Section A.  These By-Laws may be added to or otherwise amended by a resolution 
passed by two-thirds of the full members in good standing at any annual 
meeting.

Section B.  Notification of any such amendment must be forwarded to the full 
members by the Secretary no later than two weeks prior to the date of the 
meeting.

P. 5
2/18/94
APPENDIX 4


                                                                                  180°
                                                                                  40°S
         AUSTRALIA                                  NEW
         SYDNEY                                     ZEALAND
         CANBERRA                                   AUCKLAND
TASMAN SEA                                               WELLINGTON
         MELBOURNE                                  CHRISTCHURCH
         TASMANIA                                   (Lyttelton)
         HOBART                                     DUNEDIN
                                                    (Port Chalmers)
                                                    INVERCARGILL (Bluff)
                                                    Stewart          Paterson Inlet
                                                         Island
                                                    Auckland Islands
                                                    Campbell Island
                      Northern Limit of Drift Ice
                                                    Macquarie Island
ROSS DEPENDENCY
                      Northern Limit of Pack Ice
                                                    Balleny Islands
                                                    Scott Is.
                                                    Cape Adare
                                                    Possession Islands
                                                    Coulman Is.
                                                                             ROSS
                                                                             SEA
                                                    Rose
                                                    Island       Bay of
                                                    Discovery Inlet      Whales
                                                                 (Little America)
                                                                 Ice Barrier
                                                    80°S     ROSS ICE
                                                             SHELF
                                                    South Pole
          0        300      600       900 km
APPENDIX 11

IMPACT ON BIRDS

                                                                                
| SPECIES                | METHOD AND PLACE OF OBSERVATION                                                                 | IMPACT |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|
| Southern Giant Petrel  | At sea with binoculars from the ship/zodiacs                                                  | Nil    |
| Cape Petrel            | At sea with binoculars from the ship/zodiacs                                                  | Nil    |
| Antarctic Fulmar       | At sea with binoculars from the ship/zodiacs                                                  | Nil    |
| Antarctic Petrel       | At sea with binoculars from the ship/zodiacs                                                  | Nil    |
| Snow Petrel            | At sea with binoculars from the ship/zodiacs                                                  | Nil    |
| Wilsons Storm Petrel   | At sea with binoculars from the ship/zodiacs                                                  | Nil    |
| Emperor Penguin        | In the sea or on ice flows with binoculars from ship or zodiac                                | Nil    |
|                        | On land or ice from a minimum distance of 5 metres, observers will not be                     | Nil    |
|                        | permitted to surround birds or get between them and the sea.                                 |        |
| Adelie Penguin         | In the sea from ship or Zodiac with binoculars                                                | Nil    |
|                        | On land possibly at or near colonies from a minimum distance of 5 metres. Care               | Nil    |
|                        | will be taken when approaching birds if it is obvious that natural behaviour is              |        |
|                        | affected then observers will retreat.                                                        |        |
| Chinstrap Penguin      | From ship or zodiac with binoculars                                                           | Nil    |
| South Polar Skua       | At sea from ship or zodiac with binoculars                                                    | Nil    |
|                        | On land, possibly near nest sites. All observations will be from 5 metres, at                | Nil    |
|                        | first sign of birds leaving nests or becoming agitated at this distance                      |        |
|                        | observers will retreat                                                                       |        |
APPENDIX 12   IMPACT ON MARINE MAMMALS


                                                    
                        | PLACE AND METHOD OF    |            
                        |   OBSERVATION         |  IMPACT  |
                        |                       |          |
SEALS                   |                       |          |
                        |                       |          |
Weddell                 |Most likely on land or |          |
                        |on ice. Observations   |   Nil    |
                        |will be by binocular.  |          |
                        |No one will approach   |          |
                        |closer than 5 metres   |          |
                        |                       |          |
Ross                    |On ice floes with      |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
Leopard                 |At sea or on ice with  |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
Crabeater               |On land or on ice.     |          |
                        |Observations will be   |   Nil    |
                        |with binoculars. No    |          |
                        |one will approach      |          |
                        |closer than 5 metres.  |          |
                        |                       |          |
                        |                       |          |
WHALES                  |                       |          |
lue                     |From ship with         |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
Fin                     |From Ship with         |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
Southern Right          |From ship, possibly    |          |
                        |zodiac. All            |          |
                        |observations will be   |   Nil    |
                        |from 50 metres or     |          |
                        |more. If the animal    |          |
                        |shows signs of becoming|          |
                        |disturbed then the     |          |
                        |observations will      |          |
                        |cease.                 |          |
                        |                       |          |
Sei                     |From ship with         |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
Minke                   |From ship with         |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
Humpback                |From ship, possibly    |          |
                        |zodiacs. All           |          |
                        |observations will be   |   Nil    |
                        |from 50 metres or     |          |
                        |more. If animal shows  |          |
                        |signs of becoming      |          |
                        |distributed the        |          |
                        |observations will      |          |
                        |cease.                 |          |
                        |                       |          |
Sperm                   |From ship, possibly    |          |
                        |zodiacs. All           |          |
                        |observations will be   |   Nil    |
                        |from 50 metres or     |          |
                        |more. If animal shows  |          |
                        |signs of becoming      |          |
                        |disturbed then         |          |
                        |observations will      |          |
                        |cease.                 |          |
                        |                       |          |
Killer                  |From ship, possibly    |          |
                        |zodiacs. All           |          |
                        |observations will be   |   Nil    |
                        |from 50 metres or     |          |
                        |more. If animal shows  |          |
                        |signs of becoming      |          |
                        |disturbed then         |          |
                        |observations will      |          |
                        |cease.                 |          |
                        |                       |          |
Southern Bottlenose     |From ship with         |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
                        |                       |          |
                        |                       |          |
DOLPHIN                 |                       |          |
                        |                       |          |
Hour Glass              |From ship with         |          |
                        |binoculars             |   Nil    |
APPENDIX 13.1

ANTARCTIC VISITOR GUIDELINES

We ask you to thoroughly study and follow these guidelines. By doing so, you will make 
an important contribution towards the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem, and 
avoid potentially harmful and long-lasting damage.

1.    Maintain a distance of at least 15 - 20 feet from penguins, nesting birds and 
      crawling seals, and 50 feet from fur seals. Most of the Antarctic species exhibit 
      a lack of fear which allows you to approach closely: however, please remember 
      that the austral summer is a time for courting, mating, nesting and rearing young. 
      If you approach the animals or birds too closely you may startle and disturb them 
      sufficiently that they will abandon the nesting site, leaving eggs or chicks 
      vulnerable to predators. And even from the recommended distance you will be 
      able to obtain fantastic photographs.
      You should also remember that wild animals, especially seals, are extremely 
      sensitive to movement and a person's height above the ground in relation to their 
      size. Approach wildlife slowly when preparing to take photographs. And it is 
      important to remember that your photography is not over when the shutter clicks 
      - make your retreat from the subject in the same way you approach. The key 
      point to remember is not to cause the animals any distress. You should be careful 
      to avoid altering their natural behaviour.

2.    Be alert while you are ashore! Watch your steps in order not to stumble upon an 
      aggressive fur seals or a nesting bird that is unaware of your presence.Pay 
      attention to the behaviour of flying birds, as well as those on the ground. As an 
      example, when a tern or skua becomes excited or agitated and starts "dive 
      bombing" you, it is a good indication that you are walking too close to its nest, 
      though you may not have spotted it.

3.    Do not get between a marine animal and its path to the water, nor between a 
      parent and its young. Never surround a single animal, nor a group of animals and 
      always leave them room for retreat. Animals always have the right of way!

4.    Be aware of the periphery of a rookery or seal colony, and remain outside it. 
      Follow the instruction given by your leaders.

5.    Do not touch the wildlife. The bond between parent and young can be disrupted 
      and the survival of the young jeopardized.

6.    Never harass wildlife for the sake of photography. Our intention is to observe 
      wildlife in its natural state.

7.    Keep all noise to a minimum in order not to stress the animals.

8.    Avoid walking on, stepping on, or damaging the fragile mosses and lichens. 
      Regeneration is extremely slow and the scars from human damage last for 
      decades.

9.    Take away only memories and photographs. Do not remove anything, not even 
      rocks or limpet shells. This includes historical evidence of man's presence in 
      Antarctica.
10. Return all litter to the ship for proper disposal. This includes litter of all types such as film containers, wrappers and tissues. Garbage may never break down in this harsh environment.

11. Do not bring food of any kind ashore.

12. Do not enter buildings at the research stations unless invited to do so. Remember that scientific research is going on, and any intrusion could affect the scientists data. Be respectful of their work.

13. Historic huts can only be entered when accompanied by a specially designated governmental representative or properly authorized ships leader.

14. Smoking is prohibited when ashore!

15. When ashore stay with the group and/or one of the ships leaders. For your own safety, do not wander off on your own.

16. Listen to the Expedition Leader, lecturers and naturalists. They are experienced and knowledgeable about Antarctica. If you are unsure about something please ask your leaders and guides.

Protection of the environment and conservation of the wildlife are addressed in the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, which is an annex to the Antarctic Treaty of 1959. Citizens of any government that has ratified the Antarctic Treaty are legally bound by the following guidelines of conduct in that area below latitude 60 degrees South:

    Conservation of Wildlife
Animals and plants native to Antarctica are protected under the following five instruments outlined in the Agreed Measures:

1. Protection of Native Fauna
Within the Treaty Area it is prohibited to kill, wound, capture or molest any native mammal or bird, or any attempt at such, except in accordance with a permit.

2. Harmful Interference
Appropriate efforts will be taken that harmful interference is minimized in order that normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird are protected. Harmful interference includes any disturbance of bird and seal colonies during the breeding period by persistent attention from persons on foot.

3. Specially Protected Species
Special Protection is accorded to Fur and Ross Seals.

4. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
Areas of outstanding scientific interest are preserved in order to protect their unique natural ecological system. Entry to these areas is allowed by permit only.
APPENDIX 13.2

GUIDELINES FOR VISITS TO CAPE DENNISON HISTORIC SITE
(Established by A.N.A.R.E for the Australian Government)

INTRODUCTION

The main Hut and the cross and plaque are designated as Historic Monuments in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. Australia also has responsibility for the site under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975. The Cape Dennison Historic Site was entered in the Register of The National Estate in February 1979. The Hut, Cross and Plaque commemorate the Australian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) which had its Winter Quarters here from 1912-1914. The Winter Quarters consisted of four Huts and assorted scientific equipment dotted around the area to the South and East of Boat Harbour. From a point near the door of the main Hut a plume of discarded objects, which includes building material, domestic and scientific artifacts, food containers and clothing, stretches out to Boat Harbour and beyond. This plume results from the garbage disposal method adopted by AAE Members during their two year stay. This "garbage" is in fact of considerable archaeological interest. Some items in the "garbage" are new, and are labelled to allow monitoring of the effect of wind on artifact movement.

GUIDELINES FOR VISITS

1.    The Tour Operator shall limit the number of persons visiting the site at any one time to twenty.

2.    The Tour Operator shall not allow any visitor to enter any historic structure, nor climb on structures.

3.    The Tour Operator shall not allow visitors to souvenir objects or disturb or remove artifacts and other material surrounding Huts or structures. The Tour Operator shall not allow visitors to interfere with test materials on Granholm Hut. All these items are the subject of an ongoing archaeological study.

4.    The Tour Operator shall ensure that visitors move only on snow, ice or rock so as to avoid trampling of sensitive areas. In particular, the Tour Operator shall not allow visitors to disturb cached seal and bird carcasses by touching or trampling on these or to trample on or move artifacts such as "garbage" scattered around the site.
-2-

5. The Tour Operator shall ensure that visitors do not collect geological or other specimens.

6. The Tour Operator shall strictly enforce quarantine measures to prevent the transfer of non-indigenous species from Subantarctic Islands to the Antarctic Continent. These measures shall be conducted before landing operations commence and shall include:

    A)   Checking of all survival equipment before landing to ensure equipment is free from soil and vegetable matter.

    B)   Cleaning of boots and personal equipment; and

    C)   Provision on shore of only processed, packaged food items, which do not include poultry products of any kind.

7. The Tour Operator shall ensure that no litter is deposited in the Cape Dennison Historic Site. All rubbish and food items are to be returned to the ship.

8. Except in an emergency the Tour Operator shall ensure that visitors DO NOT ENTER or use supplies from Australian Antarctic Division Field Huts Granholm and Soerensen Huts. The Tour Operator will promptly report the use of any Huts or supplies to the Australian Antarctic Division.
5. Introduction of Non-Indigenous Species, Parasites and Diseases. No species 
of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought 
into the Area except in accordance with a permit. All reasonable precautions 
have to be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of parasites and diseases 
into the Treaty Area.

Our ships staff will make certain that the above guidelines are adhered to.

By encouraging your fellow expeditioners to follow your environmentally conscious 
efforts you will help ensure that Antarctica will remain pristine for the enjoyment of 
future generations. Thank you in advance for your co-operation.
APPENDIX 13.3

CODE OF CONDUCT FOR TOURISTS IN ANTARCTICA

Antarctica, with its spectacular scenery, incredible wildlife, and fascinating history 
of exploration has always been a popular adventure seeking Expedition Cruise 
destination. Tourism in Antarctica is on the increase, and that increase is intensifying 
the pressures exerted upon a very fragile ecosystem. The conduct of Antarctic ship-
based tourism, especially, is coming under closer and more exacting scrutiny. SHEL 
believes responsible tourism in Antarctica is a good thing, because in the long term 
tourist Expedition Member tourists with their first-hand experience and understanding 
are a valuable resource and will become Ambassadors in the conservation efforts 
needed to protect Antarctica.

SHEL accepts the responsibility of tour operators to educate and supervise the 
behaviour of their clients while in Antarctica. Also, it is of utmost importance that 
any cruise ship being utilized be properly certified for the rigors of Antarctic waters 
and conditions, and be managed by experienced and competent personnel. SHEL has 
chartered the Professor Shokalski which is

Our Police is to maximize the experience and enjoyment for those who visit the 
Antarctic continent, while at the same time minimize the ecological impact by that 
visit.

The SHEL Expedition Members must realize that they also play an important part in 
the safeguarding of the fragile ecosystem of Antarctica. Therefore, it is necessary 
that all visitors accept this responsibility and conduct themselves accordingly by a 
code of ethics.

PLEDGE TO SAFEGUARD THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT.

I,                                                  the undersigned, do hereby 
pledge to co-operate in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty to insure an unspoiled 
Antarctica for future generations, to protect the wildlife, to avoid disturbing the 
fragile plant life, to safeguard historic sites, to refrain from leaving behind any refuse 
or other pollutants, and to adhere to regulations set by SHEL Staff supervising the 
Expedition.

SIGNED: ..................................................
APPENDIX 13.4

LANDING PROCEDURES BY NAIAD WITH
PASSENGERS & CREW

As all landings are made in Naiad, your safety requires that you familiarise yourself 
with these instructions.

1.	Embarkation in Naiad is done at the Boarding Area, but do not go there to 
      line up until announcement to do so, has been made.

2.	Reverse your landing tag (on the Tag Board), when leaving the Ship and 
      revert it upon your return.

3.	Put on your Expedition life jacket, from your cabin, before entering the Naiad 
      and again, ashore, before your return to the Ship.

4.	Only one Passenger at a time, may step onto the landing platform where the 
      Naiad is situated.

5.	BOTH ARMS MUST BE FREE.  It is recommended that loose articles be 
      carried in a rucksack. If this is not possible, please hand over loose items to 
      the Helper, before boarding the Naiad.

6.	WHEN STEPPING INTO AND OUT OF THE NAIAD, YOU EXTEND 
      "FOREARM TO FOREARM" TO THE PERSON ASSISTING YOU. 
      NEVER GRIP HANDS - IT IMMOBILISES THE HELPER.

7.	Obey orders of the Naiad driver. He is there to help you and transport you 
      safely. Please do not try to help in any way, unless asked to do so.

8.	Never jump into or out of Naiad. Sit down as soon as you enter the boat and 
      stand up only when requested to do so.

9.	When boarding or disembarking, please wait until requested to move.

10.	While seated in a Naiad, hold on to the nearest holding point, on the boat.

11.	Boarding is done in order of arrival. If two people are together, they may 
      have to separate for the short duration of the Naiad ride.

12.	NEVER stand up, in Naiad, not even for a picture, unless the Driver has 
      agreed it is safe to do so.
-2-

13. To avoid the danger of fire and discomfort to others, no smoking in the Naiad or while waiting in line, please.

14. When reaching the shore, DO NOT STAND UP, until instructions to do so are given.

15. If you wish to board a Naiad, returning to the Ship, please do so without delay, as the Driver may have difficulties steadying it.

16. In case of incident during passage, remain clam. All Naiads are equipped with 3 compartments and will remain afloat, even when 2 are damaged.

17. There is one absolute "NO - NO". NEVER STEP OVER THE STERN OF THE BOARD. More than 100 kg is waiting to crush your foot, as the boat rises and falls.

AS YOU ARE ASHORE AND HEAR THE EMERGENCY SIGNAL (SHORT - 
SHORT - SHORT - SHORT etc) GIVEN BY THE CAPTAIN, WITH THE SHIP'S 
SIREN, PLEASE RETURNING IMMEDIATELY TO THE LANDING PLACE 
ASHORE.
APPENDIX 13.5

Subantarctic Islands
Minimum Impact Code

The Department of Conservation's primary objective in managing the New Zealand subantarctic islands is to maintain them in their natural state.
This means ensuring that the distributions, numbers and interactions of indigenous plant and animal species are not detrimentally affected by humans' past and present activities.

The following rules and regulations have been implemented in order to allow nature tourism to the islands with minimum risk and disturbance to the environment.

Please thoroughly study and follow these guidelines.

* All the New Zealand subantarctic island groups are National Nature Reserves and entry is by permit only. Tourist visit entry permits are issued on the condition that the group is accompanied by a Department of Conservation representative. The representative's role is to oversee visitors' activities to ensure they have no detrimental effects on the ecology of the islands.
Guidelines are set in accordance with Government legislation and Department of Conservation management plans for the islands.

* Tourist landings are not permitted on the Antipodes and Snares Island groups, and unmodified or near-pristine islands in the Auckland and Campbell Island groups. These islands are free of rats, and the accidental introduction of rodents would decimate insect and bird populations, and cause extinctions. An appreciation of these islands can be gained from cruising off the coast in rubber boats.

* The Department of Conservation permits landing at designated sites on the following islands:
Within the Auckland Island group on the main island (Auckland Island) and Enderby Island only .
Within the Campbell Island group only on the main island (Campbell Island).
At the Bounty Islands group landing is only permitted on Depot and Proclamation Islands between the months of March and October.

The DOC representative has the right to refuse entry or change the landing site on the island for such reasons as: risk of disturbing breeding animals, poor weather conditions, sensitivity of the environment.

*Animal (eg rodents, wasps) and plant (eg seeds, soil) quarantine procedures are strictly enforced with all tourist visits to ensure that there are no accidental introductions of new pests, plants or pathogens which could dramatically affect the unique fauna and flora of the islands. It is also necessary to be on guard against the spread of aliens between islands and within the islands of a group. All footwear and clothing must be thoroughly checked and cleaned before and following each separate island visit. All gear must not be packed until immediately prior to landing and must be sealed against rodent entry.

* No plant, animal or rock should be deliberately disturbed or removed.

* No collecting of specimens or souvenirs is permitted during visits to islands. This includes historical evidence of humans' presence in the Subantarctic.

* No rubbish of any kind (eg orange peels, tissues, film packages) may be left on any island. Rubbish takes a long time to break down, attracts rodents and spoils the natural appearance of the site.

* No avian food products (eg chicken or eggs) are permitted ashore due to the risk of spreading disease to birds.

* The individual space of all wildlife must be respected at all times. Visitors must:
   give all animals the right of way. Wild animals, particularly seals, are extremely sensitive to movement and a person's height above the ground in relation to their size.
   get no closer than five metres to all wildlife. Remember the subantarctic summer is the animals' time for courting, mating, nesting and rearing young. Approaching too closely may cause parents to abandon young, leaving them vulnerable to predators.
   do not touch any wildlife. Such action can jeopardize the bond between parent and off-spring.
   avoid surrounding any animal during viewing. It is important not to cause animals any stress or alter their natural behaviour.
   keep noise to a minimum. Disturbance of nesting seabirds can lead to exposure of eggs to chilling, sunlight and predators.

* Keep to formed tracks and boardwalks where provided to minimise damage to fragile peat soils and plants.

* Smoking is not permitted on the islands. Peat soils and dry vegetation during summer can create conditions of high fire risk.

* No toilets are provided at any visitor site for tourist purposes.
The Tourism Impact
Management Fee

The Department of Conservation charges a tourism
impact management fee in order to help with the cost of
providing for tourism on the islands.
Visitors should recognise that their presence, while welcome, creates management expenses and inherent
risks to the island ecosystem.
The fee is payable by the tour operator for each tourist
visiting the islands. The fee helps cover the following
costs:

1. Provision of Limited Tourist Facilities on the Subantarctic Islands
Due to the fragile nature of the subantarctic islands' peat soils an
extensive and costly programme of boardwalking has been carried out
at permitted tourist sites at both Campbell Island and Auckland Islands.

2. Animal and Plant Quarantine Contingency
Every visitor (research, management or tourist) places a risk of
accidental introduction of animal or plant pests to these unique islands.
All introduced species have the potential to devastate these fragile
island communities. If an animal or plant were accidentally introduced
during a visit, there would be significant costs in eradicating the alien
species. (A store of rodent and plant quarantine equipment is
maintained in Invercargill and regular rodent quarantine work carried
out by the Department of Conservation at ports and anchorages from
which subantarctic tour boats most frequently depart eg Port Pegasus,
Stewart Island).

3. Provision of Department of Conservation Representative and
Visitor Monitoring Programme
The Department of Conservation representative, required on all tourist
ships, has the important roles of ensuring that visitor guidelines are
followed and monitoring visitor impacts as part of an on-going
programme.

4. Government Resource Rental
Commercial operators utilising Department of Conservation-
administered land are required to pay a resource rental.
The subantarctic islands - national assets managed on behalf of all New
Zealand citizens - are no different. The resource rental is spent by the
department directly on management of the islands.

5. Subantarctic Islands Guidebook
A copy of this is given to each visitor.

For Further Information:
Department of Conservation, Southland Conservancy, PO Box 743,
Invercargill.

      
                                  Subantarctic Islands
                                  Minimum Impact
                                  Code

      
CONSERVATION
TE PAPA ATAWHAI

Southland Conservancy
Invercargill

ATLAS 98
Be Safe

   *   *   *

Be prepared for severe and changeable weather and ensure that
your equipment and clothing meet Antarctic standards. Remember
that the Antarctic environment is inhospitable, unpredictable,
and potentially dangerous

   * Know your capabilities, the dangers posed by
   the Antarctic environment, and act accordingly
   * Plan activities with safety in mind at all times

   * Keep a safe distance from all wildlife, both on
   land and at sea

   * Take note of, and act on, the advice and
   instructions from your leaders, do not stray
   from your group

   * Do not walk onto glaciers or large snow fields
   without the proper equipment and experience,
   there is a real danger of falling into hidden
   crevasses

   * Do not expect a rescue service Self-sufficiency
   is increased and risks reduced by sound planning,
   quality equipment, and trained personnel

   * Do not enter emergency refuges (except in
   emergencies). If you use equipment or food
   from a refuge, inform the nearest research
   station or national authority once the
   emergency is over

   * Respect any smoking restrictions, particularly
   around buildings, and take great care to
   safeguard against the danger of fire. This is a
   real hazard in the dry environment of Antarctica

   *   *   *


Keep Antarctica Pristine

   *   *   *

Antarctica remains relatively pristine, the largest wilderness area on
Earth. It has not yet been subjected to large scale human perturbations.
Please keep it that way.

   * Do not dispose of litter or garbage on land.
   Open burning is prohibited

   * Do not disturb or pollute lakes or streams. Any materials
   discarded at sea must be disposed of properly

   * Do not paint or engrave names or graffiti on
   rocks or buildings

   * Do not collect or take away biological or geological
   specimens or man-made artifacts as a souvenir,
   including rocks, bones, eggs, fossils, and parts or
   contents of buildings

   * Do not deface or vandalize buildings, whether occupied,
   abandoned, or unoccupied, or emergency refuges

   *   *   *

Southern
Heritage
Expeditions

Guidance for Visitors
to the Antarctic

   *   *

Activities in the Antarctic are governed by the
Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and associated agreements,
referred to collectively as the Antarctic Treaty System.
The Treaty established Antarctica as a zone of peace
and science

In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties
adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty, which designates the
Antarctic as a natural reserve. The Protocol sets out
environmental principles, procedures and obligations
for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment, and its dependent and associated
ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have agreed that,
pending its entry into force, as far as possible and in
accordance with their legal system, the provisions of
the Protocol should be applied as appropriate.

The Environmental Protocol applies to tourism and
non-governmental activities, as well as governmental
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. It is intended
to ensure that these activities do not have adverse
impacts on the Antarctic environment, or on its
scientific and aesthetic values

This Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic is
intended to ensure that all visitors are aware of,
and are therefore able to comply with, the Treaty
and the Protocol. Visitors are, of course, bound by
national laws and regulations applicable to activities
in the Antarctic

   *   *   *
R 2


Protect Antarctic Wildlife

 
Taking or harmful interference with Antarctic wildlife 
is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued 
by a national authority

 
• Do not use aircraft, vehicles, small boats, or 
other means of transport in ways that disturb 
wildlife, either at sea or on land

• Do not feed, touch, or handle birds or seals, or 
approach or photograph them in ways that cause 
them to alter their behavior Special care is 
needed when animals are breeding or molting

• Do not damage plants, for example by walking, 
driving, or landing on extensive moss beds or 
lichen covered scree slopes

• Do not use guns or explosives Keep noise to the 
minimum to avoid frightening wildlife

• Do not bring non native plants or animals into 
the Antarctic such as live poultry, pet dogs and 
cats or house plants




Respect Protected Areas

 
A variety of areas in the Antarctic, have been afforded special protection 
because of their particular ecological, scientific, historic or other values 
Entry into certain areas may be prohibited except in accordance with a 
permit issued by an appropriate national authority Activities in and near 
designated Historic Sites and Monuments and certain other areas may be 
subject to special restrictions.

 
• Know the locations of areas that have been afforded special 
protection and any restrictions regarding entry and activities 
that can be carried out in and near them.

• Observe applicable restrictions

• Do not damage, remove, or destroy Historic Sites or 
Monuments or any artifacts associated with them.




Respect Scientific Research

 
Do not interfere with scientific research, facilities 
or equipment.

 
• Obtain permission before visiting Antarctic 
science and support facilities, reconfirm 
arrangements 24-72 hours before arrival, and 
comply with the rules regarding such visits

• Do not interfere with, or remove, scientific 
equipment or marker posts, and do not 
disturb experimental study sites, field 
camps or supplies
