ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                    TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

SEOUL              
May 8-19, 1995              

XIX ATCM/INF 96              
May 15, 1995              
Original: English              


DRAFT REPORT OF THE              
UNITED STATES ANTARCTIC INSPECTION              

Agenda Item 9              

(Submitted by the United States of America)              


We enclose a copy of our draft Report. We are sorry that, because of limited availability, we can only              
provide one copy for each delegation.
The United States conducted an inspection under Article VII of 
the Antarctic Treaty during the period February 9-March 11, 1995. 
There is attached, for the information of delegations, a copy of 
the draft Report of the U.S. observer team (one copy for each 
delegation). The Report is subject to further editorial changes. 
The Final Report is expected to be published within the next few 
months and will be circulated to all Parties.
Report of the United States Antarctic Inspection

February 9 to March 11, 1995

Team Report

OF THE

INSPECTION CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY UNDER THE AUSPICES

OF THE

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE
AND THE
UNITED STATES ARMS CONTROL AND DISARMAMENT AGENCY

MAY 1995
PART I

Report of Findings

One of the key provisions of the Antarctic Treaty is the right of 
on-site inspection accorded to all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. 
Article VII of the Treaty entitles each Consultative Party to designate 
observers who shall have complete freedom of access at any time to any and 
all areas of Antarctica, including all stations and equipment within those 
areas, as well as vessels and aircraft at points of embarkation or 
disembarkation.

This right of inspection is designed to promote the objectives and 
ensure observance of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty.  The Treaty 
establishes the area south of 60 degrees South latitude as a zone of peace 
reserved exclusively for peaceful purposes.  It bans all military 
activities, including the testing of weapons, and prohibits nuclear 
explosions and the disposal of radioactive waste.  The Treaty guarantees the 
freedom of scientific research in Antarctica and establishes the basis for 
international cooperation in such research.  It calls for plans for 
scientific investigations to be shared in advance and the results of 
scientific investigations to be shared and made freely available.

Agreed recommendations adopted at the Consultative Meetings provided 
for by the Antarctic Treaty incorporate a wide range of measures to give 
effect to and elaborate the principles and purposes of the Treaty.  A 
significant proportion of these recommendations deal with protection of the 
Antarctic environment.  In 1991, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty was adopted in Madrid.  The Madrid Protocol, not yet in 
force, codifies, extends and strengthens the system of measures for 
protecting the Antarctic environment.

As part of its commitment to the implementation of the provisions of 
the Antarctic Treaty and measures adopted thereunder, the United States 
regularly exercises its rights of inspection under Article VII of the 
Treaty.  The first such inspection by the United States took place during
the 1963-64 austral summer;  the most recent inspection - the tenth 
undertaken by United States - took place during February/March, 1995 and is 
covered by this report.

The 1995 United States inspection team consisted of seven U.S. 
nationals designated by the U.S. Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs 
in accordance with Article VII of the Treaty. The members of the team, 
whose names had been communicated to all Parties to the Treaty by diplomatic 
note of October 27, 1994, were:

    Commander Greg Adams
      United States Coast Guard

    Dr. John Bengtson
      National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration

    Mr. David Bresnahan
      National Science Foundation

    Mr. Daniel Derkics
      Environmental Protection Agency

    Mr. Steven Kohl
      United States Fish and Wildlife Service

    Mr. R. Tucker Scully
      Department of State

    Mr. Thomas Yehl
      Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Mr. Scully served as the leader of the inspection team. Team members were 
provided with letters of appointment and identification cards for the 
inspection.

The inspection team arrived in the Antarctic Treaty area on February 9, 
1995, having flown from Christchurch, New Zealand to the United States 
McMurdo Station. The team carried out inspections of eight stations: 
Dumont d'Urville (France) ; Mirniy (Russia) ; Davis (Australia) ; Zhongshan 
(China) ; Syowa (Japan) ; Neumayer (Germany) ; Signy (United Kingdom) ; and

2
Orcadas (Argentina). The team was transported by the United States Coast 
Guard Icebreaker POLAR STAR, under the auspices of the National Science 
Foundation. The team departed the Antarctic Treaty area on March 11, 1995.

The inspection itinerary and a map of the route are shown in Figure 1. 
A summary of the inspection team's findings follows. Detailed descriptions 
of each station visit are set forth in Part II.

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

No violations of the Antarctic Treaty were observed during the 1995 
inspection. Access to any and all areas of stations visited was readily 
accorded to the inspection team. Station leaders and personnel were frank 
and open in discussion of their station operations from research activities 
to logistic support.

Military Activities

No activities of a military nature, nor any evidence thereof, was 
observed by the inspection team. Likewise, there was no indication of 
nuclear explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes, nor any activity 
linked therewith. The letter and spirit of the Treaty's provisions 
reserving Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes were fully and 
uniformly demonstrated.

Scientific Research

The inspection team was impressed with the quality of the research 
activities being carried out at the stations visited. There appeared to be 
growing emphasis upon investigation of those aspects of global processes 
that can be best studied in Antarctica. Equally noteworthy was recognition 
of the value of pooling of effort in scientific activities and there was a 
clear trend toward cooperative research projects.

Recent advances in communications and computer technologies were being 
applied at a number of the stations visited to enable in situ processing of 
data and real-time reporting of data to international data centers. (Syowa 
Station well illustrated this trend.) Scientific activities and scientific 
equipment in use at the stations visited were generally as reported in the 
annual exchanges of information under the Antarctic Treaty. It should be 
noted, however, that the most recent (1994-95) exchanges of information from
                                                                               3
Australia, Argentina, China, Russia and Japan were not available to the inspection team at the time of its departure from the United States.

Waste Management

Proper management and disposal of waste was a priority concern at all Stations visited. The provisions governing waste management in Annex III of the Madrid Protocol, though not yet in force, have already had significant influence upon waste handling practices in Antarctica. There is widespread emphasis not only upon removal of hazardous wastes, but also upon solid wastes generally from the Treaty area; as well as growing reliance upon waste minimization practices.

In most instances, handling of wastes currently being generated at stations, including sewage and combustibles, accords with the standards of the Madrid Protocol. How to deal with wastes generated in the past - dating back several decades at some Stations - is a more difficult issue. The newer or recently reconstructed Stations visited (e.g., Davis and Neumayer) had an advantage not only in having less accumulated material to deal with, but also in being able to employ innovative, less waste-generating technologies. At the same time, there had been major - and effective - clean-up efforts at several of the older Stations (e.g., Dumont d'Urville and Orcadas).

Fauna and Flora/Protected Areas

There was a high level of awareness of the measures elaborated under the Antarctic Treaty to conserve native fauna and flora, as well as of the nature and location of areas afforded special protection under the Treaty.

The team noted the presence of non-indigenous species at several Stations - parakeets at Dumont d'Urville and a cat at Mirnyy. In addition, house plants were present at most Stations.

Fuel Storage and Handling

In the view of the inspection team, fuel storage facilities and fuel transfer practices were the components of station activities with the greatest potential for causing significant adverse impacts. At most stations, there were indications of small-scale, but chronic fuel leakages associated with fuel storage and handling activities.  Few fuel storage

4
tanks were doubled-walled or lined or provided with containment berms.  In 
several instances, fuel lines appeared to display signs of deformation 
stress or corrosion and fuel tanks signs of corrosion.

Several stations had already developed contingency plans for possible 
fuel spills.  In the view of the inspection team, priority should be 
accorded not only to developing such plans, but also to identifying 
innovative means of further reducing the risk of fuel spills.  The team 
would commend the overall approach employed at Davis Station for fuel 
handling and storage; and considers the fuel transfer system employed at 
Neumayer Station - see Part II below - as an example of an innovative may of 
reducing the risk of fuel spills.

CONCLUDING COMMENTS

The 1995 U.S. Antarctic inspection team employed, as guidelines for 
items to be covered at each Station visit, the checklist for permanent 
Antarctic stations and associated installations, annexed to the Final Report 
of the Eighteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.  It has sought to 
record in detail its resulting observations.

What is less easy to capture in words is the spirit of commitment and 
cooperation that the team encountered at all of the Stations and among all 
of the personnel with whom it had contact.  Antarctica remains a special 
place and the scientists and support personnel working there treat it as 
such.  The overall conclusion of the inspection team is that the eloquent 
words of the Antarctic Treaty are being put into concrete practice on a 
day-to-day basis "on the ice".  The team finally expresses it deep 
appreciation for the unfailing and generous hospitality with which it was 
received at every station.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The inspection team is indebted to a number of individuals and 
organizations for the contributions made to the success of the 1995 U.S. 
Antarctic Treaty inspection.  Particular mention should be made of the 
briefings and background materials provided by the Division of Polar 
Programs of the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF).  Likewise, 
appreciation is due to Mr. Michael McIlroy and other employees of Antarctic 
Services Associates (NSF's contractor for logistics services) for all their

5
assistance (and patience) in outfitting the team with Antarctic gear in
Christchurch, New Zealand prior to departure.

The senior United States representative in Antarctica, Mr. Dwight
Fisher of the NSF, and his colleagues at McMurdo Station offered
extraordinary hospitality to the team during its stay there. The team is
particularly appreciative of the opportunity to tour the Station's
facilities. It gave the inspection team an invaluable benchmark for the
station visits that followed during the 1995 U.S. Antarctic Treaty
inspection. McMurdo Station clearly meets the highest standards of
excellence in the science it supports and in the environmental practices it
observes.

Finally, special tribute should be paid to Captain Robert Parsons of
the United States Coast Guard, captain of the icebreaker POLAR STAR. The
personal interest and leadership Captain Parsons brought to carrying out the
inspection mission and the superb seamanship and dedication displayed by the
entire crew, including Lieutenant Commander Robert Kaylor and the aviation
detachment on board POLAR STAR, were critical to the success of the 1995
U.S. Antarctic Treaty Inspection. In addition, the team would like to
express appreciation to Petty Officer Nephtwim Rosario of POLAR STAR for the
skilled and invaluable assistance he provided in translation and
interpretation during the visit to Orcadas Station.

                                                               6
PART II

Antarctic Station Inspection Reports

France - Dumont d'Urville
66°40'S 140°01'E
February 17, 1995

General

The inspection team arrived at Dumont d'Urville Station at 0800 local
time February 17, 1995 (2200 GMT February 16, 1995). The team was welcomed
by the Station Leader, Dr. Jean Baptiste Seigneuric; its chief of
operations, Mr. Pierre David; and its technical chief, Mr. Pascal Le
Mauguen. Advance notification of the inspection had been provided from the
POLAR STAR via International Maritime Satellite (INMARSAT) approximately
eighteen hours in advance and the time of arrival was coordinated with the
station. The inspection, including luncheon with station personnel, lasted
six hours. The team was transported by helicopters from the POLAR STAR.

Physical Description

Dumont d'Urville is located on Petrel Island, the largest of a group of
small rocky islands and islets (the Geology Archipelago), north and
immediately adjacent to the Adelie Coast. The polar ice cap is co-extensive
with the coast of the continent in this region. The tongue of the Astrolabe
Glacier extends into the sea approximately 1 km. to the east of the station
and is the source of numerous tabular ice bergs in the area.

Petrel Island (see Figure 1) is an irregularly shaped island, 0.8 km.
in length, and consists of glacially sculpted hills (reportedly granite and
gneiss) with a maximum elevation of 44 meters above sea level.

Dumont d'Urville Station is more than thirty years old and is at
7
present France's only permanent research station in Antarctica. From the 
time of the International Geophysical Year (1957-58), it has been the site 
of research activities in geophysics, upper atmosphere physics and 
chemistry, biology and meteorology, and has been a logistics support base 
for austral summer field research parties, particularly those carrying out 
glaciological investigations on the polar plateau. The station is located 
near the South Magnetic Pole and there are major Emperor and Adelie penguin 
rookeries as well as nesting sites of other bird species in the vicinity. A 
number of marine mammal species are found offshore (leopard, crabeater and 
Weddell seals, as well as killer and minke whales).

The station consists of thirty-six structures including dormitories, 
shops, warehouses, laboratories, power plant, and a hangar/tower for the 
runway complex (not operational). The buildings range in age from newly 
completed this year to over forty years old.  Station personnel reported 
that there is a regular program of replacing older structures with new 
buildings. (Three new structures were completed this year including a 
biological laboratory and a shop).

The center of the base is located on a ridge towards the northern end 
of Petrel Island. The major buildings in this cluster include a large 
dining and recreation building (the Séjour Building), a two story dormitory 
with infirmary (where winter-over personnel are housed), four laboratory 
buildings (geophysics, geology/meteorology, cosmic ray and biology), a power 
plant, a garage, and a carpentry shop. Station personnel indicated that no 
future expansion of the station is planned, but that older buildings, 
subject to availability of resources, will be dismantled and replaced.

There is an embayment on the southeast side of the island which 
provides sheltered berthing for vessels supplying the station (currently the 
Research Vessel ASTROLABE). There are off-loading facilities in this area, 
as well as buildings for storing equipment and vehicles. An additional 
dormitory for housing austral summer personnel is located on the ridge 
overlooking the embayment.

Adjacent to Petrel Island (separated from its northeast corner by a 
narrow channel) is Lion Island, which anchors an 1,100 meter aircraft 
runway. The runway, consisting of crushed gravel, was constructed by 
leveling Lion Island and two adjacent islets and using the rock removed by 
blasting as fill. There is a hangar/control tower and an equipment support 
building on Lion Island, as well as living quarters, small structures and 
several heavy vehicles which were associated with the runway construction.
8
The runway complex, completed in 1993, was damaged by a storm in January 1994 and is not operational at this time. The equipment support building at the runway complex was destroyed and it was reported that a portion of the complex was washed out, but it did not appear to the inspectors that the 1,100 meter runway itself was damaged. No fixed wing aircraft have operated from the runway and some navigation aids and other support components have been removed.

Dumont d'Urville supports a small austral summer research facility at Cap Prud'homme on the adjacent mainland of the Adelie Coast. It is capable of housing eight persons. A logistics facility, D-10, to support traverses to Dome C on the polar plateau is located in the same vicinity. Neither Cap Prud'homme nor D-10 were reported to be occupied at the time of the inspection. Dome C - an area of high interest for glaciological research - is the planned site of a new permanent research station, Concordia, to be operated jointly by France and Italy. There is also reported to be a site on the polar plateau inland from the coast, D-21, that has been used as a snow runway to support aircraft operations in the interior.

Personnel

Dumont d'Urville Station is managed by the Institut Français pour la Recherche et la Technologie Polaires (IFRTP). The station is capable of supporting 80 persons during the austral summer season and 35 winter-over personnel. In addition, it ordinarily provides logistics support to the austral summer facility at Cap Prud'homme and for traverses to Dome C. On the average, austral summer complements and winter-over parties are equally divided between scientific/technical personnel and logistics support personnel. The ASTROLABE ordinarily augments the research effort from Dumont d'Urville during the austral summer season. Activities during the 1994-95 austral summer season had been adversely affected by abnormally heavy pack ice conditions around the station through the end of January that had limited the ASTROLABE to three of its originally scheduled five voyages. (See below.)

At the time of the inspection, there were 50 persons at the station, including the majority of the 29 person party that will winter over. The Station Leader, Dr. Seigneuric, will also lead the winter-over team. There were eight military personnel present at Dumont d'Urville: Dr. Seigneuric (who also serves as the station's doctor) and three others who will winter over; as well as four helicopter personnel (two pilots; two crew) who will return with the helicopter on the ASTROLABE at the end of the austral summer

9
season. The chief of operations reported that station personnel (austral 
summer and winter-over) were provided pre-departure orientation on Antarctic 
Treaty measures, safety, and waste management and other environmental 
matters.

Scientific Research

Dumont d'Urville is the site of research in support of a wide range of 
scientific programs. In the life sciences, emphasis is upon the study of 
the eight species of birds that nest at or in the vicinity of the station 
(Emperor and Adelie penguins, snow petrels, cape petrels, giant petrels, 
Wilson's storm petrels, southern fulmars and south polar skuas). Long time-
series data have been collected on colonies of snow petrels and giant 
petrels, with banding programs ongoing. A number of ongoing projects are 
aimed at investigating adaptations to low temperature environments, 
including: (1) rates of metabolism, (2) thermal regulation and the shivering 
mechanism, and (3) examination of adipose tissue from Emperor and Adelie 
chicks. In the first two of these studies, chicks are removed from two-
chick nests for periods of up to ten hours with no reported apparent adverse 
effects. In the third study, adipose tissue samples are taken only from 
chicks found dead; none are killed.

There is an ionospheric observatory at Dumont d'Urville (its 72.8 meter 
antenna is the highest structure at the station), as well as sensitive 
instrumentation for ongoing measurement of seismic activity and magnetism. 
Studies were in progress of the southern aurora and cosmic ray activity. 
The station supports programs of study of polar ozone and the chemistry of 
the polar troposphere, including use of LIDAR (laser) equipment as part of a 
cooperative program with other stations (Italian and United States) and use 
of instrumented balloon probes. In addition to regular meteorological 
observation (with data transmitted on a real time basis via INMARSAT), there 
are basic studies being conducted at the station of katabatic winds and 
engineering studies to evaluate solar, wind and air/water temperature 
differentials as potential alternative energy sources. Glaciological 
projects at or supported by Dumont d'Urville are aimed at study of the 
chemical composition, particularly the sulphur cycle, of the atmosphere from 
contemporary snow and ice sampling, as well as of paleoclimate records from 
ice cores.

Scientific research activities observed at Dumont d'Urville, as well as 
the scientific instruments in place pursuant to these activities, 
corresponded well with the information on activities planned for the 1994-95
10
season provided by France in the annual Antarctic Treaty exchange of 
information.

Equipment and Logistics

Equipment at Dumont d'Urville was essentially as reported in the 
exchange of information. Water is supplied by distillation of sea water 
using a steam evaporator located at the power plant. Approximately 250 
liters per hour can be produced and water consumption is closely regulated. 
A small reverse osmosis unit is available as back-up to the distillation 
unit. Water is treated with both chlorine and minerals and to adjust pH 
value.

Electricity is supplied to the station by three 80 kW and one 130 kw 
generators, only one of which is operated to support the station. Planning 
is underway to upgrade the station generators in the near future to increase 
power production. Waste heat from the generators is used to heat the sea 
water before distillation and to heat some nearby buildings; plans are being 
developed to recover waste heat from the generator exhaust in the future. 
According to station personnel, air emissions from power generation have 
been characterized and the potential use of filters and other air pollution 
control technologies has been investigated; however, it does not appear 
feasible or necessary at this time to employ such technology, especially in 
light of the relatively small size of the generators. Although the station 
is evaluating potential alternative energy resources, (see Scientific 
Research section above) no alternative energy sources are currently in use 
at the station.

The number of ground vehicles at the station were as reported in the 
exchange of information (one SAVIEM 15168 truck, three Bombardier Muskeg and 
one 931 LGP tracked loader) with the addition one D-5 tractor and three 
Toyota pick-up trucks. Additional ground vehicles used during the 
construction of the runway are located at that site and station personnel 
indicated that they were scheduled to be removed. (Three dump trucks, one 
road grader, two wheeled loaders, and one snow blower.)

There is one crushed rock road at the station running from the main 
station complex to the pier area approximately 1 km in length. A second 
road leading to the runway site shown in the plan of the station has not 
been built.

Vessels at the station were as reported in the exchange of information:

11
one rigid hull inflatable boat (RHIB), one 12 meter fiberglass reinforced 
plastic (FRP) landing craft, two 5 meter aluminum work boats, and five steel 
pontoons.

One Alouette II helicopter from the ASTROLABE was at the station at the 
time of the inspection and is used for local support. There are two 
helicopter pads at the station and instruction was provided to the 
inspection party helicopter crew to avoid bird colonies in the area.

No fixed wing aircraft have landed on the 1,100 meter crushed rock 
runway located near the station and it is currently not in use. As 
indicated earlier, the runway complex was damaged during a storm in January, 
1994. Station personnel indicated that the French program is reviewing 
plans for the future use of the runway at this time.

The station is re-supplied via ship operating from Hobart, Australia. 
This austral summer two of the five planned re-supply/support visits of the 
ship were canceled due to ice conditions, forcing the reduction of the 
planned French program for the 1994-95 season. One of two planned traverses 
from the station to Dome C in support of the construction of the joint 
French/Italian Concordia Station had been deferred until next austral 
summer.

Communications facilities were as reported in the exchange of 
information.

The main fuel supply for the station is provided through ten 50 cubic 
meter steel diesel fuel tanks located adjacent to the pier facilities. Fuel 
is periodically pumped uphill from these tanks to six smaller holding tanks 
located at the main station complex. Diesel fuel from these tanks is used 
to support power generation and vehicle refueling throughout the station. 
Kerosene aviation fuel and high octane gasoline are also stored to support 
helicopter and small boat operations. In addition, there are three new 50 
cubic meter steel fuel tanks, not yet in use, located behind the runway 
hangar facilities. Station personnel reported that drums of fuel were also 
located at the D-10 station facilities on the continent.

The fuel storage tanks are positioned on solid rock with fixed tank 
supports. Station personnel reported that the tanks did not have inner 
liners or double-wall construction. The area around the fuel tanks is not 
protected by berms or ground liners in case of a spill. However, station 
personnel stated that in the austral summer of 1995-96 a program to replace 
these tanks with double-walled tanks would begin. The uninsulated steel 
12
fuel transfer and distribution piping from the tanks is run approximately 1 
meter above the ground throughout the station. The inspection team observed 
significant fuel pipe corrosion and deformation between pipe supports. In 
addition, the team observed fuel contaminated soil at locations where fuel 
was transferred or stored.

Annual refueling of the station is provided by a support vessel operated from of Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. Ice conditions allowing, the 
vessel moors at the station pier facilities, where fuel is pumped through 
flexible hose from the vessel directly to the main storage tanks on shore. 
This operation involves both station and vessel personnel who are positioned 
along the length of the fuel transfer hose to detect and report leaks. 
Station personnel reported that this year refueling operations were 
conducted while the support vessel was moored at the runway, due to ice 
blocking the pier facilities.

Arms

The station reported no arms on station except for a signal pistol. 
Station personnel indicated that there were explosives at Dumont d'Urville. 
Explosives had previously been used in the construction of the new runway 
which now has been completed, and personnel reported they have also been 
used for ice clearing operations in support of the ASTROLABE resupply ship.

There were no inappropriate weapons, military forces or facilities, or 
nuclear disposal sites observed at Dumont d'Urville.

Environment

Station personnel at Dumont d'Urville displayed a high level of 
awareness of environmental concerns. They are provided information on and 
there are notices publicly displayed regarding waste management. Glass, 
plastic and metals (including metal building components) are compacted and 
removed from the Treaty area for recycling. Corrugated cardboard is 
collected and removed from the Treaty area for recycling. Used oils are 
also collected and removed from the Treaty area, including used cutting oils 
from the machine shop, which are filtered to remove metal shavings prior to 
co-mingling with other used oils.  (Metal shavings removed from cutting oils 
are removed from the Treaty area for recycling with other metals.) No 
landfill or ice pit disposal was observed.

13
Paper and wood waste are burned in three open top metal containers: one 
approximately five feet square and two smaller ones. (The inspection team 
observed an open top metal drum containing ashes which apparently was one of 
the other smaller containers used to open burn paper and wood.) Members of 
the inspection team observed small amounts of ashes in the larger open top 
metal container being entrained and dispersed by winds; however, station 
personnel indicated that ashes are ultimately packaged and removed from the 
Treaty area for proper disposal. Inspection team members also observed a 
small area near the runway hangar where wastes had apparently been open 
burned on the ground.

The station employs macerating toilets and direct discharge to the 
ocean after mixing with potable water treatment brines. Station personnel 
stated that such wastes from field parties were also treated.

An aggressive program to clean up past activities was apparent. Old 
soiled areas near the domestic wastewater discharge are being cleaned by 
rinsing with hot water. Materials from past (and current) activities 
awaiting removal from the Treaty area were present in several locations, and 
station personnel indicated that clean up activities were nearing 
completion.

The types and quantities of potentially hazardous chemicals used at the 
station appear to be commensurate with the those from research and logistics 
of similar such stations. Waste paints, solvents, and batteries in 
relatively small and easily identifiable and manageable quantities were 
observed. Station staff stated that acids were drained from batteries and 
treated (neutralized) on-site prior to removal from the Treaty area. 
Members of the inspection team observed a shipping crate at the hangar 
building near the runway apparently temporarily holding a variety of 
potentially hazardous wastes pending removal from the Treaty area. Station 
staff advised that, in general, chemical wastes of potential environmental 
concern are shipped to France for appropriate management while other, more 
benign wastes such as plastic and glass are recycled outside the Treaty 
area.

Empty drums in good condition are held for reuse, and damaged or 
rusting drums are crushed and removed from the Treaty area for recycling.

Inspection team members observed a small quantity of polystyrene 
"peanuts" used in packing items for shipment which had apparently been 
stored for at least one season pending removal from the Treaty area. 
Station personnel were well aware of the need to prevent entry of this 
                                                                 14
material into the Treaty area and were concerned about their inability to 
control the direct shipment of it to their station.

As noted earlier, eight species of birds nest in or frequent the area 
of Dumont d'Urville. To minimize disturbances to the birds, station 
personnel are required to observe certain rules, such as visiting on-site 
cliff nesting areas only in the company of the chief biologist, and staying 
completely away from rookeries scattered on several small coastal islands. 
These regulations are prominently posted on bulletin boards in the Séjour 
Building.

Ornithologists at the station have been experimenting with techniques 
to induce the snow petrels and cape petrels displaced by the construction of 
the runway to colonize new nesting sites by creating artificial rookeries on 
adjacent rocks. They reported limited success with cape petrels and no 
success with snow petrels thus far in encouraging these site-faithful 
species to move to new areas.

As regards flora, moss and lichens were present at the station and 
subject to potential disturbance by human activity.

Several tropical birds were observed in the Séjour building. Personnel 
indicated that these birds had been there for over 30 years. Philodendron 
and other non-endemic plants were noted at various locations throughout the 
facility. None were reported to be the subject of permits.

Although there are no protected areas designated under the Antarctic 
Treaty in the environs of Dumont d'Urville, the station has declared the 
bird nesting rookeries to be off limits to all visitation.

Emergencies

Station personnel reported that there was no station oil/chemical spill 
contingency plan and that the station has no pollution response equipment 
such as absorbents, oil boom, or oil recovery equipment such as skimmer 
devices. The only response capability reported was oil dispersants carried 
on the support vessel during fueling operations.

Dr. Jean Baptiste Seigneuric, the Station Leader, is a certified 
medical doctor and has received dental training. He stated that the station 
has limited medical capabilities, including a small operating room to 
conduct emergency procedures.

15
Tourism

Dumont d'Urville personnel reported that one tour vessel - the Russian flag KAPITAN KHLEBNIKOV - had called at the station earlier in the season (at the beginning of February) and was scheduled to return towards the end of the month. The vessel carried approximately fifty tourists. Infrequent visits of this sort had not to date posed problems, though care had to be exercised to prevent adverse impacts on the numerous nesting colonies of birds found at and around the station.

Russia - Mirn[i]y
66°33'S 93°01'E
February 22, 1995

General

The inspection team arrived at Mirn[i]y Station at 0900 local time February 22, 1995 (0100 GMT), having been transported by helicopters from the POLAR STAR. The team was welcomed by Leonid Popolitov, Head of Mirn[i]y Station for the 39th Russian Antarctic Expedition. Notification of the inspection had been provided three hours in advance via communication from the POLAR STAR, contact having initially been established via the Russian Station Vostok on the polar plateau. The inspection, including luncheon, lasted eight hours.

The inspection occurred during a particularly hectic day at Mirn[i]y Station during the off loading of the supply vessel. The team very much appreciated station personnel taking time to provide detailed information on station activities.

Physical Description

Mirn[i]y is located on Mabus Point, a rocky, largely ice-covered promontory that projects northward from the Queen Mary (Pravda) Coast. McDonald Bay lies to the west.  Haswell Island, Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) Number 7 under the Antarctic Treaty, is just north of Mabus
16
Point and several smaller rocky islands extend to the north and west.

Mimiy is 35 meters above sea-level, bounded on the seaward side by 
cliffs of rock and/or continental ice. The polar ice cap extends inland 
from the station, providing access to the polar plateau. Station personnel 
reported dangerous crevasses in certain areas leading inland. Laterally, 
there are glaciers on either side of the station.

Mimiy is Russia's oldest permanent base in Antarctica, having been 
established in February 1956. Mimiy Station serves two basic functions: 
supporting local science activities and acting as a logistics support base 
for the Vostok traverses. The latter activity appeared to the inspectors to 
be the major function of the station. Tractor traverses from Mimiy supply 
Vostok which lies 1420 km inland on the polar plateau. Weather observations 
and atmospheric studies have been the emphasis of Mimiy's scientific 
effort.

The original Mimiy Station, located about 300 meters from the northern 
tip of Mabus Point, was susceptible to snow accumulation and was rapidly 
buried. It had to be replaced in 1970-71 and now lies under 2 meters of 
ice. Mimiy Station, as it now exists, dates from that period and is 
centered around two clusters of buildings north and south of the original 
station.

The northern cluster of buildings currently includes a power plant 
(that also houses laundry and bath facilities) and associated fuel storage 
tanks and a two-story geophysics building that also houses the geophysical 
scientists and technicians.

The southern cluster, oriented with the prevailing katabatic winds 
(east-southeast), consists (from north to south) of: a two-story 
atmospheric science building, with dormitory space; a single story 
storehouse/dormitory; a two story administration-dining-recreation center; 
and a two-story radio and meteorology building, also with dormitory space.

An elevated electrical line from the power plant links the two clusters 
of buildings. Several smaller structures are located to the west of the 
power line, including a balloon launch building and a building for 
production of hydrogen for the balloons. There is a helicopter landing site 
to the east. Radio antenna arrays are sited to the east of the larger 
(southern) cluster of buildings and an unusable snow runway for aircraft 
lies to the south and east of this cluster.

17
Two large fuel storage tanks are located adjacent to the cliffs overlooking the sea about 1 km southwest of the station, with additional fuel storage tanks located on a small island offshore of this location.

The atmospheric science building is the newest facility at Mirniy, having been completed in 1988. The Station leader reported that Mirniy had suffered serious losses from fire: a large vehicle maintenance building originally in the northern cluster of buildings had been destroyed during the 35th Antarctic Expedition (1990-91) and an important workshop had been destroyed during the 38th Expedition (1993-94). Plans had been made to reconstruct the garage facility during the 1994-95 season, but had to be postponed due to late arrival of the supply vessel.

Personnel

Mirniy Station, as part of the Russian Antarctic Expeditions, is managed by the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AANII) in St. Petersburg. Overall scientific content of Russian Antarctic Expeditions is coordinated by the Ministry of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring.

The staff of Mirniy Station during the 39th Russian Antarctic Expedition (1994-1995) consisted of 38 individuals. Forty-two persons had wintered over in 1994. This figure includes persons originally scheduled to winter-over at Vostok, but who, due to temporary curtailment of operations there, had remained at Mirniy and well-known wildlife photographer - Bruno Zehnder, a Swiss national - present to photograph Emperor penguins.

Twenty-five persons were at Mirniy at the time of the inspection. Thirteen members of the station contingent were on a tractor traverse to supply Vostok - the second of two such traverses in the 1994-95 austral summer. A contingent of summer personnel had just arrived, but not disembarked from the RV AKADEMIK FEDOROV, which was resupplying Mirniy at the time of the inspection. This group also included an environmental group (see Environmental Protection section, below).

The FEDOROV was scheduled to return to Mirniy in April with the 1995 winter-over team of the 40th Russian Antarctic Expedition. The FEDOROV would pick up the new winter-over team from Molodezhnaya Station to which they were to be transported by the RV MIKHAIL SOMOV. Current station personnel were scheduled to return to Russia in April, 1995; the incoming team of 35 persons, to be led by Lev Nikolaevich Metveyachev, would remain
18
until April, 1996.

The Station Leader, Mr. Popolitov, reported that it was his 
responsibility to ensure that station personnel were familiar with 
applicable provisions of and measures under the Antarctic Treaty, including 
those relating to protection of native fauna and flora.

Scientific Research

Mirniy Station undertakes regular weather observations, both surface 
and upper air. Radiosonde-equipped balloons are launched daily - twice 
daily during the summer season. Weather data are transmitted upon 
collection to Molodezhnaya Station from which they are forwarded to Moscow 
for entry into the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) system.  Other 
atmospheric research centered on regular measurement of ozone and trace 
gases in the atmosphere.

Seismic, magnetic and ionospheric measurements are carried out at 
Mirniy Station, as well as land measurement of cosmic rays. Additional 
magnetic observations were collected from remote sensing devices installed 
on the polar plateau along the traverse route to Vostok Station, a 
cooperative program with the United States.

The Station Leader and Deputy Leader for Science, Nikolai Serebryakov, 
both indicated that financial constraints facing the Russian Antarctic 
Expeditions had resulted in cutbacks in science activities at Mirniy.  For 
example, it had been necessary to suspend biological studies on penguins and 
other species found in the vicinity of the station.

The scientific equipment observed at the station appeared commensurate 
with the scientific activities being carried out there.

Equipment and Logistics

Equipment and facilities at the station were essentially as reported in 
earlier exchanges of information with several exceptions as noted below. 
Water is supplied from a "well" approximately 55 meters deep located near 
the northern group of buildings on Mabus Point.  The well was created by 
drilling a seven meter hole in the ice and circulating warm water down the 
hole; the present cavity was reported to be 50 meters in diameter and with a 
20 meter water depth.  Water quality is monitored and station personnel
19
indicated they would create a new well when the present well depth 
approached the bottom of the ice. This water well, in use for the last 
eight years, is the third such well used at Mirniy. Earlier wells had not 
been as successful as the present well due to limited ice depth. Station 
water consumption was reported to average 250 liters per person per day 
during the austral summer and slightly less during the austral winter. 
Water is distributed from the well to station buildings by a sled-mounted 
tanker hauled by a tractor.

Electricity is supplied to the station by three 320 kw and one 500 kw 
diesel-electric generators, only one of which is operated to support the 
station. The larger generator is normally only operated at limited times in 
the winter during periods of higher demand. There is one emergency 100 kw 
generator located in the second group of buildings.  The generators consume 
approximately 460 to 480 tons of fuel per year; consumption was 
approximately 600 tons per year prior to the fires that destroyed the 
vehicle maintenance (35th Expedition) and shop facilities (38th Expedition) 
at the station. Air emissions are not monitored nor are they filtered or 
treated in any way to reduce pollutants.

No sources of alternative energy are used on the station and waste heat 
is not recovered.

All buildings on the station are electrically heated and utility 
distribution is limited to electrical and telephone lines.

The number of vehicles on the station appeared to be reduced from 
earlier reports but this may have been related to the fact that a number of 
vehicles were supporting a traverse to Vostok Station at the time of the 
inspection visit. The Station Leader reported that there were eight heavy 
tow vehicles, five smaller tractors and two cranes at the station. It was 
reported that there are no small vehicles for transporting personnel on the 
station and none were observed. Ten additional vehicles on station were not 
in service and awaiting repair; eight vehicles were reportedly supporting 
the second traverse of the austral summer to Vostok which at the time of the 
visit was 200 km from Vostok. Eight new traverse vehicles had been 
delivered and were to be evaluated at the station during the coming winter. 
They were to be used for the first traverse to Vostok during the 1995-96 
austral summer. Technical personnel representing the manufacturer in 
Bashkiria, Russia, were to winter over at Mirniy preparing the new vehicles 
for the traverse. The loss of the vehicle maintenance building on the 
station had significantly added to the difficulty of performing the 
necessary maintenance on the large traverse vehicles used to support the 
20
Vostok Station traverses.

There were no small boats at the station.

The Station Leader reported there are approximately 30 km of snow/ice 
roads in or near the station complex including an ice road that is built on 
the annual ice between the station fuel tanks and the fuel tanks located on 
one of the small islands in McDonald Bay. The roads connect the two main 
areas of the station and outlying buildings and equipment storage areas.

During the period of the inspection two Russian MI-8 helicopters were 
off-loading cargo between the station and the FEDOROV, which was located in 
McDonald Bay approximately 4 km from the station complex.  These aircraft 
were to depart with the ship when it was scheduled to leave later during the 
week of the inspection.

Australian helicopters operated between Casey and Davis Stations for 
the first time in 1995, landing at Mirniy for fuel from an Australian fuel 
cache placed at Mirniy by the Russian program for the use of these 
Australian helicopters.  As of the date of the inspection, the Australian 
helicopters had flown from Casey to Davis and returned, had flown a second 
time from Casey to Davis, and were currently operating out of Davis.

The two ski landing areas previously available at Mirniy were reported 
by the Station Leader as unsafe and no longer usable due to new cracks and 
crevasses. There are no personnel on station with any expertise in snow 
runway construction and operations and no fixed wing aircraft could safely 
operate from the station.

The station is re-supplied via ship operating from Russia via Cape 
Town, South Africa. The FEDOROV arrived at the station on February 16 and 
was to depart on February 23 to re-supply other Russian stations. The SOMOV 
was to visit the station in April and the FEDOROV was to return in mid-April 
for the final re-supply stop of the austral summer. Early breakup of sea 
ice this austral summer and the late arrival of the FEDOROV due to delays in 
Capetown prevented the normal off-load of heavy cargo to the statirn. The 
Station Leader reported they hoped to be able to off-load the remaining 
cargo when the FEDOROV returned to the station in April. One alternative 
used in the past has been to off-load the heavy cargo onto nearby islands 
and transport it to the station after the sea ice returns.

Primary fuel storage is found on the main station complex in two 1,000 
m3 tanks located ashore immediately adjacent to McDonald Bay and one 700 m3 
21
tank next to the power station. Secondary fuel storage for the station is 
located offshore on a small island in the Haswell Archipelago in three large 
and two small tanks having a total capacity of 5,000 m3. All fuel tanks are 
welded steel construction on bedrock foundations. Station personnel 
reported that the tanks are not lined or double-walled; however, it was 
reported that the tanks are periodically inspected for leaks. The team 
considered this noteworthy considering the extensive weathering of all of 
the offshore tanks. None of these tanks is protected by containment berms 
or underground impregnable liners in the event of a spill. In addition to 
the fixed fuel storage, drums of aviation kerosene, diesel fuel and 
lubricating oils are stored in the open at various locations around the 
station.

Diesel fuel is used to support the power plant as well as all of the 
station's vehicles. It was reported that the station requires 460 to 480 
tons per year of diesel fuel to operate. In addition, Mirniy stages and 
provides approximately 300 tons per year of diesel and kerosene fuel in 
support of Vostok Station's power generation and ice coring operations.

Annual refueling of the station is provided by support vessels 
operating out of Cape Town, South Africa. Fuel is pumped through flexible 
hose from the vessel directly into the primary and secondary storage tanks. 
Transfer of fuel to the primary tanks at the station complex is accomplished 
using flexible hose run from the secondary storage tanks, over the ice, to 
the primary tanks. This operation is only possible when ice covers McDonald 
Bay between the station and the Haswell Archipelago. The Station Leader 
reported that after use the fuel transfer hoses are blown through to empty 
them and that any remaining fuel in the hoses is recovered. Intra-station 
fuel transfers are completed by means of mobile fueling sleds rather than a 
fixed pipeline distribution system. This arrangement requires both 
significant vehicle and personnel logistics support as well as redundant 
fuel handling procedures.

Communications seemed to be as described in the most recent exchange of 
information (HF, VHF, UHF and satellite communications, including INMARSAT).

Arms

Station personnel indicated there were no weapons at the station. The 
Station Leader stated that there were a signal pistol and explosives at 
Mirniy. The explosives are used to blast ice and packed snow away from 
buried pieces of derelict equipment which are later removed from the

22
station.

No inappropriate weapons, military forces or facilities, or nuclear 
disposal sites were observed at Mirniy.

Environment

Given the amount and types of snow present at Mirniy and the persistent 
and brisk winds, it is difficult at best to ascertain the extent to which 
environmental contamination has occurred, been mitigated or prevented; 
however, it is clear that Mirniy, an old station with primary logistic 
support responsibilities, has significant waste management and clean-up 
problems dating back several decades. The Station Leader indicated that 
waste management is an issue of importance at Mirniy and other Russian 
Stations, and that the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute 
had begun deliberations over a number of waste management issues, including 
the establishment of a central point for collection and sorting of waste, 
transportation issues, and questions regarding the burning of waste. The 
Station Leader stated that it is his responsibility to oversee all 
operations, including waste management, at the station, and that no station 
staff had been specifically assigned that responsibility. It was clear that 
he was well aware of the environmental challenges posed by waste management 
and clean-up at the station.

Limited steps to address these problems are being initiated at Mirniy. 
The Station Leader reported that glass, photography laboratory wastes and 
large (vehicle) batteries are returned to Russia. He also stated that the 
only chemical wastes of potential concern were wastes from the photography 
laboratory, which are returned to Russia for treatment and silver recovery. 

To avoid contamination from mismanagement of vehicle batteries, acids from 
these batteries are not drained in the Antarctic; rather, batteries are kept 
closed and annually sent back to Russia with their contents intact. Since 
electrical equipment is designed to be run by electricity supplied by the 
power plant, the Station Leader estimated that no more than 10 or 20 dry 
cell batteries are discarded annually. Clean-up days are held several times 
during each expedition. An environmental group had been undertaking clean-
up efforts at Russian stations over the past five summer seasons, primarily 
removal of old equipment. This was to be the third season that such a group 
had worked at Mirniy Station.

Combustible wastes are open burned, including lubricants such as grease 
from equipment maintenance and waste oil.  Near the power plant, inspection 
23
team members observed two open top metal drums which held ashes from the 
open burning of combustible wastes and a substantial amount of broken glass 
littering the area. A small number of Adelie penguins were present in this 
area at the time of the observation. The inspection team noted a large 
number of discarded drums throughout the station. Waste lubricating oil 
from transportation vehicles is reportedly dumped on the ice along the 
corridor from Mirniy to Vostok. At present, plastic is not being segregated 
or recycled.

Sewage is discharged directly to the ocean without treatment. 
Following a practice used since the opening of the station, food wastes are 
placed on special sleds for transport to and dumping on an area of open 
continental ice at least 50 meters thick.

Two species of penguins nest in the area of Mirniy: Adelie 
(spring/summer) and Emperor (fall/winter). Among the Adelie nesting sites 
is the Haswell Island Site of Special Scientific Interest approximately 4 km 
from the station. The Station Leader indicated that station personnel 
rarely venture out to the vicinity of the island, and then only to 
photograph the birds. Furthermore, he noted that it is not possible for 
station personnel to get to the island by water since the station has no 
small boats; the few visits that are made are accomplished by helicopter.

When present in the winter, Emperor penguins tend to concentrate on the 
sea ice near Cape Mabus, and are visited occasionally by winter-over 
personnel. The number of breeding Emperor penguins reported at Cape Mabus 
has been declining over the past 15 years. Station personnel have also 
noted that the annual breakup of sea ice in that area has been occurring 
earlier each year, and speculated that the change in the penguin population 
might be related to the changes in the date of annual ice breakup.

Numerous south polar skuas were resting on the snow among the buildings 
on the base. It seems likely that this group of birds (approximately 30-50 
were in the immediate vicinity of the main buildings) was taking advantage 
of discarded food.

Regarding native mammals and birds, no mammals were captured or killed. 
The Station Leader did report that perhaps once every 10 years, a request is 
made to collect Emperor and Adelie penguins for scientific purposes for 
museums in Russia.

Concerning non-native fauna and flora, the Station Leader noted that in 
the past dogs and small parrots had been kept at the station, but that these

24
had not been present for several years. At the time of the inspection 
visit, there were a cat and small aquaria containing small fish and snails 
at the station. House plants (e.g., Sansiveria, begonias) as well as 
several food plants (tomatoes and cucumbers) were observed in various 
buildings.

Emergencies

In regards to pollution prevention and response in the event of a fuel 
spill, the Station Leader reported that there was no station oil spill 
contingency plan. Further, the station had no equipment or response 
materials to deal with a pollution incident or provide assistance to a 
nearby station or vessel in the event of a spill. The team observed 
evidence of chronic fuel contamination of soil and ice wherever fuel was 
handled throughout the station.

The inspection team observed fire extinguishers throughout the station 
and station personnel reported that a fire alarm system was also installed 
at the station.

The station reported that there were two surgeons and one 
anesthesiologist at Mirniy. Normally, a physician accompanies any tractor 
traverse resupply effort to Vostok. The physicians have the capability to 
perform emergency medical procedures such as the setting of broken bones 
but do not have the sufficient equipment to perform more intrusive medical 
procedures.

Tourism

The Station Leader reported little tourist activity as only one vessel 
carrying tourists had called at Mirniy in the past two years.

Australia - Davis
68°35'S 77°58'E
February 24, 1995

General

The inspection team arrived at Davis Station at 1530 local time (0830 
25
GMT) February 24, 1995. The team was welcomed by Ms. Diana Patterson, the 
Leader of the Station. Advance notification of the inspection had been 
provided by radio communication from POLAR STAR a day in advance and the 
time of arrival had been coordinated with the station. The inspection, 
including dinner with station personnel, lasted six hours. The inspection 
team was transported by helicopters from the POLAR STAR.

Physical Description

Davis Station is located on the eastern shore of Prydz Bay, on the 
Ingrid Christensen Coast and adjacent to the Vestfold Hills. The Vestfold 
Hills, approximately 400 km2 in area, consist of low-lying ice-free hills on 
irregular east-west peninsulas, separated by deeply indented fjords. The 
hills are rugged, rocky and of a generally reddish brown color, strikingly 
marked with the dark stripes of intrusive dolomite dykes. There are 
numerous lakes and tarns of varying salinity in the region which is the 
largest ice free coastal area in Antarctica. It is bounded on the east by 
the polar plateau (24 km inland), on the south by the Sorsdal Glacier, and 
on the north and west by Prydz Bay.

Davis Station was established in 1957, closed for four years beginning 
in 1965, re-opened in 1969 and has been in continuous operation ever since. 
The original station complex is located on a low bench overlooking a semi-
circular beach on Prydz Bay near the western end of Broad Peninsula, the 
middle and largest of the three peninsulas in the Vestfold Hills. The 
current station complex, construction of which began in 1979, is on higher 
ground immediately southeast of the original buildings.

The station serves as a base for research activities in the Vestfold 
Hills, whose fjords and lakes are of particular interest, and in the near 
shore waters and islands of Prydz Bay. It is also the site of investigation 
and observation of atmospheric, geomagnetic and ionospheric phenomena, and 
supports field parties in the Larsemann Hills to the southwest and on the 
polar ice cap, including the Prince Charles Mountains to the south. 
Helicopters based at Davis during the 1994-95 austral summer had the range 
to link the station with Australia's other two main bases - Casey and 
Mawson.

The construction program at Davis Station was reported by the Station 
Leader to be essentially complete, other than further upgrading to existing 
facilities and plans to remove a number of the buildings of the original 
station. The buildings of the new station, oriented with the prevailing 
26
northeast winds, have been constructed using structural steel, concrete 
foundations and metal-clad, polystyrene insulated wall panels. The complex 
includes: an operations building (with the office of the Station Leader); a 
living quarters building (including dining and recreation facilities); a 
large dormitory building that also houses the medical center; a services 
building; a workshop; a store house; main and emergency power houses, a 
science laboratory building; a meteorological center, including balloon 
launch and associated hydrogen production facilities; an atmospheric and 
space physics building with outlying auroral observation building; an 
emergency equipment building; a waste treatment facility; and a fuel storage 
and fuel pumping facility.

●     There are two helicopter pads on the east side of the station, with a 
small helicopter operations shed adjacent thereto and several antenna masts 
to the north. There is also an emergency helicopter pad to the west. 
Southeast of the two main helicopter pads is a tarn that serves as the 
source of the station's water. From the operations building on the 
southwest corner of the station complex a road descends to the southern end 
of the beach where there is located a pier for small boat operations and the 
transfer of cargo to and from supply vessels.

      Davis Station maintains six huts in the Vestfold Hills area, (one of 
these on Magnetic Island off the tip of Broad Peninsula) and a seventh hut 
on Hop Island in the Rauer Islands to the southwest. The location of and 
facilities available at these huts are reported in Australia's exchange of 
information under the Antarctic Treaty. Support for Law Base, a summer 
station in the Larsemann Hills, is also provided from Davis. Law Base is 
adjacent to China's Zhongshan Station, the closest permanent station to 
Davis, approximately 120 km to the southwest.

Personnel

      Davis Station is managed by the Australian National Antarctic Research 
Expeditions (ANARE) with the logistic support of the Australian Antarctic 
Division. The station is capable of accommodating approximately 80 persons. 
Maximum station population during the 1994-95 austral summer had been 70 
individuals. They included the 17 members of the team, led by Ms. 
Patterson, that will winter over in 1995; seven remaining members of the 
1994 winter-over group; and 46 summer 1994-95 personnel, including 11 
scientists and a nine person field party bound for the Prince Charles 
Mountains.
      
                 27
At the time of the inspection, there were 52 persons at the station,
with the Prince Charles Mountains party in the field, as well as a number of
other science parties operating from field huts. A visiting scientist from
the United States was working with the field party studying Antarctic
petrels on Hop Island and a visiting scientist from the United Kingdom was
working with those studying Vestfold Hills lake systems. The Station Leader
estimated that approximately one-third of the personnel at Davis in recent
years had been directly engaged in scientific activities. This percentage
was expected to increase with substantial completion of station
construction, including the completion during the 1994-95 summer season of
the modern new science laboratory building. There were no military
personnel supporting activities at Davis Station.

Station personnel, under Ms. Patterson's leadership, were
exceptionally well-informed on the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and
measures thereunder relating to activities in Antarctica. A high level of
environmental awareness and concern was evident among station personnel,
including the need to protect native fauna and flora. Station personnel
receive extensive training before deployment to the ice and ANARE has
prepared a comprehensive manual for Antarctic personnel. Ms. Patterson had
also taken the initiative to prepare an informative brochure for station
personnel on the history and locale of Davis Station and activities taking
place and facilities available there during the 1994-95 season.

Scientific Research

A wide range of scientific projects were being undertaken at or around
Davis Station using modern and sophisticated equipment. The atmospheric and
space physics (ASP) program encompassed studies of auroral and airglow
emissions, including an infrared airglow (hydroxyl) occurring around 95 km
in altitude; the purple nitrogen aurora occurring around 100 km in altitude;
the green oxygen aurora occurring around 110 km in altitude; and the red
oxygen aurora occurring around 250 km in altitude. The ASP program also
featured investigation and measurement of stratospheric ozone and UV-B
radiation; atmospheric dynamics; and electric fields generated by the
interaction of the earth's magnetic field and the solar wind.

In the biological sciences, projects being undertaken included studies
of several petrel species and fulmars at Hop Island, Adelie penguin studies
at Magnetic Island, and population and ecological studies of Weddell and
southern elephant seals in the Vestfold Hills area. The lakes of the
Vestfold Hills, as well the near shore marine environment of Prydz Bay and
28
the coastal fjords were the objects of extensive research activity,
including projects on:

-   the relationship between inorganic and organic forms of carbon in
    antarctic lakes and near shore waters;
-   the role of dinoflagellates in antarctic aquatic systems;
-   psychrophillic bacteria from antarctic sea ice;
-   microbial diversity of Antarctica: sulphate reducing bacteria;
-   sea ice algae of the saline lakes of the Vestfold Hills;
-   response of diatoms to changing ecological parameters in the Vestfold
    Hills: implications for climate change;
-   trace element chemistry of antarctic lakes and fjords;
-   feeding ecology of marine copepoda in the near shore Prydz Bay area;
-   UV climate over the Southern Ocean and its biological impacts.

In the geosciences and glaciology, Davis Station supported a six person
traverse of the Lambert Glacier basin from Davis to Mawson Station, a nine
person field party to the Prince Charles Mountains and field studies of
weathering processes in the Vestfold Hills.

There is a modern meteorological observatory at the station, collecting
and reporting a wide variety of data on a real-time basis. Other ongoing
projects include studies of human biology and medicine under Antarctic
conditions, an ANARE mapping and geographical information program and
operation of a tide gauge.

The scientific equipment at the station was essentially as reported in
Australia's exchanges of information under the Antarctic Treaty.

Radioisotopes were being used at the Station in connection with carbon-
dating techniques. All wastes are subject to special handling procedures -
posted prominently in the laboratory - and are removed from the Treaty Area
for disposal in Australia.

                  29
Equipment and Logistics

Equipment and facilities at the station were essentially as reported in Australia's exchanges of information under the Antarctic Treaty. Water is pumped from a tarn located behind the station complex and processed through a reverse osmosis (R/O) system newly installed this austral summer. Station personnel reported the water was only one quarter to one third as saline as sea water. The R/O unit has the capacity to produce 18,000 liters of water per day and the station consumption averages between four and five thousand liters per day during the austral summer. There are two 600,000 liter insulated water storage tanks on station which should supply the station water requirements throughout the winter, allowing the R/O units to be shut down. The two water storage tanks are heated by circulating water through a heat exchanger in the power plant.

Electricity is supplied to the station from four 165 KW diesel-electric generators in the main power plant and two additional 165 KW generators in a separate emergency plant. Two or three of the generators are operated in the main power plant at one time to supply the station. The power plant and its substations are protected by a Halon fire suppression system (as is the store house). Waste heat is recovered from both the generator water jackets and radiators and through exhaust gas heat exchangers for heating the station buildings and water storage tanks. Supplemental heating is supplied to the system during the winter as needed by a diesel-fired boiler. Air emissions from the power plant are not monitored nor are they treated or filtered at this time.

All buildings on the station are supplied by an above-ground utility system that routes communications cabling, removes sewage and distributes power, potable water, fire fighting water, and heated water for structure heating throughout the station complex. (Living quarters are protected by smoke detectors and sprinklers.) The potable water, fire fighting water and building heating loops are circulated and have heat trace that is not normally energized. The sewage lines are heat traced and thermostatically controlled.

No sources of alternative energy are used on the station other than waste heat recovery.

The number of vehicles on the station appeared to be in keeping with normal station operations. The team observed the following equipment: Caterpillar D6 tractor, LGP D5 tractor, 518 tractor with crane, 950 wheeled loader, three Toyota utility trucks, Mack 6x6 truck, Mazda 4x4 truck, four
30
Hagglunds BV206, Case skidsteer, two Grove cranes, Ingersoll roller,
compressors, four Skidoo motor toboggans, and several Polaris ATV's.
Additional equipment was in use on a traverse between Davis and Casey via
the Lambert Glacier.

Crushed rock roads connect the various buildings in the station complex
and the outlying support facilities such as the wharf and station tam.
Numerous roads were observed from the air extending for an undetermined
distance into the Vestfold Hills.

During the period of the inspection three chartered helicopters were
operating from the station. Two long range Sikorsky S76 aircraft were
scheduled to fly approximately 700 hours supporting local activity,
including ship off loading, and two field parties working in the Prince
Charles Mountains. One Aerospatiale Squirrel 350 was scheduled to fly
approximately 400 hours supporting local area science activities.  The
Australian Helicopters also provided assistance to the Chinese vessel SNOW
DRAGON during the resupply of Zhongshan station. It was reported that all
helicopters were transported to Casey from Australia via ship and flown to
Davis via Mirniy earlier in the austral summer and will be returned from
Casey on the last supply ship voyage. There are two helicopter pads at the
station and at the time of the inspection visit both pads were being
expanded. One Russian MI-8 helicopter believed to be operating at
Druzh[n?]aya-4 visited the station during the period the inspection team was on
site for what appeared to be a social call. No fixed wing aircraft operate
from Davis and there are no facilities available for fixed wing aircraft of
any size.

The station is re-supplied via ship operating from Hobart, Tasmania,
Australia throughout the austral summer. The AURORA AUSTRALIS was reported
to have called at the station twice (late September and early November 1994)
and was scheduled to call again in mid-March for the final visit of the
austral summer. Station personnel reported that cargo and personnel were
off loaded directly on the sea ice during the early ship call approximately
2 km from the station. Barges were used to off-load cargo to the station
during the second call when the area was ice free.

Communications facilities include satellite data and telephone links
via INMARSAT including Internet, VHF with repeater stations and long range
HF. A telephone link was in use between Davis and the nearby Zhongshan
station during the time of the inspection.

The bulk fuel storage facilities, refueling operations and related
                                                                 31
pollution prevention and environmental response capabilities reflect 
Australia's commitment to protection of the Antarctic environment through 
the use of state-of-the-art equipment and standardized pollution prevention 
procedures. Most of the station's fuel facilities were completed during the 
1993-94 and 1994-95 austral summers. The annual station fuel requirement is 
approximately 600,000 liters of diesel.

The main bulk fuel storage area for the station is located in a central 
fuel farm containing 11 welded steel tanks each with a capacity of 90,000 
liters of Special Antarctic Blend (SAB) diesel fuel. Though these tanks are 
not double-walled or equipped with inner liners, secondary containment for 
the tanks is provided through a concrete bermed (bunded) area in which the 
tanks are located. This secondary containment has a capacity of 390,000 
liters, which exceeds the reported Australian containment standards of 10 
percent of the total tank farm capacity or the capacity of the largest tank. 
These tanks are also equipped with both electric audible and visual high 
level alarms to prevent overfilling, which is an accepted practice for 
pollution prevention and fuel management. In addition to these tanks, there 
are a total of six other secondary fuel tanks throughout the station. They 
are positioned as follows: one each 10,000 liter tank with containment berm 
at the power house, R/O facility, and recycling/incinerator facility; one 
36,000 liter tank with berm adjacent to the main storage building; one 3,500 
liter vehicle fueling tank without containment berm positioned on top of a 
CONEX box (steel shipping container) next to the power house, and one 3,500 
liter tank contained within a towed mobile fueling van. Except for the 
mobile and temporary fueling tank, all tanks are supported on concrete 
pedestals and protected from differential settlement by concrete 
foundations.

The only other bulk fuel stored on the station are drums of aviation 
gas located in several orderly caches within the main station complex.

Annual station refueling is typically completed in early November 
during the first or second visit of the resupply vessel AURORA AUSTRALIS. 
This operation is usually accomplished while the ship is able to moor 
against the fast ice within 4 km of the station with fuel being pumped 
ashore through hose laid across the ice. This method is considered lower 
risk than the over-water method because it avoids the effects of wind, 
current, and drift ice on the transfer hose. During pumping operations, the 
fuel transfer line is continuously monitored by station and ship personnel 
equipped with hand-held radios to report fuel leaks or spills. The flexible 
fuel hose is laid from the ship to a fixed flanged fuel header at the 
station's small boat pier. From that point the fuel is pumped through 
32
fixed 3 inch (7.6 centimeter) steel pipe running from the shoreline above ground directly into the main fuel farm tanks. This maximum transfer rate for using this method is approximately 18,000 liters/hour.

When the bay adjacent to the station is clear of ice, alternative fuel transferring methods are used. The first method utilizes floating fuel hose run from the vessel to shore as in the over-ice operation. The second method transfers fuel by barge, where fuel is pumped from the ship to a barge alongside, brought to the shore, and pumped out directly into the fixed fuel piping system to the storage tanks. The Davis Station Management Plan indicates that the second method is the preferred and safest method. Regardless of the transfer method used, the fuel hoses are either drained or pigged to remove any residual fuel in the hose with the residual recovered in a holding tank.

Except where it passes underground to traverse roadways, the main fuel piping runs approximately 1 meter above ground from the shore side transfer point to the main fuel farm. The main fuel line is comprised of standard 3 inch (7.6 centimeter) steel pipe, adequately supported throughout with no indication of deformation or corrosion. Provisions for pipe expansion and contraction have been incorporated into the pipe support brackets through stainless steel spring retainers.

There is no fixed fuel piping system between the primary and secondary fuel tanks. Instead, the secondary tanks servicing the support buildings are refilled utilizing the 3,500 liter capacity mobile fueling van. Vehicles are presently refueled using gravity pressure from a 3,500 liter diesel tank strapped to the top of a CONEX box. This arrangement provided the only location on the station where minor fuel handling spills were observed. Fuel management is assigned to key station operations personnel knowledgeable in the station's fuel transfer systems and safe fuel transfer procedures.

Arms

The only weapon at the station was a 1944 Enfield rifle which the Station Leader showed to the inspection team.  The station has a supply of explosives used for quarry operations.

No inappropriate weapons, military activity, or nuclear disposal sites were observed at Davis Station.

33
Environment

The Australian Antarctic Division has a detailed and comprehensive 
waste management strategy for its Antarctic operations which addresses waste 
classification, identification and labeling, collection, minimization, 
reuse, recycling, storage and disposal, as well as the provision of 
information, education and training on waste management issues.  The 
strategy's aims and objectives are reflected in the management plan written 
specifically for Davis Station. Station personnel are provided waste 
management information during their orientation sessions before and after 
arriving at the station. The benefits of such methodical planning, 
organization, preparation and execution were evident in the generally 
meticulous appearance of the station and its facilities.

Copies of material safety data sheets (MSDS) which provide information 
on chemicals present at the station are maintained in the laboratory 
building and the information is also available in electronic format through 
the station's Local Area Network (LAN).

Waste segregation at the point of generation and removal from the 
Treaty Area were common themes observed by the inspection team at Davis 
Station. Lead acid batteries are drained, their contents neutralized and 
both waste streams returned to Australia ("RTA'd"). Wastes which are 
segregated/collected and returned to Australia include: glass and plastics; 
aluminum and other metals (e.g., metal shavings from machining); tires, oily 
slop, used oils and spent antifreeze (e.g., from vehicle maintenance); 
photography laboratory wastes; paint wastes; and chemical wastes (e.g., 
isotopes, wet laboratory wastes). Empty fuel drums are often used as 
containers in which some of these wastes are returned to Australia. The 
team also observed empty fuel drums being used to store caustic soda used at 
the R/O plant.

Low density polyethylene bags, oily rags from vehicle maintenance, 
kitchen wastes, wood, paper, and cardboard are burned in an incinerator of 
approximately 1.5 m
3
 capacity installed in 1987. The refractory-lined 
chamber is preheated for approximately one-half hour. Its operating 
temperature is reported as 600° C; flue gas is reported to undergo secondary 
combustion at approximately 1,200° C. Emissions are not routinely 
monitored; rather, carbon dioxide is monitored periodically during 
maintenance as an indicator of incinerator performance. During the summer, 
station personnel reported that approximately 310 kg of waste is burned once 
a day; this rate drops to once per month during winter, when fewer personnel 
occupy the station. Ash is collected and returned to Australia for 
                                                               34
disposal.

Each building is equipped with a macerating pump which moves sewage to secondary treatment in a rotating biological contactor (RBC). The sewage treatment system processes approximately 4,500 liters per day in summer and 1,500 to 2,000 liters per day in winter, when fewer personnel occupy the station. Treated effluent is piped overland to the above-water outfall on the coast.

Several species of marine birds are found in the vicinity of the station. Personnel are instructed not to approach areas where cliff-dwelling seabirds (cape petrels, snow petrels, southern fulmars, Antarctic petrels) lay eggs and fledged chicks between November and February. Those species plus Adelie penguins are the subjects of research and surveys conducted from field camps adjoining the station.

On the date of inspection approximately 60 elephant seals were hauled out in two groups in the beach area immediately in front of the station, apparently undisturbed by station activities. (The largest group was hauled out next to drums staged for return to Australia.) Those driving vehicles in that area are asked to exercise care. Weddell seals also breed earlier in the summer season in the Davis area.

Regarding exotic fauna and flora, personnel are advised of station policy prohibiting introduction of animals and plants without a permit. No members of the inspection team saw any indication of the presence of non-endemic species.

One SSSI designated under the Antarctic Treaty is located nearby Davis Station: Marine Plain. Station personnel are advised of the boundaries of this SSSI, and aerial photos and maps clearly indicating these boundaries were posted in several buildings as well is in briefing materials provided to personnel. Access to the SSSI is possible on foot over land or sea ice via Ellis Fjord. Alternately, helicopters can be used to land personnel outside of the SSSI, with subsequent access to the site itself by foot.

In addition to the SSSI at Marine Plain, the station has designated three other sites as locally protected: (1) Hawker Island, where there is a giant petrel colony; (2) Magnetic Island, an important nesting site for Adelie penguins; and (3) Lichen Valley, site of sensitive terrestrial flora. Although the protected designation for these three sites has no formal status, station personnel are advised to treat these areas with special care so as not to disturb the environment. A management plan for Magnetic Island
35
has been developed, and this site has been proposed for formal protection 
under CCAMLR as an ecosystem monitoring site.

Three sites of historic interest are situated in close proximity to the 
station. The first is a cairn placed at Walkabout Rocks during the 1939 
Ellsworth expedition and is designated as Historic Monument Number 6 under 
the Antarctic Treaty. The second, Law Cairn, marks the first Australian 
landing site in Antarctica in 1954. Both are visited, the latter 
frequently.  Station personnel expressed concern about inadvertent damage to 
Law Cairn, and indicated an intention to develop a plan to protect it.  A 
memorial on Anchorage Island, though not officially designated under the 
Antarctic Treaty, is also maintained by the station to honor one of its 
personnel who died in an accident in.

Emergencies

The Station Leader provided the inspection team with a copy of the 
"Davis Station Oil Spill Contingency Plan" published in September 1992.  The 
plan is comprehensive, including laying out required station training and 
exercises, response organization, sensitive biological areas near the 
station, etc.  To support the response plan, the station also has oil spill 
response equipment including sorbent boom, sorbents (SOKEROL), and an oil 
skimming pump.  This equipment was contained in a CONEX van which is 
positioned at the shore side during fuel transfer operations.

When asked whether station personnel received training in the use of 
the oil spill response equipment or whether periodic response drills were 
conducted, the Station Leader reported that to date no training or drills 
had been conducted.  However, sufficient oil spill response equipment is 
available to provide limited assistance in the event of a spill at or near 
the station and could be deployed by the small boat and helicopters at Davis 
Station.

During the time of the inspection, there were two medical doctors at 
the station who also have some dental training.  One had wintered over and 
was scheduled to leave in March.  The other was to winter over in 1995.  
Davis Station has a small state-of-the-art medical facility that includes a 
medical examination room, dental facilities, operating room for emergency 
procedures, X-ray equipment and a two bed hospital room area.  Station 
36
personnel indicated that there are four personnel trained to assist the doctors in emergencies.

Tourism

The Station Leader reported that no visits had occurred to date in the 1994-95 season. The last visit she recalled was by the KAPITAN KHLEBNIKOV during the 1992-93 season.

China - Zhongshan
69°22'S 76°23'E
February 25, 1995

General

The inspection team arrived at Zhongshan Station at 1000 local time (0500 GMT) February 25, 1995. The team was welcomed by the Station Leader, Mr. Qian Songlin. Advance notification of the inspection had been provided the previous day relayed from the POLAR STAR via Davis Station. The timing of the visit was coordinated through the Deputy Station Leader of Zhongshan Station, Mr. Wang Jianguo, who happened to be at Davis Station during the inspection team's visit to that station the previous evening.  The inspection, including luncheon with station personnel, lasted seven hours. The team was transported by helicopters from the POLAR STAR.

Physical Description

Zhongshan Station is located on the southern shore of Prydz Bay along the Ingrid Christensen Coast, towards the eastern end of the Larsemann Hills. The Larsemann Hills form an ice-free area of rolling hills, consisting mainly of gneisses, metamorphosed to produce pockets of sandy, granular soil, and with minor undeformed granites.  The main area of the
37
Larsemann Hills extends to the west of the station in a coastal strip 
bounded on the south and east by the polar ice cap, on the west by the Amery 
Ice Shelf and on the north by Prydz Bay.

The station complex lies on the north/south trending Mirror Peninsula. 
The Mirror Peninsula is separated from the similarly aligned, but larger 
Broknes Peninsula to the west by Nella Fjord and is bounded on the east by 
Dalk Bay and on the southeast by Dalk Glacier that flows down from the polar 
ice cap. There were numerous icebergs grounded in Prydz Bay in the vicinity 
of the station.

Zhongshan Station was established in 1989. (The sixth anniversary of 
its establishment was to be observed on the following day, February 26.) 
Its current scientific emphasis is on studies in upper atmosphere physics 
and meteorology. The station is not at present the base for extensive field 
party work, but, according to Mr. Qian, was designed to be able to provide 
logistics support for traverses onto the polar ice cap.

At the center of the station (oriented north/south) is a long one-story 
building that houses the Station Leader's office, dining and recreation 
facilities, as well as some living accomodations for station personnel. In 
front of this building on the western side is the Station's helicopter pad. 
Further to the west lie two small lakes from which the station draws its 
water supply. To the south of this main building are a dormitory and a 
science building. The latter also houses communications equipment (HF and 
VHF radio and INMARSAT) as well as its medical facilities. Further to the 
south is a garage housing heavy tracked vehicles and to the east of the 
garage a complex of fuel storage tanks. Immediately to the west of the 
dormitory lies a series of steel containers to provide storage.

North of the main building is the power plant and water supply building 
and east and slightly down slope is a building housing a sewage/waste water 
treatment facility and an incinerator. A discharge pipe extends downhill 
from this sewage/waste water facility to Dalk Bay.

North of the power plant and water supply building, along a ridge that 
rises to overlook Prydz Bay is the meteorology building and six small 
modular buildings for specialized observation and/or measurement. The two 
most distant are structures housing equipment to measure the earth tide 
(gravity) and the earth's magnetic field. The latter building was

38
constructed in 1991. The most recently constructed (and highest along the ridge) is the auroral observation building, completed during the current austral summer season.

There are a number of HF radio aerials adjacent to the science building, a Digisonde antenna array east and down slope from the main building, satellite antennas along the ridge and a VHF mast at the southeast corner of the Station, the tallest structure in the vicinity.

Australia's Davis Station, approximately 120 km to the northeast is the nearest permanent station to Zhongshan. Progress II, a Russian station, sometimes occupied in the summer, is located about 2 km to the northeast on Dalk Bay. (Progress I, now abandoned, lies further to the northeast, adjacent to Dalk Glacier). Law Base, an Australian summer station is located about 1 km inland to the south.

Personnel

Zhongshan Station is managed by CHINARE - the Chinese National Antarctic Research Expeditions. The scientific personnel represent various institutes in China. The Station Leader is a senior engineer with the Polar Research Institute of China; the Deputy Station Leader from the State Oceanic Organization. Also represented was the Institute of Atmospheric Chemistry of the Chinese Academy of Meteorological Science.

At the time of the inspection, there were 22 persons at Zhongshan Station. This group, led by Mr. Qian, will winter over in 1995. It includes 13 scientific and nine support personnel. There had been a 14 person summer contingent at the station from early December, 1994 through late January, 1995. The station is capable of accommodating up to 60 individuals during the summer season. The size of the 1995 winter-over party was described as average. There were no military personnel supporting activities at Zhongshan Station.

The Station Leader reported that personnel undergo training in China prior to arrival in Antarctica, including psychological screening for those wintering over. He indicated that personnel are briefed on the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and measures thereunder applicable to activities in Antarctica. He provided the team with a copy of CHINARE's Antarctic

39
personnel manual that includes information on these provisions and measures, 
as well as other material relating to conditions in Antarctica.

Scientific Research

Zhongshan Station is the site of a number of research projects in 
atmospheric sciences and physics. Most recently, an all sky camera system 
and scanning spectrophotometer have been installed for carrying out 
observations of the aurora. The station employs a Brewer Ozone 
Spectrophotometer to measure vertical ozone profiles and other atmospheric 
gases, as well as an ozone concentration analyzer system to continuously 
monitor lower tropospheric ozone. The Station Leader reported that there is 
a joint project between China and Japan to undertake coordinated auroral and 
ozone observations at both Zhongshan and Japan's Syowa Station.

Additional scientific activities at Zhongshan Station include 
ionospheric observations using a Digisonde Portable Sounder and riometer; 
observation of stratospheric aerosols using a laser radar system; and 
measurement of solar radiation, including UV-B, solar flare activity and 
atmospheric electro-field variation. Regular geomagnetic observations are 
carried out to measure a number of parameters of the earth's geomagnetic 
field and there is an earth tide gravity meter.

Zhongshan Station carries out regular meteorological observations and 
relays data to Davis Station for entry into the World Meteorological 
Organization's global system. It is equipped to receive high resolution 
picture transmission from polar orbiting satellites on a real time basis.

Station personnel reported that no radioactive isotopes were being used 
at Zhongshan Station.

Equipment and Logistics

Water for the station is obtained from a small lake west of the station 
buildings; the water is passed through a heat exchanger in the power plant 
and returned to the lake. It was reported by the Station Leader that this 
water, which is not treated, is somewhat salty and only used for bathing and 
cleaning. Potable water for drinking and cooking is obtained from a second

40
smaller lake and by melting ice and snow. Potable water supplies are 
somewhat limited during the austral summer months. Station water usage 
rates were not available at the time of the inspection but showers were 
allowed daily during the austral summer and reduced to two per week for the 
austral winter.

Electricity is supplied to the station from three 110 kw Caterpiller 
diesel electric generators in the main power plant. Only one generator is 
operated at a time to supply station power and there is a spare generator in 
outside storage available at the station. One generator is air cooled and 
two generators are water cooled and the waste heat is used to warm the 
station water supply. Emissions from the power plant are not filtered or 
monitored.

Station buildings appear to be electrically heated using mainly plug-in 
oil-filled heaters. The Station Leader reported that there were problems 
with the current heating system mostly due to poor circulation and 
significant floor to ceiling temperature differential.

The Station Leader reported that no sources of alternative energy were 
being used at the main station but solar panels were used to supply power at 
a glaciology field camp earlier in this austral summer.

Thirteen vehicles were observed on the station including a 931 
Caterpiller tracked loader, one wheeled loader, a second tracked loader that 
was under repair, a 20 ton wheeled crane, a second smaller wheeled crane 
estimated 12 ton capacity, one non-operational flat bed truck, one Kasbohrer 
Flexmobil awaiting replacement tracks, and four Kasbohrer Pisten Bully 
vehicles and three sleds. The latter machines have reportedly been on 
station for four years and have seen very limited use; they were originally 
purchased for a proposed traverse from Zhongshan to the South Pole.

The Station Leader reported there were less than 1 km of crushed 
rock/sand roads within the station complex. Additional roads were observed 
between the station complex and the nearby Russian stations Progress I and 
II.

The station has no boats of any kind; however, the Station Leader noted 
that a small boat would be useful in maintaining the water pumping system 
located in the station's fresh water lake.

41
The station is re-supplied once a year by ship from China. The Station Leader reported that the station had been supplied in December by the SNOW DRAGON. The SNOW DRAGON is an ice-breaking vessel recently purchased from Ukraine. It is being refitted for oceanographic research and it is planned that it will in the future carry out marine research as well as resupply activities, as did the previous vessel the JI DI. During normal ice conditions the ship is off loaded using three barges carried on the vessel. This austral summer ice conditions prevented the use of the barges and the ship was off-loaded using two Australian helicopters from Davis station.

During the period of the inspection no aircraft were operating from the station. (As noted, Australian helicopters operated at the station earlier in the austral summer assisting with the off-load of the SNOW DRAGON.) There is a single circular concrete helicopter pad, approximately 20 meters in diameter, located east of the lake near the main station complex. There are no facilities on the station to support fixed-wing aircraft.

Communications facilities include satellite links via INMARSAT, VHF radio monitoring channel twelve for local area operations and HF radio for long distance communications. Additionally, a radio telephone link is maintained between Zhongshan and Davis station.

Primary fuel storage for the station is contained in a fuel farm of 10 steel diesel fuel tanks each having a 40 ton capacity. The tanks rest on concrete pedestals poured directly onto the underlying bedrock with no indication of differential settlement or foundation deformation. The Station Leader reported that the tanks are not double-walled or equipped with inner liners.

In addition to these tanks, there are two secondary fuel tanks each with a 15 ton capacity. Both of these tanks are adjacent to the station's power plant. One of them, which directly feeds the power plant, is fixed on concrete pedestals. The other is mounted on a sled. The inspection team noted that there were no containment berms around any of the station's fuel tanks in the event of a fuel leak or spill. There is also no spare fuel storage capacity available in the event of a tank failure or other fuel related malfunction.

Throughout the station there were also open caches of aviation fuel and lubricating oil drums.

42
Diesel fuel is used for power generation and refueling of station vehicles. Since the station has no aircraft, the drummed aviation fuel on the station is staged to support Australian helicopter operations between Davis and Mawson stations. Lubricating oil is used for both the diesel power generators and station vehicles. As noted in the station activities information package provided to the inspection team, the station requires approximately 200,000 liters of diesel fuel/year to operate, which is less than half of the station's total fuel capacity.

The station is refueled annually from the supply vessel. Typically, the vessel will moor at the ice edge to the northeast of the station and pump fuel ashore to the main fuel tanks via flexible fuel hose laid over the ice. The Station Leader reported that the captain of the supply vessel manages this operation with assistance from station personnel.  According to the Station Leader, station personnel equipped with radios are positioned along the transfer hose to report fuel leaks or other transfer related problems.  Station personnel reported that on occasion fuel is pumped from the supply vessel directly to fuel tanks a Russia's Progress Station, located on a promontory adjacent to the supply vessel ice moorings. When this refueling option is taken, fuel can be pumped from the Russian fuel tanks to the station's tanks as needed. Station personnel reported this procedure was used when direct pumping from the vessel to the station was not possible. The team did observe plastic type fuel hose still in place from the last fuel transfer operation. It was run from the station storage tank area to the supply vessel mooring area. The fuel hose appeared to have been stored on a large hose reel located near the fuel storage tanks. However, given the observed inflexibility of the unreeled hose, restoring of the hose on the hose reel was not considered probable.

The station's fuel distribution system relies almost completely on flexible reinforced hose rather than fixed steel piping.  In most places on the station, flexible fuel hose is fed through rough cutouts in the steel sides of station buildings without the advantage of flanged connections or stuffing tubes to prevent chafing. The station's fuel piping and distribution systems lacked structural integrity and appeared to be poorly maintained.

The team noted chronic and recent fuel spills around fuel transfer areas. The most serious of these was at the power station fuel tank, where residual diesel fuel from undrained transfer hoses had collected and was 
43
observed to be flowing down the tank sides saturating the unprotected soil 
below. Similar fuel transfer practices were observed at the fuel transfer 
headers adjacent to the main fuel storage tanks.

The fuel transfer system from the primary storage tanks to the 
secondary fuel tanks consisted of approximately 600 meters of flexible 
rubber fuel hose laid directly on the ground, periodically buried where the 
hose traversed roadways. This arrangement was made possible by joining 
multiple lengths of hose using sleeved hose unions held in place by twisted 
wire wraps at each hose end. Throughout the length of this hose run there 
were no check valves or manual shutoff valves to help prevent a fuel 
discharge in the event of a hose failure anywhere in the line. Discarded 
and broken hose unions as well as fuel-contaminated soil in several areas 
along the fuel hose run indicated previous hose failures and resultant fuel 
spills. The exterior casing of the hose also showed evidence of 
deterioration due to weathering and deformation. In particular, the team 
observed compression damage to the fuel distribution hose near the main fuel 
tanks resulting from vehicles traffic.

In the opinion of the inspection team, the fuel distribution and piping 
system posed significant risk of fuel line failure and resultant pollution. 
Similarly, fuel transfer operations were resulting in incidents of soil 
contamination from fuel. Finally, the team believes there was increased 
risk of fire from fuel- and solvent-contaminated dunnage, rags, and 
equipment.

Arms

The Station Leader indicated that there were no weapons, explosives or 
signal pistols at the station. However, he stated there were non-pistol 
type flares devices at the station.

No inappropriate weapons, military forces, facilities or nuclear 
disposal sites were observed at Zhongshan.

Environment

The Station Leader reported that the station had no formal written 
waste management plan; however, procedures for waste segregation and removal

44
from the Treaty Area have been put in place, station personnel are provided 
information on waste management as part of their orientation, and 
appropriate waste management notices are publicly displayed.

Waste materials reported to be stored and ultimately removed from the 
Treaty Area include: glass, PVC pipe, metals (including metal shavings, cans 
and small batteries), vehicle batteries (removed with contents intact or 
untreated), tires, any radioactive materials, any other solid non-
combustibles (e.g., spent gas cylinders) and fuel and lubricants. Wood 
waste is reused as much as possible (e.g., in woodworking or other small 
projects). No waste materials had been removed from the station due to 
logistical difficulties encountered this season.

Any remaining wood, paper, and bagged oily rags from vehicle 
maintenance, and some waste fuel/oil is used in the incinerator as 
supplemental fuel to remove moisture from kitchen wastes, used toilet paper 
(segregated from other sanitary wastes) and a small amount of solids removed 
from the remaining sanitary wastes by the sewage treatment system prior to 
final combustion. The incinerator operator reported that approximately 100 
to 200 kg of waste is batch-processed in this manner. The incinerator uses 
diesel and waste oil as the principal energy sources for combustion, and is 
reported to operate at 200° C. The incinerator does not employ any 
secondary combustion of flue gases; rather, exhaust gases pass through a 
cyclonic separator which removes ash and deposits it in plastic bags for 
removal from the Treaty area.

As mentioned above, the sewage treatment system removes a small amount 
of solids from the liquid waste stream for drying and ultimate incineration. 
Liquid effluent is disinfected with what appeared to be solid granular 
sodium hypochlorite prior to ocean disposal. The treatment plant operator 
reports that approximately 5 to 6 tons of effluent are treated and 
discharged daily.

The CHINARE personnel manual, provided to station personnel before 
leaving China for Antarctica, includes sections on the Convention on 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and on Annex II 
(Conservation of Antarctic fauna and Flora) to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

Snow petrels and Wilson's storm petrels breed in the rocky environs of

45
the station, and Adelie and Emperor penguins are seen periodically. (The
inspectors noted several skuas near the outdoor entrance to the station's
kitchen, evidently waiting to scavenge food waste.) Weddell seals are also
found on coastal sea ice within walking distance of the station.

Mosses and lichers are present in the Larsemann Hills where the station
is located.

As regards non-endemic fauna and flora, station personnel reported no
introduced animals on site, and none were observed by the inspection team.
House plants were noted in several locations at the station.

Although no SSSI or Special Protected Areas (SPA) are located at
Zhongshan, a list of all protected areas in the Antarctic Treaty Area is
included in the personnel manual mentioned above.

Emergencies

The Station Leader reported that there was no station oil or chemical
spill contingency plan and that the station had no equipment or materials to
respond to a spill. He also advised that no specific pollution prevention
or response training was provided to station personnel, nor were station
personnel provided any pollution control training exercises. Though no
significant pollution incidents causing damage to the environment or station
facilities were reported to have occurred in the last year, station fuel
handling practices are resulting in small spills causing chronic soil
contamination with cumulative effects.

One medical surgeon is on the staff of the Zhongshan winter-over group.
There is a small operating room at the station which can support intrusive
medical procedures on an emergency basis.

Tourism

The Station Leader reported that there had been no tourist visitation at
Zhongshan Station. He noted regular exchanges of visits between personnel
of Zhongshan Davis Stations.

46
Japan - Syowa
69°00'22"S 39°35'24"E
March 1, 1995

 
General

The inspection team arrived at Syowa Station at 1000 local time (0700 
GMT)0 March 1, 1995, via helicopter from the POLAR STAR.  The team was 
welcomed by the Station Leader, Mr. Shigemi Meshida and the Deputy Station 
Leader, Mr. Kenji Ishizawa.  Advance notification of the inspection had been 
provided the previous day via INMARSAT from the POLAR STAR.  The inspection, 
including luncheon with station personnel, lasted seven hours.

Physical Description

Syowa Station is located on East Ongul Island, one of a group of low-
lying ice free islands along the eastern shore of Lützow-Holm Bay and is 
bounded on the west by the Riiser-Larsen peninsula.  Lützow-Holm Bay forms a 
major indentation along the Prince Harald Coast of East Antarctica.  East 
Ongul Island lies about 4 km off the mainland coast where the polar ice cap 
meets the sea.

East Ongul Island is separated from the larger West Ongul Island to the 
southwest by a narrow channel.  South-southwest of East Ongul Island lie 
three other ice-free islands - Langhovde, Breidvågnipa and Skarvsnes - also 
along the shore of Lützow-Holm Bay.  Langhovde, the nearest of these, about 
30 km away, is the location of Yukidori Valley, SSSI Number 22 under the 
Antarctic Treaty.  On the mainland, Mount Botnnuten, which is about 70 km 
away, and several other rocky peaks extend up through the ice cap at the 
southern end of the Bay.

East Ongul Island, approximately 5 km², consists of glacially-scoured 
hills, with several freshwater lakes.  The hills are composed of 
metamorphosed granites, with glacial till soil.  The highest point on the 
island is 44 meters in elevation on a ridge that runs southwest to northeast
         
47
across the southern half of the island. There is another lower ridge,
similarly aligned, on the northwest part of the island. The main part of
Syowa Station is on a terrace to the east of this ridge, about 15 meters in
elevation, on the northern end of East Ongul Island.

Syowa Station dates back to the era of the International Geophysical
Year, having been established in January, 1957. Except for a four-year
period during which it was closed (January, 1962 to January, 1966), it has
remained in year-round operation ever since. Syowa Station serves as the
center of Japan's south polar research supporting major programs in high
latitude science, including programs in upper atmosphere physics,
atmospheric chemistry, meteorology, solid earth geophysics and biology.  It
supports Dome Fuji Station, established by Japan at Dome F, the highest
point on the Queen Maud Land ice sheet - 3710 meters above sea level at
77°18'34"S 39°41'52"E. It is the site of a major deep ice coring project.
Syowa Station also maintains a small field research hut on Langhovde Island
adjacent to the Yukidori Valley SSSI.

Syowa Station consists of 43 structures (the majority more than ten
years old) occupying about half the area of East Ongul Island. The main
building of the station, located at its center, is a four story structure
completed in 1992, overlooking Lützow-Holm Bay, that houses the office and
quarters of the Station Leader, the radio communications center and the
medical facility, as well as the station's dining and recreation facilities
and library. Immediately to the west of the main building are three living
quarters, pre-fabricated one-story buildings connected to the main building
by an enclosed corridor completed during the 1994-95 austral summer. Also
connected to the main building by covered walkways is the power plant and
water supply facility.  Directly in front of the main building is a small
building that formerly housed the power plant and is now used for storage.
Adjacent to it is a fuel storage facility.  To the northwest, on the shore
of the Bay, are two large workshop/repair buildings.

To the southeast of the main station complex on a northern spur of the
main ridge on the island is an 11 meter diameter parabolic antenna enclosed
by a dome. The antenna, installed in 1989, is for the station's
multipurpose satellite data receiving system. Between the main complex and
the parabolic antenna dome are five one-story prefabricated buildings: the
biological science building; a storehouse; the upper atmosphere chemistry
building and observatory; the upper atmosphere physics building and 
48
observatory; and the multipurpose satellite data receiving system building.
A gravity observation building, which was under renovation at the time of 
the inspection, is located on the south side of the parabolic antenna dome.

To the southwest of the main station complex is a group of 
prefabricated buildings that includes the meteorological observatory and the 
geosciences building that houses the station's seismographs.

Approximately 2 km from the station there is a fuel storage depot on 
the northeastern tip of the island , with a helicopter pad immediately to 
the west.  A road links the fuel depot to the main complex.

There is a small lake about 150 meters south of the main station 
complex (below the ridge spur with the parabolic antenna dome).  Another 
slightly larger lake lies to the southwest.  To the west of this second lake 
is a two story living quarters building for summer personnel - the 
"Lakeshore Hotel".  There is a road from the main complex to the Lakeshore 
Hotel and beyond to two helicopter pads on the northwest corner of the 
island.

There are a large number of antenna arrays in the vicinity of the 
station, including, in addition to the parabolic satellite receiving dish, 
HF, VHF and UHF arrays, parabolic INMARSAT antennae, a delta antenna for 
middle atmosphere observation, and a long period antenna for solar 
terrestrial energy observation.

The nearest permanent research station to Syowa is Russia's 
Molodezhnaya Station, about 300 km to the southeast.

Personnel

Syowa Station is managed by Japan's National Institute of Polar 
Research. Activities at the station (and Japan's other Antarctic 
facilities) are carried out by the Japanese Antarctic Research Expeditions 
(JARE) , made up of participants from a number of agencies and institutes. 
The 1994-95 contingent at Syowa Station is part of the 36th JARE. The 
content of Japan's Antarctic research programs is determined by the 
Headquarters of JARE, an inter-ministerial mechanism, chaired by the

49
Ministry of Education, Science and Culture. The Station Leader, Mr. 
Meshida, is from the Japan Meteorological Agency and the Deputy Station 
Leader, Mr. Ishizawa, is from the National Institute of Polar Research.

At the time of the inspection, there were thirty-one persons at Syowa 
Station. This group, including 16 science and 15 support personnel, led by 
Mr. Meshida, will winter over in 1995. A nine person party, including four 
science and five support personnel, was in residence at Dome Fuji Station 
and will winter over there. Earlier in the season, during the one month 
stay of the icebreaker SHIRASE, an additional 17 persons had been at Syowa 
Station, including a visiting German scientist.

The SHIRASE is operated by the Japanese Maritime Self-Defense Forces. 
During its visits, the vessel, particularly its two helicopters, supports 
activities at and around Syowa Station. There were no military personnel 
present at the station at the time of the inspection.

The Deputy Station Leader reported that station personnel receive 
rigorous training before deployment to Antarctica, including familiarization 
with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and measures thereunder relating 
to activities on the ice. JARE has prepared manuals for Antarctic personnel 
("Instructions for JARE Members" and "Handbook of JARE Stations").

Scientific Research

Syowa Station is an active scientific facility with modern equipment 
and well-designed programs in upper atmospheric physics, atmospheric 
chemistry, meteorology, solid earth geophysics and biology.

Upper atmospheric physics projects observed at the station included 
investigations of the aurora and of the ionosphere generally, measurements 
of cosmic rays and galactic noise, natural very low frequency (VLF) waves 
and geomagnetic variation, and satellite data acquisition. Atmospheric 
chemistry projects included monitoring of carbon dioxide, methane, surface 
ozone, nitrogen oxide; isotope measurement of in-situ carbon dioxide 
extruded from the atmosphere and air sampling (and isotope measurement).

Meteorological projects included synoptic surface observations, twice 
daily aerological balloon soundings, and measurement of solar radiation and
50
ozone, as well as satellite data acquisition.

Solid earth geophysics projects included earthquake monitoring using a 
variety of seismographs and gravity observations.  The gravity observatory, 
employing superconducting and absolute gravimeters, was reported by station 
personnel as the only observatory so equipped in the southern hemisphere. 
The station also maintains an ocean tide gauge.

Projects in biology included studies of reproduction and DNA 
polymorphism in terrestrial mosses of the Yukidori Valley, monitoring of 
soil algae and bacteria as indicators of man's impact on the Antarctic 
environment, ecological monitoring of nearby lakes, spore sampling, and 
censuses of Adelie penguins and Weddell seals.  Two marine biologists spent 
the austral winter of 1994 at Syowa; one terrestrial ecologist will winter-
over in 1995.

The scientific research activities and equipment used in support 
thereof at Syowa Station accorded with those reported in Japan's annual 
exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty, 1994-95.

Equipment and Logistics

Equipment and facilities at the station were essentially as reported in 
Japan's exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty.  Station 
personnel reported that potable water is obtained from two sources.  Water 
is pumped from a small pond near the station complex and processed through 
two five-micron and one one-micron paper filters and a reverse osmosis (R/O) 
system with a 5 ton per day capacity.  (A 10 ton per day capacity R/O system 
was on station and scheduled to be installed this austral winter.)  The 
second source of potable water is from a snow melter located next to the 
power plant complex.  Water is circulated through heat exchangers associated 
with the diesel-electric generators and into an open tank that collects snow 
drift from the end of the power plant building.  Station personnel also 
reported that heated water is circulated back to the small pond to prevent 
freezing.  There are two water storage tanks in the power plant complex of 
100 and 130 ton capacity.  Daily consumption was reported to average 100 
liters per person per day; greywater is used in the station toilets in the 
main complex which accounts for the low water consumption.

51
Electricity is supplied to the station from three 200 KVA/160 KW 
diesel-electric generators in the main power plant. One generator normally 
provides power for the entire station and there are plans to install a 300 
KVA generator next austral summer. Annual fuel consumption for electrical 
production was reported as 450 tons of diesel fuel. Waste heat is recovered 
from both the generator radiators and water jackets for heating buildings 
located in the central station complex. Supplemental heating is supplied to 
the system during the winter as needed by a diesel-fired boiler; no waste 
heat is recovered from the exhaust gas. Air emissions from the power plant 
are not monitored nor are they treated or filtered at this time. Outlying 
buildings are heated by individual furnaces located in each structure.

No sources of alternative energy are used on the station other than 
waste heat recovery.

The number of vehicles on the station appeared to be as reported in the 
exchange of information and in keeping with normal station operations. The 
team sighted a wide variety of vehicles including tractors, dump trucks, 
power shovels, cranes, utility pick-up trucks, cargo trucks, forklifts, 
snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles and a wide range of over-snow vehicles. 
Station personnel reported that varying conditions at Syowa throughout the 
year require a broad selection of vehicles for the support functions 
performed at the station.

Crushed rock roads connect the various buildings in the station complex 
and the outlying science and support facilities, including the remote fuel 
farm located approximately 2 km from the station. The Station Leader 
estimated there were 3 to 4 km of roads associated with the station.

The Station Leader reported that there were no small boats at the 
station.

During the period of the inspection no fixed or rotary wing aircraft 
were present at the station. Two fixed wing aircraft, a Pilatus Porter PC-6 
and a Cessna A-185F, had operated from a sea ice runway near the main 
station complex earlier in the austral summer but had been returned on the 
re-supply ship to Japan for maintenance. Two Sikorsky S-61A and one Hughes 
OH-6D helicopters, based on the re-supply vessel, supported cargo offloading 
and local science activities from late December through late January. All 
three helicopters returned to Japan on the re-supply vessel.

52
There are two helicopter pads located near the main station complex and
a third pad located near the main station fuel farm. The surface of all
three pads is covered with an unidentified petroleum-based product; station
personnel reported that plans were being made to remove this covering and
put in concrete helicopter pads as early as next austral summer. No other
aircraft have operated from Syowa in the past but Russian helicopters have
been sighted in the area.

The station is re-supplied once a year via ship operating from Japan.
The diesel-electric powered icebreaker SHIRASE was reported to have arrived
at the station December 24, 1994 and departed January 25, 1995. The
icebreaker was able to ice dock approximately 800 meters from the station
and cargo was offloaded with helicopters and oversnow vehicles.

Communications facilities on the station include satellite data and
telephone links via INMARSAT including Internet, HF for long range and VHF
and UHF for local area communications. A state-of-the-art communications
center was located in the main building and science laboratories are
connected to a station LAN.

All buildings at the station are equipped with heat and smoke
detectors. Outlying buildings are equipped with hand held fire
extinguishers and the recently completed main building has a sprinkler
system. All winter-over personnel are provided fire fighting training
before they depart Japan and monthly training exercises take place at the
station.

Station fuel-stock is contained in two tank farm areas: a primary fuel
storage area approximately 2 km east of the station and a secondary fuel
transfer area immediately adjacent to the north-side of the station. The
type and capacity of the primary storage tanks was reported to consist of
(the inspection team observed these tanks from the air): two 200 kl plastic
membrane tanks (with steel frame), and two each 100 kl and 50 kl aluminum
tanks. The secondary fuel area is made up of a variety of different fuel
storage configurations. First, there are seven rubber "pillow" diesel fuel
tanks; four are rated at a 10 kl capacity, two at 25 kl, and one at 38 kl.
There is one 60 kl fiberglass reinforced plastic (FRP) kerosene storage tank
and an additional four metal diesel tanks (i.e., three aluminum tanks with
38 kl capacity and one stainless steel tank rated at 10 kl). In addition to
these large tanks, most of the station's living quarters and science
53
buildings utilize a variety of small kerosene heating fuel storage tanks 
ranging from simple configurations using 205 liter steel drums to purpose-
built FRP and stainless steel tanks of similar capacity.

The fuel storage tanks are not double-walled or equipped with inner 
liners and the areas under and around the tanks are not protected from leaks 
or spills by containment berms or impregnable ground liners. Plastic 
sheeting was observed under the pillow tanks; however, this was largely 
ineffective in protecting the soil around these tanks.

Station personnel reported that approximately 450 kl of diesel fuel for 
power generation and an additional 50 kl for station heating and vehicle use 
are required annually. JP-5 aviation grade kerosene is used both for 
heating buildings and refueling the station's aircraft.

Throughout the station there were also orderly caches of steel drums 
containing lubricating oil, aviation fuel, and waste oil awaiting return to 
Japan.

A combination of fixed steel piping and flexible fuel hose is used to 
transfer fuel throughout the station. Fuel is pumped via an above ground 
steel fuel line which runs from the primary fuel storage facility to a 
transfer header approximately 60 meters east of the secondary fuel storage 
area. From this point, flexible hose is used to pump fuel to the secondary 
fuel tanks. Station personnel reported that this procedure is required only 
about four times a year. There are no fixed fuel lines between the 
individual secondary fuel tanks, between the tanks and the fuel pump house, 
or from the pump house to the station power plant and other station 
buildings serviced by the secondary fuel storage area. The team observed 
rubber fuel hose run underground from the secondary fuel area pump house 
towards the station powerhouse.  Station personnel did not know how many 
years this arrangement had been in place and reported that no periodic 
excavation of this fuel line was conducted to inspect its condition. 
However, it was reported that this fuel line would be replaced with fixed 
piping in the next several years as part of a planned overall station fuel 
piping and distribution system upgrade project.  Observed fixed fuel piping 
and transfer headers were equipped with adequate check and gate valves to 
prevent fuel discharge during fuel transfer operations. Further, the 
numerous lengths of rubber fuel hose observed in the secondary fuel storage 
area had hose end caps to prevent residual fuel drainage.

54
It was reported that station fuel piping, storage tanks and related 
above-ground fuel facilities are checked weekly by the station mechanics. 
Additional checks are conducted after storms and when station crews change 
annually.  At the end of each month, the fuel tanks are sounded to determine 
their volume.

Refueling of the station is conducted once a year from the support 
vessel SHIRASE which moors to the fast ice adjacent to the primary fuel 
tanks east of the station.  Fuel is pumped from the vessel to the shoreside 
primary storage tanks through flexible fuel hose laid over the ice.  This 
operation involves both ship and station personnel who are positioned along 
the length of the transfer hose to report leaks or other possible transfer-
related problems.  Station personnel reported that all fuel transfer hoses 
used during the annual refueling operations are blown through with 
compressed air to remove residual fuel in the hoses.  Any fuel remaining in 
the hoses is recovered.

Arms

Station personnel indicated there were no weapons or explosives at 
Syowa.  Explosives had previously been used at the station for geological 
research.  Station personnel indicated that explosives may be used again for 
such research.  The station has a small launch facility for sounding 
rockets, which is no longer in operation.  There is a small supply of smoke 
signaling devices at Syowa.

No inappropriate weapons, military activity, or nuclear disposal sites 
were observed at Syowa.

Environment

The Deputy Station Leader reported that Syowa has a waste management 
plan, which is modified annually as changes in operations warrant.  Training 
on waste management issues is provided to personnel during pre-deployment 
orientation in Japan, and notices are publicly displayed at the station 
concerning waste management.  While the Station Leader retains 
responsibility for all station operations, including waste management, Mr.

55
Yuji Adachi, an environmental engineer, has been designated as the logistic officer for waste management. Scientists and medical officers who have responsibility over the laboratories in which small amounts of chemicals are used for biological and medical research oversee the storage and use of these chemicals prior to their removal from the Treaty Area.

Syowa has an extensive program of waste segregation, collection and removal from the Treaty Area to Japan for proper management. The following categories of waste are subject to this program: batteries (both dry cell and vehicle lead acid batteries); fuel, used oil and other lubricants; chemicals (e.g., laboratories and photography darkroom); glass (clear and colored), PVC and plastics; rubber and tires; used drums (200 were reported to have been returned in the previous year); metals (including aluminum, iron and scrap metal); light bulbs (fluorescent, incandescent and mercury vapor); and miscellaneous mixed wastes. Station personnel report that, of about 50 tons of waste returned to Japan to date, approximately 20 to 30 tons is non-burnable.

Wastes are both open burned and incinerated. During the austral summer, wood and paper are reportedly open burned in a small area (approximately 5 m in diameter) on the ground at some distance from the station. (The inspection team did not visit this site during its stay.) During times when construction is underway, open burning is employed when construction generates too much combustible waste to incinerate. A kerosene-fired incinerator of 500 liters capacity is otherwise used for combustibles (paper, wood and kitchen waste). The combustion chamber, which is not lined with refractory brick, is radially fired by four nozzles. The incinerator is preheated to 200° C and operated at 550° C. Secondary combustion of flue gas is employed; however, the temperature was unknown since the sensor was inoperative at the time of the inspection. Ashes from the incinerator are removed to Japan, while ashes from open burning are reportedly left in place.

Plumbing has been configured at the main building so that sanitary wastes and greywater can be kept separated as much as possible until they are finally co-disposed in the ocean. This approach may be linked to reported plans for upgrading sewage treatment in the next five years. At present, greywater is chemically deodorized and recirculated for use in conveying sanitary wastes. At the main building, greywater is held in a 4,500 liter tank and discharge is regulated by a level control; sewage is 

56
held in a 2,450 liter tank and deodorized and discharged in batches twice monthly. Effluent is not sampled and analyzed, nor have studies been conducted which characterize the ocean waters receiving this effluent. No toilets have been installed in the buildings which house sleeping accomodations; rather, these buildings only have urinals which deliver liquid sanitary wastes to drums. These drums are disposed on sea ice in the winter. At Dome Fuji Station, human wastes are disposed in ice pits.

Clean-up of past activities has been reported to be underway for the last five years and is expected to continue. Inventories are reportedly being prepared in and around Asuka station, which did not operate this season. The Deputy Station Leader estimates that 50 tons of clean-up wastes from past activities have been returned annually for the last five years. At the time of the inspection at Syowa, old equipment had been dismantled and was awaiting shipment back to Japan.

Station personnel are made aware of conservation principles and policies pertaining to Antarctic fauna and flora in the JARE manuals cited above. Skuas are frequently observed at the station; Weddell seals are found in the fast ice and crabeater seals in the unconsolidated pack ice nearby. In addition, there are several locations near the station where mosses grow on freshwater lake bottoms at depths of 2 to 3 meters.

Non-endemic plants include some hydroponically grown vegetables for consumption by station personnel; several house plants were also noted by the inspection team. The station reported no exotic animals on site, and none were observed during the course of the inspection.

The Yukidori (meaning "snow petrel" in Japanese) Valley SSSI is abundantly populated by that species, which nests there. The five species of mosses, plus lichens and algae comprising the flora of Yukidori are particularly noteworthy, and are studied by Syowa biologists. The valley contains two freshwater lakes. Two Adelie penguin rookeries are also located on Langhovde Island.

Station personnel are informed in the JARE Handbook about the SSSI and its location. Maps of the area are available. The station biologist told the inspection team that about five people visit the Yukidori Valley annually for scientific research purposes.

57
Emergencies

The Station Leader reported that there was no station oil and chemical 
spill contingency plan and that station personnel were not trained to deal 
with fuel or chemical spills. He also reported that station pollution 
response training exercises were not conducted as the station had no 
equipment to respond in the event of a spill. No significant pollution 
incidents were reported to have occurred at the station within the last 
year. However, the inspection team noted chronic soil contamination from 
fuel spills within the secondary fuel tank storage area. Fuel contamination 
was most pronounced around the pillow tanks. Station personnel reported 
that this contamination was largely due to the weight of snow accumulation 
on the pliable tanks causing them to compress. This results in over-
pressure releases of fuel from the tank top vents. It was reported that 
because of this problem, the pillow tanks were scheduled for removal and 
replacement with metal tanks within the next several years. Further, it was 
reported that two older pillow fuel tanks were no longer used due to leaks 
which had contributed to soil contamination.

In the event of a significant spill, the Station Leader would make an 
emergency report to the Director-General of Japan's National Institute of 
Polar Research.

Two medical doctors, who have some dental training, are assigned to 
Syowa. One medical doctor is assigned to Dome Fuji Station. Syowa has a 
small medical facility which includes a medical examination room, dental 
facilities, X-ray room, and operating room for emergency procedures.

Tourism

The Station Leader reported no visits by tourists to Syowa Station 
during the 1994-95 season.

Neumayer - Germany
70°39'S 08°15'W
March 5, 1995
                                  58
General

The inspection team arrived at Neumayer Station at 1000 local (also 
1000 GMT) March 5, 1995 via helicopter from the POLAR STAR. The team was 
welcomed by the Station Leader, Dr. Johannes Lowenstein. Prior notice of 
the inspection had been provided two days in advance by HF communication 
from the POLAR STAR. The inspection, including luncheon with station 
personnel, lasted five hours.

Physical Description

Neumayer Station is located on the Ekstrom Ice Shelf along the Princess 
Martha Coast of East Antarctica. The station is on the western side of Atka 
Iceport, about 5 km inland from the ice edge. (The Atka Iceport is an 
embayment of about 30 km in width in the Ekstrom Ice Shelf.) The ice shelf 
is approximately 200 meters in thickness in the area of the station.

Neumayer Station was constructed during the 1991-92 austral summer and 
initiated operation in March, 1992. It replaced Georg von Neumayer Station, 
8 km to the northwest, that was abandoned after eleven years of operation 
due to movement in the shelf ice and snow accumulation.

Neumayer Station, at present Germany's only station in year-round 
operation, serves as a scientific observatory for investigations in 
meteorology, geophysics and atmospheric chemistry. It also supports 
biological work from sea ice adjacent to the ice shelf and is the logistics 
base for field parties into the interior.

The station itself consists of two parallel galvanized steel tubes 
(oriented north-south), 90 meters in length and 8.4 meters in diameter, 
connected by traverse tubes. The steel tubes are buried, with their tops 
about one meter below the level of the snow surface. They are designed to 
withstand the pressure of 15 meters of accumulated snow.  The primary 
working and living spaces of the station are enclosed in pre-assembled 
compartments that were inserted into the tubes.

59
The main entrance to the station descends down metal steps at the south end of the western tube. This western tube encloses the kitchen and dining area, with adjacent library and recreation space; the radio room; the Station Leader's office; the hospital/medical facilities; the air chemistry and biology laboratories; a photography dark room; laundry and shower facilities; a snow melting plant and the electric generators. The eastern tube includes living quarters for station personnel; the geophysics laboratory; the meteorology laboratory and a workshop. There is a short tube connecting the two main tubes and a large traverse tube extending across them at their north end. The traverse tube houses store rooms, waste storage containers and fuel tanks, as well as space for vehicles.

A snow tunnel (with a plywood roof on steel frames) extends from the north end of the main tubes, enclosing a large garage for vehicles and leading up an exit ramp to the surface.

While the main station is below the snow surface, there are several above-ground installations. On the surface to the northwest of the station complex is a 1.5 km snow runway for ski-equipped aircraft, oriented east-west and marked by empty fuel drums. Adjacent to the station complex on the east is a tower for the wind generator and, to the east of that, a helicopter landing area. At the southeast corner of the complex is a mast with weather sensors and on the southwest side a radio antenna field. Extending south of the station complex are a balloon launch facility, a geophysics installation and (1 km from the station) a new air chemistry monitoring facility. There are six small prefabricated huts on the surface on the west side of the station complex for housing summer personnel.

A snow road extends northeast from the station 8 km to the edge of the ice shelf where vessels moor when supplying the station. There are fuel storage tanks on sleds, to which fuel is transferred from the supply vessel, positioned at this location. The ice edge is about 8 to 12 meters above sea level in this area.

Neumayer Station maintains a network of automated seismology monitoring stations within an approximate 100 km radius. The nearest permanent research facilities are South Africa's SANAE Station, 200 km to the east; and the United Kingdom's Halley Base, 800 km to the southwest.

60
Personnel

Neumayer Station is managed by the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar 
and Marine Research, located in Bremerhaven. German activities in 
Antarctica are supervised by the Federal Ministry for Research and 
Technology.

At the time of the inspection, there were nine persons at the station. 
These nine, plus a biologist scheduled to arrive within a few days on the 
icebreaker R/V POLARSTERN, constituted the 1995 winter-over party for 
Neumayer Station. This group included Dr. Lowenstein, the station's medical 
doctor and Station Leader, five scientists and four technical/support 
personnel. However, as a result of an injury to one of the scientists 
requiring his return to Germany on the final voyage of the POLARSTERN, the 
actual winter-over party had been reduced to nine. One of the winter-over 
scientists was from Austria.

A nine-person field party, consisting of the 1994 winter-over group 
from Neumayer, was expected to return to the station following work at 
Germany's Filchner Station, 1,000 km to the southwest. This group was to 
return to Germany on the POLARSTERN. The Station Leader also noted that an 
additional seven individuals had been present at Neumayer during the 1994-95 
austral summer.

It was reported that 22 persons could be accommodated in the main 
station complex and an additional 36 during the summer in the above-ground 
huts on the surface.

There were no military personnel supporting activities at Neumayer 
Station.

The Station Leader reported that station personnel receive rigorous 
training before deployment to Antarctica. The winter-over group had 
undergone a four-month training program, including cold weather field work 
in the Alps as well as orientation at the Alfred Wegener Institute.  The 
orientation incorporated familiarization with the provisions of the 
Antarctic Treaty and measures adopted under it.  There is also medical and 
psychological screening of personnel.

61
Scientific Research

Neumayer Station is a state-of-the-art research facility supporting 
major programs of observation in meteorology, geophysics and atmospheric 
chemistry.

The meteorology program involves extensive and regular measurements of 
radiation affecting the atmosphere as well as upper atmosphere soundings. 
The latter include vertical ozone profiling using balloon sondes, generally 
on a weekly basis, but more frequently during austral spring. In addition, 
standard surface synoptic observations are carried out at three-hour 
intervals with data reported on a real-time basis to the World 
Meteorological Organization data network (GTS).

The geophysics program at Neumayer involves measurements of the earth's 
magnetic field, gravity measurements of the tidal motion of the ice shelf, 
measurement of melting at the base of the ice shelf and a seismology 
observation network.  The latter network includes a number of remote, 
automated seismograph installations that report data by telemetry to the 
station for initial analysis and retransmission to Germany.

The atmospheric chemistry program involves measurement and analysis of 
trace gases and dust particles in the atmosphere.  A new mobile atmospheric 
monitoring facility had been installed during the current (1994-95) season 
and located 1.5 km south of the main station complex.

In addition, it was reported that a marine biologist would join the 
1995 winter-over party to carry out research on sea ice algae and, in the 
austral spring, on Weddell seals.

The scientific activities at Neumayer Station, as well as the equipment 
used in carrying them out, accorded with those reported in Germany's 
exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty, 1994-95.

Equipment and Logistics

Equipment and facilities at the station were also essentially as 
reported in Germany's exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty. 
Station personnel reported that potable water is obtained by melting snow 
using waste heat from the station generators.  The snow melter is hand fed 
                                                  62
and average water consumption is 10 tons per week. Water quality is monitored regularly and water is filtered through a carbon filter and disinfected by UV light. Two tanks, in addition to the snow melter, are used for storage of the station water supply.

Electrical power is supplied to the station from two 110 kw diesel-electric generators; a third 50 kw emergency generator is used as an emergency backup generator. One generator normally supplies power for the entire station complex. Each generator is equipped with heat exchangers for recovery of water jacket and radiator heat for heating the station. All generators are equipped with catalytic convertors and emissions are regularly monitored for carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide. Annual fuel consumption for power generation was reported as 178,370 liters.

No alternative energy sources are currently used at the station complex. A wind generator, previously used at the station, has been returned to Germany for repair; solar panels and batteries are used at the remote seismology field stations.

The number of vehicles reported at the station appeared to be in keeping with normal station operations. The Station Leader reported there were four Kassbohrer Pisten Bully/Flexmobiles at the station and five additional machines would be delivered to the station via ship from Filchner Station later in March. There are ten Alpine II Skidoos and one snow trencher/miller also at the station. The trencher has not been used for the past year.

One 8 km snow road connects the station complex with the ship off-load area at the edge of the ice shelf. No special methods were used to construct or maintain this road.

It was reported that the station has one Zodiac inflatable boat used primarily as a standby rescue craft.

During the period of the inspection, no fixed- or rotary- wing aircraft were present at the station. One of the two Dornier 228 aircraft operating from the Filchner camp made one flight to Neumayer this season, landing at the 1.5 km dragged skiway near the main station complex. Helicopters operating from the POLARSTERN supported cargo off loading earlier in the austral summer. One helicopter from the South African station SANAE visited

63
the station earlier in the summer, landing at the marked helicopter landing 
site on the snow surface near the entrance to the station complex.

The station is re-supplied by the POLARSTERN, which was scheduled to 
complete its third visit to the station shortly after the inspection. 
Operating via Capetown, South Africa and Punta Arenas, Chile the vessel off 
loads cargo and passengers onto annual sea ice early in the austral summer; 
during the last call at the station cargo will be discharged directly from 
the ship onto the ice shelf. Cargo is moved to the station complex using 
helicopters from the ship as well as the station's tracked vehicles. This 
season the Station Leader reported that some summer personnel were flown 
from Neumayer to SANAE via South African helicopter and transported to 
Capetown via the South African re-supply vessel.

Communications facilities at the station consist of satellite data and 
telephone links via INMARSAT including Internet, HF for long range and UHF 
and VHF for local area communications.

All buildings at the main station complex are equipped with heat or 
smoke detectors. Halon fire suppression systems are installed in the 
galley, power plants and communications areas; the remainder of the station 
is equipped with hand-held fire extinguishers and self-contained breathing 
apparatus. It was reported that the winter-over personnel attend a one-week 
fire training program in Germany and that fire-fighting exercises are 
conducted at the station every two months.

During the 1994/1995 season, it was reported that 181,000 liters of 
arctic diesel fuel were used for station power generation and vehicle 
refueling. Station diesel fuel storage capacity is reported to be: 276,000 
liters in 12 steel tanks of 23,000 liters each; 24,000 liters in three 
bladder tanks, which presently are not used; and 2,400 liters in three day 
tanks.

Though only observed from the air, six of the 23,000 liter tanks are 
mounted on sledges and stored at the edge of the ice shelf. Station 
personnel reported that a 10,000 liter aviation fuel tank on a sledge was 
also located at the edge of the ice shelf.

The remaining six 23,000 liter tanks and all three diesel day tanks of 
800 liters each are located inside the station. Drums of diesel fuel and 
64
lubricants are also stored within the station tubes for use both by the 
station and in field operations.

It was reported that none of the station's fuel tanks are of double-
walled construction or equipped with inner liners. Secondary containment 
for the diesel storage tanks at the station is provided by the fabricated 
steel containment in which they are placed.  This containment is greater 
than the capacity of any one of the tanks. These fuel tanks are also 
equipped with audible and visible high-level alarms which provide additional 
spill protection. Station personnel reported that the alarms are activated 
when the tanks are filled to 21,000 liters, which is 2,000 liters below 
their rated capacity.

The alarm system is an integral part of the tank refilling operation. 
Refilling of the tanks inside the station is accomplished by towing fuel 
tanks from the edge of the ice shelf into position over the inside storage 
tanks.  Using only gravity feed, the inside tanks are then refilled.  This 
operation requires radio communications between fuel transfer personnel 
stationed both above and below to monitor the rate of tank filling. All 
fuel tanks inside the station are electrically grounded to prevent the risk 
of fuel ignition from static charges.

The other tanks within the station and those at the edge of the ice 
shelf have no leak protection. However, in the event of a fuel tank leak, 
the bladder tanks can be used for spare fuel storage at the edge of the ice 
shelf, and all the tanks within the station are plumbed to allow for ease of 
transfer between tanks, should one malfunction.

Protection against settlement for the station's inside tanks is 
provided through flexible hose connections between the individual tanks and 
fixed fuel piping.  Flexible expansion and contraction joints are also 
engineered into the fixed fuel piping runs within the station's tubes.

The station is refueled annually from the POLARSTERN. Since the 
station has no shipping facilities, it was reported that the vessel moors to 
the edge of the ice shelf and pumps fuel through flexible hose to the 
station's sledge-mounted fuel tanks which have been towed to the edge of the 
ice shelf for refilling. Upon completion of the refueling operation the 
fuel hoses are gravity drained back to the vessel's fuel tanks. The fuel 
tanks inside the station are then refilled from the sledge tanks transported

65
from the edge of the ice shelf and the transfer hoses are also gravity drained.

Station personnel reported that the tanks inside the station are monitored by the chief engineer as part of his routine duties. However, the tanks on the edge of the ice shelf are only periodically checked for leaks when station personnel are in the tank storage area. It is worth noting that all of the station's fuel tanks were new in 1992 and that the fuel tanks and fuel handling facilities are inspected annually under contract with Germany's Hapag-Lloyd maritime services.

Arms

Station personnel indicated there were no weapons or munitions at Neumayer.  The station has signal flares.

No inappropriate weapons, military activity, or nuclear disposal sites were observed at Neumayer.

Environment

The Station Leader provided the inspection team a copy of the recently-developed station waste management plan. Training on waste management issues is provided to personnel during pre-deployment orientation in Bremerhaven, Germany, and notices are publicly displayed at the station concerning waste management. While the Station Leader retains responsibility for all station operations including waste management, chief engineer Rüdiger Krawietz has been designated as the person in charge of waste management. All wastes, except sewage and greywater, are removed from the Treaty Area; there is no incineration, open burning, or land disposal of wastes at the station.

Small amounts of chemicals are used for biological research, X-ray development and personal photography.  The Station Leader estimated that approximately 20 liters of chemical waste are removed annually from the Treaty Area. No radioactive isotopes are used at the station.

Waste minimization and removal from the Treaty Area for proper

66
management appear to be central waste management themes at Neumayer. The 
station has an extensive program of waste segregation, collection and 
removal of the following wastes: batteries (both small dry cell and larger 
vehicle lead-acid batteries); used oil/other lubricants, used oil filters 
and spent antifreeze (e.g., from vehicle maintenance); chemicals (as noted 
above); glass and plastics; rubber tires; metals; light bulbs (fluorescent 
tubes and incandescent bulbs); galley (kitchen) wastes; and wood and other 
packaging from the shipping of supplies to the station. Empty drums are 
often used as containers in which many of these wastes are removed from the 
Treaty Area. Station personnel indicated that there were plans to return 
the carbon media from potable water treatment to Germany for regeneration 
when the carbon had exceeded its service life. The Station Leader estimated 
that two 8' x 8' x 20' shipping containers of waste had been returned to 
Germany during the season.

Station personnel have taken an innovative approach in waste 
minimization and pollution prevention in certain areas. The station uses 
certain large batteries which are manufactured and shipped without acid; 
these need only the addition of water and initial charging prior to use. 
This, in effect, reduces the inventory of battery acid needed to be shipped, 
handled and stored. The station also uses a new formulation, reported to be 
non-toxic, as an alternative to traditional antifreezes (glycols) in the 
water circulation system used to melt snow for water. Should a leak occur 
in this system, the toxicity of the resulting contamination would be 
expected to be lower than if a more traditional antifreeze were used. 
Finally, the "Instructions for Packaging and Waste Handling for Antarctic 
Station and Expedition Personnel of the Alfred Wegener Institute" presents a 
hierarchy of preferred packaging, ranging from no packaging to glass. 
Examples of alternative packaging recommendations are also given for 
commonly-used food products.

Sewage and greywater from activities at Neumayer are collected in a 
tank and disposed into the ice (i.e., in a cavern created in the ice by the 
higher temperature of the effluent). Currently, all wastes from field camps 
are carried back to the station and subsequently returned to Germany. 
(Human wastes from field camps are not added to those from the station which 
are disposed into the ice.) Station personnel report that a new sewage 
treatment system is planned which would provide secondary treatment and 
separation of solids for removal to Germany for disposal; however, details 
of the planned design and operation of this new treatment system were not

67
available at the station at the time of the inspection.

Several species of marine birds and mammals inhabit the vicinity of 
Neumayer. During the austral winter emperor penguins nest at a rookery on 
the shelf ice several km to the south of the station; Adelie penguins are 
found in the area in summer when sea ice is present, and had departed just 
prior to the inspection. South polar skuas, snow petrels and Wilson's storm 
petrels are also present. Weddell seals are found in the fast ice, and some 
tagging is planned by the station biologist wintering-over in 1995. Other 
seal species are rarely observed.

The Station Leader said that personnel are informed about 
responsibilities for protection of wildlife under the Antarctic Treaty and 
are warned not to approach too close to bird nesting sites. Because the 
station is sited on the ice shelf, there are no mosses, lichens or other 
endemic flora. Several house plants were observed in the main living/dining 
room by the inspectors. The station reported no exotic animals on site, 
and none were seen during the course of the inspection.

There are no areas protected under the Antarctic Treaty in the vicinity 
of Neumayer Station.

Emergencies

The station leader provided the inspection team with a copy of the 
station's oil and chemical spill contingency plan which was reported to be 
updated annually. The station has no special equipment to respond to a 
pollution incident, nor are personnel specifically trained to deal with oil 
or chemical spills. Similarly, there are no periodic pollution control 
training exercises. However, it was reported that in the orientation prior 
to assignment, station personnel receive general training in environmental 
awareness and pollution prevention. On the few occasions when fuel had been 
spilled, the station leader reported that the contaminated snow was 
recovered in a drum and returned to Germany for disposal.

No significant pollution incidents were reported to have occurred 
within the last year. Should an incident occur, the Station Leader stated 
that it was his responsibility to report the incident directly to his 
superiors in Bremerhaven.

68
The Station Leader at Neumayer was a medical doctor who received some prior dental training. The station has a small medical facility which includes an examination room, X-ray equipment, dental equipment, and equipment to perform emergency medical procedures.

Tourism

The Station Leader reported that there had been two visits to Neumayer Station by tourist groups during the 1994-95 austral summer season. The groups were from the Russian vessel DRANITSIN and had been ferried to the station by helicopter from the vessel. The tour organizers had requested and received permission directly from the Alfred Wegener Institute for the visits approximately one week prior to their arrival. The Station Leader described the visits to the station as well-organized and as having caused no difficulties for its operations.

United Kingdom - Signy
60°43'S 45°36'W
March 9, 1995

General

The inspection team arrived at Signy Station at 1300 local time (1600 GMT) March 9, 1995 via helicopter from the POLAR STAR. The team was welcomed by Mr. Mike Dunn, Station Leader for the 1994-1995 austral summer season. Prior notice of the inspection had been provided the previous day by INMARSAT communication from the POLAR STAR. The inspection, including refreshments with station personnel, lasted five and one-half hours.

Physical Description

Signy Station is located on Signy Island, the smallest of the four main
69
islands of the South Orkneys. It lies just off the south coast of
Coronation Island, the largest of the group. Powell Island and Laurie
Island, to the east of Coronation, are the other main islands.

Signy Island is roughly triangular in shape - 8 km north to south and 5
km east to west - with an area of approximately 20 km2. While its central
and southern sections are permanently ice-covered, the island includes
extensive ice-free areas. Geologically, Signy Island is composed of
metamorphosed sedimentary rocks, mainly quartz-mica schists and
amphibolites, with frequent marble exposures.

The island is characterized by extensive fresh-water systems: lakes,
ponds and streams. The wide range of ice-free habitats, complex geological
structure and associated soils, combined with a relatively mild marine
climate, support rich and extensive flora.

Signy Station is located on the east side of the island, at Factory
Cove, the site of a former whaling station. Factory Cove is a small
north/south embayment on the peninsula that forms the southern end of Borge
Bay. Factory Cove is bounded on the east by Bernsten Point, a rocky
headland with a maximum elevation of 25 meters and on the south by Factory
Bluffs, a series of steep moss-covered terraces rising to 111 meters in
elevation. A rocky, scree-covered ridge extends down from Factory Bluffs on
the west side of the cove.

The station was established in 1947 on a flat beach area towards the
end of Bernsten Point and relocated in 1955 to its current site at the
southeastern end of Factory Cove. Signy Station is primarily a biological
research facility. Its scientific programs have emphasized long-term
investigations of terrestrial flora and fauna and the near shore marine
ecosystem. The station supports field work at a number of study areas on
the island and maintains a network of field huts for both scientific and
recreational purposes.

The nearest permanent research station to Signy is Argentina's Orcadas
Base, located approximately 40 km to the east on Laurie Island.

At the time of the inspection, Signy Station was undergoing a major
transition. It is being converted from a year-round, permanently occupied
facility into a smaller summer-only scientific station.

70
The current station consists of five main buildings, generally oriented
north/south, grouped around a small pier and a slipway for launching small
boats. The main station building is a two-story prefabricated, glass-
reinforced plastic structure, also known as Plastic Hut. It includes living
quarters, dining and recreation facilities, biology laboratories and
administrative offices.

The main building is linked at its southern end to Tonsberg House by a
small structure containing toilets, showers and a drying room. Tonsberg
House is a one-story wooden building that includes laboratory and technical
support space as well as the station's radio communication center. Loft
space in Tonsberg House is used for food storage.

Immediately to the south and east of Tonsberg House is Sorlle House, a
two-story wooden building, in the process of being dismantled, that
originally housed the station's diving support facility, storage areas and
additional accommodation for sumer personnel.

Adjacent to Sorlle House, on its west side, is a boat house at the head
of the slipway into Factory Cove. The other main building is the generator
shed immediately to the east of Tonsberg House.

In addition to the main buildings, there is a large fuel storage tank
up slope of the northeast corner of the station complex; a storage house
next to the generator shed, a hazardous chemical storage shed at the
southern end of Tonsberg House; and a water tank and satellite receiving
antenna south of the station complex. There is a clear area suitable for
helicopter landing on a terrace above the station complex on its east side
and radio aerials farther up Factory Bluffs.

The Station Leader reported that the conversion of Signy Station to a
summer-only research facility is scheduled to be completed during the 1995-
96 season. The converted facility will consist of three main buildings. A
single new structure, to be constructed on the site of Sorlle House, will
house the new station's science and technical support work space, including
laboratories, as well as living accomodations, dining and recreation
facilities for nine persons. Dismantling of Sorlle House, including removal
of the resulting material was scheduled to be completed in April, 1995. The
existing boat house is to be reconstructed to house the generators, and the
current generator shed is to be converted into a storage facility. Current
71
plans also call for the existing main building - Plastic Hut - and Tonsberg 
House to be moth-balled pending eventual dismantling and removal.

Personnel

Signy Station is managed by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), located 
in Cambridge in the United Kindom. At the time of the inspection, there 
were 21 persons at the station, including four contract personnel working on 
the dismantling of Sorlle House. Maximum station population during the 
1994-95 summer season had been 27. Sixteen scientists had worked at Signy 
during the summer season, with a maximum of 11 at one time.

Twelve persons, including five scientists, had wintered-over in 1994 
under the leadership of Dr. Martin Davey, the senior science person at the 
station who was due to return to the United Kingdom in April on the final 
voyage of the supply vessel. The 1995 winter-over party - the last winter-
over group at Signy - will be led by Mr. Phill Banham, the station's chief 
engineer, and will consist of 11 persons, including two scientific 
personnel. The current Station Leader noted that there has traditionally 
been a one-to-one ratio of scientific to support personnel at Signy, but 
that the transition to a summer-only station had created an atypical 
situation for the 1995 winter-over season.

There were no military personnel supporting activities at Signy 
Station.

The Station Leader reported that BAS organizes training and orientation 
in Cambridge for station personnel being deployed to Antarctica. This 
includes familiarization with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and 
measures adopted under it. Station personnel seemed fully cognizant of 
these provisions and measures.

Scientific Research

Scientific research at Signy during the 1994-95 season emphasized both 
terrestrial and marine biology. With respect to terrestrial biology, 
activities included investigations of nutrient cycling and microclimates, 
limnology, microbial ecology, invertebrate ecology and physiology, and plant 
ecology.

As regards marine biology, studies included continued long-term
72
monitoring of the nearshore Antarctic marine ecosystem, including 
seasonality in that ecosystem; the ecology of Southern Ocean benthic 
organisms; routine bird banding and seal tagging; and penguin censuses as 
part of the Convention on the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP).

In addition, routine synoptic meteorological observations and studies 
on human microbiology and physiology under Antarctic conditions were being 
carried out at Signy Station.

Station personnel reported that conversion of Signy to a nine-person, 
summer-only research facility would have a significant impact upon future 
scientific activities. Terrestrial biology, including studies of the 
island's extensive plant and invertebrate communities and its freshwater 
lake and stream systems, would become the central focus of the station. 
Marine biological activities, it was reported, would be shifted to Rothera 
Station in the Antarctic Peninsula, with the exception of maintaining CEMP 
monitoring activities.

The scientific activities at Signy Station, as well as the equipment 
used in carrying them out, accorded with those reported in the U.K.'s exchange 
of information under the Antarctic Treaty, 1994-95. With respect to 
radioactive isotopes, station personnel reported that carbon-14 and Tritium 
were used at the station.

Equipment and Logistics

Equipment and facilities at the station were essentially as reported in 
the U.K.'s exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty. Station 
personnel reported that potable water is obtained by processing seawater 
through a reverse osmosis (R/O) system with a 4,000 liter per day capacity 
and a UV sterilizer. Rainwater is also collected as a reserve and an 
electric snow melter is available for use during winter months. Maximum 
consumption is 130 liters per person per day and average consumption is 100 
liters per person per day. One storage tank of 5,000 liter capacity is 
used.

Electricity is supplied to the station from three 120 KW diesel-
electric generators located in the main power plant; one generator normally 
provides power for the entire station complex. Two additional 50 KW 
generators were at the station at the time of the inspection but will be 
taken out of service in conjunction with the building demolition currently 
73
in progress. Annual fuel consumption for electric production was reported 
as 192 tons of diesel fuel. No waste heat is recovered from the generators 
at the station and all buildings are heated with electric heat. Air 
emissions from the power plant are not monitored nor are they treated or 
filtered.

Solar panels and batteries are used to supply power for some remote 
science sites but no alternative energy sources are used at the main 
station.

The number of vehicles on the station is limited to five motor 
toboggans (Alpine I and Nordic) and one tracked crane being utilized for 
building demolition. Station personnel reported that all materials 
delivered to the station by ship are moved within the station complex by 
small wheeled carts.

There are no vehicle roads associated with the station complex; 
footpaths connect the main station structures with outlying sites.

The Station Leader reported there were two Zodiac inflatable boats at 
the station and one solid hull boat that will be returned to the U.K. at the 
close of the current austral summer. Several additional small boats, 
apparently used for recreation, were also observed.

No fixed- or rotary-wing aircraft were present at the station; there is 
one small unimproved helicopter landing site available. It was reported 
that helicopters from a German research ship and the HMS ENDURANCE had 
landed at the station earlier this austral summer.

The station is re-supplied by BAS vessels. The R/V JAMES CLARK ROSS 
refueled the station earlier in the summer and the R/V BRANSFIELD was 
scheduled to complete its fifth and final call at the station for the 1994-
95 austral summer shortly after the inspection. Both vessels operate 
between the U.K., Port Stanley in the Falkland Islands, and other BAS 
antarctic stations.

Communications facilities at the station consist of satellite telephone 
links via INMARSAT, computer HF links (ARQ), HF for long range and VHF 
marine for local communications.

All buildings at the station complex are equipped with heat or smoke 
detectors connected to a central control panel. Halon fire suppression
74
systems are installed in areas containing electronic equipment; the 
remainder of the station is equipped with carbon dioxide, water and dry 
powder extinguishers and self-contained breathing apparatus. A seawater 
pump and hoses are also available for fire fighting. Station personnel 
receive limited fire fighting training in the U.K. and the station fire 
officer completes an equipment maintenance course. The Station Leader 
reported that monthly fire fighting exercises are conducted.

Fuel for the station is primarily stored in a single steel diesel fuel 
tank (light marine gas oil) with a 300 to 350 ton capacity. It was reported 
that this tank is never totally filled since its capacity exceeds the 
station's total annual fuel needs of approximately 200 tons. This tank, 
constructed in 1964, is situated uphill and directly north of the station 
and forms a part of the early station complex. There is also secondary fuel 
storage in two pillow tanks rated at 38 tons each which are located just 
above the main storage tank. These tanks are relatively new to the station, 
having been added in 1991. Station personnel reported that the pillow tanks 
are normally only filled to 75 percent of their rated capacity.

In addition to these tanks, there are two small 3.5 ton capacity diesel 
fuel day tanks located at each station generator building. Directly outside 
the galley there is also a small tank of approximately 205 liters which 
contains fuel for cooking appliances.

Near the main fuel storage tank there is a small fuel depot containing 
30 drums of aviation fuel as well as 13 drums of gasoline (petrol). These 
are all standard 205 liter steel drums. Station personnel reported that 
there are also small caches of fuel stored on Signy and Coronation Island at 
emergency shelters and at recreation facilities. These fuel stores range in 
size from 25 liter "jerry cans" to 205 liter drums of petrol.

With the exception of the main generator shed fuel tank which was 
replaced in 1993, none of the fuel tanks are double-walled or equipped with 
inner liners. Further, there are no berms or heavy ground liners to protect 
against leaks or spills from any of the tanks. Though not observed, station 
personnel reported that plastic matting had been laid under the pillow 
tanks; however, no ground preparation such as sand lining had been done 
prior to installation. Also, since the main fuel storage tanks have been 
placed directly on bedrock there is no need for protection against 
differential settlement of the tanks.

The team observed evidence of chronic soil contamination from fuel
                                                                 75
spillage in all locations where fuel was handled on the station. Some of 
this contamination could be prevented through the use of portable 
containment under valve connections. However, considering the age of the 
station, most of the contamination appeared to have accumulated over the 
years.

The worst contamination was under and adjacent to the main generator 
building where significant soil saturation still remained from the rupture 
and subsequent spill in 1992 of the 3 ton capacity diesel fuel tank located 
in the power house. There was also evidence of down slope soil 
contamination from the main fuel storage tank fill pipe. Of particular note 
was minor fuel leakage emanating from three locations at the outside base of 
the main fuel tank. This tank was reported to have passed ultrasonic 
testing for tank wall thickness by BAS personnel in 1993.

The Station Leader expressed concern over the age and condition of the 
main fuel storage tank since the station has no spare fuel storage capacity 
in the event of a tank malfunction. (The inspection team's observations 
confirm that action needs to be taken.) He reported that, in the near 
future, all of the station's fuel tanks will be replaced with new double-
walled steel tanks contained within concrete berms. This will be a part of 
the overall plan for converting the station to summer-only occupancy.

All station fuel lines are fixed steel pipe run above ground and 
insulated where exposed to the weather. There is no need to pump fuel 
throughout the station as all fuel transfers are accomplished by gravity 
feed due to the uphill location of the main storage tanks. There are 
sufficient shutoff valves throughout to isolate sections of the fuel piping 
to allow for repair or replacement in the event of a fuel line failure. The 
Station Leader acknowledged that it was his responsibility to oversee all 
station operations, including fuel management, he reported that the fuel 
piping and tanks are monitored daily by the station mechanic.

Annual refueling of the station is provided by the R/V JAMES CLARK 
ROSS. This operation is accomplished by floating approximately 150 meters 
of flexible fuel hose on empty 205 liter drums from the vessel to the shore 
side pump site. Fuel is then pumped from the shore side pump house through 
flexible hose into the main storage tanks. A non-return valve is installed 
at the pump house to prevent back flow of the fuel when pumping is finished. 
The fuel transfer hose is monitored for leaks by station and vessel 
personnel throughout the transfer operation. When the transfer operation is 
completed the fuel hoses are gravity drained into recovery tanks. The
76
Station Leader reported that the fuel transfer hoses are not periodically 
pressure tested as the station has no equipment to conduct such tests. 
Rather, he stated that the hoses are replaced with new hoses as needed.

Arms

Station personnel indicated there were no arms or munitions at Signy. 
They reported there were hand flares, diving recall flares and smoke 
signaling devices at the station.

No inappropriate weapons, military activity or nuclear disposal sites 
were observed at Signy.

Environment

The Station Leader reported that the BAS had developed a waste 
management plan ("The British Antarctic Survey Waste Management Handbook") 
for its bases. A review of the Handbook showed it to contain a thorough and 
detailed discussion of Antarctic non-hazardous, hazardous and biodegradable 
waste management from point of generation to disposal. Training on waste 
management issues is provided to personnel during both pre-deployment 
orientation and after arrival at the station. BAS works closely with 
suppliers to ensure that they minimize or prevent the entry of unnecessary 
or undesirable packaging materials into its bases.

The general rule for hazardous chemical wastes, as well as some non-
hazardous wastes, is to return them to the U.K. Station personnel were well 
aware that even common household items such as detergents, bleaches, and 
paints may need special handling. A separate building is used to store 
hazardous chemicals, and a portion of that building has been specially 
constructed for the purpose of properly holding flammable materials. At the 
same time, the team noted hazardous chemicals and flammable materials in 
laboratories, work areas and other storage areas.

Wastes removed from the Treaty Area include: hazardous chemicals 
(silver is reclaimed in the UK from spent "fixer" from the photography 
darkroom); small dry cell and large vehicle batteries (acid is drained and 
shipped in high-density polyethylene-lined 25 liter drums); isotopes 
(carbon-14 and Tritium); medical wastes (e.g., sharps); aluminum cans (for 
recycling); bulk metallic wastes (e.g., unserviceable Skidoos); and some 
77
fuels. Contaminated oils are removed from the Treaty Area for combustion in 
a two-stage incinerator; some petroleum (gasoline and diesel) removed from 
the Treaty Area is reportedly used for training fire fighters in the 
Falkland Islands. Most drums are reused for shipping wastes and are in such 
demand that the Station Leader reported importing approximately 100 empty 
drums during the past year. Petrol drums to be removed from the Treaty Area 
are filled with seawater to avoid the accumulation of potentially flammable 
hydrocarbon vapors.

Non-combustible wastes such as mixtures of glass and plastic are 
packaged in 205 liter drums and removed from the Treaty Area for disposal in 
landfills. (Efforts to segregate and recycle plastics have been frustrated 
since it is not a common practice in the UK to identify the type of plastic 
used in containers.) Compacted waste removed from the Treaty Area is either 
land filled or incinerated, depending on the availability of the 
incinerator. Wood is also removed from the Treaty Area. Any wastes 
potentially contaminated by microorganisms are autoclaved prior to bagging 
and disposal.

Although open burning (in a steel drum) and discharge of untreated 
sewage and greywater is still employed at the base, station personnel 
reported that alternatives to open burning are being investigated. While 
food wastes generally are macerated and discharged with sewage, eggshells 
are boiled and bones are burned prior to disposal. Ashes from open burning 
are packaged in 205 liter drums and removed from the Treaty Area for land 
filling. It was reported that most co-mingled sewage and greywater is 
discharged via pipe to the intertidal zone; however, direct discharge of 
greywater from a shower was observed by the inspection team. No monitoring 
of either the effluent or the receiving waters is conducted; however, 
station personnel believe that the relatively small amounts of effluent and 
strong mixing in the receiving waters result in little, if any, impact.

The Station Leader estimated that annual waste generation amounts to 
approximately 100 to 120 drums (0.23 m^(3) per drum) of non-combustible waste, 
200 drums (0.3 m^(3) per drum) of compacted waste, 20 m^(3) of "bulk" (large item) 
waste, 10-15 m^(3) of wood, and 40 drums (25 liters each) of waste chemicals.

All wastes produced by field parties are bagged and removed from the 
Treaty Area.

Clean-up of past activities (old huts, stakes, etc.) has been conducted 
and is continuing, generally during the austral summer months. One old 
78
dumpsite was reported to have been cleaned up, yielding approximately 3 m3 of waste and resulting in some re-colonization of vegetation; however, the Station Leader expressed concern that more damage than benefits could accrue if further cleanup is pursued at this site or others.

There is an abundance of marine mammals and birds present in the vicinity of Signy. Thousands of non-breeding sub-adult and adult male Antarctic fur seals visit Signy Island seasonally, and the inspection team observed numerous fur seals hauled out near station buildings. Several colonies of southern elephant seals are located in close proximity to the station, and small groups of molting elephant seals were observed along the shorelines near the station. Weddell seals breed on coastal sea ice in the austral spring, and are observed hauled out locally throughout the year. Crabeater and leopard seals are also found in the area. There are several colonies of chinstrap, Adelie, and gentoo penguins located near Signy, with chinstrap penguins being the most abundant. Cape petrels, snow petrels, Wilson's storm petrels, giant petrels, Antarctic prions, blue-eyed shags, Antarctic terns, and brown skuas also nest locally. Personnel are briefed on the relevant regulations concerning avoiding or minimizing disturbances to Signy's wildlife. This instruction is part of the training received by station personnel both prior to Antarctic deployment as well as on site.

The terrestrial floral habitats (and associated invertebrate faunal communities) near the station are well-developed and diverse. Antarctic hair grass, many species of mosses, lichens, liverworts, and the antarctic pearlwort are present among station buildings or within easy walking distance of the station. Station personnel are told specifically to avoid stepping on this fragile vegetation; upon arrival at Signy, personnel wishing to venture into these sensitive habitats are required to be accompanied by experienced persons during an orientation period.

The increasing number of fur seals over the past 15 years has led to the destruction of terrestrial flora in several locations in the South Orkney Islands. Many species of mosses, lichens and one liverwort growing around Signy have been trampled by fur seals. Some of these slow-growing moss banks and floral communities are estimated to be thousands of years old as well as being of particular scientific interest. Therefore, BAS has erected electrified fences in some places to protect these sites from further destruction. The difference between fenced and non-fenced areas was striking.

Station personnel reported that no non-endemic animals or plants were

79
present on site, and none were seen during the course of the inspection.

There are four Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in the South Orkney Islands: Moe Island (SPA Number 13), Lynch Island (SPA Number 14), Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands (SPA Number 15), and North Coronation Island (SPA Number 18). Moe and Lynch Islands are easily accessible from Signy Station, being approximately ½ and 3 km away, respectively. Signs indicating the protected status of Moe and Lynch Islands were erected at each site by the British Antarctic Survey in 1994.

Moe Island has well-developed vegetation, mainly fellfield and moss turf communities, as well as being the home to numerous breeding birds (chinstrap penguins, cape petrels, Antarctic prions). Station personnel visit Moe Island every 3 to 4 years to monitor the impact of fur seals on vegetation. Lynch Island is also noted for its flora: Antarctic hair grass, mosses, lichens, and the Antarctic pearlwort. The island is visited annually by Signy personnel to assess damage by fur seals to grass and mosses. Powell Island is notable for its diverse floral communities and abundant seabird and mammal populations. North Coronation Island has large seabird colonies, pristine ice fields, and lichen communities.

Emergencies

The Station Leader showed the inspection team the Signy Oil Spill Contingency Plan. A review of the plan showed it to be a comprehensive document covering overall oil spill response planning and techniques as well as specific issues pertinent to Signy Station operations. The plan was developed in 1992 and is reportedly updated annually during station crew change-overs.

The station is equipped with a modest supply of absorbent pads and containment boom as well as a oil skimmer pump and a collapsible oil recovery tank of 2 to 2.5 tons capacity.  The Station Leader reported that personnel are trained to deal with fuel spills and that twice during the summer months spill training exercises are conducted.  However, he stated that the station could not provide assistance in the event of a pollution incident unless it occurred within the bay area immediately adjacent to the station.

No significant incidents such as fires or oil spills were reported to have occurred within the last year.  Should an incident occur the Station
80
Leader is responsible for promptly reporting the incident to BAS, Cambridge, 
so that they may coordinate assistance to the station as required.

The station has a medical doctor who has some dental training. Signy 
has a small medical facility which includes a surgical area (which did not 
have a sterile environment), X-ray equipment and a hospital bed.

Tourism

Station personnel reported that procedures have been developed for 
Signy Station to permit visits by four tourist vessels per season. In fact, 
tourists do not visit the station itself, but station personnel join the 
vessel to provide lectures and slide shows on local flora and fauna and 
often accompany the vessels on visits to Shingle Cove on nearby Coronation 
Island. Shingle Cove is an area where wildlife representative of the South 
Orkneys can be easily viewed.

During the 1994-95 season, only one of the four originally scheduled 
visits had taken place - that by the Russian vessel AKADEMIC IOFFE, carrying 
75 passengers. The other three visits had been canceled as a result of bad 
weather.

One private yacht had called at Signy during the 1994-95 season.

Argentina - Orcadas
60°44'S 44°44'W
March 10, 1995

General

The inspection team arrived at Orcadas Station at 0900 local time (1200 
GMT) March 10, 1995 via helicopter from the POLAR STAR. The team was 
welcomed by the Station Leader, Teniente de Fregata Fabian Gustavo Giudice. 
Advance notice of the inspection visit had been provided the previous day by 
HF communication from the POLAR STAR. The inspection, including luncheon

81
with station personnel, lasted four and one-half hours.

Physical Description

Orcadas Station is located on Laurie Island, the second largest and easternmost of the main islands of South Orkney chain. Laurie Island runs east-west and is approximately 20 km in length. Its terrain is generally mountainous, featuring rugged ridges and sharp peaks under 1,000 meters in elevation, with significant areas subject to permanent ice cover.

The station itself is situated on a narrow, low-lying isthmus of rock and gravel towards the western end of Laurie Island that connects the two major lobes of the island. The isthmus is approximately 700 meters across with a maximum elevation of 3 to 4 meters above sea level. It extends from Bahia Uruguay (Uruguay Cove) on the northwest to Bahia Scotia (Scotia Bay) on the southeast.

Bahia Uruguay is a partially sheltered cove whose headlands are Mount Ramsay on the west and Point Iola on the east. Bahia Scotia is a more sharply indented bay, with deep water immediately adjacent to the gravel beach. The Mossman Peninsula extends down the western side of Bahia Scotia. The lateral width (northeast to southwest) of the isthmus on which Orcadas Station is centered is approximately 1 km. It is bounded on the west by a steep rocky ridge, extending from the Mossman Peninsula to Mount Ramsay (the latter approximately 450 meters in elevation); and on the east by a glacier and moraine by a glacier that runs into Bahia Scotia.

The station maintains a small emergency hut/refuge at Punta Comoran (Cormorant Point) about 2 km to the southwest on the Mossman Peninsula adjacent to Bahia Scotia. The nearest research facility is the United Kingdom's Signy Station approximately 40 km to the west on Signy Island.

Orcadas Station has been continuously occupied since it was formally established on February 22, 1904. It is the oldest permanent station in Antarctica. Its activities have traditionally centered upon meteorology and related sciences, with the addition of marine biological activities during the austral summer seasons.

The station's main building, dating from 1982, is at the mid-point of the isthmus. It is built on steel pilings, as are most of the structures at the station.  It is oriented east-west, unlike most of the other buildings

82
which are generally laid out along north-south lines.  The main building is 
divided into four sections: the office of the Station Leader, the living 
quarters of the Station leader and station doctor, the radio room and the 
meteorological lab on the east; living quarters for other winter personnel 
and the medical facilities in the center; the kitchen and dining facilities 
and the recreation area with library on the west; and an entrance section on 
the southeast that houses water tanks and the heating boiler, as well as a 
small chapel. Adjacent to the entrance section on the west is a shed for 
the snow melter.

Directly in front of the entrance to the main building on its southeast 
side is the foundation of the former main station building which was 
destroyed by fire in 1975. West of this structure is a building housing two 
generators. At the southwest end of the beach facing the shore of Bahia 
Scotia lie the ruins of the first building on the island, Casa Omond (Omond 
House), constructed by the British explorer William Bruce in 1903, actually 
predating the station by a year. Four fuel storage tanks, a pump house and 
a helicopter pad are adjacent to Bahia Scotia directly in front of the 
station.

West of the station, at the foot of the rocky ridge, is an enclosed 
cistern for collecting water from snow runoff in the austral summer. 
Northwest of the station, towards Bahia Uruguay are two buildings housing 
geomagnetic instruments for observations. Beyond the geomagnetic buildings, 
is a small cemetery at the northwest corner of the isthmus.

Directly adjacent to the station on the northwest side are instruments 
for meteorological observations and beyond toward Bahia Uruguay, are a flag 
mast and commemorative cross.

On the western side of the main building, two roughly parallel rows of 
buildings extend across the isthmus. The first includes the three oldest 
buildings of the station complex: Casa Moneta, built in 1905, now a museum 
with exhibits on the history of station and the flora and fauna of the 
region; Casa Pampa, dating from 1943 and now an electronics shop; and a 
wooden dormitory structure that serves as the station's emergency shelter 
and provides housing for summer personnel. There is also a cold storage 
building in this row. The second row of structures, adjacent and parallel 
to the glacier and moraine bounding the isthmus on the northeast, includes 
(proceeding from Bahia Scotia across to Bahia Uruguay): a building housing 
the vehicle garage, the station's incinerator and compactor, workshops and 
storerooms for food and spare parts; a second generator building; a battery 
                           83
storage shed; and three sheds for storing bottled gas and carbon dioxide, 
cleaning materials and paints, respectively.

There is a wastewater discharge pipe that extends from the main 
building to Bahia Uruguay and there are masts with radio aerials on both 
north and south sides of the main building.

The main building and most other station structures are painted bright 
red-orange. The older buildings - Casa Moneta, Casa Pampa and the emergency 
shelter/dormitory - as well as the newer geomagnetic observation buildings 
are black or dark in color.

Personnel

Orcadas Station is an installation, managed by the Area Naval Antartida 
(the Command for the Naval Area of Antarctica) of the Argentine Navy. At 
the time of the inspection, there were 14 persons at the station. This 
contingent will winter-over in 1995. The group includes nine Argentine Navy 
personnel, including the Station Leader, Lt. Giudice, and the station's 
medical doctor; three Argentine Air Force personnel - two meteorologists and 
one geomagnetic specialist - and two civilian biologists from DNA - the 
Direccion Nacional de Antartida (the National Antarctic Directorate).

The Station Leader reported that the maximum station population during 
the 1994-95 season had been 37 persons. This group had included three 
additional biologists and a large repair crew that undertook station 
improvements. Summer personnel had departed by the ice breaker ALMIRANTE 
IRIZAR two days prior to the visit of the inspection team.

The Station Leader indicated that winter-over personnel undergo a 
rigorous one-month training course, including rock and ice climbing 
instruction, provided by experienced Antarctic personnel in the vicinity of 
San Carlos de Bariloche in the Andes of southern Argentina. In addition, 
DNA provides orientation, including briefings to familiarize station 
personnel with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and measures adopted 
under it. Supplementary sessions take place among the personnel at the 
station itself. Copies of the Antarctic Treaty, the new environmental 
protocol and other relevant measures (e.g., identification of, and existing 
management plans for, protected areas in Antarctica) were readily available 
at the station. In addition, summaries of the rules for protection of the 
Antarctic environment were posted in the main building.

84
Scientific Research

Orcadas Station undertakes regular year-round synoptic meteorological 
observations that are reported to Argentina's Marambio Station in the 
Antarctic Peninsula. In addition, measurements of solar radiation and 
atmospheric aerosols (trace gases) are regularly made. Aerosol samples are 
collected for later analysis at specialized laboratories in Buenos Aires.

Regular measurements of the earth's magnetic field are carried out on a 
year-round basis at the station.

Two biological groups had worked at Orcadas during the 1994-95 season. 
The first group undertook studies of native birds, with an emphasis on long-
term monitoring of the reproductive success of local penguin populations 
(Adelie, chinstrap and gentoo) as part of the Convention on the Conservation 
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
(CEMP). The second undertook marine mammal studies, concentrating on local 
populations of fur seals and southern elephant seals. As noted, two 
biologists also were members of the 1995 winter-over contingent.

The scientific equipment at Orcadas Station were commensurate with the 
research activities carried out there. There were no radioisotopes reported 
at the station.

Equipment and Logistics

Equipment and facilities at the station were as reported in Argentina's 
exchange of information under the Antarctic Treaty. The Station Leader 
reported that potable water is obtained from two sources. During the months 
of November through April, melt water is collected in a catchment and pumped 
to two 10,000 liter holding tanks in the main station building. During the 
austral winter months, snow is collected by hand in containers and melted in 
a snow melter heated by a diesel-fired boiler. Approximately 140 containers 
of snow are used per day to provide potable water during the winter. The 
water quality is tested regularly and chlorine is added to the storage tanks 
as needed. Average daily consumption is 1,500 liters per day. Water usage 
is restricted, more so in the winter period.

Electricity is supplied to the station from four 75 KW diesel-electric 
generators located in two separate power plants at the station. One
85
generator provides power for the entire complex. Annual fuel consumption for electrical production averages 180 tons. No waste heat is currently recovered from the generators, but it was reported that plans are being made to install heat exchangers for snow melting and heating water for building heating. All buildings on the station are heated by separate diesel-fired boilers that heat water-circulated radiators. Emissions from the generators are not treated nor monitored; the generators' exhaust systems are equipped with noise suppression equipment.

No sources of alternative energy are used on the station at this time.

The Station Leader reported that there is only one tracked Thiokol Sprite vehicle at the station, and no other vehicles were observed during the inspection.

Due to the nature of the flat rocky surface the station occupies, there is no need for roads to support operations at the complex.

The Station Leader reported that there were two inflatable Zodiac boats at the station. A third inflatable had been damaged during a recent storm. There are no pier or jetty facilities at the station; the boats are launched directly from the beach.

The station is re-supplied twice a year by the Argentine icebreaker, ALMIRANTE IRIZAR. The icebreaker is reportedly able to approach to within 10 m of the beach. All cargo and fuel are transferred from the ship to the station via helicopters based on the icebreaker.

No fixed- or rotary-wing aircraft operate from the station; the Argentine icebreaker operates helicopters at the station during the re-supply operations twice a year. No other aircraft had visited the station this year. There is one unimproved helicopter landing site at the station.

Communications facilities on the station consist of HF, VHF and teletype. There are no satellite communications facilities available; however, there is a satellite TV reception antenna at the station.

The inspection team was impressed with the level of fire safety awareness at Orcadas. All buildings at the complex are equipped with smoke and heat detectors monitored from a central control panel; fire bills are posted in every building on the station. The main station complex is equipped with a sprinkler system attached to a 10,000 liter storage tank

86
with associated pressure pump and standpipe-hydrant-hose reel system. The
central station complex and all outlying buildings are also equipped with
carbon dioxide, dry powder (PKP) and water extinguishers ranging from hand-
held up to large cart-mounted size. Most station personnel have had
extensive fire fighting training as part of their military service and the
Station Leader reported that fire drills are included in the weekly
exercises that are conducted.

The main fuel storage for the station is contained within four steel
diesel fuel tanks, each with a 50 ton capacity. These tanks are located
southwest of the station adjacent to Bahia Scotia. Additional storage
capacity is available in three 5,000 liter pillow tanks which are not
presently used. There are also a number of fuel day tanks as follows: two
2,000 liter tanks for power generation, one 1,500 liter tank for heating
boilers, two 1,000 liter tanks for the snow melter and building heating, and
one 200 liter tank serving the incinerator.

The station also has 25 drums of lubricating oil, 13 drums of gasoline
and 3 drums of JP-1 aviation fuel. These are stored on a concrete
foundation from an old station building which is next to the main station
complex. The Station Leader reported that there were no field fuel depots.

Protection against differential settlement of the tanks is not
required, as they are mounted on concrete foundations built upon rock. None
of the tanks are double-walled or equipped with inner liners, nor are there
containment berms around the tanks in the event of a leak. Some of the fuel
tanks have been in use since the 1960s. However, the Station Leader
reported that the fuel tanks are examined for leaks every two hours, seven
days a week by a designated roving watchman. The Station Leader reported
that day-to-day station fuel management was the responsibility of the chief
engineer, while he retained overall responsibility. The inspection team
observed good fuel management and spill prevention practices throughout the
station and the station grounds generally appeared free of any signs of
chronic fuel contamination. Portable containment was provided under most
fuel transfer valves as well as drip pans being provided for operating
machinery and pumps within station buildings. The team observed only one
minor uncontained fuel leak which was from a valve in the fuel pipeline near
the pillow storage tanks.

All station fuel lines are made of uninsulated fixed steel piping which
appeared to be in good condition. The piping between the shore side fuel
storage tanks and the main station building is run approximately 1.5 m above

87
the ground. From there, the piping is run below ground to service outlying 
buildings. Sufficient shutoff valves are located throughout the fuel pipe 
runs to isolate sections in the event of a leak or need for repair. All of 
the station's fuel tanks are inter-connected by fixed piping which allows 
them to be refilled by pumping from the main storage tanks.

The station is refueled once a year by a support vessel which moors in 
Bahia Scotia within 10 meters of shore. Instead of transferring fuel ashore 
via flexible hose, refueling is accomplished through an airlift operation. 
In this operation fuel is loaded into 2,000-liter rubber drums aboard the 
vessel, which are then airlifted ashore using the ship's helicopters. The 
Station Leader reported that approximately 50 helicopter flights are 
typically required to complete station refueling using this process.  Once 
ashore, fuel from the rubber drums is pumped into the storage tanks using a 
short 5 meter length of flexible hose. Upon completion of the operation, 
the fuel hose is gravity drained to remove any residual fuel remaining 
inside.

Arms

With the exception of a flare pistol, the Station Leader reported that 
there were no weapons or explosives on the station.

No inappropriate weapons, military activity, or nuclear disposal sites 
were observed at Orcadas Station.

Environment

The Station Leader had a familiarity with the new environmental 
protocol which manifested itself in thorough organization and record-keeping 
of Treaty-related documents, (including a detailed waste management plan). 
The operation and maintenance of the station and its facilities appeared to 
be orderly and well-managed. The protocol's waste classification and 
management scheme is followed at Orcadas Station. Pre-deployment 
orientation on waste management and other environmental issues is reinforced 
after personnel arrive on station by additional training and by public 
notices posted at key locations.

A two-stage diesel-fired incinerator is used for the combustion of 
food/kitchen, wood and paper wastes. The incinerator is housed in the

88
building which also houses the compactor, as noted above. The Station 
Leader reported that the operating temperature of the primary combustion 
chamber was estimated to be between 500° C and 700° C (the sensor was 
inoperable at the time of the inspection) and the secondary combustion 
temperature to be approximately 800° C. Ashes are removed from the exhaust 
by a 200 liter per hour water curtain. The Station Leader estimated that 30 
drums of incinerator ash are returned to Argentina annually.

Clean-up of past activities was evidenced by the disassembly of the old 
incineration building during the past season and its removal to Argentina.

The station employs a 10,000 liter fiber reinforced plastic (FRP) tank 
for the storage, settling and microbial digestion (unassisted by the 
addition of any chemicals or microbes) of sewage and greywater. The Station 
Leader reported that only 100 percent biodegradable cleaners and soaps of no 
less than 80 percent biodegradability are allowed to be used at the station. 
Decanted effluent is discharged by pipeline to the intertidal zone of Bahia 
Uruguay, as noted above. Solids are removed from the tank as needed, 
usually no more frequently than biennially, and returned to Argentina for 
proper management. The Station Leader reported that there are plans under 
development for an improved wastewater treatment system which could be 
installed as early as the next austral summer; however, details were 
unavailable at the time of the inspection.

At Orcadas Station, hazardous chemical wastes (as well as some non-
hazardous wastes) are removed from the Treaty Area to Argentina for proper 
management. Hazardous wastes, batteries, and paints are stored in separate 
buildings, as noted above. In addition to the wastes noted above, other 
wastes removed from the Treaty Area include: a very small quantity of small 
dry cell batteries; large lead-acid batteries (with their contacts intact); 
compacted glass and compacted cans (both aluminum and other metal); 
plastics; and used lubricating oils. The Station Leader reported that three 
drums of used oil were collected and returned to Argentina during the year.

A large number of marine mammals and birds are found at and near 
Orcadas. Non-breeding sub-adult and adult male Antarctic fur seals visit 
Laurie Island seasonally, and the inspection team noted many along the shore 
of Bahia Scotia. Southern elephant seals breed on Laurie Island near the 
station, and small groups of molting elephant seals were observed along the 
shoreline near the station during the inspection. Weddell, crabeater, 
leopard seals are also found in the area. Chinstrap, Adelie, and gentoo 
penguins nest in colonies near Orcadas. Other avian species nesting in the

89
vicinity include cape petrels, snow petrels, Wilson's storm petrels, giant 
petrels, Antarctic prions, blue-eyed shags, Antarctic terns, and brown 
skuas. As part of their training both prior to Antarctic deployment as well 
as on site, personnel are instructed on procedures for minimizing 
disturbances to local wildlife.

The terrestrial floral communities near Orcadas Station are diverse. 
Antarctic hair grass, many species of mosses, lichens, liverworts, and 
Antarctic pearlwort are present. No non-endemic animals or plants were 
observed at the site during the inspection.

There are four SPAs in the South Orkney Islands: Moe Island (SPA Number 
13), Lynch Island (SPA Number 14), Southern Powell Island and adjacent 
islands (SPA Number 15), and North Coronation Island (SPA Number 18). (See 
the preceding section on Signy Station for a description of these areas.) 
Station personnel were well aware of the site designations and management 
plans for the SPAs. The location and boundaries of these sites were marked 
on maps posted for reference in the station's library.

Emergencies

The station did not have a comprehensive oil and chemical spill 
contingency plan; however, the Station Leader showed the team a copy of a 
one-page document setting forth fuel transfer and pollution response 
practices he had prepared for use by all station personnel.

Limited absorbent materials are maintained at the station in the event 
of a spill, and pollution response exercises are incorporated into the 
station's weekly safety drill regimen. However, insufficient equipment or 
personnel are available to provide significant assistance beyond the limits 
of the station area.

The Station Leader reported that there had not been any significant 
damage to station facilities or to the environment within the last year. 
Should such an incident occur, he was responsible for reporting it to his 
superiors at Area Naval Antartida.

The station has modest medical facilities with the capability to 
perform minor surgery. The Assistant Station Leader is a medical doctor 
with some dental training.

90
Tourism

The Station Leader reported that three tourist vessels had called at
Orcadas Station during the 1994-95 season: the M/S WORLD DISCOVERER, the
M/S EXPLORER and the M/S MONTANA. The vessels visited Punta Martin, midway
down the Mossman Peninsula on Bahia Scotia, to view wildlife.  Station
personnel reported that tourists from the vessels viewed wildlife from small
boats and did not walk through wildlife areas. Passengers in groups of
twenty from the M/S WORLD DISCOVERER and from the M/S EXPLORER had visited
the station itself. Only the Captain and the tour leader from the M/S
MONTANA (a vessel chartered by the Mountain Travel Company) had called at
the station. The Station Leader indicated that the visits had been well
organized and caused no disruption of station activities.

There had been one visit by a sailing yacht which had also called at
Signy Station.

91
