ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                                
                                  SEOUL                
                                  May 8-19, 1995                
                                                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION CONSULTATIVA                
                                                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                                
                                                
XIX ATCM/INF 56                
May 16, 1995                
Original: English                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
 ANTARCTIC WARMING: EARLY SIGNS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE                
                
 Agenda Item 17                
                
 (Submitted by ASOC)                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                

1. INTRODUCTION

Antarctica, simultaneously breathtakingly beautiful and inhospitable, plays an essential and 
primary role in global and regional climate. It may also be an area particularly vulnerable to 
climatic changes.

Several recent observations in the region, coincident with a global atmospheric warming trend, 
have led scientists to raise concerns about what they are recording. The recent calving of the 
'mega-iceberg' from the Larsen Ice Shelf in the Antarctic Peninsula and large-scale disintegration 
of the northern section of the ice shelf, has increased the public profile of that alarm. Is this a 
clear warning of the impact of global warming?

If so, our concern should not be limited to the impacts on the fragile ecological balance of the 
seventh continent. The 1990 scientific estimate that Antarctica would not contribute to sea-level 
rise [1] is now looking over-optimistic. Antarctica may already be adding to sea levels, or it may 
not do so for some time, but, if warming continues, increased melting of inland ice looks 
inevitable.

Behind the reasoned scientific estimates lies the possibility of the collapse of the West Antarctic 
Ice Sheet and the potential catastrophe of a six metre rise in sea level.

2. THE SENSITIVE POLES

In its 1990 science report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) noted that 
global warming is expected to warm the poles faster than the tropics [2]. This is partly because 
warming causes loss of sea-ice, which reduces albedo (reflection) and also allows more heat 
transfer from the ocean surface, accelerating the warming (a 'positive feedback'). The warming 
at the poles is also larger because it is confined near the surface, and because heat is released from 
the extra moisture transported from the tropics. In 1993, British scientists suggested that the polar 
regions would be among the first to respond to global warming and that the warming-induced 
changes might accelerate the warming further [3].

The IPCC also noted that the capacity of the Southern Ocean to absorb large amounts of heat 
may counter this accelerated warming, resulting in a smaller warming trend nearer the global 
average [4]. Recent research however, comparing ocean model results with the observed ocean 
circulation patterns around Antarctica, suggests that the heat-absorbing ability of the Southern 
Ocean may have been overestimated [5]. This suggests that the extremes of warming projected 
for the Arctic region may also be felt in the south. Furthermore, any heat that is carried to depth 
away from the sea surface may reduce surface temperature rise at the expense of increased basal 
melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet [6], with serious implications for sea level rise (see 
Section 7).
Loss of sea-ice may also cause changes in the circulation of the Southern Ocean, leading to global warming positive feedbacks. When sea-ice forms in the austral Autumn and Winter, salt is rejected from the freezing waters, increasing the salinity and therefore density of the surface ocean. This cold and saline water then mixes downwards, carrying carbon dioxide and heat into the deep ocean. The loss of sea-ice in a global warming world may reduce this deep mixing by limiting salt rejection, thus producing a positive feedback, increasing the rate of carbon dioxide build-up in the atmosphere and the rate at which the surface ocean warms [7].

3. WARMING TRENDS

In March 1994, the fastest sustained atmospheric warming since worldwide temperature records began 130 years ago - 0.5 degrees Celsius per decade since 1947 - was reported in the Antarctic Peninsula by British Antarctic Survey (BAS) scientists. The Head of the BAS meteorological group, Dr John King stated: "The rise is the fastest we have on record... people should be looking to the future for the consequences could be quite dire" [8].

First reports of the warming trend surfaced in 1990; although the warming has been particularly obvious in the Peninsula area, an analysis of coastal stations across Antarctica revealed a 0.15 degrees Celsius increase per decade since 1957 [9]. Since then, various researchers have reported dramatic increases in mean summer air temperatures and an associated reduction in snow cover on the sub-Antarctic Signy Island since 1951, a 1.5 degrees Celsius increase over the last 20 years on Kerguelen Island and a similar increase for Heard Island. Spanish researchers have also reported minimum summer temperatures 5 degrees Celsius higher than usual on Livingston Island in recent years [10].

4. ANTARCTIC LAKES INDICATORS OF WARMING TREND?

Possible evidence of climate warming may also be found at several Antarctic lakes, thought to represent a sensitive indicator of short-term climate change. New Zealand scientists report that Lake Vanda, a 75 metre deep lake in the Wright Valley, near their Vanda research station, is rising at a rate of nearly one metre each year. The rise is related to an increase in glacier meltwater flowing in via the lake's contributory river, the Onyx; volumes of water flowing into the river have more than doubled in the last decade. While scientists caution there is no clear evidence of a link between the high water level, increased lake or water volumes and global warming trends, other lakes in the Dry Valleys have also been rising in recent years [11]. Another study of six Antarctic lakes has shown that the surface ice has thinned by up to 40 percent over the last decade [12].
5. SHRINKING SEA-ICE AND ICE CAPS

Winter sea-ice has been shrinking in area. Measurements taken between 1973 and 1988 show a decrease in sea-ice extent of around 33 kilometres per decade [13].

While some researchers maintain that warming temperatures will result in an expansion of some glaciers, at least in the short to medium term [14], BAS scientists working at Faraday Station, Galindez Island, in the Antarctic Peninsula, report that the thickness of the ice cap on the island has diminished by one metre between 1973 and 1988 [15]. Glacial retreat has also reportedly accelerated on other glaciated sub-Antarctic islands in recent decades [16].

6. THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE ICE SHELVES

As a consequence of the observed warming, vast areas of the ice shelves are rapidly disintegrating. Ice shelves are the large floating masses of ice surrounding the continent's grounded ice sheets. Calving icebergs from these shelves ordinarily represent the major source of ice discharge from the continent, yet recent changes to the ice sheets have been unexpectedly dramatic.

In 1986, more than 11,000 square kilometres of the Larsen Ice Shelf and 11,500 square kilometres of the Filchner Ice Shelf broke off into the Weddell Sea. At the same time, about 1,600 square kilometres of the Thwaites Tongue broke away. While these events were not necessarily outside the bounds of natural calving rates, the total ice mass discharged from these events was three to four times the annual Antarctic snow accumulation [17].

In 1991 BAS published satellite images of the rapid disintegration of the Wordie Ice Shelf, and suggested that recent warm temperatures in the Antarctic Peninsula region might be to blame. More than 1,300 square kilometres of the Wordie Ice Shelf have disappeared since 1966. Ice shelves along the coast of the Peninsula are extremely sensitive to even small changes in temperature [18]. Further evidence of the disintegration of the Ice Shelf was produced in early 1992, when the disappearance of the snow ramp on Stonington Island was reported following a BAS study of photos taken over a number of years [19], while comparison of satellite images of the Antarctic coast shows substantial changes in ice volume in coastal areas [20].

In early 1993 BAS noted an increase in iceberg calving, but said that there was insufficient evidence to link this to global warming [21]. The increase in icebergs was confirmed later in 1993 from data collected by ships traversing the Southern Ocean, and collated by the Norwegian Polar Research Institute. Although the accuracy of the observations was questioned, the Institute suggested that the data indicated a more rapid disintegration of the Antarctic ice shelves than projected [22].

In February 1995, a giant iceberg, the size of Luxembourg (2,600 square kilometres, and 77 kilometres long) calved off the Larsen Ice Shelf in the Antarctic Peninsula; further investigation revealed that a large tongue of ice that had connected the mainland with nearby James Ross Island had also disappeared as well as a section of the northern part of the Larsen ice shelf. According to BAS scientists, this provided more evidence of the disintegration of the Ice Shelf. BAS suggested that the recent higher than usual summer temperatures were to blame. BAS
glaciologist, Dr David Vaughan, stated that "There is no doubt that the climate on the Antarctic 
Peninsula has warmed significantly over the past few decades. What we are seeing now are 
changes only just working through to glaciers and ice sheets." [23]. While the formation of 
icebergs is a regular occurrence in the Antarctic, their birth can usually be tracked up to 20 years 
before they break off. This iceberg was unusual in that it had not been foreseen and was 
surrounded by large-scale disintegration, including a 60 kilometre crack in the shelf [24].

7. THE SPECTRE OF SEA LEVEL RISE

The dramatic warming of the Antarctic peninsula could herald global effects. Sea level rise 
associated with increased discharge from the ice sheets represents one of the greatest threats of 
human-induced climatic change.

    In their 1990 report, the IPCC calculated that warming in Antarctica would actually reduce 
expected sea level rise, because increases in snowfall were expected to be much greater than 
increases in melting. Now scientific opinion has changed. Dr Adrian Jenkins of BAS states, "A 
good case can be made that the Antarctic ice sheet will contribute to sea level rise" [25].

    A study of annual snow accumulation from several sites inland of the Australian Casey Base 
shows a dramatic build-up since 1965, possibly as a result of increased cyclonic activity [26]. 
However, in spite of large increases in snowfall in some regions. Antarctica as a whole seems 
more likely to be losing rather than gaining ice - although measurements are not conclusive 
[27;28]. This estimate takes into account iceberg calving and melting at the base of the ice 
shelves, previously assumed to be small. Melting of sea-ice and the floating ice shelves do not 
directly add to sea level rise. But as Jacobs and co-authors state, "...if the floating parts are 
receding or thinning, that must eventually lead to greater discharge across the grounding line." 
Once ice has crossed the `grounding line' between grounded and floating ice, its main contribution 
to sea level rise has already been made.

    Ice lost from the shelves may already be coming from the inland ice sheet, or alternatively the ice 
shelves could be shrinking, leading to greater exposure of the inland ice sheet at some time in the 
future. Studies which have tried to estimate the balance of only the grounded ice have in the past 
concluded it is accumulating, not losing, ice [29; 30]. However, new satellite measurements of 
the rate of movement of ice on Pine Island Glacier, West Antarctica [31] suggest that the basin 
which this drains is close to balance, not gaining ice significantly as previously thought. In 
addition, an area of very low snowfall in East Antarctica is now thought to be larger than mapped 
[32]. These measurements could affect the conclusions of earlier studies that Antarctica is 
currently contributing to a lowering of sea level.

    If the flow of ice off the land already balances the loss from the floating ice sheets, Antarctica may 
already be contributing to sea level rise [33]. Recent satellite measurements from NASA indicate 
that sea levels are currently rising at 3mm/year - twice as fast as previously thought. Taking into 
account the effects of temporary warming in the tropical Pacific (`El Nino') and the contribution 
from changes in use of water resources, this means that the sea level rise due to global warming
is less than this amount. Nevertheless, the 1990 IPCC 'best estimate' calculations accounted for 
only 1.05mm/year by ocean thermal expansion and meltwater from glaciers and Greenland. The 
gap between this and the sea level measurements is increasing; neglected Antarctic ice loss may 
prove to be the missing source.

8. AN UNSTABLE ICE SHEET?

One alarming possibility is the loss of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet - grounded ice that is thought 
to be unstable and could contribute up to six metres to sea level rise.

In 1990, application of various temperature scenarios suggested that ice retreat around the 
Antarctic Peninsula and the east Antarctic coast would be pronounced while the Ross and Ronne-
Filchner Ice Shelves might experience only a small retreat [34]. In the same year, NASA scientists 
speculated that fast-flowing ice streams on the Antarctic Ross Ice Shelf may indicate ice loss from 
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. A report of a January 1990 workshop on the problem concluded 
that "the presence of five active ice streams feeding ice from the interior of West Antarctica into 
the Ronne Ice Shelf and separate peripheral ice shelves on the northern boundary of the ice sheet, 
may be manifestations of collapse already underway." [35].

A University of Chicago study of the behaviour of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) in the 
past, suggests that sporadic or even chaotic collapse of the ice sheet has occurred several times 
during the past million years. Evidence from fossil beach and coral reef terraces suggests that sea 
level was up to six metres higher than present levels when this happened, most recently during the 
interglacial warm phase 120,000 years ago. The erratic behaviour of the ice sheet is due to the 
way the ice sheet slips over the rocks underneath it, in particular glacial deposits. The study 
concluded that the hypothesis that WAIS snow accumulation rates increase when the climate 
warms does not contradict the hypothesis that future climate warming could cause the WAIS to 
collapse. Said Macayeal: "My simulations incorporate the feedback between accumulation rate 
and climate warming, yet they display ice-sheet collapse or shrinkage at times when model climate 
forcing is warm. What is most important in determining the possibility of WAIS collapse in the 
near future is the distribution of deformable subglacial till." [36]

Recent measurements at Pine Island Glacier increase fears of ice sheet collapse. Ice from glaciers 
feeds directly from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet into Pine Island Bay, a region where there is no 
substantial ice shelf. These glaciers are therefore likely to be the weakest points in the potentially 
unstable ice sheet [37]. Jenkins et al [38] find in a recent study that the base of Pine Island Glacier 
is melting at a rate in excess of ten metres per year - more than an order of magnitude higher than 
has been estimated for the larger Antarctic ice shelves. Their oceanographic measurements show 
relatively warm salty water near the sea floor and fresher outflows nearer the surface, which may 
be caused by meltwater from the glacier. They suggest that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet could 
be especially vulnerable if global warming increases deep ocean temperatures.
9. WARMING-INDUCED ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS

9.1 THE DECLINE IN PENGUIN NUMBERS

American researchers have blamed the contracting winter sea-ice around the Antarctic Peninsula, observed since 1970, for a dramatic decline in Adelie penguin populations. Rising sea and air temperatures have also been reported during this time in this region. According to William Fraser from Montana State University, studies of penguins on Torgerson Island show declines in Adelie numbers and the establishment of a colony of Chinstraps (decreasing Adelie numbers usually mean increased Chinstrap penguin numbers because Chinstraps feed in the ice-free seas). He believes that the presence of Chinstraps this far south is a further indication of the warming trend.

During the previous four years of unprecedented warm winters, however, the numbers in both populations have plummeted. Since 1989, Chinstrap and Adelie numbers have fallen by 35 percent and 40 percent respectively on King George Island [39].

Associate professor Wayne Trivelpiece, also of Montana State University, relates the drop in penguin populations to declines in Antarctic krill, the primary food source of the birds. Researchers suspect that less sea-ice means less algae, the primary food source for larval krill in winter [40]. Trivelpiece has found "gaps" in the size range of krill pumped from the stomachs of penguins, suggesting that the krill may not be surviving or developing during the warm winters. This may have severe implications for other species in the short Antarctic food chain. It is not yet clear if the decline in krill extends across the whole of the region. However, he reported that "We think it's a harbinger of what's coming. The number of winters in which there is extensive ice is declining."

A significant decline in Rockhopper penguin numbers has also been reported at sub-Antarctic Campbell Island, 94 percent since the early 1940s, from an estimated 1.6 million to 103,000 breeding pairs in 1985. Many breeding colonies have disappeared altogether.

The decline appears to have been greatest during the 1950s, coinciding with substantial changes in sea temperatures. The mean December to February sea surface temperature rose from 9.1 degrees C in 1944 to peaks of 9.7 degrees C in 1948-49 and 9.6 degrees C in 1953-54, and then declined to 8.6 degrees C by 1965.

The temperature then rose rapidly to 10.2 degrees C by 1970, and has averaged 9.7 degrees C since that time. Scientists suggest that the rising sea temperatures may be associated with changes in the food supply and thus be responsible for the population decline [41].

Meanwhile, New Zealand scientists have associated a recent INCREASE in Adelie penguin numbers in the Ross Sea region with recent atmospheric warming. They suggest that the increase in chick numbers and decrease in adult mortality is linked to atmospheric warming and a reduction in sea-ice during the breeding season [42].
9.2 PLANT PROLIFERATION HERALDS FURTHER CHANGES IN
ANTARCTIC ECOLOGY

Scientists from BAS report that the continent's only two indigenous flowering plants, Antarctic
pearlw?rt (Colobanthus quitensis) and Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica), are rapidly
increasing as a result of global warming, with hair grass showing a 25-fold increase on Galindez
Island. New species are also appearing as melting ice frees long-trapped seeds [43].

Other scientists had already noted an expansion of plant colonisation in maritime Antarctica. They
linked the increasing summer temperatures observed in this region over the last 40 years with the
thinning glaciers and ice caps in coastal areas, and shrinking ice fields which have exposed new
land areas [44].

10. GLOBAL WARMING MAY ENHANCE ANTARCTIC
OZONE DEPLETION

In early 1991, Australian Antarctic researcher, Dr Bill Budd, suggested a feedback link between
climate change and Antarctic ozone depletion [45]. As stratospheric ozone has been lost, upper
atmospheric temperatures have fallen. The decrease in stratospheric temperatures over the
Antarctic has been coincident with a general increase in lower atmospheric temperatures. Budd
stated that "This type of reaction would be expected to result from reduced stratospheric ozone
but it is also a feature which can result from the CO2 warming in the troposphere...these changes
were strongest in the Antarctic, pointing to the dominance of the ozone effect, although no doubt
both processes may be acting together and reinforcing each other." He went on to refer to "...the
strength of the antarctic stratospheric vortex which may be expected to increase and last longer
with the reduction in Antarctic stratospheric temperatures. This could isolate the region of ozone
reduction even more, and possibly lead to further reduction extending longer into summer...".

The link between global warming and ozone depletion has since been demonstrated in a modelling
study of the Arctic, in which cooling of the stratosphere produced enhanced ozone loss [46].

11. OZONE DEPLETION WILL MAKE GLOBAL
WARMING WORSE

Meanwhile, US researchers published measurements made over six weeks below the spring ozone
hole which found a link between UV-B levels and photosynthesis inhibition in phytoplankton, and
an overall productivity drop of between six and twelve percent. Spring is the time of highest
productivity in the Southern Ocean [47].
Further research undertaken in experimental conditions suggests ozone depletion may result in 
an inhibition of photosynthesis of marine organisms of up to 12-15 percent [48]. Phytoplankton 
play an important role in absorbing carbon from the atmosphere as well as being a major link in 
the Antarctic food chain.

12. CONCLUSION

Significant climatic changes, including a marked warming, have occurred in parts of Antarctica 
over the relatively short period for which there are instrumental measurements. The changes are 
most marked on the Antarctic Peninsula and coastal regions. Glaciological evidence, such as the 
shrinking sea-ice and ice caps, and biological evidence, such as the spread of flowering plants and 
changes in penguin populations, confirms the reality of the warming in this region.

The full effects of this warming on the Antarctic climate are complex and not yet fully understood. 
They include potential changes to atmospheric and ocean circulations and possible positive 
feedbacks. The effects are likely to extend well beyond the region.

Scientists do not yet know if the melting ice in Antarctica is already contributing to sea level rise 
or not, however it is looking increasingly likely that it will do so in the future. Until now, policy 
decisions on mechanisms for protecting the climate have been based on the assumption that 
Antarctica would reduce sea level rise, not contribute to it. It is likely these policies will need 
revision.

The potential collapse of the entire West Antarctic Ice Sheet also raises frightening possibilities. 
The risk remains unquantified but the consequences would be catastrophic.

Antarctica, the seventh continent, is providing us with a warning of global climatic change. We 
ignore this warning at our peril.
REFERENCES

1. Houghton, J.T., Jenkins, G.J., & Ephraums, J.J. (eds), Climate Change, The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment. Report prepared for IPCC by WG1, WMO/UNEP, Cambridge University Press, 
1990.

2. Ibid ref 1.

3. "Global Warming Cuts No Ice," New Scientist, vol.139, 25 September 1993.

4. Ibid ref 1.

5. England, M., CSIRO Division of Oceanography, pers. com, March 1995.  In the new 
atmosphere-ocean GCMs the Southern Ocean sequesters massive amounts of heat by vertical 
mixing. Matthew England has shown that the ocean models sequester a neutral tracer much too 
rapidly and suggests that the models may underestimate the warming over the Southern Ocean 
by up to a factor of two. He has a letter in press Geophysical Research Letters to that effect.

6. Jenkins, A., Jacobs, S.S., Keys, J.R. (1995) "Is this little PIG in hot water?", Antarctic Journal 
of the United States (in press).

7. Budd, W.F., "Antarctica and Global Change", Climatic Change, vol.18, p.271-299, April 
1991.

8. King, J.C., "Recent climate variability in the vicinity of the Antarctic Peninsula",International 
Journal of Climatology, vol.14, p.357-369, May 1994; Reuter, 24 June 1994.

9. Jacka, T.H. & Budd, W.F., "Detection of temperature and sea ice extent changes in the 
Antarctic and Southern Ocean", p.63-71, in Weller, G. Wilson, C.L. & Severin, B.A.B. (eds), 
Proceedings of International Conference on the Role of the Polar Regions in Global Change, 
June 11-15, 1990, University of Alaska Fairbanks, vol.1, Geophysical Institute and the Centre for 
Global Change and Arctic System Research, University of Alaska Fairbanks, 1991.

10. Lewis-Smith, R.I., "Signy Island as a paradigm of biological and environmental change in 
Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems", in Kerry, K.R. & Hemple, G (eds),Antarctic Ecosystems, 
Ecological Change and Conservation, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1990: Scott, J.J., 
"Changes in vegetation on Heard Island 1947 - 1987," in Kerry, K.R. & Hemple, G. (eds), 
Antarctic Ecosystems, Ecological Change and Conservation,  Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 1990: "Antarctic suffers the warmest southern summer in the last years, La 
Vanguardia, 17 March 1993; Diario 16, 8 October 1993.

11. "Rising lake threatens a NZ Base in Antarctica",The Press [Christchurch], 10 April 1994.

12. Linder, B.L., McKay, C.P., Clow, G.D. & Wharton, R.A., "Computational modelling on 
Antarctic lake ice; advances in ice technology", in Sackinger, W.M. & Wadhams, P. (eds), 
Proceedings of the Third Conference of Ice Technology, 1992.
13. Jacka, T.H. (1990) "Antarctica and southern ocean sea-ice and climate trends," Annals of 
Glaciology, vol. 14, 1990.

14. Domack, E.W., Jull, A.J.T. & Nakao, S., "Advance of East Antarctic outlet glaciers during 
the Hypsithermal: Implications for the volume set of the Antarctic Ice Sheet under global 
warming", Geology, vol.1033, p.1059-1062, 1991.

15. World Climate News, World Meteorological Organisation, no.4, January 1994.

16. Chittleborough, R.G., "Potential impacts of climatic change on southern ocean ecosystems," 
Memoirs of the Queensland Museum, vol.30, p.243-247, 1991.

17. Allison, I., "The Antarctic cryosphere: evidence of the impacts of change and strategies for 
detection", in Impact of Climate Change on Antarctica - Australia, AGPS, Canberra, 1992.

18. Doake, C.S.M. & Vaughan, D.G., "Rapid disintegration of the Wordie Ice Sheet in response 
to atmospheric warming", Nature, vol. 350, p. 328-330, 28 March 1991.

19. Splettstoesser, J., "Antarctic global warming?", Nature, vol.355, p.503, 6 February 1992.

20. Ferrigo, J.C., Williams Jr., R.S., Lucchitta, B.K. & Molina, B.F., "Recent changes in the 
coastal regions of Antarctica documented by landsat images," in G. Weller, C.L. Wilson & A.B. 
Severin (eds), Proceedings of International Conference on the role of the Polar Regions in 
Global Change: June 11-15, 1990. University of Alaska, Fairbanks, vol. 1}, Geophysical 
Institute and the Center for Global Change and Arctic System Research, University of Alaska 
Fairbanks, 1991.

21. Vaughan, D., "Chasing The Rogue Icebergs," New Scientist, 9 January 1993.

22. Ibid ref 3.

23. The Australian, 1 March 1995.

24. Guardian, "40-mile Crack in Antarctic Ice Sheet", Guardian, 23 March 1995.

25. Independent, "Meltdown of the seventh continent", Independent on Sunday, 5 March 1995.

26. Morgan, V.I., Goodwin, I.D., Etheridge, D.M. & Wookey, C.W., "Evidence from Antarctic 
ice cores for recent increases in snow accumulation", Nature, vol.354, p.58-90, 1991.

27. Jacobs, S.S. (1992) "Is the Antarctic Ice Sheet Growing?", Nature, vol 360, p29-32, 5 
November 1992.

28. Jacobs, S.S., Helmer, H.H., Doake, C.S.M., Jenkins, A., Frolich, R.M.(1992) "Melting of ice 
shelves and the mass balance of Antarctica", Journal of Glaciology, vol. 38, no. 130, p375-387, 
1992.

29. Ibid ref 1.
30. Bentley, C.R. and Giovinetto, M.B. (1991) "Mass balance of Antarctica and Sea Level 
Change", Proceedings of International Conference on the Role of Polar Regions in Global 
Change: June 11-15, 1990, University of Alaska Fairbanks, edited by G. Weller, C.L. Wilson and 
B.A.B. Severin, Vol. II, December 1991, Published by Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska 
Fairbanks and Center of Global Change and Arctic System Research, University of Alaska 
Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska.

31. Lucchita B.K., Smith, C.E., Bowell, J.A. and Mullins, K.F. (1993) "Velocities and mass 
balance of Pine Island Glacier, West Antarctica, derived from ERS-1 SAR images", ESA SP-361 
Vol I, Proceedings of the second ERS-1 symposium, Space at the Service of Our Environment, 
11-14 October 1993, Hamburg, Germany, Published by ESA Publications Division, ESTEC, 
Norrdwijk, The Netherlands.

32. Zwally, A.J. and Giovinetto, M.B. (1994), "Accumulation in Antarctica and Greenland 
derived from passive microwave data: A comparison with contoured compilations", International 
Symposium on the Role of the Cryosphere in Global Change, Byrd Polar Research Center, Ohio 
State University, 7-12 August 1994.

33. Ibid refs 27 & 28.

34. Huybrechts, P. & Oerlemans, J., "Response of the Antarctic ice sheet to future greenhouse 
warming", Climate Dynamics, vol. 5, p.93-102, December 1990.

35. Bindschadler, R.A., "SeaRISE: A multidisciplinary research initiative to predict rapid changes 
in global sea level caused by collapse of marine ice sheets", Results of a workshop held in College 
Park, Maryland, January 23-25, 1990, NASA.

36. Macayeal, R., "Irregular Oscillations Of The West Antarctic Ice Sheet", Nature, vol. 359, 
p. 29-32, 3 September 1992.

37. Hughes, T. J. (1981), "The weak underbelly of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet", Journal of 
Glaciology, vol. 27, no. 97, 518-525.

38. Ibid ref 6.

39. Fraser, W.R. Trivelpiece, W.Z., Ainley, D.G. & Trivelpiece, S.G., "Increases in Antarctic 
penguin populations: reduced competition with whales or a loss of sea ice due to environmental 
warming?", Polar Biology, vol.11, p.525-531, 1992;  "Penguins in Peril", The Chronicle of 
Higher Education, vol. 40, 5 January 1994.

40. Wayne Trivelpiece, Associate Professor, Montana State University, 1994.

41. Cunningham, D.M., et al., "The decline of Rockhopper penguins Eudyptes chrysocome at 
Campbell Island, Southern Ocean and the influence of rising sea temperatures", Emu, vol.94, 
1994.

42. "Global warming suits penguins, New Scientist, vol. 139, Science and Education in Australia 
and New Zealand supplement, 24 July 1993.
43. Reuter, 18 September 1994; "Greening of the Antarctic Peninsula", Science, vol. 266, p.35, 
7 October 1994.

44. Fowbert, J.A. & Lewis-Smith, R.I., "Rapid population increases in aturive vascular plants in 
the Argentine Islands, Antarctic Peninsula", Arctic and Alpine Research,  vol. 26, no.3, 
p.290-296, 1994.

45. Ibid ref 7.

46. Austin, J., Butchart, N. and Shine, K., "Possibility of an Arctic ozone hole in a doubled-CO2 
climate", Nature, vol. 360, p 221-225, November 19 1992.

47. Smith, R.C. et.al., "Ozone Depletion: Ultraviolet Radiation And Phytoplankton Biology In 
Antarctic Waters, Science, vol. 255, p. 952 - 959, 21 February 1992; "Hole In The Sky Stunts 
Antarctic Phytoplankton," New Scientist, 29 February 1992.

48. Cullen, J.J., Neale, P.J. & Lesser, M.P., "Biological Weighting Function For The Inhibition 
Of Phytoplankton Photosynthesis By Ultraviolet Radiation," Science, vol. 258, p.646-650. 23 
October 1992.
