ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                        SEOUL
                        May 8-19, 1995


TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XIX ATCM/INF 23
May 12 1995
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS

BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR DIETRICH GRANOW,
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Mr Chairman,

I am particularly pleased and gratified to congratulate you on your election and to wish you
good luck and a successful conference. I know from experience how much skill, prudence and
patience it takes to chair a Consultative Meeting. We will be happy to do all we can to support
you in your task.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Government of the Republic of Korea
for inviting the XIXth Consultative Meeting to Seoul and for the hospitality extended to us in
this interesting and beautiful country.

Mr Chairman, in keeping with our decision taken in Kyoto last year, the XIXth Consultative
Meeting has a new structure. We are going to precede the main conference of the parties to the
Antarctic Treaty with a week-long meeting of the Transitional Environmental Working Group
(TEWG), which comprises Antarctic experts and scientists and is to consider practical
environment-related issues. The Antarctic Treaty states are thus taking account of the ever in-
creasing importance for their cooperation of environmental protection in Antarctica.

Mr Chairman, the effectiveness of the Antarctic Treaty System plays a key-role in our delib-
eration for this XIXth Consultative Meeting. We think that the rule-making functions of the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting must be preserved, its central role needs to be re-estab-
lished. Together with other Consultative Parties Germany will therefore introduce proposals
for reorganising in a most effective way future ATCM's and for a better qualification of measu-
res adopted under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. We are expecting intensive and fruitful
discussions on these ideas.

Mr Chairman, since the rapid adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty in Madrid in the autumn of 1991, we have been agreed that effective, com-
prehensive environmental protection of the sixth continent, which is entrusted to us jointly,
suffers no delay. My Government is therefore pleased to note that the majority of Consultative
States have meanwhile, like Germany, ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Our
- 2 -

confidence and hopes are now directed towards those contracting partners who have not yet completed the ratification process to ensure that the Protocol enters into force soon by acceding to it as quickly as possible.

In the meantime Germany has endeavoured to implement the decisions and recommendations of the last Consultative Meetings as effectively as possible.

Under German chairmanship a working group of legal experts from the parties to the Antarctic Treaty has now been endeavouring for over two years to elaborate a liability regime regarding environmental damage in Antarctica. This matter is on the agenda for the Consultative Meeting here in Seoul as well.

Mr Chairman, we are aware that the global ecological interrelations and the growing problems of climate change and nature conservation make ever greater demands and impose heavier responsibility on the Antarctic Treaty states as the administrators of one of the world's largest and most important climatic laboratories. We are expected to make forward-looking decisions; this Consultative Meeting must not restrict itself to discussions and well-meaning advice. For that reason we can no longer allow ourselves the luxury of doing without a secretariat which can assume the expanding administrative and information tasks. We deeply regret that no consensus has yet been reached on the location of the secretariat. We believe that at least an intermediary solution should be elaborated at this Consultative Meeting.

Mr Chairman, Germany attaches great importance to its membership of the Antarctic Treaty and to its active participation in the Antarctic Treaty system. We hope that this XIXth Consultative Meeting will succeed, and will do all we can to ensure that it does so.

Thank you very much.
