ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIX th CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                             XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                                XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                    SEOUL
                                  May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 85
May 11, 1995
Original: English

IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCEDURES
FOR IEEs AND CEEs AND THE ROLE OF TEWG

Agenda Items 11 and 6 a

(Submitted by ASOC)
May 11, 1995

ASOC INFORMATION PAPER

on

IMPLEMENTATION of PROCEDURES for IEES and CEES

and the

ROLE OF TEWG

 
According to the Protocol, activities in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area are to be subjected to environmental impact analysis (EIA), 
be based on sufficient information and oriented toward the goal 
of limiting environmental effects. The ultimate aim of the EIA 
process established in the Protocol is to come to a conclusion 
about whether a proposed activity should be allowed to go ahead 
as planned, whether it should be modified as a result of the 
analysis and comments, whether another alternative should be 
chosen, or whether it should be dropped.

 
If we want to breathe life into the Protocol, there must be a 
commitment by the Parties to ensure that the EIA process is fully 
developed and used as a key tool. This will not happen if 
Parties take a narrow approach to the functional role of TEWG and 
the CEP. ASOC is concerned that the TEWG and the CEP not be put 
into a "straight-jacket" that would prevent the objectives and 
goals of the Protocol from being met. In this general connection, 
ASOC notes that all Parties committed themselves, in the Final 
Act to the Protocol, to treat the Protocol as if it were legally 
in effect to the greatest extent feasible.

 
In our view, the TEWG and CEP have legitimate, indeed crucial 
roles to play in ensuring that the EIA process facilitates the 
goal of environmental protection, which lies at the center of the 
Protocol. In general, a common understanding on how to prepare 
EIA documents can be accelerated by widely circulating IEEs and 
CEEs. This will give all Parties a chance to study them and 
comment, laying the foundation for a discussion in the TEWG about 
whether a particular document is both substantively and 
procedurally consistent with the Protocol's requirements.

 
It would be useful for the TEWG and ultimately the CEP to analyze 
CEE and IEE documents, even those already acted on, at least in 
this initial "learning stage". In this way, a common 
understanding of what constitutes a quality IEE or CEE can spread 
much more quickly through the Antarctic Treaty System. SCAR 
should be invited to comment on the scientific aspects of IEEs 
and CEEs that have been produced in the last two or three years. 
All parties would gain from sharing this experience, which will 
help lead to a body of common practice as compared to 26 separate 
state practices.
Scientific knowledge and expertise is of course a cornerstone of 
the EIA process, but the final decision on whether a project should 
go ahead, or go ahead in a modified way, has to include a value 
judgment. It is ASOC's contention that the values used in reaching 
a decision should not be merely those of the proposer of the 
activity or its national government, or even of the Treaty System, 
but those of the community at large. A crucial question, therefore, 
is how the Antarctic Treaty System and its individual Parties 
ensure appropriate public participation in the EIA process.

Given the crucial role of the EIA process in achieving the aims and 
objectives of the Protocol, ASOC notes that there are a number of 
areas where the TEWG and the CEP have particular responsibilities. 
It would be useful for the TEWG to discuss the following questions:

1) What happens if a planned project is substantially changed after 
a draft CEE has been circulated? Such modification is not uncommon 
or unreasonable in the planning of large scale activities. How do 
we ensure that the changes are known by all and that there is a 
renewed opportunity for comment?

2) How should the comments received on a CEE following its initial 
circulation be dealt with? Several recent CEEs could be used 
collectively to develop elements of a model in this respect.

3) How will a discussion and analysis take place on whether an EIA 
is based on sufficient information, on whether it adequately deals 
with minimizing environmental impacts, and on alternatives?

4) How can cumulative impacts be evaluated and assessed?  For 
instance, with many scientific projects taking place in the same 
locality (e.g. The Dry Valleys) it would make sense to prepare one 
EIA covering all of them rather than a separate one for each 
separate project. At present, there is no incentive for an operator 
or government to undertake such an assessment, or in general to 
study cumulative impacts, given that there are often a variety of 
other operators and Parties involved. If the TEWG and CEP don't 
play a role in synthesizing what is learned from the various 
individual assessments and evaluating the impacts from the 
accumulation of activities, who will?

5) How can common standards be developed to determine which level 
of EIA is required? Some Parties have produced a CEE for station 
construction, and others only an IEE. Some parties have prepared an 
IEE for modifications to existing stations while others seem to 
have prepared no evaluation at all. It would be useful for TEWG to 
discuss non-exclusive lists of activities that are likely to 
require an IEE or a CEE, respectively, to analyze the existing 
practice, and to provide advice to the Parties on this.

6) How can a common understanding of how to meet the EIA 
requirements of the Protocol be facilitated by TEWG and the CEP? It 
could be useful to Parties for the TEWG, or perhaps a sub-group, to 
discuss final CEEs, assuming the proponent requests it.
