ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                  SEOUL                
                                  May 8-19, 1995                
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                


XIX ATCM/INF 90                
May 12, 1995                
Original: English                


                                   FIRST OBSERVATIONS OF PMSE IN ANTARCTICA                
                                   Agenda Item 15                
                                   (Submitted by Peru)                


                                   :                
                                   :                
First Observations of PMSE in Antarctica1

By Ronald F. Woodman, JRO
        Ben B. Balsley, CIRES
        Freddy Aquino, JRO
        Luis Flores, UDEP
        Edilberto Vazquez, UDEP
        Martin Sarango, JRO

Abstract

A 50 Mhz radar, with 25 kW. average power, has been installed at the Peruvian base in
St. George Island, Antarctic. A search for PMSE echoes were made during its first year of
operation, with negative results. These results have already been reported in the literature. Here
we report our results during the summer of the second year of operation. This time the
observations were made starting earlier, closer to the summer solstice. On this occasion PMSE
have been observed, albeit much weaker that what one would expect based on the Poker Flat
radar results at comparable latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere. The asymmetry, therefore,
remains. It is explained in terms of subtle differences in temperature in the mesopause region
of both polar regions. The potential of the technique to monitor global changes in temperature
is discussed.

Introduction

It is unusual to find, today, recent important discoveries of upper atmospheric
geophysical phenomena. Decades of intense space activities, initiated with the International
Geophysical year in 1957, has left little to be discovered. One interesting exception is the
discovery by Ecklund an Balsley (1981) of what, now, are known as the Polar Mesospheric
Summer Echoes or PMSE's (See Cho and Kelley, 1993, and Rottger, 1994, for a review). The
phenomenum manifests itself as very strong radar echoes from mesospheric altitudes at VHF
frequencies, these echoes can not be explained-- as other echoes of similar nature have been-
on the basis of standard turbulent mixing theories. The existence of related radar echoes at even
UHF frequencies (Rottger et al., 1990) makes them even more puzzling.

There is still no consensus on the nature of the physical processes responsible for the
exceptionally strong echoes received. Fluctuations in the dielectric constant of the medium,
produced by turbulence-induced fluctuations in the ionization densities, have been used as an
explanation for the relatively much weaker echoes (although still strong when compared to
Incoherent Scatter levels) received at comparable altitudes and lower latitudes (Woodman and
Guillen, 1974). But, even this weaker echoes can only marginally be explained using turbulent
processes, since the inner scale of turbulence is comparable or even larger than the unique
wavelength to which the radar is sensitive. The "inner scale" is the smallest structural size that
turbulence can create against the competition of molecular diffusion, an efficient mechanism for
destroying structure this small. The current thinking is that turbulence must still play an
important role, but with the requirement of the existence of slowly diffusing heavy and large

1 Presented at the Latin American Conference on Antarctic Space and Atmospheric Science, Serra
Negra, Brazil, 1994.
ions or charged particles. The reader is referred to the work of Cho and Kelley (1993) for the 
current understanding (or lack of) the physical processes that have being put forward, to explain 
the strength of PMSE.

The interest in the phenomena is heighten by its possible relation to Global Change. 
There is a relationship of this phenomena with the occurrence of Polar Noctilucent Clouds and 
the related Polar Mesospheric Clouds (Thomas, 1991). The possible relation of these phenomena 
with man industrial activity has been postulated by Thomas et al., (1989). They observed that 
Polar Noctilucent Clouds -- spectacular as they are-- were not reported before the industrial 
era. According to Thomas et al. [1989], the first observation of this kind was made by R. Leslie 
in 1885, who attributed the formation of the clouds in this occasion to the eruption of the 
Krakatoa, two years before. This first observation, and all the later ones since, would be due to 
the increase in methane in the earth atmosphere. Methane is the main source of water vapor 
in the mesosphere, necessary for a condensation process responsible for the particles producing 
the light scattering.

The occurrence of the clouds, and all the mechanisms proposed for the PMSE, also need 
the existence of very low temperatures (which are the lowest in the region of the earth 
atmosphere where they occur) capable of producing the necessary condensation. It is therefore 
interesting to speculate that man industrial activities could also produce temperature changes 
at these altitudes, and that we have an easily observable phenomena, using radar techniques, 
sensitive to these changes.

In the summer of 1993 a VHF radar was installed and operated in Machu Picchu, 
Antarctic (not Cuzco), 620 06' S, 580 28' W, in the Peruvian base at King George Island. The 
project is an important part of the Peruvian research activities in Antarctica, and was carried 
with the collaboration of the Polar Programs of NSF. The most interesting result of this first 
campaign was the discovery that no PMSE were observed (Balsley et al., 1993, 1995). This was 
indeed surprising, since an equivalent radar, with the same sensitivity, would have observed 
echoes at least 30 db above the noise level, in an equivalent latitude in the Arctic, and at an 
equivalent time of the year. The observations in this first campaign were made in the period 
between the 21 of January and the 15th of February, i.e., on the later part of the Summer months, 
when echoes would have been observed in the Arctic.

A second campaign has been carried out during the Summer of 1994. This time, echoes 
have been observed, albeit much weaker than in northern latitudes. The purpose of this paper 
is to report these observations and discuss their significance in the context of our previous 
negative results reported by Balsley et al. (1993, 1994).

We also include one particular observation made during the first campaign, lasting about 
a few hours, were weak echoes can be appreciated. Its detection required a longer integration 
time than the one used before by Balsley et al. (1995), and a more sophisticated interference 
rejecting scheme. The existence of this one observation was added as a note in proof in this 
earlier, and we are here providing the evidence.

Observations
THE INSTRUMENT USED IN THIS PARTICULAR OCCASION WAS FOR THE EARLIER PART UNTIL JANUARY 15
much earlier than the previous one. Had it not been for antenna problems, we could had been 
observing as early as the first days of December. Unfortunately, the antenna did not survived 
well the harsh winter conditions, and it was not possible to repair it until the ice over its ground 
structure and foundation had melted. The North pointing antenna was back in operation on 
December 16, 1993, but we now suspect than the system did not have its designed sensitivity 
until January 11, 1994, at 19:00 L.T., when the system was switched to the vertical antenna and 
used a overhauled receiver and front end. Within this period, the system was down for the days 
between the 22nd and 24th of December.

After January 11, the system was switched to the vertical antenna and was operated in 
a mode that sampled continuously the mesospheric altitudes. This is a period when mesospheric 
echoes were observed almost continuously. We will discuss them, in more detail, in the results 
section. The observations were discontinued again on January 16, 1994, due to equipment failure.

The system was back on operation with a newly developed processing system on January 
29, 1994. This new system was used until the end of the campaign on February 13, 1994. No 
mesospheric echoes were observed during this period, except for sporadic meteor echoes. 
Tropospheric echoes were seen, in occasions up to 11 km, giving us confidence on the good 
performance of the system.

The newly developed system has three transmitters and three receivers, one for each of 
the three antennas, one antenna points in the vertical direction and the other two 15 degrees 
north and west off Zenith. The processing system is capable of processing the spectral 
characteristics of the three channels in parallel and in real time. Within each channel, two 
sampling windows can be defined, one in the troposphere-stratosphere region, and the other in 
the mesosphere. Any of this windows can be selected in a real time display to show the spectral 
information as a function of altitude and frequency, either as a shade or as a contour plot. The 
system, except for a later developed 8-mm tape recording media, has been described elsewhere 
by Sarango et al. (1995). Because of technical problems, only two transmitter-receiver channels 
were operated with the new system. The parameters that determine the system sensitivity are 
shown in Table I.

Results

In Figure 1, we show a spectral profile corresponding to mesospheric heights for a 
particular time. As in all Middle-atmosphere radars, the spectra can be characterized by three 
parameters: power, Doppler shift and spectral width. In this paper we will discuss only the 
power of the signal. Its Doppler characteristics will be discussed in a later paper. For our 
purpose here, it suffices to say that the Doppler shift and the spectral width are typical of what 
one would expect from PMSE echoes. The vertical velocities are typical of mesospheric heights 
and the spectral width is what one would expect from beam broadening effects for characteristic 
mesospheric winds.

Previous to January 11, 19:00 L.T., the north pointing antenna was used. During this 
period, only in two occasions, weak mesospheric echoes (~ 4db signal-to-noise ratio) were 
observed: once, on January 9, for a short time around 20:56 L.T., and again on January 11, 
between 13:00 and 14:53. 
The signals did not exceed 10-12 db over the detectable level, corresponding to a signal-to-noise 
ratio of -2 to -4 db. No mesospheric echoes were observed during the rest of the period, even 
though a time window of around two hour duration, starting after midday, was daily dedicated
to mesospheric observations, except for the down period between December 22 and 29. The rest 
of the day was used for tropospheric and lower stratospheric observations. Observational 
parameters, which influence the system sensitivity, are shown in Table I.

Figure 2 shows a Range-Time-Intensity (RTI) plot corresponding to the period between 
the 11th and 16th of January. This is the only period when PMSE's were observed almost 
continuosly. Figure 3 shows a blowup of an interesting sub-period showing the same 
information, but at full observing temporal resolution. The on line incoherent integration time 
for both plots is 1.5 minutes, but further integration has been performed in the longer record, 
to match the pixel resolution of the display. The plots show the signal strength in a logarithmic 
scale, after having subtracted noise and altitude independent interferences. We had interference 
problems, with interference power levels comparable to the noise. It was originated mainly in 
the processing and control electronics. The noise and the interference is estimated from the first 
ten altitudes, and subtracted from the other. Here we are taking advantage of the fact that these 
altitudes never had any echoes.

Although it is difficult to separate the noise from the interference, we need to do so, in 
order to use the noise level as a reference for comparison with other radar results. We have 
estimated the noise level indirectly. The standard deviation of the noise power estimate was 
evaluated using the same ten altitudes, assuming that the interference was range independent. 
From the level of the standard deviation, the noise power level can be obtained assuming a 
Student distribution for its deviation statistics. The only additional parameter needed is the 
corresponding number of degrees of freedom in the averaging process, which is equal to twice 
the number of coherently integrated samples taken. The factor of two comes about because two 
values, the real and the imaginary part of the phase detected signals, are used for each sample. 
The assumption of range independence for the interference can be checked post facto, by 
observing the resultant RTI plot. And indeed, except for the time at around 16:00 and 21:00 on 
January 12th, we notice that there are no power fluctuations in range which can be attributed 
to interference. Even at the time of the exception, the range dependent fluctuations are only a 
few db, 10 db below the noise level.

It is clear from Figures 2 and 3, that the echo observed during the times displayed, 
correspond to PMSE. They have the same morphology as other similar plots taken at other 
northern latitude stations. The activity is centered at 87 km, within a km of what has been 
reported for Poker Flat (Ecklund and Balsley, 1981). Furthermore,if we scale down the Poker 
Flat results, considering the difference in power and sensitivity, the altitude range of the affected 
zone is within the same range we observe. In addition, their velocity and spectral width 
correspond to expected PMSE values. Their velocity correspond to expected vertical mesospheric 
velocities and their spectral width to antenna beam broadened spectra consistent with expected 
horizontal mesospheric velocities.

Another conspicuous feature that is evident from the RTI plots is the existence of quasi-
periodic down-coming structures with periods of about 30 to 60 minutes. See for instance the 
almost identical features between 17:40 to 19:00 on January 12. The form of these two features 
is very similar to other isolated features which can be seen at 11:30 and 16:20 on the same day, 
and at 6:00, 8:30 and 10:00 on January 13. They all progress downward, slowly at the beginning 
and precipitating at the end. The downward phase progression, and its periodicity, indicate a 
close relationship with gravity waves. Such a relationship has also been observed at the 
northern polar latitudes.
Both days show minimum activity between midnight and 04:00 hours, indicating strong
solar control. We don't have a long enough series as to derive a climatology, but this behavior
in time is also similar to its northern latitude counterpart. The only and important difference is
the echoe strength and the seasonal duration of the phenomena, at least with the sensitivity of
our instrument. The January 11th to 15th reduce the difference in power from our previously
reported figure, for the two hemispheres, from three orders of magnitude to two. This is still
a very large asymmetry which needs to be explained.

Figure 4, show the only event in which the echo strength of the echoes exceeded the
sensitivity of the system during the previous campaign of 1993. As mentioned in the
introduction, by changing our processing scheme, we have been able to "pull" this one event
from the noise. We can no longer claim, as stated in Balsley et al 1993,1995, complete absence
of echoes for the period of observations in 1993, January 27 to February 15,1993. The event
shown in figure 4 change our previously reported asymmetry by 3 or 4db for the last days of
January, but stays the same for the last 15 days of observation, were no echoes are evident, even
after its improved reprocessing.

Even though we suspect the equipment was not up to specifications during the period
prior to January 11, it did have sufficient sensitivity to observe tropospheric echoes to about 5
km altitude. It is not possible for us to discern now, retroactively, with certainty, if the
maximum altitude was low because of lack in the system sensitivity or if the atmosphere did not
present turbulent regions above this altitude from which the radar could backscatter some
echoes. But at least in one occassion, on the afternoon and evening of December 30, we did see
tropospheric echoes up to 10 km altitude, and yet we did not see any mesospheric echoes during
the two hours of mesospheric echoes at noon time. An spectral contour plot and a power profile,
corresponding to tropospheric altitudes, is shown in Figure 5, for this particular date .

As stated in the observations section, we can state with confidence that no mesospheric
echoes were seen in the period January 29th to February 13th, confirming our previous negative
results obtained in February 1993.

Discussion

The observations made in the summer of 1994 complement the previous one made one
year before, in the sense that earlier days, closer to the Austral Summer Equinox, are included.
Although, the period of the newer observations reported here were not made as early as
desirable, they seem to cover an important period of transition, from actual PMSE occurrence
to their absence, at least for radars with sensitivities comparable to ours. If we scale down the
echo power levels of the Poker Flat radar shown in Figure 6. taking into account the difference
in sensitivity, we can predict positive results for the period May 15th to August 15th. The season
of occurrence of PMSE, as observed by the Poker Flat radar, is so sharply defined that one can
claim only a few days of error for this period of activity. May and August in the North
Hemisphere map into November and February  in the South.

The picture that emerges from our 1994 observations and the one day in January 27, 1993,
is that the transition, marking the end of the PMSE season, occurs in the Antarctic during the
last days of January, instead of February 15th, as one would expect from the Arctic observations.
More importantly, the expected power levels within the active period are two orders of
magnitude lower than their northern latitude counterpart. And although, we don't have much
confidence in the system for the last days of December and first days of January. There is the
possibility that they disappear for more than one day at a time, even at the center of the season.
We have at least one day to show, December 30, 1993, a day when the system did see
tropospheric echoes at high altitudes. In any case, there was sufficient sensitivity, during the
other questionable days, to claim that the echoes would be at the most 20 db below the strength
of the Arctic ones at the peak of the season.

It should be mentioned that a shorter Antarctic season is also seen in the observations
of Polar Mesospheric Clouds. If one looks carefully at the ocurrence frequency reported by
Thomas [1991], one sees that not only the latitude extend of PMC's are wider at the Arctic, but
that for a latitude of 64° the season of non-zero ocurrence is larger in the Arctic than in the
Antarctic (See Fig. 4 in Thomas, 1991).

It is interesting to notice that the PMSE seen in Poker Flat at both extremes of the season,
are not only weaker, but become more sporadic (Ecklund and Balsley, 1981). This can be
appreciated in panels b) and c) from Figure 6 (After, Balsley, Personal communication). It
appears then, that what we see at the Antarctic is only comparable with the weak and sporadic
echoes at the extremes of the Arctic season.

As discussed in the literature (Balsley et al., 1995, Thomas 1991), PMSE, Noctilucent
clouds and Polar Mesospheric Clouds must be related, because their confined seasonal and
latitudinal extend, to the very low temperatures that occur at the polar summer mesosphere.
There is apparently a temperature threshold, very possibily a condensation temperature threshold
around 150 K (Thomas, 1991), that the mesosphere must go under for all of these related
phenomena to take place. If such a temperature threshold exist, all what we need to postulate
to explain the difference in behavior of the PMSE at the two hemispheres is a difference in
temperature comparable to the one that exist between the coldest time, near the Summer Solstice,
to the temperature at the end of the PMSE in the Arctic, i.e. about 80 K.

Considering the large difference in behaviour for such small difference in temperature,
we can claim that a polar mesospheric VHF radar provides us with a very sensitive tool to
monitor the changes in temperature that could exist at these altitude due to anthropogenetic or
natural reasons. If we add to this that mesospheric temperatures are more prone to change than
tropospheric ones, because their very weak coupling to the earth surface, PMSE radars provides
us with an additional advantage for monitoring global changes in temperature.

Acknowledgement
CONAAN, NSF, Concytec, DHN
Soldi, Villegas, Torres

References

Balsley, B.B., R.F. Woodman, M. Sarango, R. Rodriguez, J. Urbina, E. Ragaini, J. Carey, M.
Huaman, A. Giraldez. On the Lack of Southern-Hemispheric PMSE, J. Geophys. Res., 1995.

Balsley, B.B., R.F. Woodman, M. Sarango, J. Urbina, R. Rodriguez, E. Ragaini and J. Carey.
Southern-Hemisphere, PMSE : Were are they?, Geophys. Res. Lett., Vol. 20, No. 18, pp 1983, 1993.

Röttger, J. Polar Mesosphere Summer Echoes: Dynamics and Aeronomy of the Mesosphere, Adv.
Space Res, Vol. 14, No. 9, pp (9)123-(9)137, 1994.
Röttger, J., M.T. Rietvel, C. La Hoz, T. Hall, M.C. Kelley, and W.E. Swartz. Polar mesosphere summer echoes observed with the Eiscat 933-MHz radar and the CUPRI 46.9-MHz radar, their similarity to 224-MHz radar echoes and their relation to turbulence and electron density profiles, Radio Sci. Vol. 25, pp 671, 1990.

Thomas, G. E., Mesospheric Clouds and the Physics of the Mesopause Region, Rev. of Geophys., Vol. 29, No. 4, 1991.

Cho, J.Y.N. and M. C. Kelley, Polar mesosphere summer echoes: observations and current theories, Rev. of Geophys., Vol. 31, No. 3, pp 243, 1993.

Ecklund, W.L. and B.B. Balsley. Long term observations of the arctic mesosphere with the MST radar at Poker Flat, Alaska. J. Geophys. Res., Vol. 86, 7775, 1981.
Figure captions

Figure 1). Typical power profile (left) and spectral contour plot (right) obtained by the radar.

Figure 2). Range-time-intensity plot covering the period between late January 11 to mid day Jan. 
15, 1994, when continuous observations at mesospheric heights were made and PMSE were observed.

Figure 3). Same as in Fig. 2 but for the shorter period between 7:30 and 14:20, Jan. 12, 1994.

Figure 4). Range-Time-Intensity plot showing the only PMSE seen in the 1993 campaign.

Figure 5). Spectral contour plot corresponding to tropospheric heights, for December 30, 1993, 
showing good system sensitivity. Despite the sensitivity no PMSE were seen at noon time.

Figure 6). Climatology of important PMSE parameters as observed with the Poker Flat radar in 
1994. a) spectral width, b) signal to noise and c) occurrence ratio, B. Balsley personal 
communication.
CHU-PICCHU STATION, ANTARCTICA, UHF WIND PROFILER             CHAZDS : 1
EP - IGP - DIHM - PERU                                      UNZDS : 1
94 Jan 12 Wed       15:58:04 Day 012                     HT_INDEX : 0

                            SIGNAL POWER                                VIND PROFILE

         93.8                                                    93.8

         91.3                                                    91.3

         88.8                                                    88.8

         86.3                                                    86.3

         83.8                                                    83.8

         81.3                                                    81.3

         78.8                                                    78.8

         76.3                                                    76.3

         73.8                                                    73.8

         71.3                                                    71.3

         68.8          0    10   20   30    40   50             -11.7    -5.9     0.0    5.9   11.7
      SIG. P O V. (dB)                                      VELOCITY (M / S)

Fig. 1
PMSE - Power Plot
Mandu Pichu, Antarctica, Jan 11-15, 1994

             95       90       85        80       75       70
         |        |        |        |        |        |
       Height (km) 

         12 
         .
         .
         .
         13
         .
         .
         .
         14
         .
         .
         .
         15

Local Solar Day

                  db over s.d. of noise
                  0        5        10       15       20
Fig. 2
PRIMEROS ECOS POLARES MESOSFERICOS DE VERANO - MACHU-PICCHU, ANTARTIDA


                                 
             90 -
             85 -
 ALTURA     80 -
   (KM)     75 -
             8        10       12       14
                  HORA SOLAR (ENERO 12, 1994)

Fig. 3
SIGNAL POINT
DATE : 8/7/93
INTERPOLATION: 1.50 KILOMETRES
PERFIL DE POTENCIA                                          ESPECTRO DE POTENCIA

                                                            rango:(-6, 21) canal-1
                                                            archivo: a9336403.p02 hora:14:52:44 pos-ant:x

                                                            23.2
23.2                                                      
                                                            19.0
19.0                                                      
                                                            14.8
14.8                                                      
                                                            10.6
10.6                                                      
                                                            6.4
6.4                                                        
                                                            2.2
2.2

Fig. 5
FIG. 8.9


                      Height above ground (km)


      (Xenon/Kal)                  Recelvo Signal to Nolae                Spectral Width (k?/s?lt)


                                                                               POKER FLAT RADAR
