ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              XIX REUNION. CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                              XIX консультативное совещание

                                      SEOUL
                                      May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 57
May 10, 1995
Original: English

CONCERNING THE SITUATION AT ARRIVAL HEIGHTS (SSSI No. 2)

Agenda Item 12 c

(Submitted by SCAR)
ATCM INFORMATION PAPER FROM SCAR
Concerning the situation at Arrival Heights (SSSI No 2)

The Chairman of the SCAR Working Group on Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical Research acted on behalf of SCAR as Chairman of the meetings, between representatives of the United States and New Zealand National Committees, concerning the problems of electromagnetic radiation at SSSI No 2. He reported to the Delegates meeting at XXIII SCAR who adopted Recommendation XXIII-6.

Recommendation SCAR XXIII-6
Concerning Arrival Heights SSSI

Recalling SCAR Recommendation XXII-3 concerning the Arrival Heights SSSI;

Accepting the conclusions and recommendations of a report to the SCAR Executive Committee on the "Analysis of the Electromagnetic Environment at Arrival Heights" in response to this Recommendation;

SCAR urges the appropriate National Committees and Antarctic Treaty Parties to implement the conclusions and recommendations of this report, as given below.

Conclusions

There are currently many sources of electromagnetic radiation in the Ross Sea area which create unacceptable levels of both broad and narrow band electromagnetic interference within the Arrival Heights SSSI.

Within the limitations of the noise surveys and the paucity of controlled experiments, there are no discernible impacts on the on-going experiments at Arrival Heights from the New Zealand Telecom Satellite Earth Station (SES).

Anecdotal information indicates that the SSSI has not been effective in the past in terms of limiting access to the site.

The Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for the SES was inadequate in terms of consideration of electromagnetic compatibility and electromagnetic interference.

Recommendations

1. It is recommended that there should be an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) with approximately the same boundaries as the existing SSSI and that, within this ASPA:

    a. The electromagnetic noise level should be maintained as close as practicable to the natural noise floor over a frequency range from 10-4 to 1010 Hz;

    b. Intentional electromagnetic radiation be prohibited except within agreed frequency bands and power levels;

    c. The electromagnetic emissions produced by any equipment introduced to the ASPA must not adversely affect any on-going investigation;

    d. Physical access is prohibited except for the purposes of new and on-going investigations, or for necessary health and safety operations.

2. In order to facilitate the above, it is recommended that there should be an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) which is circular with a radius of 100 km, centred on 77°49'45" S, 166°39'45" E (approximately in the centre of the ASPA), with the following management philosophy:

    a. Reduction of the present electromagnetic radiation levels where practicable so that the natural noise levels can be achieved within the ASPA;
b. The need to ensure electromagnetic compatibility should be an essential part of the 
planning, installation and operation of equipment and facilities within the ASMA.

c. The ASMA will be managed jointly by the National Operators active in the ASMA;

d. Periodic comprehensive electromagnetic noise level surveys will be conducted in the 
ASPA to monitor compliance with the management plan.  The planning of noise 
surveys should include input from scientists with equipment operating in the area.

e. The effectiveness of the operation of the ASMA should be reviewed annually by a panel 
consisting of scientific experts nominated by SCAR and representatives of the National 
Antarctic Operators active in the ASMA.
