
BULGARIA IN ANTARCTICA

ANTARCTICTREATY
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
IN ACCORDANCE WITH
ARTICLES III(1) & VII(5)
AND RECOMMENDATION VIII(6)
I. Introduction                                                         2

The Republic of Bulgaria ascended to the Antarctic treaty in 1978, and thus became the twentieth contracting Party because of its firm conviction that Antarctica shall for ever be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that international cooperation on the basis of freedom and scientific investi- gation in Antarctica shall continue in the interest of all mankind.

Antarctica is the only continent still largely unexplored. Its geogra- phic position and physical features, distance from sources of pollution and the little human activity make it a special area from which to gain an inside of the entire planet. Antarctica is without doubt Nature's largest laboratory on Earth. The scope of Antarctic research goes beyond an understanding of the natural processes that occur in high latitudes in relation to their extreme climatology. Its study reveals planetary phenomena whose origins lie in the Antarctic zone. Recent scientific research has stressed the role of the Continent and its surrounding oceans in the maintenance and stability of the biosphere.

We are well aware that Bulgaria is at the beginning of its serious invol- vement in Antarctic research. Nevertheless, we are convinced that Antarctica is an unique continent of international harmony and freedom and as such needs even the modest contributions to scientific progress in its study.

II. Past Bulgarian Antarctic activities

Since the years 1967-1969 when a Bulgarian meteorologist took part in the 13th Soviet Antarctic Expedition, until recently Bulgarian researchers have not been very active in the scientific investigation of Antarctica. In the summer season of 1987-88 six Bulgarian scientists participated in
АНТАРКТИКА
о. ЛИВИНГСТЪН

Бази
◇ Св.Климент Охридски - България
■ Хуан Карлос I - Испания

прол. Макфарлан
зал.Ню Плимут
зал.Баркли
зал.Хироу
зал. Емона
зал. Плъжий
Южен
зал.
въз.Глинър
н.Уилямс
н.Алта
Луне[?] зал.
н.Пи[?]
н.Си[?]ънс
н.Ха[?]а[?]
н.Алеко
л-к Перуника
в[?]р.Ре[?]ен
вр.Плиска
вр.Орфей
вр.Фри[?]ла[?]
вр.Мака[?]
н.Майърс
н.Барнард
н-в Байърс
вр.Роч
плато Балкан
л-к Хурон
н.Глин
в[?]р.Г[?]и[?]ъ[?]
©1995                                                
                 Атлантическият Клуб в България        
                 The Atlantic Club of Bulgaria                
                 Антарктически Институт                 
                 Bulgarian Antarctic Institute              


ГРАФИЧЕН ДИЗАЙН
PAT DESIGN STUDIO

ПЕЧАТ - БЪЛГАРСКА ФИЛАТЕЛИЯ 
И НУМИЗМАТИКА

снимки: Хр. Пимпирев     карта: Л. Иванов
PRINTE[?] IN BULGARIA
3.

joint projects with the British Antarctic Survey and the Soviet Institute for 
Antarctic and Arctic Research. This Bulgarian program was aimed at 
gathering valuable experience both in carrying out scientific research and 
in the organization of logistics in Antarctica.

The joint British-Bulgarian project was agreed under the name of "The 
granitoids of Alexander Island, Antarctic Peninsula and their metallogenic 
significance". The airlift and shipping of the Bulgarian participants was 
provided by the British Antarctic Survey on RRS "John Biscoe", RRS 
"Bransfield" and by the BAS air-units. During the joint field work 
Bulgarian scientists got highly estimated experience for field geology 
work in the hard Antarctic conditions.

The joint Soviet-Bulgarian project included a group of four Bulgarian 
scientists, with an own research program, in the staff of the 33rd Soviet 
Antarctic Expedition. During this cruise a refuge was established on 
Livingston Island (South Shetland Islands)  on a spot located on the 
North-East side  of the South Bay with coordinates 62º 38' 29" S and 
60º 21' 53" W.

III. Present activities

In the period 1993-1995 Bulgaria organized two successive Antarctic 
campaigns. A summer base was established and a systematic collection 
of data and samples in various research fields was initialized. These 
campaigns were organized by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute and the 
Atlantic Club in Bulgaria, with the help and logistic support of the 
Spanish Antarctic Program.

During the 1993-94 Antarctic summer campaign the Bulgarian refuge on 
Livingston Island was reconstructed and put into operation as a summer 
base.
4

The base was named "St. Kliment Ohridski" by an official Act of the
President of the Republic of Bulgaria. Ecological hazards caused by the
five-years interruption of the activity in the refuge were removed during
this campaign. The scientific program included studies in the fields of
geology, meteorology, glaciology and human medicine.

In the summer of 1994-95 the third Bulgarian Antarctic Campaign was
carried out. The scope of the Bulgarian scientific program was broadened
and new research projects in the field of biology were initialized, together
with the continuing geological, glaciological and meteorological
studies. Scientific collaboration has been established with the Argentinean
Antarctic Institute. A joint geological project was carried out and a
Bulgarian geologist was logistically supported to work in the Argentinean
field camp on Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island.

In 1994 the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute presented an application for
associate membership in SCAR. On March 5, 1995 Bulgaria became an
associate member of this most important scientific coordination body.

IV. Future activities.

Bulgaria plans to continue and intensify its Antarctic research program in
the forthcoming years. The Bulgarian National Program for Antarctic
Research is the framework for the organization and coordination of future
Antarctic campaigns. The Program is guided by the Bulgarian Antarctic
Institute which is in charge to create the logistics required for scientists
to carry out their research projects under the best possible conditions.

During the 1995-96 Antarctic campaign a further reconstruction of the base
"St. Kliment Ohridski" is planned. A new living complex and a scientific
laboratory building will be constructed. The base is designed to shelter a
5

total staff of 10 persons. After the reconstruction the base will be able to 
accept guest-scientists and could be used permanently if necessary. 
Research will continue to be initially limited to the Livingston Island. 
However, some scientists will carry out their work aboard vessels or at 
bases and field camps belonging to other nations within the framework of 
international scientific programs. An international project for deep ice-
core drilling on Livingston Island is in preparation. A suita ble drilling 
site has been suggested in the close vicinity of both the Bulgarian base "St. 
Kliment Ohridski" and the Spanish base "Juan Carlos I". Within the 
biological research program a joint Bulgarian-Spanish project to study 
the effect of parasitism on penguin reproductive success is under 
consideration. A joint Bulgarian-Brazilian project aiming at studying 
the difficult to access rock complexes at the Friesland Massif is also in 
preparation.

V. Events and Developments

V.1. Visits and meetings in Bulgaria

In November 1994 the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute organized a session 
on Antarctic research at the University of Sofia. More than 10 talks were 
given devoted to different aspects of the Bulgarian Antarctic Program. 
Dr. Peter Clarkson, Executive Secretary of SCAR and invited lecturer, 
gave an open lecture entitled "Structure, scientific programs and priorities 
of SCAR".

In April 1995 the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute with the support of the 
Atlantic Club of Bulgaria organized the first Spanish-Bulgarian 
Workshop on Antarctic Research. The aim of the workshop was to 
coordinate the 1995-96 Antarctic campaign and to discuss scientific 
projects of common interest. From the Spanish side in the meeting took 
part Dr. Juan Ramon Vericad, Manager of the Spanish Antarctic
6

Program and Dr. Alberto Castejon, Base Commander of the Spanish base "Juan Carlos I".

V.2. Visits and meetings abroad.

In the work of the XXIII SCAR meeting in Rome took part Prof. Dr. Christo Pimpirev, Prof. Dr. Borislav Kamenov, Dr. Nesho Chipev and Dr. Dimiter Balabanski.

At the end of November 1994 Dr. N. Chipev and Dr. K. Veltchev visited the Chilean Antarctic Institute in Santiago de Chile and exchanged information on the objectives of the Bulgarian and Chilean Antarctic programs.

In December 1994 Prof. Christo Pimpirev, Director of the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute, met Prof. Dr. Carlos Rinaldi, Director of the Argentinean Antarctic Institute. A bilateral agreement between the two institutes was discussed.

In January 1995 Prof. Dr. Lyubomir Ivanov participated in the second annual meeting of South Shetland Islands base commanders held at Eduardo Frei Base, King George Island, and dedicated to problems of local communications, marine pollution and tourism.

In February 1995 Prof. Dr. Christo Pimpirev visited Dr. Juan Ramon Vericad at the Interministry Commission of Science and Technology, Madrid, Spain and discussed the possibilities of a bilateral agreement for Antarctic research.

In March 1995 Dr. D. Balabanski and Dr. D. Dimov visited the secretariat of SCAR at Scott Polar Research Institute, Cambridge, UK and gave information about the 1994-95 Bulgarian campaign and had also a working visit at the British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge.
7

V.3. Planning, management and execution of scientific activities in 
Antarctica. Governmental and non-governmental institutions involved.

The present Bulgarian scientific activities in Antarctica have been 
managed jointly by the Atlantic Club of Bulgaria and the Bulgarian 
Antarctic Institute since the latter was established in 1993. These activities 
are conducted along the guidelines of consistent official Antarctic 
policies, followed by consecutive Governments ever since Bulgaria joined 
the Antarctic Treaty in 1978.

The Atlantic Club is a non-governmental, non-partisan organization 
established in 1991 to promote the common values of Euro-Atlantic 
community and to further Bulgarian's integration into Euro-Atlantic 
political, security, economic and scientific structures. The Club's activities 
include visits and lectures by distinguished Bulgarian and foreign 
speakers, sponsorship of seminars and conferences, as well as ongoing 
programs in a variety of fields including sustainable development, 
Antarctic and aerospace research. The Club was the first organization of 
that kind to be formed outside the Atlantic Treaty area and has been 
associated with the Atlantic Treaty Association since 1992. Dr. Solomon 
Passy has been the President of the Club since its foundation.

The Antarctic Institute carries out its activities under the aegis of the 
President of Bulgaria. The Institute consists of two corporate members, the 
Bulgarian State and the Atlantic Club of Bulgaria, and several individual 
members. The State is represented in the Executive Council of the Institute 
by Vice Foreign Minister appointed by the Bulgarian Foreign Minister. 
Prof. Dr. Christo Pimpirev has been the Chairman of the Executive 
Council since the foundation of the Institute, as well as the leader of the 
1993/94, 1994/95 and forthcoming 1995/96 expeditions.
8

The Antarctic Institute's aims include: establishment of a lasting Bulgarian presence in Antarctica; scientific studies of Antarctic ecosystems, geological structures, atmospheric and other processes; achieving a consultative status of Bulgaria under the Antarctic Treaty system; support of Bulgarian organizations with economic, cultural and other interests in the region. These goals are to be pursued through: national and joint with other nations Antarctic expeditions; construction of a permanent Bulgarian scientific base in the Antarctic Peninsula region; conferences, seminars and meetings on Antarctic topics; scientific research related to the exploitation of the Antarctic marine living resources.

The Antarctic Institute and the Atlantic Club organize annual National Antarctic expeditions and operate the Bulgarian Antarctic Base "St. Kliment Ohridski". The Atlantic Club is responsible for providing the necessary funding, mainly from non-governmental sources s.a. financial and industrial enterprises. The Antarctic Institute is responsible for the scientific aspects of the Bulgarian Antarctic activities, carried out under the 1995/97 mid-term National Antarctic Research Programme proposed by the Institute and accepted by the National Scientific Research Fund. The annual research activities are planned by the Executive Council on recommendation by the Scientific Broad of the Institute. The Bulgarian Antarctic activities get valuable logistic support from the Spanish Antarctic Programme. Technical and scientific cooperation with other nations operating in the Antarctic Peninsula region has been expanding as well.

The permanent Bulgarian base "St.Kliment Ohridski" is located at South Bay, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, position 62º 38' 29" S by 60º 21' 53" W.The base has two modules and is opened for 3 months during the summer. Some 8 to 10 scientists carry out research and field work using the base each year. Construction of additional living and research facilities is planned for the 1995/96 season.
9

Scientific programs

GEOLOGY

Principle investigators:

Prof. C. Pimpirev

Prof. B. Kamenov

Dr. D. Dimov

Dr. Z. Verguilov

The Mesozoic turbidite basins in the Northern part of the Antarctic 
Peninsula were created in specific geotectonic environment. As the 
remnants of a subduction-related accretionary wedge its constituent rocks 
might be expected to vary considerably in age, stratigraphic position and 
sedimentology. The aims of the study are to undertake detailed 
stratigraphic and sedimentological observations and facies analysis of 
the turbidite sequences different in age and depositional environments. 
Age determining would be done using the palynological method. The 
overall goal of the project is to develop an integrate picture of the 
paleoenvironments during the Mesozoic in the Northern parts of the 
Antarctic Peninsula using the achievements of the studies of the modern 
and ancient turbidite systems.

The calc-alkaline arc magmatism associated with the subduction of 
PaleoPacific Ocean lithosphere bellow the continental margin has 
numerous outcrops almost everywhere in Antarctic Peninsula and its 
neighboring islands. In spite of the research done up to now on some of 
the accessible exposures of the plutonic bodies still there are no 
sufficient geochemical or reliable radiometric data to support or refute the 
claims for their significance in the structural and geodynamic 
reconstructions. The isolated plutonic intrusions occurred in 
Livingston Island show petrological similarities with the other plutons of 
the extensive calc-alkaline plutonic suite that forms much the Antarctic
10

Peninsula and its neighboring islands, being part of the volcanic arc. The 
study is aimed at collecting new evidences for the chemical variation of 
these rocks and their relationships with the arc-building process.

Structural and metamorphic evolution of the basement of the Northern 
Antarctic Peninsula is to clarify the geological setting, age and structural 
evolution of the metamorphic complexes. The establishment of the 
mineral composition and the age of the protolites, as well as the timing 
of their metamorphism are the basic tangible tasks.

The cristallochemical features and real structure of rock-forming minerals 
from different regions of the Antarctic Peninsula are under 
investigation. The orientation, thickness and spatial distribution of the 
main zones of ductile, ductile-brittle and brittle shearing in the 
metamorphic complexes  is studied. This work is directed towards 
compiling a system of crystallochemical and crystallostructural 
petrogenetic criteria by the means of X-ray powder diffraction, 
electron diffraction, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, 
microraman and IR spectroscopy, Moessbauer spectroscopy. 
Peculiarities of the crystal chemistry and such elements of the real 
structure of minerals as lattice imperfections order - disorder 
phenomena, twinning, phase unhomogenity of any order, mineral 
and fluid inclusions, etc., etc., are extremely sensitive to any changes of 
the conditions of nucleation, growth and evolution of minerals, due to 
subsequent geological processes.
11

GLACIOLOGY
Principle investigators:
Dr. D. Balabanski
Dr. K. Veltchev

Polar glaciers are studied in order to gain information about the evolution of the atmospheric pollution. The isotope analysis of the annual glacier layers will allow to estimate the deposited chemical admixtures of natural and antropogenic origin. This problem is closely connected to the environmental monitoring and the predictions about its future development. The primary aim of the project is to study the technogenic pollution in glacier layers in the vicinity of the Bulgarian base at Livingston Island and to establish reference firn layers there. Concentrations of deposited heavy metals and radioactive pollutions are studied. Ice-core samples collected during the Bulgarian Antarctic expeditions will be analyzed using different analytical methods. Radioactive pollution will be studied by direct radiometric measurements, too.

The dynamics of the ice cap on Livingston Island in particular that on Hurd Peninsula is under study. Ice-core drillings up to 30-35 meters have been performed aimed at detecting pyroclastids included in the gletcher. The dating of the ice layers is done in cooperation with researchers from other countries. The distribution and penetration of aerosol particles of antropogenic and natural (sea) origin inside of Livingston Island is also studied.
12

TERRESTRIAL ECOLOGY
Principle investigators:
Prof. V. Golemanski
Prof. D. Temniskova
Dr. N. Chipev
Dr. V. Peneva

The structure and organization of Antarctic terrestrial communities
is not well studied. This topic is the priority of the international BIOTAS
program. The species composition, taxonomy and ecology of algae
from different terrestrial habitats on Livingston Island is studied.
Samples are characterized typologically and the qualitative and
quantitative structure of algal communities is related to habitat
characteristics.

Many components of the soil protozoan fauna (Rhizopoda: Testacea)
actively participate in the soil forming processes. Species composition
and ecological analysis of the protozoan communities in Antarctic habitats
are under study. Samples of the specific interstitial protozoan fauna,
inhabiting the littoral zone and the sea coast and other water bodies are also
analyzed.

Rich nematode fauna has been established in samples from soil and
vegetation in different habitats on Livingston Island. Studies on the
communities of nematodes and their relation to environmental factors are
in progress.
13.

PARASITES OF ANTARCTIC VERTEBRATES
Principle investigators:
Prof. V. Golemanski
Dr. N. Chipev
Dr. B. Georgiev

The species composition of helminth and protozoan parasites, their
abundance and occurrence in different Antarctic hosts is studied. Data
are being gathered for the analysis of the taxonomic and ecological
structure of parasite communities in different host species. Investigation
of the role of parasites in the reproduction and behaviour of penguins
are initialized.

MICROBIOLOGY
Principle investigators:
Dr. V. Chipeva
Dr. Z. Sholeva

More than 400 strains of microorganisms have been isolated from
Antarctic fish, penguins, seals and soil sampled from the region of
Livingston Island. Testing of the strains for the production of bioactive
substances is in progress. The study of bioactive substances will
provide, among others, valuable data about the behaviour of organisms in
the extreme antarctic environment.
