ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                        XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                      SEOUL
                                      May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 59
May 10, 1995
Original: English

 
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT PLANS

Agenda Item 12 b

(Submitted by New Zealand)
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT PLANS

QUICK REFERENCE SHEET FOR OPERATIONAL USE

Background

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty establishes a revised protected area management regime for the Antarctic. Specific requirements are set out in Annex V to the Protocol, Area Protection and Management, and include a revised format for management plans.

In June 1993, New Zealand and the USA contracted the International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR) to review the management plans for protected areas in the Ross Sea region. During the review process for the first management plans drafted under Annex V, the issue of plan format came under discussion. The need for a management plan quick reference sheet was debated within the New Zealand Antarctic Programme (NZAP) during these discussions. The attached example sheet for the (proposed) Tramway Ridge Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is an outcome of this process.

The Quick Reference Sheet

The aim of the ASPA quick reference sheet is to pull out information from the plan that relates directly to how activities are to be conducted in and around the ASPA and what restrictions there are on, for example helicopter and vehicle movements.

The attached double sided sheet provides a summary of the main requirements of the (proposed) management plan for the Tramway Ridge ASPA. The first page of the sheet provides a quick reference guide to the requirements of the plan and is aimed at aspects that relate directly to operational and field matters, for example acceptable modes of transport. Page two provides easy reference maps (from the management plan) of the ASPA site showing features and restrictions referred to in the text. Examples include the location of the helicopter pad, and the snow mobile route in relation to ASPA boundaries.

Potential users of the sheet could include national programme operational and science support personnel, helicopter air crews and tourist operators.

Need for the Sheet

Identification of the need for a quick reference sheet arose out of internal NZAP discussions regarding the format of the new management plans being drafted under Article 5, Annex V of the Protocol. While the format is comprehensive, it was felt that key requirements of the plans were 'lost' within the bulk of the document. Support for the sheet was strongest among operations staff who need to know the basic requirements for activities in and near protected areas often within very short time frames. The sheet could have a similar value to science parties as an easy reference guide in the field, to helicopter pilots and to tourist operators when visiting sites in the vicinity of protected areas, for example at Cape Royds and Cape Hallett. The sheet is NOT intended to be used as a replacement for the plan and refers users to the full copy of the management plan where appropriate. The quick reference sheet concept is consistent with the requirements of Article 9, Annex V of the Protocol, Information and Publicity, which encourages the distribution of information on protected areas, including "listings of prohibitions relevant to each Area" (Annex V, Article 9, 1(c)).

Use of the sheet should encourage increased awareness of the location and restrictions on access to and conduct within ASPAs, and help to ensure that the aims and objectives of a management plan are met. NZAP intends to draw up similar sheets for other ASPAs in the Ross Sea region for use within the programme as the revision of plans into Annex V format continues.

New Zealand Antarctic Programme
PO. Box 14 091
Christchurch
New Zealand

Draft 24/4/95
ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (ASPA) NO. *
TRAMWAY RIDGE, MT. EREBUS, ROSS ISLAND

Management Plan Quick Reference Sheet

This sheet is a quick reference guide to the requirements of the management plan for ASPA * (the Area).
THIS SHEET IS NOT THE MANAGEMENT PLAN.

All visitors to the ASPA must read and comply with the provisions of the full management plan.

Access
  • a permit is required to enter the Area
  • a full copy of the management plan and the permit must be carried within the Area
  • helicopter landings are prohibited in the Area - overflights should be avoided except for essential 
    scientific or management purposes - no lower than 30m above ground surface
  • use of helicopter smoke bombs is prohibited within 200m of the Area - discouraged nearby
  • short-duration visits (no camp establishment) - helicopter access to designated pad (refer map A)
  • long-duration visits (camp establishment) - helicopter access to USAP Upper or Lower Erebus Huts and 
    on foot or by land vehicle to the Area boundary (refer map A)
  • helicopter landings at other sites close to the Area are strongly discouraged
  • keep to preferred snow mobile route when moving between Upper and Lower Erebus Huts (refer map A)
  • field camps should be located near the existing Upper and Lower Erebus Huts
  • camping is discouraged anywhere within 500m of the Area boundary

Movement
  • access to the Restricted Zone is strictly prohibited (refer map B)
  • access into the Area must be on foot - no land vehicles
  • avoid walking on visible vegetation and as far as practicable on areas of warm ground
  • make every effort to minimise the effects of walking activity and keep pedestrian movements to a minimum

Structures and Equipment
  • structures and equipment must not be erected or stored in the Area except in accordance with a permit
  • all equipment and structures should be made of materials that pose minimal contamination risk
  • all equipment and structures installed must be identified by country, name and year of installation

Introductions
  • no living animal, plant material or microorganism shall be deliberately introduced into the Area
  • precautions shall be taken to ensure that accidental introductions do not occur (IMPORTANT - refer 
    section 7(ix)3 of management plan for specific precautions required)
  • no herbicides, pesticides or fuels shall be brought into the Area - permit required for any other chemicals
  • food shall not be consumed in the Area
  • all sampling equipment must be sterilised before being brought into the Area

Flora and Fauna
  • taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited except in accordance with a permit

Removal of Materials
  • material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit
  • all materials brought into the Area shall be removed at the conclusion of the activity
  • material of human origin not brought into the Area by the permit holder, but which is likely to compromise 
    the values of the Area, may be removed from any part of the Area

Waste Disposal
  • all wastes must be removed from the Area
  • human wastes must not be excreted in the Area

Reports
  • All visitors who enter the Area must provide a report on their activities within 6 months of their visit

ALL VISITORS TO THE ASPA MUST READ AND COMPLY WITH THE 
PROVISIONS OF THE FULL MANAGEMENT PLAN.
Map A - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX
Location image-map.

 
                                                                                  N

                                                                                  Protected area boundary
                                                                                  Provisional boundary route
                                                                                  Caldera photographic flight path transformation.

Photography, 11 November 1983 : rectified using affine transformation.


Map B - Tramway Ridge, Mt. Erebus : Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. XX

 
                                                                                  N

Restricted Zone
(Entry Prohibited)

(Entry by Permit)

Warm Ground

Photography, 9 February 1980                      Protected area boundary
                                                  Survey marks
                                                  Boundary signpost

                                                  Orthophoto positional accuracy : +/- 2m
                                                  Protected Area boundary origin of coordinates :
                                                  Station E8, Camp Area Plane Datum 1981, WGS72.
                                                  DSUJ survey: 37/142

                  0          metres         100
