ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                        
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA                
                                        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                        
                    SEOUL                
               May 8-19, 1995                
                                        
                                        
                                        
XIX ATCM/INF 54                
May 11, 1995                
Original: English                
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
          INTERNATIONAL SEMINAR ON THE                
       FUTURE OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM                
                                        
               Agenda Item 8 d                
       (Submitted by Argentina/Australia)                
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
An International Seminar on the Future of the Antarctic Treaty System organized by the Consejo Argentino para las Relaciones Internacionales (C.A.R.I.) and the Australian Antarctic Foundation took place in Ushuaia, Argentina, from 20 to 24 March 1995. A report of this meeting will be circulated by those private institutions in the near future.

A summary of remarks relating to the Seminar, which will be included in the report (but which does not necessarily reflect the opinion of individual participants nor that of the meeting) is herewith attached.
Report of the Seminar on the Future of the Antarctic Treaty System

Summary

The seminar proved to be a valuable event, which would contribute useful and constructive 
ideas for future official meetings. It was important that such general, informal reviews of the 
future of the Antarctic Treaty System occurred from time to time.

The participants in the Seminar were conscious of the deep roots of the Antarctic Treaty 
System in the past. The Treaty had settled the problem of conflicting political positions as to 
the status of the Antarctic, providing for continuing scientific cooperation, the non-
militarisation and non-nuclearisation of the Antarctic and a mechanism for future cooperation 
in furtherance of the objectives of the Treaty. Nothing should be done to affect the continued 
effectiveness of the Treaty System, which had shown itself complex but adaptive, in the 
achievement of its basic goal of preventing Antarctica from becoming the scene or object of 
international discord.

At the same time, the Treaty is silent or lacks detail on a number of issues which have become 
priority issues in recent years - in particular, the question of the renewable and non-renewable 
resources of the Antarctic, the conservation of the Antarctic environment, the growing interest 
of the wider international community in the Antarctic and the relationship with international 
organisations. Much had been done on these matters in recent years.

However, the Madrid Protocol is not yet in force and every effort should be made to bring it 
into force as soon as possible. Key aspects of the Protocol need to be implemented. It was 
important, both to the System and in its relations with non-Parties, that the TEWG and the 
CEP, begin work as soon as possible. A number of references were made to the importance of 
the creation of a Secretariat, not only in this context, but, more generally, in order to facilitate 
the work of Parties to the Treaty, particularly in the exchange, storage, processing and 
distribution of data and information.

Exchange of information is a vital element of the Antarctic Treaty System, both for the value 
of the information itself and for the importance of its exchange as a confidence building 
measure. However, there is now such an array of Recommendations on the subject, some 
"effective" (to use the term employed in Article IX) and some not and some wholly or partly 
inconsistent with earlier Recommendations and/or with the Protocol, that it is sometimes 
difficult to know what exactly are the obligations of Parties. In any event, not all 
Recommendations are complied with fully, even where there was no uncertainty. There needs 
to be both a rationalisation of the Recommendations requiring that information be exchanged 
(at the same time, perhaps, adapting the form of data exchange to the computer age) and 
closer monitoring of compliance. The review of Recommendations has largely lapsed and 
should be resumed

Cooperation in scientific research has two elements. One is the physical cooperation on the 
ground by scientists of two or more countries. It was noted that this is an increasing tendency 
and should be encouraged, both as a way of rationalising the use of resources and eliminating 
or reducing duplication. Other ways of achieving greater cooperation include the greater use 
of joint facilities and shared logistics.
The second element is the coordination of scientific work in the Antarctic. This provoked 
considerable discussion without clear conclusions. It was generally recognised that budgets for 
Antarctic science are under pressure and that coordination and prioritising are necessary. 
However, given the legitimate diversity of priorities among the different countries, achieving 
consensus at an international level will not be easy. It is a matter which might be considered by 
SCAR. In the meantime, the more information that is available well in advance about 
individual countries' scientific research plans and priorities, the easier it will be informally to 
reduce overlap and promote coordination and collaboration.

A separate question was the definition of scientific research as it affects Consultative Party 
status. It was now possible to do substantial scientific research relating to the Antarctic 
without sending an expedition or establishing a station. It might be time to re-examine the text 
of the conclusions of the First Special Consultative Meeting on this question, without prejudice 
to the terms of Article IX.

Cooperation within the Treaty System would be enhanced if there were an organic relation 
between the Consultative Meetings, as the central policy body within the system, and 
COMNAP. Some matters of an operational kind, which used to be dealt with in Consultative 
Meetings are now not and COMNAP came into existence in part to fill the gap. However, this 
led COMNAP to stray into fields more appropriately the province of the Consultative 
Meetings, while the Consultative Meetings have failed to deal adequately or in good time with 
some matters of priority interest to national operators. An agreed solution needs to be found 
and this is a matter which might be taken up at the next Consultative Meeting. In this context, 
the difference was stressed between Treaty institutions (the Consultative Meetings, CCAMLR) 
and non-Treaty fora.

Cooperation was also seen as an important feature of the relations between the Antarctic 
Treaty System and international organisations, particularly within the United Nations family. It 
was noted that such cooperation is explicitly provided for in the Treaty and has been a feature 
of the Treaty's functioning since the beginning, with notable cooperation with the WMO and 
IHO. However, that cooperation has largely been coordinated through SCAR and later 
CCAMLR and only recently has the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings included 
representatives of relevant United Nations agencies and international environment NGOs.

It seems that the challenge to the Antarctic Treaty within the General Assembly has been 
successfully met, but it could always re-surface. On the one hand, the Treaty is open to 
accession by any member of the United Nations and any Party which demonstrates sufficient 
interest in scientific work in the Antarctic can participate in the decision-making processes of 
the Consultative Meetings.

On the other hand, there is a widespread, if mistaken, impression that the Antarctic Treaty 
System is closed. This is partly for historical reasons and partly because of the decision-
making process. Consultative Parties are conscious of their special responsibility for 
Antarctica. It is important that they continue to show a sense of responsibility as custodians 
for the Antarctic. By accepting responsibilities for the Antarctic, the Consultative Parties 
acquired certain rights, without, however, trying to bind third states.

There are some possible problems on the horizon, which it was agreed should be examined at 
an early date. One of these was the relationship between the Antarctic Treaty System and the 
institutions of the Law of the Sea Convention. The question of the status of the seabed within 
the Antarctic Treaty area needs to be examined both in relation to declarations that must be
made within ten years of the entry into force for each Party to the Continental Shelf Limits
Commission and in relation to the possible differences which might exist in this area between
CCAMLR, the Seals Convention and the Protocol and, indeed, between individual Parties
relating to certain aspects of maritime jurisdiction (i.e. fisheries, environnent).

A growing problem is the management of tourism. There was considerable discussion of ways
of ensuring that decisions of the Antarctic Treaty System are carried out by operators, who may
be from non-Party states - as may be their ships. A suggestion was made that the exercise
of port state jurisdiction, as provided for in MARPOL and SOLAS conventions, would be one
way in which gateway states could assist in this matter. This matter might be considered
further. It should also be possible to work through IAATO, which should be brought into a
closer relationship with the Consultative Meetings. An outstanding matter to address was the
question of cumulative impacts.

The implementation of the Environment Protocol gives rise to a number of issues. It is
essential that the institutions of the Protocol begin to work as soon as possible. Bodies which
are scientific or expert should strictly maintain that character.

It was noted that the Liability Annex was not yet complete. There are important differences
between some of the Annexes and other comparable international instruments and some major
activities are excluded - in particular those covered by CCAMLR and the IWC. Potential
existed for conflict among Treaty Parties or between the Treaty System and international
organisations outside the System.

At the same time, the Protocol, like the Treaty, is a living document, with the capacity to
develop in response to perceived needs. It is ahead of what is being done in the Arctic and has
achieved widespread international recognition. It requires, however, continuous self-
examination on the part of Antarctic Treaty Parties.

In that context, it was noted that different state practice already exists regarding environmental
impact assessment. A question on which it would be helpful to have a common understanding
is the meaning of "minor and transitory" and what type of activity requires an IEE or CEE.

The Antarctic Treaty System in general faces the challenge of improving its own effectiveness
and legitimacy, especially in view of the special responsibility of Consultative Parties as
custodians of the Antarctic. It can do that in a number of ways. Firstly, it can examine its
institutional infrastructure. The slow pace of decision making and the tendency to put off hard
issues for later meetings needs to be addressed. The central role of the Consultative Meetings
in the System needs to be restored. Secondly, while the consensus principle is fundamental to
the System, ways might be found to improve the System's decision making procedures - for
example by an "opting out" procedure similar to that employed by CCAMLR.

The question of effective implementation of the measures agreed by the Parties needs to be
addressed. One suggestion was for a reporting system to monitor the implementation of
Recommendations. Another related question was the treatment of non-Treaty Parties. There
is a possible solution in the prudent use of port state jurisdiction.

Another challenge arises from new areas for science or commercial exploitation, for example
of the genetic resources of the Antarctic. Operators and scientists would need quick guidance
on such issues. There are other matters likely to confront the Treaty Parties for which a
prompt response will be required - the Parties need to recognise these issues and act decisively.
Some Specific Action Points

1.      That steps should be taken to restore the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings to 
their central position in the Antarctic Treaty System and to enhance the efficiency of their 
functioning;

2.      A permanent Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is urgently needed;

3.      That the legal status of measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty should be 
addressed. Specifically:

      -      that a review of the continuing relevance of existing Recommendations 
      be undertaken;

      -      that the approval mechanism by states to render measures effective be 
      re-examined, with a view to introduce an opting out procedure 
      comparable to that of CCAMLR;

      -      that a distinction be made between mandatory and hortatory measures;

4.      That a more effective means of reporting on how states have implement measures and 
obligations under the Protocol should be introduced;

5.      That consideration be given to closer cooperation with relevant United Nations 
Specialised Agencies and programs, in particular UNEP;

6.      That the inter-relationship between the environmental Protocol and the Law of the Sea 
Convention in respect to the deep seabed needs to be determined, specifically to establish 
whether responsibility for deep seabed resources and environmental protection of the deep 
seabed, south of 60° S, would be held by the International Seabed Authority established under 
the Law of the Sea Convention or the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties;

7.      That the role of COMNAP should be integrated more closely to the Antarctic Treaty 
System.
