ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE


                        SEOUL
                        May 8-19, 1995

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XIX ATCM/INF 62
May 10, 1995
Original: English

EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Agenda Ítem 7 c

(Submitted by SCAR/IUCN)

We enclose a copy of our book Progress in Conservation of the Subantarctic Islands. We are sorry that,
because of limited availability, we can only provide one copy for each delegation.
ATCM INFO PAPER FROM SCAR AND IUCN

EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Introduction

As part of a series of joint workshops on areas of common interest SCAR and IUCN convened a workshop at Gorizia, Italy in 1993, on opportunities for Antarctic environmental education and training. Attached is a final draft of the workshop proceedings for detailed information on specific aspects of particular subject areas. This paper aims to summarise four major conclusions of the workshop as a contribution to discussion under  Agenda Item 7(c) Environment Education and Training.

1. Now that so many Parties have ratified the Protocol, and since the remaining Parties have undertaken to abide by it pending domestic legislation, Antarctic management is effectively already under the new regime. As with many legal documents the Protocol itself, and in many cases the derived national legislation implementing the Protocol, is difficult for many people to understand. Since the Protocol exhorts the Parties to improve information exchange and availability a useful step would be the production of an agreed lay guide to the Protocol requirements that could be made available in a wide range of languages.

2. Nowhere in the Protocol is there a clear indication of how its obligations should be made more available and accessible to a wider audience. Nor, on the basis of previous ATCMs, is there apparently any agreed approach to how education and training could be used to assist in the effective implementation of the Protocol. One possible route might be for an oversight of environmental education and training to be included within the functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection.

3. There are a considerable number of academic educational activities being undertaken at present in Treaty countries. It seems certain that if more details were generally available valuable resource sharing might be possible in the design and provision of material for schools and tertiary educational courses. There is an opportunity here for an existing institution to undertake the collection and dissemination of data in this field. A report to a future ATCM on this might provide the basis for a valuable initiative.

4. At present public access to information on Antarctica varies considerably between countries. Some Parties have well established polar institutes with comprehensive libraries whilst others have no clearly identifiable publically accessible focus for Antarctic information. One way forward to meet the Protocol requirements could be for all Parties to consider designating at least one publically accessible library where Antarctic Treaty material would be deposited.
