ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  
                                                                      
SEoul              
May 8-19, 1995              
                                                                      
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


XIX ATCM/INF 76              
May 12, 1995              
Original: English              


                                      
OPENING ADDRESS              
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF BULGARIA              


              Agenda Item 3              
Mr. Chairman

May I, first of all, congratulate you, on behalf of the delegation of the 
Republic of Bulgaria, on your election as a Chairman of the 19th Antargtic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting.

We would also like to express our gratitude to the Goverment of the Republic 
of Korea, the host of the present Meeting, for the exellent conditions of work, 
provided for the participants. We thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the 
Republic of Korea for his delightful congratulatory speech.

Dear Chairman,

The Republic of Bulgaria ascended to the Antarctic Treaty in 1978, and thus 
became the twentieth contracting Party becouse of its firm conviction that 
Antarctica shall for ever be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that 
international cooperation on the basis of freedom and scientific investigation in 
Antarctica shall continue in the interest of all mankind.Up to now Bulgaria 
organized three succesive Antarctic campaigns and realized several scientific 
programmes in Antarctica.In 1994 the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute presented 
an application for associate membership in SCAR. On March 5, 1995 Bulgaria 
became an associate member of this most important scientific coordination 
body. We highly estimate this fact as a recognition of our country for its 
scientific activities and long standing scientific interests in the continent.

The first Bulgarian Antarctic expedition (austral summer 1987/1988) was 
organized by the University of Sofia with the logistic support of British 
Antarctic Survey and Russian Institute for Antarctic and Arctic Research, 
about which we have already had the opportunity to express our gratitude. 
The scientific programmes were planned and developed in close colaboration 
with those institutions. During this campaign a refuge was established on 
Livingston Island on a spot located on the North-East side of the South Bay 
with coordinates 62º 38' 29'' S and 60º 21' 53'' W.

In the period 1993-1995 Bulgaria organized two succesive Antarctic 
campaigns. A summer base was established and a systematic collection of data 
and samples in various research fields was initialized. These campaigns were 
organized by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute and the Atlantic Club in 
Bulgaria, with the help and logistic support of the Spanish Antarctic Program. 
During the 1993-94 Antarctic summer campaign the Bulgarian refuge on 
Livingston Island was reconstructed and put into operation as a summer base. 
The base was named "St. Kliment Ohridski" by an official Act of the 
President of the Republic of Bulgaria. Ecological hazards caused by the five-
years interruption of the activity in the refuge were removed during this 
campaign. The scientific program included in the fields of geology, 
meteorology, glaciology and human medicine.

In the summer of 1994-95 the third Bulgarian Antarctic Campaign was carried 
out. The scope of the Bulgarian scientific program was broadened and new 
research projects in the field of biology were initialized, together with the
continuing geological, glaciological and meteorological studies. Scientific 
collaboration has been established with the Argentinean Antartic Institute. A 
joint geological project was carried out and a Bulgarian geologist was 
logistically suported to work in the Argentinean field camp on Byers 
Peninsula, Livingston Island.

In May 1994 a National Scientific Antarctic Programme for a three years 
period was accepted and financed by the Bulgarian National Fund for 
scientific Research. The Programme is multidisciplinary in approach and 
includes several scientific projects in the field of biology, geology and physics, 
which set problems of present interest for today's antarctic science. Part of 
these scientific projects will be creative extension of the modest former Bulgarian 
scientific experience in the Antarctica. Some other projects are new for the 
traditional Bulgarian Antarctic research and they refer to research in physics 
and biology. Having in mind the global significance of every human activity in 
this largest natural laboratory on Earth and the wide scope of the Bulgarian 
scientific programme, as well, we are in full consciousness of the close 
collaboration with other nations, carrying out their own programmes in the 
Antarctic, that is necessary for the realization of the ambitious Bulgarian 
scianfitic plans.

May I, Mr. Chairman avail myself of this meeting so as to express, on behalf of 
the Bulgarian delegation and of all Bulgarian members of the last two 
expeditions of our colleagues from the Spanish Antarctic Programme and the 
Argentinian Antarctic Institute, our gratitude for the great support lent to the 
Bulgarian scientific expeditions and proggrammes, as well as for the beneficial 
co-operation.

Mr. Chairman,

Bulgaria has had other oportunities occasions to demonstrate its high 
estimation of the system of the Antarctic Treaty. My country views as positive 
the fact about the increasing number of states that have acquired a 
consultative status under the Antarctic Treaty, for the last decades. In our 
opinion, this is a natural reflection of the confidence in the Antarctic Treaty 
and of the ever wider understanding of the abcence of other practical 
alternativies of the system of the Antarctic Treaty. During the period of its 
existence, it has proved its aspiration to a positive system of value of global 
importance.

The Republic of Bulgaria shares the confiction that the present status af 
Antarctica is in the interests of the whole of mankind and it has to be 
preserved and consolidated by all reasonable means. One of these means 
logically presuposses the inclusion among the states which have acquired a 
consultative status under the Antarctic Treaty, and also among these, whose 
activity coresponds entirely to the requirements of article IX, item 2 of the 
Antarctic Treaty. This impulses an enlargement of the number of states aware 
of their mutual and high responsibility of undertaking measures, on a 
consensus basis, for the configuration of the principles and objectives of the 
Antarctic Treaty.
Sharing such an understanding and evaluating realisatically its scientific activities and presence in the region of the sixth continent, Bulgaria has sufficient grounds to believe and sincerely hopes that its future nomination for the acquisition of a consultative status under tha Antarctic Treaty, according to its regulations, will meet the positive support of the other consultative member states.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I would like to assure you of the determination of the Republic of Bulgaria to be persistent in its effords to promote the development of the system of the Antarctic Treaty which aims at the solution of all existing problems in the spirit of a constructive co-operation. We are fully convinced that the 19th Consultative Meeting will contribute to the acquisition of positive results in this respect. It is our firm belief, Mr. Chairman, that our delegation is willihg to assist in any possible way the growth and development of the collaboration among the states participating in the present meeting.

Thank you Mr. Chairman
Statement made on behalf of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme at the plenary session of the XIXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, May 15, 1995.

"Mr. Chairman, I have been instructed to make the following statement on behalf of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, as follows, and I quote:

'It is with regret that I am informed of the issuance of document XIX ATCM/inf. 77, Considerations for Interim Organizational Aspects, in the name of the United Nations Environment Programme. This action clearly contravened the understanding among the consultative parties through which an invitation had been extended to UNEP. UNEP does not have and cannot have any position on the issues in question, but stands ready to assist in any way, on any issue, when and only when requested to do so as a result of a consensus decision of the Parties. UNEP wishes to withdraw the document and apologize for this breach of procedure and protocol.'

This concludes the statement by the Executive Director. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
