ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              TRATADO ANTARTICO
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                  XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                         XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                         SEOUL
                                         May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 117
May 17, 1995
Original: English

 
INTERNATIONAL ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC AND LOGISTIC
COOPERATION AND OTHER ACTIVITIES (1994-1995)

Agenda Item 14

(Submitted by Brazil)
INTERNATIONAL ANTARCTIC SCIENTIFIC AND LOGISTIC COOPERATION 
AND OTHER ACTIVITIES (1994-1995)

Agenda item 14

(Submitted by Brazil)

I - Scientific Cooperation:

1. The Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (National Institute for 
Space Research - INPE) of Brazil and the Radio-Observatory of Jimarca (Peru) 
are initiating a joint investigation of irregularities and auroral electric flows using 
the radar equipment installed at Machu Pichu Station, King George Island.

2. INPE of Brazil and the University of Magallanes (Chile) are developing a 
joint project for ozone layer and UV radiation monitoring in Southern South 
America and West Antarctica.

3. The Laboratorio de Estudos Glaciologicos e Antarcticos (Laboratory of 
Glaciological and Antarctic Studies) of the University of Rio Grande do Sul 
(Brazil), the Argentine Antarctic Institute and the University of Magallanes (Chile) 
are conducting glaciological research on possible climatic induced changes in 
the King George Island ice cap.

4. During the summer season of 1995-96, an international glaciological 
expedition will be conducted by scientisis from Brazil, Argentina, France and 
Russia in relation to a study of physical and chemical characteristics of the King 
George Island ice caps.

5. In 1994, Brazil hosted the First Latin-American Conference on Antarctic 
Space and Atmospheric Sciences, where participants from Latin America and 
from France, the United Kingdom and the United States reviewed the present 
situation of atmospheric and space research in West Antarctica.

6. A German research team utilized the Emilio Goeldi summer refuge, 
maintained by Brazil on Elephant Island, for performing geodetic survey and 
installation of a GPS station.

7. The University of Sao Paulo is conducting geological investigations on 
King George Island, with the participation of scientists from Canada, France, 
Poland and the United States.
II - Logistic Cooperation:

1.      Transportation support for a Bulgarian team visiting the Bulgarian station on Livingstone Island.

2.      Transportation support from Antarctica to Brazil for a Polish winter team, returning from Arctowski Station.

3.      Transportation and lodging support for Ecuadorian personnel responsible for maintaining that country's refuge in Admiralty Bay.

4.      Transportation support for personnel from the Uruguayan Antarctic Program.

5.      Visit to Brazil by a Uruguayan Navy official to collect information on Ferraz Station sewage system, the process for transfering fuel from ships to the Station and the use of alternative energy sources.

6.      Mutual support between the Brazilian and the Chileanan Antarctic Programs for the aerial transportation of cargo and personnel.

III - Other Activities:

1.      Acquisition, in 1994, of the Research Vessel "Polar Queen", built in Norway in 1981, remodeled in 1986, and in excellent state of conservation and operation. The ship was renamed "Ary Rongel" and has the following characteristics:
- total length: 75 m.
- breadth: 13 m.
- capacity: 90 people (crew and researchers)
- aerial support: 2 helicopters AS355 "Ecureil"
- cruise speed: 12 knots
- autonomy: 60 days.

2.      Mounting, in an area already used for landing and take-off of helicopters (Super Puma type), of an helipad near Ferraz Station. Its metalic structure has the following characteristics:
- size: 28m x 28m
- landing area: 18.6m x 18.6m
- capacity: 5.000 kg
3. Continuation of the work to substitute the single-skin tanks for fuel 
storage for new double-skinned tanks. From a total of 17 tanks in Ferraz Station, 
8 were already substituted, 4 new tanks are under construction and, until 1996, 
all Ferraz Station units for fuel storage will have double skin.

4. Five new power generator units for Ferraz Station, each with 150 KVA.

5. Installation of a new system for filtering gases from the power generators 
of Ferraz Station, which reduces carbon monoxide emissions by 95%, 
formaldehydes by 85%, and noise !vel by 50%, without increasing the level of 
NO2.

6. Acquisition of equipments for oil spill prevention and control in the Ferraz 
Station area.

7. Development by the Brazilian National Institute for Space Research 
(INPE) of a portable mobile communication system, which allows the monitoring 
of the situation of research teams far from the station.

8. Development, by INPE, of an aeolic energy power generator, to be 
installed at Ferraz Station.

9. From 1995, the Port of Rio Grande (in the South of Brazil) began to 
provide infra-structure and port services for Consultative Parties ships in support 
of their scientific activities.

IV - Humanitarian Cooperation:

Emergency medical help was provided by a team of Brazilian, Russian 
and Chilean doctors to a member of Ferraz Station, who underwent surgery at 
the Chilean Station President Frei. The Brazilian Antarctic Program is deeply 
grateful for this Chilean and Russian example of humanitarian cooperation in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area.
