ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                           SEOUL
                                                        May 8-19, 1995
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                

XIX ATCM/INF 104
May 15, 1995
Original: English


OPENING ADDRESS
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF ITALY

Agenda Item 3
Mr. Chairman,

on behalf of the Italian delegation I would like to extend 
my warmest congratulations to you on your appointment as Chairman of the 
XIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I wish you good luck and 
success in this important function.

     I also wish to express the deep appreciation of my 
government to the government of Korea for hosting our meeting. We are 
most impressed with the excellent facilities and the warm welcome we 
have received in this charming city of Seoul.

     Mr. Chairman, we look forward to further progress in this 
ATCM on the important issues on our agenda.

     It seems to us that one of the highest priorities is the 
formal entry into force and effective implementation of the Protocol on 
the Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Italy has ratified 
the Protocol and deposited the instrument to the Depositary Government 
of the Treaty and we hope that the whole procedure will be soon 
completed.

     As a matter of fact we are deeply concerned with the late 
phenomena of degradation of the Antarctic ecosystem caused by the global 
warming that is already changing the shape of the Antarctic peninsula. 
The ice shelf has begun to break up in warming seas that are slowly 
beginning to destroy a barrier that keeps the continental ice cap from 
melting.

     We think that more attention should be given to the 
Antarctic envirnment and for this reason Italy welcomed the introduction 
of the Transitional Environmental Working Group as an interim measure to 
address the function of the Committee for Envirinmental Protection 
envisaged by the Madrid Protocol.

     The insitution of the TEWG and the eventual entry into force 
of the Protocol will considerably increase the administrative 
responsabilities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
For this reason we think that a decision on the location of the 
Secretariat cannot be indefinitely postponed. Establishing the
Secretariat is itself an administrative task that will take some thime;
it is therefore important that an agreement is reached in the course of 
this meeting.

      Italy welcomes the progress made at the second meeting of 
the Group of Legal Experts in the Hauge on the elaboration of rules and 
procedures relating to the liability under the Madrid Protocol. We look 
forward to further progress during this meeting on the basis of the text 
of Professor Wolfrum's "third offering".

      And now, Mr. Chairman, allow me to say a few words on the 
Italian activities in Antarctica.

      Since the last ATCM in April 1994 the Italian Programme of 
Antarctic Research has carried on its activities.

      The most important of them has been the implementation of 
the tenth Antarctic Campaign which has taken place from mid-October 1994 
to the end of February 1995. Within the scope of this Campaign two 
oceanographic and one geophysical expeditions have been performed in 
Antarctic waters.

      Also two oceanographic campaigns have been performed in the 
Strait of Magellan. This activity, even if it is not in Antarctic areas, 
is performed within the framework of the Antarctic Programme.

      In the field of international cooperation, more work has 
been carried on, in the joint venture with France on the Concordia 
Project, aiming at the construction of a research station at Dome C on 
the Antarctic Plateau and at a deep ice drilling operation at the same 
site.

      Another international activity is the Cape Roberts Project, 
where Italy is a partner together with Germany, the UK, the USA and New 
Zealand.  In January 1995 the Italian support vessel "Italica" has 
unloaded at Cape Roberts material and supplies to be used during the 
drilling operation. The purpose of the programme is to obtain offshore 
drilling cores recording Antarctic tectonic and climatic history from 30 
to 100 million years ago. Actual drilling at Cape Roberts is planned for 
1996-97.

      Mr. Chairman, in all the above mentioned issues the Italian
welegation will work constructively towards consensus, we look forward 
to a profitable meeting under your Chairmaship.

I thank you,
