ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              

                                  SEOUL              
                                  May 8-19, 1995              

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
                              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XIX ATCM/INF 60 Rev.1              
May 15, 1995              
Original: English              


                              
                              
                              
                              
              BELGIAN              
       SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH PROGRAMME              
              ON THE ANTARCTIC              

              1994 PROGRESS REPORT              

              Agenda Item 14              

              (Submitted by Belgium)              

                              
PRIME MINISTER OFFICE
FEDERAL OFFICE FOR SCIENTIFIC,
TECHNICAL AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS
(OSTC)

Ref. ANTAR/95/1

BELGIAN
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH PROGRAMME
ON THE ANTARCTIC

1994 PROGRESS REPORT


Brussels - March 1995
Internet                     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet
Internet                     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet
                     NEWS!
                     
A WWW home page on the
Belgian Scientific Research Programme
on the Antarctic

can now be reached at :

http://www.belspo.be/antar

Internet                     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet
Internet                     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet     Internet
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

CONTENTS

1 INTRODUCTION ............................................................ 1
2 RESEARCH WORK .......................................................... 2
3 FIELD ACTIVITIES ......................................................... 15
4 BIBLIOGRAPHY ............................................................. 18
5 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS & RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY ................ 21
6 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ............................................ 22

1994 PROGRESS REPORT
                  i
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

1 INTRODUCTION

The Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic was initiated in 1985 
by the Council of Ministers with a view to giving tangible form to Belgium's 
commitment towards the strengthening of the scientific knowledge of the area 
covered by the Antarctic Treaty. The programme is funded, managed and co-
ordinated by the Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs 
(formerly the Science Policy Office). The money allocated to the two first phases 
of the programme, i.e. 1985-88 and 1988-92, was 92 and 96 million BEF 
respectively. The budget of the current phase, namely 1992-95, amounts to 126 
million BEF. Research-work is implemented by means of 3-years projects 
undertaken by university-based scientists. All research costs (personnel, equipment, 
travel, working and overheads) are financed by OSTC.

Such research effort aims at contributing to the development of the knowledge 
required for a science-based conservation and management of the Antarctic 
environment and to the assessment of the mechanisms through which the Antarctic 
and the global climate interact. Emphasis is given on a multi-disciplinary approach 
of the dynamics of the global functioning of Antarctic main natural systems and of 
their evolution and interactions. The programme comprises seven research lines 
under three priority areas. They are:

- ECODYNAMICS OF THE SOUTHERN OCEAN AND INTERACTIONS WITH THE CLIMATE:

  o Biogeochemical fluxes and cycles in the main trophic 
    compartments
  o Modelling the global dynamics of ecosystems
  o Assessment of the role of "new production" in the burial of 
    atmospheric CO_(2) by the Southern Ocean

- EVOLUTION AND PROTECTION OF MARINE ECOSYSTEMS:

  o Application of predictive ecological models to simulate 
    ecosystem responses to man-made climatic disturbances
  o Study of hydrocarbons spills dispersion

- ROLE OF THE ANTARCTIC IN GLOBAL CHANGES:

  o Ocean-Cryosphere-Atmosphere interactions.
  o Sedimentary palaeoenvironment.

The following section gives an overview of the mid-term results of the research 
projects financed under Phase III of the Programme.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT
1
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

2 RESEARCH WORK

2.1 PROJECT A3/03/001 - Dr F. DEHAIRS, VUB
SPATIAL AND SEASONAL VARIABILITY OF BIOGENIC ELEMENTAL TRANSPORT IN THE
SOUTHERN OCEAN:

The distribution and uptake of N-nutrients have been analyzed in marginal ice
zones in the Southern Ocean (SO). The observed nitrogen signature often
departs from the "classical" SO nutrient profiles of high NO3- and low NH4+
surface values. In the Weddell Sea, marginal ice zones often show enhanced
NO3- depletions (up to 800 mmolN/m2). NH4+ stocks in the upper layer can be up
to 7% of the inorganic nitrogen pool. The corresponding nitrogen uptake regime
suggests elevated NO3- assimilation during the early phase of the productive
season but significantly reduced NO3- assimilation at a later stage. Absolute as
well as specific NO3- uptake rates decreased by an order of magnitude when
NH4+ stocks exceeded 1.7% of the N-nutrients. Variability in nitrogen utilisation
reflected physiological changes in the phytoplankton assemblage. Phytoplankton
showed a reduction in its capacity to take up NO3- and following an initial diatom
bloom, non-siliceous phytoplankton became predominant in a regenerated
production regime in response to increased NH4+ stocks.

Ba(p)-barite profiles in the mesopelagic zone of the water column have been
compared with profiles of O2(eq). A 1D advection-diffusion consumption model
was elaborated to estimate O2 consumption in the water column starting from
the information contained in vertical profiles of S, T and O2(eq). Contrarily to
models applied widely since the late 60's, it allows for variability of the
up(down)welling velocity and of the mixing coefficient as a function of depth.
This provides valuable information of profiles of O2 consumption and allows to
compare regions. The model was tested using data from the INDIGO 3
expedition.

The model approach has been applied to Ba(p) and O2(eq) data sets obtained during
ANT X/6 (Atlantic sector). In order to estimate rates of O2 consumption, a value
had to be assigned to the constant of eddy diffusivity (mixing coefficient). For
the ACC we used the value of the Fine Resolution Antarctic model. Results
indicate that the Ba signal is transient over the plankton growth season and that
mesopelagic Ba(p) stocks are significantly correlates with water column
consumption rates of O2, thus opening the way for setting up a transfer function
between the Ba-barite and export production. For the ACC region south of the
PFZ the model calculations suggest that 10% of the Corg produced is oxidised in
the upper 1000 m.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                    2
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

Suspended matter sampled monthly within the KERFIX programme over two 
years and within the ANTARES 2 expedition (Indian sector) are being analyzed. 
First results show that the site is significantly under impact of bottom 
resuspension and/or terrigenous input. The biological signal, however, is not 
wiped out too much by the detritic signal and seasonal fluctuations can be 
clearly detected.

Suspended organic matter (SPOM) samples (Marine Science Voyage 6, Prydz Bay 
and ANT X/6, Atlantic sector) were studied for possible relationships between 
δ^(13)C composition of SPOM and plankton community composition, primary 
production, biomass, cell growth rate, specific NO_(3)^(-) uptake, sea surface T and 
CO_(2(aq)) ambient concentration. Shelf areas with well stratified, shallow surface 
waters sustain a very high plankton biomass. Some of the highest δ^(13)C values 
for SPOM were observed despite very low T. Biomass impact on DIC content of 
shallow upper mixed layer, which functions as a semi-closed system with 
reduced input of CO_(2) from the deeper layers due to the extreme density gradient, 
and plankton species appeared to be possible control parameters of δ^(13)C.

Truly oligotrophic regions δ^(13)C of SPOM show an inversely correlation with 
ambient CO_(2(aq)) content which is generally high and largely depending on 
temperature of the water. For the Polar Front Zone (PFZ), primary production and 
photosynthetic activity appeared to have a major impact on setting the δ^(13)C 
value of SPOM. Furthermore, a hypothesis is developed in which the variability 
of δ^(13)C in SPOM of the PFZ is controlled also by the cell's nitrogen demand for 
amino acid synthesis and the resulting variable activity of the Rubisco and 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPCase) pathways.

2.2 PROJECT A3/02/001 - Dr M. VINCX, UG 
ROLE OF THE MEIOBENTHOS IN ANTARCTIC ECOSYSTEMS:

Studies on the marine biota from the Antarctic, particularly on macrofauna, 
suggest some general ecological concepts such as high diversity, gigantism, slow 
metabolism and endemism. The Antarctic marine environment is characterised 
by constant low temperatures and a seasonal variation of light input and primary 
production, thus influencing all levels of the Southern Ocean food web [Clarke, 
1988]. The impact of this seasonality on the community structure of the 
meiofauna, however, has not investigated to date.

In this perspective, the role of meiofauna in two different habitats in the Antarc-
tic marine ecosystem (e.g. deep sea and shallow subtidal) was questioned.

For the deep-sea study a total of 18 stations were sampled. They were located 
in the Weddell Sea, in the region off Kapp Norvegia (71-72°S, 12-13°W) and

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                    3
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

Halley Bay (74-75°S, 25-30°W), at a depth varying from 211 to 2,080 m. Total meiofauna abundance ranged from 790 to 5,120 individuals per 10 cm², total biomass from 0.09 to 0.97 mg dwt per 10 cm². Although 28 taxa were found, the meiofauna consisted mainly of nematodes (up to 97 %), followed by harpacticoid copepods, polychaetes and kinorhynchs. Length-frequency distributions of the nematodes were generally skewed to the left with most animals belonging to the 0.4-0.6 mm size-class. The widely accepted deeper-longer relation, known from vertical distribution studies of marine nematodes in the sediment, could be extended to most communities of the Antarctic waters off Kapp Norvegia. An attempt was made to estimate meiofauna production. Using two Production/Biomass ratios known from nematode production in temperate regions (e.g. P/B = 4 and 69), the annual production in the Weddell Sea varied between 0.47 and 12.96 gC/m²/y. The validity of this method was discussed. The structure of the meiofauna community was positively correlated with grain size, organic matter and microbiota in the sediment. Total density and biomass showed different distributions along the sediment depth gradient. From multivariate analysis it was concluded the two regions in the Weddell Sea do not markedly differ. Depth and sediment grain size were the most important structuring factors.

The shallow subtidal study was carried out at Signy (60°42'S, 45°36'W). In this respect, meiobenthos was sampled fortnightly over a period of 18 months. The impact of the seasonal variation of different nutritive sources (e.g. chlorophyll, bacteria, organic matter) on the meiobenthic communities was followed. Total density ranged between 2,000 and 20,000 individuals per 10 cm² and showed a high seasonal variation. Biomass showed a similar, though less pronounced trend. The genus composition of the nematodes showed no seasonal influence yet, but further taxonomic investigation is necessary. A first attempt was made to follow respiration rates of the meiofauna in the sediments of Signy Island.

Although the deep-sea fauna has been studied very intensively, only little is known about meiofauna on the continental shelves and slopes. In this context the meiobenthic exploration of the deep sea surrounding Antarctica has been described for the first time. Densities and biomasses of Antarctic deep-sea meiofauna were shown to be comparable with values from the NE Atlantic.

References

Clarke A. (1988) Seasonality in the Antarctic marine environment. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 90B(3): 461-473.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT
4
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

2.3 PROJECT A3/12/001 - Dr J.-H. HECQ, ULg
CONTROL OF THE ANTARCTIC PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM BY HIGHER TROPHIC LEVELS IN
RELATION WITH ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES:

A 1-D model of the water column with a k-1 turbulent closure has been applied
to the study of interactions between sea-ice and ocean and their influence on
planktonic communities. The sea-ice model is the one proposed by Semtner
(1976), but with a parameterization of leads. Special attention was paid to: (1)
the sharing of energy between lateral and basal melting; (2) melting induces
persistent shallow mixing layer thus favouring primary production; (3) the
absence of ice nearly forbids blooming; (4) the modification of biological
parameters (maximum production rate or I ) can have important consequences
on biomasses; and, (5) the lesser sensitiveness of results to initial conditions of
zooplankton than of phytoplankton.

Planktonic data (HPLC pigments, zooplankton, krill) and samples obtained during
ITALIANTARTIDE cruises were used to parametrize and calibrate a model of the
secondary planktonic levels in the Ross Sea. A preliminary coupling between 1-D
physical and a ecological model has been achieved which includes explicitly the
effect of vertical turbulence on biological processes. Data on phytopigments and
degradation products were used as tracers along the food chain. Pigments
distribution was investigated in connection with: (i) distribution, structure and
composition of meso-zooplankton communities; (ii) vertical repartition of trophic
levels; and, (iii) krill patchiness.

Hydrodynamical data confirmed the importance of physical processes within the
circumpolar marginal ice zone in regulating the Ross Sea pelagic food chain. In
the Ross Sea, the ice free surface propagates from S to N. The wind and superfi-
cial circulation are responsible for the accumulation of algae containing ices in
coastal area. The control of phytoplankton by herbivores in the mixed layer is
characteristic of the Ross Sea: krill (Euphausia superba) outside the shelf, pelagic
pteropods (Limacina helicina) in coastal ice edge or mesozooplanktonic copepods
(Calanus propinquus) in the shelf ice-free zone. In the shelf area, omnivorous
organisms below the pycnocline are heavily feeding on fecal pellets: amphipods
in coastal zone and copepods (Metridia gerlachei) offshore. The diversity of
pattern of planktonic vertical profiles seems due to constraints such as
macroscale water masses distribution associated to frontal systems, ice coverage
and vertical structure of the water column, rather than to ecosystem
diversity. The ice edge melting occurs sooner in the central and southern Ross
Sea. Also, areas shallower than 500 m seems to be inaccessible to krill which
strongly influences the utilisation of primary production. Finally, the W Ross Sea
is richer in phytoplankton than the E one, probably because of the different ice
algae content of the ice pack.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                      5
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

Nutrients, phytoplankton size-fractionated Chl.a, photosynthetic pigments (by 
HPLC) and primary production were studied during the 1991 austral summer in 
the Strait of Magellan in relation to meteorological and hydrodynamical 
constraints and runoff/land forcing. Chl.a, nutrients and primary production 
showed uneven but similar distributions, allowing the characterization of different 
sectors each showing distinct hydrographic typologies: an oligotrophic, 
wind-mixed coastal area, adjacent to the Pacific opening; a high runoff fjord and 
a divergence zone in the Andean sectors; a stratified inland sea in the basin-like 
part of the channel in the Patagonian sectors. Global features of the channel 
were the confinement of the microphytoplankton fraction to the external areas 
and the uniform structure of phytoplankton communities < 5 μm within the 
internal ones. Phytoplankton biomass (active Chl.a) was 10-51 mg/m2 and 
primary production 275-1,170 mgC/m2/d. Nitrates were never exhausted. The 
assemblage of plant pigments indicated that the high levels of phytoplankton 
pigments and production were attributable to Chlorophytes, Prasinophytes, 
Prymnesiophytes and/or Gyrodinium and Gymnodinium-like dinoflagellates that 
were submitted to superfluous feeding activity. When diatoms, Cryptomonads 
and Prymnesiophytes were dominant, efficient zooplankton grazing occurred and 
characterized a balanced food chain.

References

Semtner A.J. (1976) A model for the thermodynamic growth of sea ice in 
numerical investigations of climate. J. Phys. Oc., 6: 379-389.

2.4 PROJECT A3/11/001 - Dr Ch. LANCELOT, ULB
DYNAMICS OF THE PLANKTONIC MICROBIAL FOOD-WEB OF THE SOUTHERN OCEAN IN 
RESPONSE TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES:

Biomass of auto- and heterotrophic microorganisms (nano- and net-sized 
phytoplankton; bacteria and 3 key taxons of nanoprotzooplankton) and their 
feeding activities (phytoplankton photosynthesis and growth; protozoan feeding 
on bacteria and autotrophic flagellates) were regularly measured during the early 
spring (29 Sept - 29 Nov '92) SO-JGOFS ANT X/6 polar expedition on board of 
the R/V Polarstern in the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean. In particular the 
technique of fluorescently labelled bacteria (FLA) and autotrophic flagellates 
(FLB) for measuring bactivorous and herbivorous nanoprotzoan grazing was 
successfully applied for the first time in the Southern Ocean.

Transects were repeatedly worked along the 6°W meridian, from the ice-covered 
Weddell Sea, across the Southern Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) and into 
the Polar Frontal Zone. During that cruise, meteorological conditions were severe 
and no bloom of any significance was recorded in the vicinity of the ice-edge.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                          6
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

Maximum phytoplanktonic biomasses were recorded in the Polar Frontal zone.
The analysis of the microbial network, as based on microscopic observations,
revealed the occurrence of two different trophic webs with respect to the water
masses: a diatom-mesozooplankton-dominant food-web in the Polar Front area;
an active microbial food-web, composed of autotrophic flagellates, bacteria, and
nanoprotozoa at the receding ice-edge. Budget calculations based on comparison
of daily auto- and heterotrophic activities indicate, however, that the control of
nanophytoplankton and bacteria development by nanoprotozooplankton was of
little significance in early spring.

Theoretical considerations on the physical processes governing vertical stability
of marginal ice zone surface layers on the one hand and mathematical simula-
tions with the one-dimensional coupled physical-biological SWAMCO model of
Lancelot et al. (1993), forced by either the moderate or the extremely windy
weather conditions experienced during the Polarstern marginal ice zone
expeditions EPOS and ANT X/6 on the other hand, evidence, in accordance with
observations, the tight coupling between atmospheric forcing - most notable in
the frequency, duration and strength of storm events - and ice-edge
phytoplankton bloom occurrence. In particular it is demonstrated that the windy
meteorological conditions prevailing during the ANT X/6 expedition prevented
blooms from developing. This implies that primary production associated to the
circumpolar marginal ice zone of the Southern Ocean should be predicted to the
same extent as weather can be predicted in these extreme latitudes provided the
ice-covered area is known and biological controls evidenced in the studied sector
hold for the whole circumpolar marginal ice zone.

References

Lancelot Ch., Mathot S., Veth C. and de Baar H. (1993) Factors controlling
phytoplankton ice-edge blooms in the marginal ice-zone of the northwestern
Weddell Sea. Polar Biology, 13: 377-387.

2.5 PROJECT A3/58/001 - Dr G. PICHOT, MUMM
OIL SPILL MODELLING FOR THE ANTARCTIC SEAS (OSMAS):

The danger of oil pollution in the Antarctic has been growing proportionally to
human presence and activities, and to shipping in the area. The nature of the
coastline, the presence of the ice pack and the sensitivity of the biological
community explain the very high vulnerability of the Antarctic ecosystem to oil
pollution. It seems thus necessary to develop adequate models able to predict
the evolution of an oil slick in such an environment in order to assist in
counter-pollution operations and in impact assessment studies.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                             7
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

This research work aims at developing a methodology for predicting the drift and spreading of oil spills in cold and ice-infested waters. We place emphasis on the physical behaviour, rather than the chemical fate of oil and try to adapt and link three models previously developed at MUMM (a circulation model, a sea ice model and an oil spill model in open seas) and empirical methods used to determine the spread of oil in ice-infested waters. The models mentioned above are shortly described. More emphasis is placed on the behaviour of oil on cold water and the physical interaction between oil and ice. The main influences of ice on oil behaviour are identified on basis of the (limited) available data.

This work is an important step before simulating the evolution of a spill at the sea surface, in the water column and in the ice, over a seasonal cycle, which is the goal of the present research.

A continuous formula proposed by Maykut to compute the ice albedo has been implemented in the SEAICE model.

The wind drift factor and the deflection angle used to compute the ice pack drift have been adopted according to the results of recent studies carried out in the Weddell Sea. These modifications have improved the agreement between the computed seasonal cycle of ice extent and the observations.

Tests have been carried out to incorporate the density effects in the 3D hydrodynamic model available at the beginning of this project. Problems, linked to the computation of the pressure gradient in sigma coordinates, have been encountered. Different techniques, recently proposed in the literature, have been investigated but none of them completely eliminate the error.

The spreading equation of the MUSLICK model [Scory, 1991] has been corrected to be applicable to cold water conditions. The equation is now able to reproduce the considerably reduced area of an oil slick on cold water. The strong influence of oil viscosity has been pointed out. The evolution equation has then been used to study the interaction between oil and ice. The previous study on the same topic [El-Tahan et al., 1988] used Fay's theory which considers that an oil slick evolutes according to three phases characterized by an equilibrium between forces acting on the oil slick (inertia/gravity, gravity/viscous and viscous/surface). Our spreading equation gathers all these forces and includes Fay's theory: the contribution of each force in the equation varies with time.

Finally, the parameters of the transport equation of the oil slick have been adapted to take into account the presence of ice.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                             8
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

References

El-Tahan H., Comfort G. and Abdelnour R. (1988) Development of a methodology for computing oil spill motion in ice-infested waters. Report of the Fleet Technology Limited, Canada, Ontario to Atmospheric Environment Service, Downsview, Canada, Ontario, 85 pp.

Scory S. (1991) The MUSLICK model. Management Unit of the North Sea and Scheldt Estuary Mathematical Model, Report CAMME/91/03, 30 pp.

2.6 PROJECT A3/11/002 - Prof. R. SOUCHEZ, ULB
ISOTOPIC AND CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF ANTARCTIC SHELF ICE: IMPLICATIONS ON GLOBAL CHANGES:

The question of the stability of Antarctic ice shelves in the context of climate changes has been tackled in the literature mostly by developing models of oceanic circulation underneath ice shelves and of the relevant ice shelf-ocean interactions or by measuring various geophysical parameters on these ice masses. Another way of approaching the problem is to study the isotopic and chemical properties of the marine ice accreted at the base of some ice shelves in order to infer, in connection with a crystallographic study, the mechanisms responsible for its formation.

The Terra Nova Bay area offers an unique opportunity for sampling marine ice accreted at the bottom of small ice shelves. Because of tectonic disturbances and/or heavy ablation by katabatic winds, this marine ice outcrops in the downstream or in the lateral parts of some ice shelves and floating ice tongues. Two sites were studied in that area:

Campbell Glacier Tongue (north of Terra Nova Bay): Two types of marine ice formed near a grounding line have been distinguished on the basis of isotopic composition and textural properties of the ice and characteristics of the included debris. In both cases, the ice samples are aligned in a δD-δ18O diagram on a mixing line. This does not necessarily imply a mixture of continental water and sea water in varying proportions.

In the first type, the isotopic characteristics are explained by the filling of basal fissures appearing close to the grounding line with marine ice. The change of state is probably due to the pressure dependence of the freezing point.

In the second type, the isotopic characteristics are explained by a variable contribution of continental meltwater versus sea water within a water-filled sediment at the glacier-ocean-rock contact. The freezing results in this case from the difference in freezing points between two waters of different salinities.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT
9
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

Late-Wisconsin ice-cored moraines in the coastal region exhibit features 
suggesting that this ice partially formed near a fossil grounding line in accord-
ance with the processes studied.

Hells Gate Ice Shelf (south of Terra Nova Bay): Comparison of the textural, 
isotopic and chemical characteristics of frazil ice at the base of HGIS provides 
new insights in the dynamics of marine ice accretion under small ice shelves. 
Medium to coarse grained orbicular frazil accretes upstream in a relatively calm 
environment and eventually piles up as thick units in inverted channels or domes 
where the subglacial topography is favourable. As these frazil ice bodies or 
congelation ice, formed via heat conduction through the ice shelf, enter the zone 
of influence of warm oceanic waters, they are subjected to melting. This 
produces isotopically heavy waters that progressively dilute the interstitial sea 
water of the loose frazil, initiating chemical differentiation that is preserved in the 
frazil matrix. These diluted waters will converge in the highest parts of the 
inverted depressions, where they are further protected from mixing by 
mechanical convection.

Farther downstream, where the ice shelf is thinning under the effect on katabatic 
winds, the remaining ice will recrystallize resulting in the final crystal sizes and 
fabrics of medium and coarse grained solid frazil. In places where no channel or 
dome exists, or where those are already filled with frazil, the effect of interfacial 
streaming will increase where water currents exist. Individual frazil crystals will 
align more or less parallel to the ice/ocean interface showing strong c-axes 
fabrics with a single maximum. In places, non-laminar flow will create vortices 
that will be frozen-in later on. In this type of frazil the chemical sorting is 
"single-step" and total salinity is higher, though less than in typical congelation 
or frazil in fast ice. It is not clear yet whether the individual frazil ice crystals are 
generated by a double-diffusion process in a small scale diluted layer at the 
ice-sea water interface or as the result of supercooling in the rising watercolumn.

2.7 PROJECT A3/10/001 - Prof. A. BERGER, UCL 
FORMATION OF THE TERRA NOVA BAY POLYNYA AND CLIMATIC IMPLICATIONS:

The 3-D Atmospheric Mesoscale Circulation Model (MAR) has been improved by 
including a more detailed this scheme for the representation of atmospheric 
turbulence. Sensitivity tests to this scheme have been performed and show that 
the katabatic wind speed is improved by 5 to 10%. This is not enough compar-
ing with the observations and suggests that other processes not represented in 
the simulations have also to be tested [synoptic scale forcing, blowing snow 
process, see Gallée and Schayes, 1994]. Nevertheless the relative small 
sensitivity to the representation of turbulence indicates that these schemes are 
sufficiently realistic for simulating katabatic winds.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                              10
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

The atmospheric model has also been coupled to a wind-forced polynya model, 
generalized from that of Ou [1988], by including drifts varying in space and time. 
The second horizontal dimension is also taken into account and the polynya 
model is discretized as MAR. Several assumptions generally done in the Ou 
[1988] model remain and are discussed here: (i) the sea-ice dynamics are not 
included, and the ice drift speed is that of the sea-ice edge; in the case of 
katabatic winds, which offshore extent is limited, this could lead to an 
overestimation of the ice drift speed and consequently of the polynya extent; 
another consequence of the non inclusion of sea-ice dynamics is that small leads 
are not allowed to form in the model; (ii) the accretion process is also poorly 
represented in the model; for the Terra Nova Bay area, a value of 22 cm has 
been chosen for the frazil collection thickness; however, this assumption does 
not seem to be critical, as it has been found in preliminary sensitivity experi-
ments (not shown) to the value of the collection thickness; (iii) the oceanic 
current is not taken into account; this is a good approximation for the Terra Nova 
Bay area as far as the polynya extent is smaller that the length of the Drygalski 
Ice Tongue; a next generalization of the model should be to include the oceanic 
current in order to allow operational forecast for example; (iv) although the 
turbulent heat fluxes are well represented in the model, it is possible that 
secondary processes like evaporation from drops entrained in the atmosphere by 
the wind may be important; (v) the hydrological cycle is not switched on in the 
simulations presented in this paper; it is recognized that for air temperatures 
below -20°C, an ice fog forms as warm moist surface air mixes upward and 
cools; this could have an influence on the radiative transfer and consequently 
modify the polynya surface energy balance; further tests have to be performed 
with the model in order to examine this possibility.

Despite the above mentioned assumptions, the coupled atmosphere-polynya 
model allows to take into account in an interactive way the polynya impact on 
ocean-atmosphere-ice interactions in the antarctic coastal zone. Encouraging 
results are obtained: in particular the model seems to represent accurately the 
Terra Nova Bay polynya. The atmospheric model simulates realistic katabatic 
winds over the polynya, simulated winds are probably in closer agreement with 
the observations than over the ice sheet. It is the first time that a meso-τ scale 
atmospheric model is coupled to a wind-forced polynya model. The Terra Nova 
Bay polynya is well represented by this model and constitutes an important 
component in the ocean-atmosphere-ice interactions in Terra Nova. It was also 
found that the atmospheric circulation in Terra Nova Bay is significantly 
influenced by the presence of an open (warm) water area. A breeze effect results 
and increases the katabatic wind speed when it passes the coastline. On the 
contrary, the breeze effect which is also present at the downwind edge of the 
polynya acts in the opposite way there and the katabatic wind is stopped.

Because of the strong mesoscale heat fluxes generated by the Terra Nova Bay 
polynya, its climatic impact could be important. Despite this fact, the size of this 
polynya is not large enough to be represented into a GCM. For this reason its

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                    11
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

effects could be parameterized and the parameterization may be developed using 
a coupled atmosphere-polynya model. Other possible applications of the coupled 
atmosphere-polynya model are numerous. It has been found that the model is not 
only able to simulate the Terra Nova Bay polynya but other observed polynyas 
like that existing along the north-western part of the Ross Ice Shelf. An 
application should be to evaluate with the model the formation of wind forced 
polynyas everywhere along the antarctic coast. Moreover, such model could be 
of considerable interest to operational meteorologists. Indeed, polynyas fore-
casting is important for the navigation. Polynyas are strongly dependant of the 
wind field and in turn influences local weather [e.g. Anderson, 1993].

References

Anderson P.S. (1993) Evidence for an Antarctic winter coastal polynya. 
Antarctic Science, 5 (2), 221-226.                     
Gallée H. and Schayes G. (1994) Development of a Three-Dimensional Meso-τ 
Primitive Equations Model, Katabatic Winds Simulation in the area of Terra Nova 
Bay, Antarctica. Mon. Weath. Rev., in press.           
Ou H.W. (1988) A Time-Dependant Model of Coastal Polynya. J. Phys. Ocean. 
18, 584-590.

2.8 PROJECT A3/03/002 - Prof. H. DECLEIR, VUB           
DYNAMICS OF THE ANTARCTIC ICE CAP AND CLIMATE CHANGES:

New insights into the glacial and paleo-climatologic history of the East Antarctic 
Ice Sheet underscore the importance of an interdisciplinary approach towards a 
more profound understanding of the paleo environment which, from the ice sheet 
modellers side, require an effort in detailed regional modelling of the dynamics 
of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet. Therefore, research efforts were focused on (i) 
an improved numerical computation and a refined analysis of the dynamic ice 
flow, with respect to a more detailed modelling, and (ii) the simulation of the 
behaviour of drainage basins in East Dronning Maud and Enderby Land in 
accordance with the climatic signal in the past.

Two ice flow models were developed, each with a different computational 
scheme: (i) a three-dimensional ice flow model based on a finite element scheme 
and (ii) an ice sheet - ice shelf flow line model based on a finite difference 
scheme with irregular grid-size spacing. Both schemes are able to cope with the 
inhomogeneous data distribution on Antarctica and therefore allow a more 
detailed computation in areas of particular interest (outlet glaciers, ice streams, 
grounding zones of ice shelves).

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                              12
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC


Furthermore, detailed ice flow modelling requires that the proper ice dynamics 
and physics are included in order to deal with the behaviour of the central ice 
sheet, outlet glaciers as well as ice streams. Therefore, in the flow line model, 
basal drag, basal sliding and longitudinal stresses were incorporated, the latter 
not only at the grounding line, but in the ice sheet as well. Also a full 
thermo-mechanical coupling in the ice sheet was established, taking into account 
the two-dimensional temperature calculation and heat conduction in the bedrock.

The S¢r Rondane Mountain glacier Gjellbreen was used as a reference experiment 
in modelling the last glacial-interglacial cycle (by imposing the Vostok tempera-
ture signal), in order to calculate the present local imbalance of the ice sheet. 
The results were compared and discussed in accordance to recent 
geomorphologic and glacio-geologic findings in the S¢r Rondane area and the 
Transantarctic Mountains. Experiments in other drainage areas (such as Shirase 
Drainage Basin) are on their way.

Finally, a method was developed to retrieve glacier surface velocities from 
sequential satellite images, using an automatic matching procedure. In the near 
future, this method will be applied on images of the central S¢r Rondane 
glaciers.

2.9 PROJECT A3/02/002 - Dr M. DE BATIST, UG
BELGIAN CONTRIBUTION TO ANTOSTRAT PROJECT (BELANTOSTRAT):

During the 1st term of the 3rd Phase of the Belgian Antarctic Research 
Programme, RCMG's research activities were strongly focused on the application 
of high-resolution reflection seismic stratigraphy to the study of Cenozoic 
medium- to long-term glacial/interglacial cycles along different continental 
margins of Antarctica. Three study areas were investigated in these terms so far:

    * ODP Site 693 off Cape Norvegia in the northeastern Weddell Sea, using the 
seismic data acquired during the ANT V/4 (1986-1987) and ANT VIII/5 
(1989-1990) surveys;

    * Crary Fan, one of the world's biggest submarine fans occupying a large part 
of the eastern and southeastern Weddell Sea, using seismic data acquired 
during the ANT V/4 (1986-1987), ANT VIII/5 (1989-1990) and ANT X/2 
(1992) surveys;

    * Bransfield Basin along the Antarctic Peninsula, using the seismic data 
acquired during the GEBRA-93 (1993) survey.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                            13
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

ODP Site 693: Re-examination of the seismic records in the vicinity of ODP Site 693 have allowed a number of fine-scale unconformities to be identified in addition to those previously defined. They all occur within seemingly lithologically homogeneous Pliocene strata. The unconformities coincide with stratigraphic horizons characterized by spikes in smectite percentage in an overall illite-dominant lithology. Smectite spikes probably indicate a change in sediment source from the Antarctic continent where glacial activity produced illite in response to direct rock erosion, to the continental shelf where previously hydrolysed Cretaceous and Tertiary sediments were exposed. Eroded detritus could have been transported to the shelf edge by ice sheets. Melt water debouching from the ice-sheet grounding line may have initiated mass flow through Wegener Canyon on the mid-slope bench. The smectite horizons at ODP Site 693 would represent overbank deposition.

Crary Fan: Seismic profiles on the Weddell Sea basin floor reveal the existence of thick and extensive chaotic facies units, which are interpreted as debris flows. They fill the base of erosional channels within Crary Fan at five stratigraphic horizons, and are overlain by acoustically stratified fan lobes and channel/levees. The debris flows are probably sourced from sedimentary material collapsed from large, shelf-edge deltas on the upper slope. These large, upper-slope deltas were deposited by ice sheet during extended glacial periods, which is probably a pre-condition to large-scale slope collapse. Slope deltas were composed of glacial and glacial-marine detritus. Mobilization of glacial debris from the upper slope to the basin could be initiated after ice-sheet retreat during isostatic rebound of the continental shelf. Hereby, it is inferred that at least five long-term glacial expansions occurred in the Weddell Sea region since the Middle Miocene. Shorter duration glacial periods probably did not create a sufficiently unstable upper slope, hence, not all stratigraphic sub-divisions in Crary Fan are associated with major debris flows.

Bransfield Basin: New high-resolution reflection seismic data-acquired during the GEBRA-93 survey have shown the presence of glacial unconformities on the Trinity Peninsula margin of Bransfield Basin, indicating that at least six major glacial periods occurred since the Pliocene. Magnitude of slope progradation varies along the margin and appears to be related to local sources of sediment supply associated with separate glacial troughs: a thick stack of prograding units is preserved at the mouth of Orleans Trough, whereas most of the correlative section has been removed by repeated canyon incision at the GEBRA Channel, located at the mouth of the Antarctic Sound. Sediment eroded from the canyons is probably an important contributor to basin-floor sedimentation. Development of basin-floor strata appears to be temporally distinct from the development of slope foresets which downlap the basinal strata.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                              14
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

3 FIELD ACTIVITIES

Field activities i.e., at sea sampling and measurements, are being achieved in the 
framework of scientific voyages to the Antarctic organized by other countries.

Through their involvement in such campaigns, the research teams of the 
Programme were also provided with the unique opportunity to develop or 
strengthen international co-operation links. As an outcome, most of the 
Programme's research projects are increasingly contributing to, and taking 
advantage of, the common implementation of internationally integrated studies.

  Recorded field activities (austral summers 1993-94 and 1994-95):

Sixteen scientists of the Programme participated in expeditions to the 
Antarctic organized by France, Germany, Italy, Spain and United Kingdom 
(Table I, page 16).

  Planned field activities (austral summer 1995-96):

Seven scientists of the Programme will participate in an expedition to the 
Southern Ocean organized by France, Germany, Italy and New Zealand (Table 
II, page 17).

 
1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                            15
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

TABLE I : RECORDED FIELD ACTIVITIES (AUSTRAL SUMMERS 1993-94 AND 1994-95)

| LOCATION                  | PERIOD             | DOMAIN (PROJECT N°)         | PARTICIPANT                     | EXPEDITION           | HOST COUNTRY |
|---------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------|--------------|
| Terra Nova Bay area       | Oct. 93 - Jan. 94  | Glaciology (A3/11/002)      | Dr J.-L. Tison                  | Italiantartide IX    | Italy        |
| Bransfield Strait,        |                    | Marine Geophysics           | Mr Ph. Bart                     | GEBRA 93             | Spain        |
| South Shetland Islands    | Nov. 93 - Dec. 93  | (A3/02/002)                 | Dr M. De Batist                 | R/V Hesperides       |              |
|                           |                    |                             | Eng. E. Van Heuverswyn          |                      |              |
|                           |                    | Marine Biogeochemistry      | Dr F. Dehairs                   |                      |              |
| Indian sector of          |                    | (A3/03/001)                 | Dr L. Goeyens                   | ANTARES 2            | France       |
| Southern Ocean            | Jan. 94 - Mar. 94  |                             | Mr M. Semeneh                   | M/V Marion Dufresne  |              |
|                           |                    | Marine Ecology              | Dr Ch. Lancelot                 |                      |              |
|                           |                    | (A3/11/001)                 | Ms P. Menon                     |                      |              |
| Amundsen Sea,             |                    | Marine Geophysics           | Eng. E. Maes                    | ANT XI/3             | Germany      |
| Bellingshausen Sea        | Jan. 94 - Mar. 94  | (A3/02/002)                 | Eng. K. Vanneste                | R/V Polarstern       |              |
| South Orkney Islands      | Jan. 94 - Apr. 94  | Marine Ecology              | Ms M. Beghyn                    | Signy base           | UK           |
|                           |                    | (A3/02/001)                 | Ms S. Vanhove                   |                      |              |
| Ross Sea                  | Oct. 94 - Jan. 95  | Marine Ecology              | Dr A. Goffart                   | Italiantartide -     | Italy        |
|                           |                    | (A3/12/001)                 | Dr J.-H. Hecq                   | ROSSMIZE             |              |
|                           |                    |                             | Ms C. Veeschkens                |                      |              |

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                                                                  16
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

TABLE II : PLANNED FIELD ACTIVITIES (AUSTRAL SUMMER 1995-1996)

LOCATION                  | PERIOD          | DOMAIN (PROJECT Nr)       | PARTICIPANT         | EXPEDITION        | HOST COUNTRY
--------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------
Indian sector of         |                 | Marine Ecology           | Dr Ch. Lancelot    |                   | 
the Southern Ocean       | Sep. 95 - Dec. 95| (A3/11/001)               | Ms J. Piraux       | ANTARES 3         | France
                          |                 | Marine Biogeochemistry   | Dr L. Goeyens      |                   | 
--------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------
Terra Nova Bay area      | Oct. 95 - Feb. 96| Glaciology               | Dr J.-L. Tison     | Italiantartide XI | Italy
                          |                 | (A3/11/002)               |                    |                   | 
--------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------
Dry Valleys South        | Dec. 95 - Feb. 96| Glaciology               | Prof. R. Lorrain   | NZAP expedition 95-96| New Zealand
Victoria Land            |                 | (A3/11/002)               |                    |                   | 
--------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------
South-eastern Weddell    | Jan. 96 - Mar. 96| Marine Ecology           | Ms M. Beghyn      | CS-EAZIZ          | Germany
Sea                      |                 | (A3/02/001)               | Ms S. Vanhove      | R/V Polarstern    | 

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                                                                      17
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

4 BIBLIOGRAPHY

BART P.J., DE BATIST M. and MILLER H. (1994): Neogene collapse of glacially-deposited, shelf-
edge deltas in the Weddell Sea: relationships between deposition during glacial periods and sub-
marine fan development, Terra Antarctica 1: 317-318.

BOUQUEGNEAU J.-M. and JOIRIS C. (1993): CO2 and O2 in Antarctic marine ecosystems. In:
Casc[?]hetto S. (Ed.), Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase
Two, Vol. I: Plankton Ecology and Marine Biogeochemistry, Belgian Science Policy Office, 1107B:
1-17.

CANALS M., DE BATIST M., BARAZA J., ACOSTA J. and THE GEBRA Team (1994): New reflection
seismic data from Bransfield Strait: preliminary results of the GEBRA-93 survey, Terra Antarctica
1: 291-292.

DE BATIST M., BART P., KUVAAS B., MOONS A. and MILLER H. (1994): Detailed seismic
stratigraphy of the Crary Fan, southeastern Weddell Sea, Terra Antarctica 1: 321-323.

DE BATIST M., HENRIET J.-P., MILLER H., MOONS A., DENNIELOU B., KAUL N., MAES E., JOKAT
W., SCHULZE B., UENZELMANN-NEBEN G., VERSTEEG W. and the GRAPE TEAM (Geophysical
Research of the Antarctic Peninsula) (1993): High-resolution seismic investigation of the evolution
(stratigraphy and structure) of the continental margins of the eastern Weddell Sea and of the An-
tarctic Peninsula. In: Casc[?]hetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic -
Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. II: Marine Geophysics, Belgian Science Policy Office, II: 1-70.

FETTWEIS M., YU C.-H. and BERLAMONT J. (1993): Numerical simulations of wind-driven flows
in the Antarctic coastal zones. In: Casc[?]hetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the
Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. III: Glaciology and Climatology, Belgian Science
Policy Office, 1102: 1-54.

GALLEE H. (in press): Simulation of the mesocyclonic activity in the Ross Sea, Antarctica, Month.
Weath. Rev.

GALEE H. and SCHAYES G. (1994): Development of a Three-dimensional meso-τ primitive
equations model: katabatic winds simulation in the area of Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica, Month.
Weath. Rev. 122: 671-685.

GALEE H., SCHAYES G. and BERGER A. (1993): Development of a 3-D dimensional meso-τ primi-
tive equations model: katabatic winds simulation in the area of Terra Nova Bay, Antarctica. In:
Casc[?]hetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of
Phase Two, Vol. III: Glaciology and Climatology, Belgian Science Policy Office, II/03: 1-36.

GOEYENS L. and DEHAIRS F. (1993): Seasonal fluctuation of export and recycled production in
different subareas of the Southern Ocean. In: Casc[?]hetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research
Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. I: Plankton Ecology and Marine
Biogeochemistry , Belgian Science Policy Office, II/08: 1-79.

GOFFART A. and HECQ J.-H. (1993): Biochemistry and ecodynamics of zooplankton of the
Southern Ocean. In: Casc[?]hetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic -
Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. I: Plankton Ecology and Marine Biogeochemistry, Belgian
Science Policy Office, II/06: 1-56.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                              18
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

GUGLIELMO L., HECQ J.-H., ARTEGIANI A., AZZOLINI R., BENEDETTI F., CATALANO G.,
GOFFART A., INNAMORATI M., LAZZARA L., NUCCIO C., PASCHINI E., POVERO P. and VANUCCI
S. (in press): Ecohydrodynamical approach of the planktonic ecosystem during the Vth Italiantartide expedition in the Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean (1989/1990), Part I: Oceanographic data,
J. Mar. Syst.

HECQ J.-H., AZZALI M., CATALANO G., DECEMBRINI F., FABIANO M., GOFFART A., GUGLIELMO
L., KALINOWSKI J. and MAGAZZU G. (in press): Ecohydrodynamical approach of the planktonic ecosystem during the Vth Italiantartide expedition in the Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean (1989/1990), Part II: Structure and functioning of the ecosystem, J. Mar. Syst.

HECQ J.-H., BRASSEUR P., LACROIX G. and GUGLIELMO L. (1993): Modelling approach of the planktonic vertical structure in deep Austral Ocean: the example of the Ross Sea ecosystem. In: Anonymous, Progress in Belgian Oceanography Research (Brussels, January 21-22 1993), Royal Academy of Belgium, National Committee of Oceanology, 235-250.

HUYBRECHTS Ph. (1993): A numerical study on the response of the Antarctic ice sheet to changes in environmental conditions. In: Caschetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. III: Glaciology and Climatology, Belgian Science Policy Office, II/04A: 1-45.

HUYBRECHTS Ph. (1993) Glaciological modelling of the Late Cenozoic East Antarctic ice sheet: Stability or dynamism?, Geogr. Annaler 75A/4 : 221-238.

JOIRIS C. and HOLSbeek L. (1993): Ecotoxicology of stable pollutants in Antarctic marine ecosystems: mercury and organochlorines. In: Caschetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. I: Plankton Ecology and Marine Biogeochemistry, Belgian Science Policy Office, II/07A: 1-33.

LANCELOT Ch., MATHOT S., BECQUEVORT S., DANDOIS J.-M. and BILLEN G. (1993): Carbon and nitrogen cycling through the microbial network of the marginal ice zone of the Southern Ocean with particular emphasis on the northwestern Weddell Sea. In: Caschetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. I: Plankton Ecology and Marine Biogeochemistry, Belgian Science Policy Office, II/05: 1-110.

LANCELOT Ch., VETH C., MATHOT S. and de BAAR H. (in press): Factors controlling phytoplankton ice-edge blooms in the marginal ice-zone of the northwestern Weddell Sea during sea ice retreat 1988: field observations and mathematical modelling, Polar Biol. 13.

PATTYN F. and DECLEIR H. (1993): Satellite monitoring of ice and snow conditions in the S?r Rondane Mountains, Antarctica, Ann. Glac. 17, 41-48.

PATTYN F., DECLEIR H. and HUYBRECHTS Ph. (1993): Ice dynamical studies in the S?r Rondane Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. In: Caschetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. III: Glaciology and Climatology, Belgian Science Policy Office, II/04B: 1-35.

PETIT B. and DEMUTH C. (1993): Sea ice and circulation in the Weddell Sea. In: Caschetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic - Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. III: Glaciology and Climatology, Belgian Science Policy Office, II/10: 1-48.

1994 PROGRESS REPORT
19
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

SAGGIOMO V., GOFFART A., CARRADA G.C. and HECQ J.-H (1994): Spatial patterns of 
phytoplanktonic pigments and primary production in a semi-enclosed periantarctic ecosystem: the 
Strait of Magellan, J. Mar. Syst. 5: 119-142.

SOUCHEZ R. and TISON J.-L. (1993): Chemical and isotopic distribution in ice due to water freezing 
in Antarctica. In: Caschetto S. (Ed.), Belgian Scientific Research Programme on the Antarctic -
Scientific Results of Phase Two, Vol. III: Glaciology and Climatology, Belgian Science Policy Office,
II/01: 1-42.

TISON J.-L., PETIT J.-R., BARNOLA J.-M. and MAHANEY W.C. (1993): Debris entrainment at the 
ice-bedrock interface in sub-freezing temperature conditions (Terre Adélie, Antarctica), J. Glaciol.
39: 303-315.

TISON J.-L., RONVEAUX D. and LORRAIN R. (1993): Low salinity frazil ice generation at the base 
of a small Antarctic ice shelf, Ant. Sc. 1: 261-268

VANNESTE K., BART P., DE BATIST M., MILLER H. and THEILEN F. (1994): A comparison of 
reflection seismic geometries on three diferent glacial margins, Terra Antarctica 1: 437-439.

 
1994 PROGRESS REPORT                                                             20
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

5 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS & RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY

5.1 RESEARCH PROJECT-LEADERS

Professor A. BERGER                                            Dr Ch. LANCELOT
Université Catholique de Louvain                              Université Libre de Bruxelles
Institut d'Astronomie et de                                   Microbiologie des milieux aquatiques
Géophysique G. Lemaître                                       Boulevard du Triomphe - C.P. 221
Chemin du cyclotron, 2                                        B-1050 Bruxelles
B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve                                       Phone:    +32(0)2/650.59.88
Phone:    +32(0)10/47.33.03                                  Fax:      +32(0)2/650.59.93
Fax:      +32(0)10/47.33.22                                  E-mail:   lancelot@ulb.ac.be
E-mail:   berger@astr.ucl.ac.be

Dr M. DE BATIST                                               Dr G. PICHOT
Universiteit Gent                                             Ministry of Public Health and
Renard Centre of Marine Geology                              the Environment - MUMM
Krijgslaan 281 - S8                                           Gulledelle, 100
B-9000 Gent                                                   B-1200 Brussels
Phone:    +32(0)9/222.57.15                                  Phone:    +32(0)2/773.21.22
Fax:      +32(0)9/220.40.45                                  Fax:      +32(0)2/770.69.72
E-mail:   debatist@geology.rug.ac.be                          E-mail:   mummgp@camme.ac.be

Professor H. DECLEIR                                          Professor R. SOUCHEZ
Vrije Universiteit Brussel                                   Université Libre de Bruxelles
Geografisch Instituut                                        Département Sciences de la Terre et
Pleinlaan 2                                                   Environnement
B-1050 Brussel                                               Avenue Roosevelt, 50 - C.P. 160/03
Phone:    +32(0)2/641.33.83                                  B-1050 Bruxelles
Fax:      +32(0)2/641.33.78                                  Phone:    +32(0)2/650.22.16
E-mail:   ilinthou@vnet3.vub.ac.be                           Fax:      +32(0)2/650.22.26
                                                              E-mail:   glaciol@ulb.ac.be

Dr F. DEHAIRS                                                Dr M. VINCX
Vrije Universiteit Brussel                                   Universiteit Gent
Analytische Scheikunde (ANCH)                                Laboratorium voor Morfologie en
Pleinlaan 2                                                   Systematiek der Dieren
B-1050 Brussel                                               K.L. Ledeganckstraat 35
Phone:    +32(0)2/641.32.60                                  B-9000 Gent
Fax:      +32(0)2/641.32.74                                  Phone:    +32(0)9/264.52.10
E-mail:   fdehairs@vnet3.vub.ac.be                           Fax:      +32(0)9/264.53.42
                                                              E-mail:   magda.vincx@rug.ac.be

Dr J.-H. HECQ
Université de Liège
Unité d'écohydrodynamique
Institut de Physique B5
B-4000 Sart Tilman - Liège
Phone:    +32(0)41/56.36.46
Fax:      +32(0)41/56.23.55
E-mail:   U215201@vm1.ulg.ac.be
BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC PROGRAMME ON THE ANTARCTIC - OSTC

5.2 PROGRAMME-RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY

Prime Minister Office - Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs (OSTC)
Rue de la Science 8 - Wetenschapsstraat 8 B-1040 Brussels
Phone: +31(0)2/238.34.11 Fax: +32(0)2/230.59.12 Telex: 24501 prosci b
E-mail: casc@smtp.belspo.be

6 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACC                  Antarctic Circumpolar Current
ANTOSTRAT           Antarctic Offshore Acoustic Stratigraphy Project
BELANTOSTRAT        Belgian contribution to ANTOSTRAT
EPOS                 European Polarstern Study
FLA                  Fluorescent-labelled Algae
FLB                  Fluorescent-labelled Bacteria
GEBRA                Evolución Geológica de la Cuenca de Bransfield y de la Dorsal Sur del MAr de 
                     Scotia
HPLC                 High Performance Liquid Chromatography
JGOFS                Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
MUMM                 Management Unit North Sea and Scheldt Estuary Mathematical Model
ODP                  Ocean Drilling Program
OSMAS                Oil Spill Modelling for the Antarctic Seas
OSTC                 Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs
RCMG                 Renard Centre of Marine Geology, Gent
ROSSMIZE             Ross Sea Marginal Ice Zone Ecology
SWAMCO               Seawater Microbial Community Model
UCL                  Université Catholique de Louvain
UG                   Universiteit Gent
ULB                  Université Libre de Bruxelles
ULg                  Université de Liège
VUB                  Vrije Universiteit Brussel
