ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                                                        
SEOUL                
May 8-19, 1995                
                                                                        
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA                
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                        
XIX ATCM/INF 106                
May 15, 1995                
Original: English                
                                        
                                        
OPENING ADDRESS                
BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF FINLAND                
                                        
Agenda Item 3                
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        
The 19th Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting in
Seoul, 8-19 May 1995

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR
HEIKKI PUURUNEN,
HEAD OF THE FINNISH DELEGATION

Mr. Chairman,
On behalf of the Delegation of Finland I wish to congratulate you
on your election to the chairman of this 19th Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. I am convinced that under your able
chairmanship we will conclude succesfully our work which commenced
last week. I also wish to give our thanks to the Government of the
Republic of Korea for its generous hospitality and efficient
organisation it has provided for this meeting.

Mr. Chairman,
We have many important issues and a tight time-table for our
weeks's discussions. In this statement I would like to bring up
some brief points essential to us.

Recently it has been raised a preoccupation that the Antarctic
Treaty System in general faces the challenge of improving its own
effectiveness and legitimacy. My delegation shares this view. The
coordination within the ATS must be enhanced. The key elements are
the strengthening of the role of the ATCMs in the system and the
establishment of a permanent secretariat for the Antarctic Treaty.
The question of the secretariat has been in our agenda for some
years. A solution to this question is needed soon.

Mr. Chairman,
Nordic logistical cooperation in the Antarctic is well established
and continues. Finland will arrange the joint Finnish-Swedish-
Norwegian transportation for the coming season. In the framework
of scientific cooperation a Nordic marine geological research
project will be carried out. Finland has done meteorological
research on a continuous basis using an automatic weather station
at the research station Aboa in the Queen Maud Land. Ozone
sounding continues in Argentinian Marambio station as Finnish-
Argentinian cooperation.

The ratification process of the Madrid Protocol by Finland is
under way. A working group prepares a national act on the
implementation of the Protocol and its annexes. It is envisaged
that the working group will submit a draft act by the end of this
year and that the Parliament will adopt that act in the course of
next year.

Mr. Chairman,
Finally I would like to use this opportunity to inform the
participants of this ATCM about the development of Environmental
Impact Assessment in the work for the Arctic Environmental
Protection Strategy (so called Rovaniemi Process).
In accordance with a Finnish initiative the purpose of that work is to develop practical guidelines on EIA specially for the Arctic conditions. This includes definition of special features of the Arctic which have to be taken into account when EIA is implemented. It is also to improve the cooperation of authorities between the Arctic countries. Finland has submitted information paper No. 49 on this issue.

Cooperation and interaction relating to the development of EIA procedures for the Antarctic and Arctic could in our view be useful.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
