ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  SEOUL
                                  May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 82
May 12, 1995
Original: English

 
ASOC REPORT TO THE XIXTH ATCM

Agenda Item 5 b

(Submitted by ASOC)
May 11, 1995

Report from the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
to the
XIXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Since the XVIII ATCM in Kyoto, ASOC member groups have continued to participate in and to monitor components of the Antarctic Treaty System. ASOC member groups also regularly provide educational and public information materials on the Antarctic Treaty System to specialists, professional groups and the public in a number of countries.

ASOC's primary focus during the past year has been to facilitate ways to ensure that the Protocol is ratified and brought legally into force as soon as possible, and implemented in a way that affords the greatest protection for the Antarctic environment. More than three years have elapsed since the signing of the Protocol and momentum on ratification and implementation is lagging. Although 16 nations have ratified the Protocol, only six have passed implementing legislation.

ASOC member groups have been working closely with a number of governments on ratification and implementation. ASOC has provided an Information Paper for this ATCM entitled "Green Legislation for Antarctica," which outlines essential elements that we submit should be included in implementing legislation. We hope this will assist those parties which have not enacted the legislation and regulations necessary to give full legal and practical effect to the Protocol and its annexes to do so expeditiously.

ASOC has focused substantial attention and resources on the question of a liability annex to the Protocol. This is a key gap in the overall system of "comprehensive" protection that we all desire, and is of course a commitment contained in the Protocol. Until a liability annex is agreed, there is no system in place for determining who is responsible for damage to the Antarctic environment and what level of response is needed to repair the damage. Professor Wolfrum is to be congratulated for his work in developing the elements of a liability annex. ASOC has provided all of the ATCPs with detailed background information on the liability issue, and has submitted detailed comments on each of Professor Wolfrum's offerings.

1
ASOC is concerned that another year has gone by without discernible 
progress in setting up the Secretariat for the Treaty, which is crucial to 
the proper implementation of the Protocol. In the interim, discussions 
relating to organizational aspects would facilitate a smooth transition to 
an operational Secretariat. Proposals such as that put forward by UNEP 
for a transitional approach should be given careful consideration by this 
ATCM.

ASOC welcomes the establishment of the Transitional Environmental 
Working Group (TEWG), which has begun its work at this ATCM. We are 
pleased to be able to participate and offer our expertise on the issues that 
the TEWG is addressing.

ASOC notes with some concern the rapid escalation of tourism to the 
Antarctic. Given the increases in tourism, it is particularly important that 
cumulative impacts of visits to popular locations are assessed and 
monitored in a universally accepted standardized format. Although 
pleased that Parties at the XVIII ATCM agreed to a "Code of Guidance" for 
all visitors and expedition organizers to the Antarctic, ASOC urges 
member nations to strengthen this guidance in order to ensure that all 
expeditions to the Antarctic are based on a sound environmental 
assessment, and that they are conducted in full compliance with the spirit 
and letter of the Protocol and relevant national regulations. In this 
context, ASOC urges Parties to specify which "appropriate national 
authorities" tour operators should contact in connection with EIAs and 
provision of information.  We also submit that operators should be 
required to carry liability insurance commensurate with their Antarctic 
operations. ASOC has tabled a paper for this ATCM on "Qantas 
Overflights", based on our participation as an observer on one flight. ASOC 
member groups regularly supply educational materials to some tourist 
expeditions, and would be pleased to do so for all tourist expeditions.

ASOC continues to focus significant attention and resources on science. 
ASOC scientists have participated in meetings of SCAR and some of its 
Groups, such as GOSEAC, Seals and Biology, and specialist scientific 
meetings such as the 6th Meeting on Antarctic Biology, sharing expertise 
on environmental assessment, environmental monitoring and other issues. 
We look forward to continuing these relationships. ASOC member groups 
will continue to support SCAR. In particular, ASOC wishes to endorse 
SCAR's involvement in the development of environmental monitoring 
programmes, and we applaud the SCAR/COMNAP workshops planned for 
later this year on this subject. Another area which deserves special 
emphasis is SCAR's program on global change, and in this respect we 
congratulate SCAR on its formation of a Group of Specialists on Global 

2
Change. ASOC has tabled a paper on global change for this ATCM, 
"Antarctic Warming: Early Signs of Global Climate Change."

ASOC participated in the international symposium, "The Future of the 
Antarctic Treaty System", in Ushuaia, and hopes that the 
recommendations from that meeting will be endorsed by Antarctic Treaty 
Parties.

One of ASOC's members, Greenpeace, conducted an expedition to the 
Antarctic in the 1994/95 austral summer. The MV Greenpeace visited 10 
stations on the Antarctic Peninsula. Expedition findings show that 
implementation of the Protocol in the field still is far from satisfactory. 
During the voyage, scientists on the ship also conducted benign research 
in support of the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. The report of this 
expedition has been tabled by ASOC as an Information Paper at this ATCM, 
"Greenpeace Antarctic Expedition Report 1994/95."

In the broader context of the Antarctic Treaty System, ASOC has been 
supporting stronger measures in CCAMLR to prevent unregulated fishing 
for several threatened Antarctic fish species. As new nations continue to 
travel south in search of new fisheries, there is an added urgency to 
ensuring that CCAMLR remains effective. If these fisheries are not 
managed sustainably within an ecosystem approach and applying the 
precautionary principle, fishing activities will deplete the krill and fish 
stocks to a level that could adversely affect the entire food chain. In this 
respect, it is important to take steps to prevent illegal fishing, which 
could undermine these important measures. This has been a problem in 
past years.

ASOC congratulates member nations of the International Whaling 
Commission on the establishment of the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary, 
which will permanently protect the primary feeding grounds for over 90% 
of the world's populations of great whales by banning commercial whaling. 
Creation of this Sanctuary greatly assists in achieving the objectives of 
the Protocol and CCAMLR. ASOC urges Antarctic Treaty Parties to ensure 
that the Sanctuary's integrity is maintained and internationally respected.

In concluding this year's report, ASOC wishes to honor the memory of 
Nigel Bonner, who devoted his life to the Antarctic. As chair of GOSEAC, 
Nigel helped pioneer environmental protection efforts in the Antarctic. 
Nigel was a colleague and friend to all of us, and his knowledge, kindness 
and wit are deeply missed.

3
