ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

SEOUL
May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 77
May 10, 1995
Original: English

CONSIDERATIONS FOR INTERIM ORGANIZATIONAL ASPECTS

Agenda Item 8 a

(Submitted by UNEP)
XIX ATCM/inf

Considerations for interim organizational aspects

Agenda item 8a

(submitted by the United Nations Environment Programme)

Introduction

The work of the Antarctic Treaty Parties has become 
increasingly complex over the years. The adoption of the Madrid 
Protocol on Environmental Protection and the agreement to advance 
the practical implementation of the Protocol as rapidly as 
possible pending its entry into force have placed extensive new 
organizational and logistical demands upon the Parties.

In light of the decision taken at the XVIIIth ATCM which set 
up a Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) of the XIXth 
ATCM, and which indicated that certain expert groups (invited 
under Agenda item 17) should participate in the detailed work of 
the TEWG to identify ways in which they could contribute to the 
work of future ATCMs, the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), would like to offer the following suggestions in order to 
assist the process of implementing the Madrid Protocol.

Background

At the request and for the benefit of the constituent 
governments, UNEP has designed and currently manages or assists 
in the management of, directly or indirectly, twelve bodies that 
administer nine regional conventions and three action plans for 
the protection and preservation of the marine environment. (1) 
UNEP provides this facilitation and management service for 
states-parties to these conventions and action plans only after a 
formal decision by the governments involved to request UNEP to do 
so.

UNEP serves as a strictly neutral and objective body to 
assist the governing body of the Conventions and the Action 
Plans, which in every case is the states-parties - and only the 
states-parties - themselves, to facilitate their work to achieve 
the objectives of the parties they have imposed upon themselves 
in those Conventions and Action Plans. No non-parties, no other 
national or international governmental, inter- or non-
governmental organizations (including other UN organizations and 
the UN as such) are permitted to participate - or even attend as 
observers - unless the states-parties to the Convention or Action 
Plan themselves so formally decide, at plenipotentiary level, and 
so specifically and formally instruct UNEP, together with precise 
terms of reference for the conditions of any such participation.
UNEP provides this management and facilitation service only 
on the basis of full, explicit, and regularly (every year) 
reexamined and renewed authority by the governing body of the 
Conventions, i.e., the states-parties at plenipotentiary level. 
These secretariats have no independent decision-making ability 
other than what is granted to them by the states-parties. In 
fact, a non-negotiable, prerequisite condition to any secretariat 
service provided by UNEP is such specific, formal, written 
guidance from the states-parties.

Suggestions

a)      Organizational

UNEP proposes for the consideration of the meeting that it 
could offer a similar service of a facilitating mechanism to the 
Antarctic Treaty Parties, on a strictly temporary and interim 
basis, which would permit the efficient and cost-effective 
progress towards the implementation of the Madrid Protocol, 
without prejudice to and pending the resolution of the other 
outstanding items.

UNEP can and would operate such a mechanism only under the 
authority of and pursuant only to the terms of reference given it 
by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. UNEP can 
categorically assure the Antarctic Treaty parties that no non-
party state or organization, including the UN itself, can 
interfere in any way with UNEP's work as a Convention 
secretariat. UNEP cannot be obliged to act ultra vires by other 
governments or organizations with regard to its obligations as a 
secretariat to a Convention.

UNEP currently serves as the temporary secretariat for three 
conventions (Abidjan, Bucharest, Nairobi) and two Action Plans 
(East Asia and Northwest Pacific) pending the decision by the 
governments on the location and initial terms of reference for 
the formal secretariat, thus enabling the substantive objectives 
of the Conventions to be advanced pending decision on these other 
matters and without prejudice to any decision that might be 
reached.

UNEP has over twenty years of experience in administering 
for governments a variety of environmental agreements under 
various legal, financial and institutional arrangements that are 
tailor-made for the requirements of the particular regional 
configuration of governments it is assisting.

UNEP can make available to the parties a variety of 
management and organizational designs for such an interim 
facilitating mechanisms drawn from its thirteen regional sea 
programmes. It would be able to provide, on an interim basis, any

2
or all of the functions outlined in paragraph 6 of WP 13, and certainly, the first three, which also appear to UNEP to be the most urgent matters for such a facilitating mechanism.

Where the governments have decided on a location and terms of reference for the secretariat, UNEP has assisted in the design of host government agreements, including legal personality of the secretariat, priviledges and immunities, financing and organization. In one case the secretariat rotates every five years, because that was what the governments of that region preferred. In every case, however, UNEP's driving motivation is to best assist the governments in implementing the environmental obligations they have imposed upon themselves.

All secretariat agreements have built-in sunset clauses, whereby the states-parties undertake to eventually to fully manage and finance their conventions themselves. UNEP can be dismissed at any time. At the request of the states-parties, UNEP can maintain a role as an overall environmental policy expert for that Convention or provide such other input as is deemed useful by the states-parties.

b)      Environmental

As so many of the substantive matters now facing the parties are environmental in nature, UNEP would also be able to offer its experience in precisely this domain to the parties, experience which encompasses specially protected areas and species, environmental impact assessment, waste management, land-based and marine sources of pollution, emergency response procedures and tourism, all of which are addressed in one or more of the other Conventions, Protocols and Action Plans listed above.

Some thought has also been given by UNEP to the possible temporary site of this mechanism. It must be in an Antarctic Consultative Party, preferably under the aegis of an existing autonomous unit with substantial and independent Antarctic expertise (for example, a research centre or foundation) and with the logistical, administrative and telecommunications structure for the rapid collection, collation and dissemination of information to the parties and such other bodies as instructed by the parties worldwide.

Conclusion

It must be emphasized that the organizational service, were it to be accepted, could and would only be offered by UNEP on condition that it would be temporary, interim and, run exactly as it works with the parties to other Conventions and Action Plans, i.e., purely for the benefit and at the behest of the parties to the Convention in question. Otherwise UNEP cannot undertake this function.

3
UNEP stands ready to give further information on its possible services to the ATCM in this regard, and on any other matters in which the ATCM considers UNEP could be of assistance to it.

Note

(1) The oldest and most complex of these management bodies is that serving the member states of the Barcelona Convention and its protocols for the Mediterranean. The secretariat for the Barcelona Convention itself is in Greece, but several of the protocols have their own secretariat to coordinate for the parties the implementation of activities under that Protocol. The protocol secretariats are located in other countries of the region.

The other Conventions and protocols directly or indirectly managed or assisted by UNEP are (in alphabetical order) the Abidjan Convention for the Atlantic Ocean off West and Central Africa, the Bucharest Convention for the Black Sea, the Cartagena Convention for the Caribbean and Latin America, the Convention for the Southeast Pacific, the Conventions for the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden and the Persian/Arabian Gulf, the Nairobi Convention for the Indian Ocean off Eastern Africa and the Noumea Convention for the South Pacific. UNEP also manages the Action Plans for the protection of the marine environment agreed upon by governments for, respectively, East Asia, the Northwest Pacific and South Asia.

 
4
