ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  SEOUL              
                                  May 8-19, 1995              

TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XIX ATCM/INF 114              
May 17, 1995              
Original: English              


OPENING ADDRESS              


BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF SWEDEN             
Address by Ambassador Wanja Tornberg,
Head of the delegation of Sweden

Mr. Chairman,

On behalf of the Swedish delegation I wish to extend the warmest congratulations on your election as Chairman of the XIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. May I also take this opportunity to thank the Government of the Republic of Korea for hosting this meeting.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection has been ratified by a majority of the Parties but it is essential that all Parties do so without undue delay. It is also most important that the Parties implement the provisions of the Protocol. We must make sure that our concern for the Antarctic environment is put into practical decisions. For the Parties, TEWG is an opportunity to try out working methods and gain experience for the day we can set up CEP. We must therefore strongly support the TEWG in its work.

It is obvious from the number of information papers that protection of the environment has grown into an issue of great concern. We must not, however, forget that Antarctica has vital clues for the knowledge of  the future development of the global environment. Scientific activities must go on, and we believe that science will benifit from the interest in environmental issues.

The need for a secretariat is now obvious both for the more and more complex work of the ATCM and for TEWG. To resolve this question is perhaps the most urgent question for ATCM.

Mr. Chairman,

The development of a liability regime has in some areas taken a step forward during last weeks discussion in the legal expert group so skilfully and efficiently led by Professor Rüdiger Wolfrum from Germany. But the discussions also revealed that there still exist fundamental differences between the parties with regard to the content of such a regime. Sweden has always advocated a strong liability regime with as few exceptions as possible - if any at all. It is important not to loose momentum in the negotiations of such a regime, and Sweden would therefore like to support the Australian suggestion to set a timetable for the future work of a liability protocol. The expert meetings should be transformed into a diplomatic conference as soon as possible.
Sweden appreciates the efforts of several countries to make better use of the 
inspection provisions under the Antarctic Treaty by presenting "checklists" or 
"guidelines" for inspection teams. During the Swedish inspection last year, Sweden 
saw the usefulness of such guidelines even if they are neither compulsory nor to be 
exclusively used. It is important to uphold the free inspection regime under the 
Antarctic Treaty as outlined under the Treaty and beware of the risk of turning it 
into an administrative procedure. The inspection regime under the Treaty and the 
one under the Protocol are separate regimes and should remain so.

The Swedish delegation looks forward to a constructive meeting where the work of 
achieving the objectives of the Treaty can be taken a step further and the Antarctic 
Treaty System strengthened.

Thank you Mr. Chairmanman
