ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                             XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                             ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                             XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                             SEOUL
                                                             May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 12
May 8, 1995
Original: English

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY

Introduction

Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty calls on Parties to report annually on the steps
they have taken to implement the Protocol, including notification
as to how Parties have ensured compliance through the adoption of
laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement
measures (see Article 13 (3) of the Protocol).

The United Kingdom has enacted domestic legislation to enforce the
provisions of the Protocol through the Antarctic Act, 1994 and the
Antarctic Regulations, 1995.  The provisions of the legislation
have been extended also to the UK's Overseas Territories, including
the Dependent Territories in the South Atlantic, through the
Antarctic Act 1994 (Overseas Territories) Order 1995.

Detail

The introduction of these legislative changes enabled the United
Kingdom to ratify the Protocol on 25 April 1995.

When the Antarctic Act enters into force activities in Antarctic
will require a permit issued by the Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs.  The carrying out of Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) as required by the Protocol will be a precondition
for the grant of a permit.  Such activities include:

drs/299
- British expeditions. It is important to note that British 
Expedition encompasses all expeditions, including tourist 
cruises, which are organised in, or depart to Antarctica from, 
British Territories. A British Expedition need not necessarily 
be composed of UK nationals and will include expeditions which 
leave from UK Overseas Territories. Of particular 
relevance here are the UK Dependent Territories in the South 
Atlantic;

- British research stations;

- British vessels and aircraft entering Antarctica;

- Mineral resource activities (permits will be restricted to 
scientific research or the use of mineral resources for 
construction purposes).

In addition, further permits will be needed by British nationals 
for the following:

- the taking, or harmful interference, of fauna or flora;

- the introduction of non-native animals and plants into 
Antarctica;

- entry into areas protected under the Protocol (Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas) or under the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) 
(CEMP Monitoring Sites).

drs/299
The Act prohibits damage, destruction or removal of Historic Sites and Monuments, which are listed in the Regulations.

Provisions in Annex IV of the Protocol regarding the prevention of marine pollution in Antarctic waters are contained in existing UK Merchant Shipping legislation and need not be addressed further in specific Antarctic law.  In addition, it was felt that the most appropriate way to address the provisions on waste disposal and management, set out in Annex III of the Protocol, was through conditions on a permit.

● Carrying out activities without first obtaining a permit, breach of a permit condition or breach of a prohibition is an offence punishable by up to 2 years imprisonment and an unlimited fine.

The Act and Regulations will be brought progressively into force.  For example, it is anticipated that permits for wildlife and Protected Areas may be introduced by the 1995/96 season.  Other permitting provisions will follow.

● The UK has also prepared a set of Guidelines on the obligations and procedures for Environmental Impact Assessment to assist those proposing activities in Antarctica.  Those guidelines have been submitted as an information paper.

The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) has already implemented the provisions of the Environmental Protocol, pending its entry into force, and accords its environmental management programme a high priority.

drs/299
Since the signing of the environmental Protocol in 1991, concern 
for the Antarctic environment at the BAS has been transformed into 
real and sustained action. The following measures have been 
carried out:
-   the production of the BAS environmental policy statements;
-   the production of Initial Environmental Evaluations of the 
    redevelopments at Rothera and Signy Research Stations;
-   the establishment of long-term environmental monitoring 
    programmes at Rothera and Signy Research Stations;
-   the acquisition of waste management equipment and materials for 
    stations and ships, and the production of the BAS Waste 
    Management Handbook;
-   the assessment of abandoned UK stations in the Antarctic 
    Peninsula region, and the clean-up and removal of wastes at 
    many sites;
-   the instigation of an annual Antarctic oil pollution control 
    training course;
-   the inspection and marking of protected areas near to BAS 
    research stations.

The new policies and procedures outlined above have enabled the UK, 
through its principal operator the British Antarctic Survey, to 
take a leading role in the practical and pragmatic implementation 
of the Environmental Protocol.

drs/299
