ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                                         
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                        SEOUL
                        May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 52
May 9, 1995
Original: English

WASTE MANAGEMENT CONCEPT
AT KOREAN ANTARCTIC RESEARCH STATION
KING SEJONG, IN KING GEORGE ISLAND

Agenda Item 13 b

(Submitted by the Republic of Korea)
Waste Management Concept at Korean Antarctic Research Station, 
King Sejong, in King George Island

1. Introduction

This brief information intends to introduce the Waste Management Concept at Korean 
Antarctic Research Station, King Sejong, since the Protocol on Environmental Protection was 
signed in 1991.

In Annex A, it is said that all member countries try to reduce the amount of waste and to 
remove the waste from Antarctica. It was also decided to dispose of the waste in the 
countries of origin or in countries that signed international agreement like the Basel 
Convention. Korea is carrying out the waste management at King Sejong Station according to 
these guidelines to protect Antarctic Environment and the dependent ecosystems.

2. King Sejong Station

King Sejong Station, which was built in February 1988, locates in Barton Peninsula, King 
Geoge Island at 62° 13′ 23″ S, 58° 47′ 21″ W.

About 15 scientists and supporting staffs dispatched every year to the station to conduct 
scientific activities around a year and to support summer research party.

King Sejong Station consists of 7 container(40 feet), 11 building, and 6 oil tank(150M^(3) each).

The total floor area of the building has increased from 1,386M^(2) in 1988 to 2,651M^(2) in 1991. 
Electric power for the station is provided by three 113KW and two 275 KW diesel generators. 
Double chamber incinerator and sewage treatment system have been operated since 1988.

3. Waste Management Concept at King Sejong Station

3.1 Measures taken in advance to avoid rubbish

At planning stage for the supply to the station, we are taking into account on the 
environmental degradability of the products and their packing boxes.

Educational and orientation program for waste management and waste reduction have been 
developed and implemented for all participants before and during the season.

3.1.1 Choice of products

Knowledge about the ingredients or components of the goods is considerably important. The 
relation between the utility value and the ingredients or components is checked, and the data 
of the different alternative products are compared before the final decision of choice.

The material currently used at King Sejong Station are as follows,

    Fuel : unleaded gasoline for snow mobile and rubber boat, 0.3% weight sulfer diesel oil 
           for generators
    Paint : no heavy metals included and lower content of solvent
    Detergents : biologically degradable one
3.1.2 Packing box
The packing should be reusable or at least should be possible to recycle, and
polyvinyl-chroride is avoided, because of its environmental harzardous character when
incinerated. The reduction of weight and volume directly results in the reduction of transport
expenditure and the possibility of environmental damages.
We try to select light and reusable packing boxes, thus reducing the amount of wastes.

3.2 Waste Management during the season

3.2.1 Treatment of domestic waste
Domestic wastes are collected and sorted in classes. These classes are paper, synthetic
material, glass, metal and other wastes.
To reduce the volume of the waste at King Sejong Station, a hydraulic press compacts it
onto 1/3 to 1/5 of its initial volume. It is stowed in a container and  it is taken out of
Antarctica once a year.

3.2.2 Treatment of non-domestic waste
Also the non-domestic waste is removed from the Antarctica. Non-domestic waste are
radioactive materials, used batteries, waste oil, any waste containing rubber, oil or heavy
metal, etc. These materials are stowed in suitable containers which are removed every year.

3.2.3 Purification of waste water
During the season, a sewage treatment plant is installed at station. This system purifies
sewages biologically and chemically.
In addition, a sludge treatment is carried out, enabling us to remove the sludge from the
Antarctica.

The cleaning capacity of the sludge treatment plant meets the requirements of the
international rules.

3.3 Disposal of waste

Once a year the King Sejong Station is supplied by a vessel. The wastes are brought to the
continent by ship after logistic supplying is completed. The waste is disposed out of the
Antarctica accdrding to the requirements of the Basel Convention.

3.4 Future

The exhaust gas of the diesel generators will be cleaned by catalytic converters, which
reduce carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, aldehyds and the black smoke.
Also, it is being considcred to install a wind energy plant. This would further reduce the fuel
consumption and in consequnce the amount of arising emissions.
4. Conclusion

This document shows briefly how the Korean Antarctic Program treats waste management at 
King Sejong Station. Before we prepare logistic supplying to the station, all kinds of rubbish 
and extensive packing should be considered to reduce and avoid environmental damages. 
Heavy packing materials are replaced by more lightweight ones.
All wastes are collected during overwintering period and removed from the Antarctica once a 
year.

King Sejong Station will endeavour to minimize the human impact and thus cope with the 
requirements of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.

 
26
