ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                
                                        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                
                                        
SEOUL                
May 8-19, 1995                
                                        
TRATADO ANTARTICO                
XIX REUNION-CONSULTIVA                
                                        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                
                                        
                                        
XIX ATCM/INF 22                
May 11 1995                
Original: English                
                                        
                                        
                                        
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON                
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE                
ANTARCTIC TREATY                
                                        
Agenda Item 6 a                
                                        
(Submitted by Germany)                
                                        
504-380.20 SB 4

Information Paper

(Submitted by Germany)

Implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty
(No. 6a of the preliminary agenda)

Germany signed the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on 4 Octo-
ber 1991 and has committed itself to taking the necessary steps to secure its ratification and en-
try into force as soon as possible.

Germany had also agreed to apply the provisions of the Protocol in the meantime as far as 
possible and in accordance with its legal system. Immediately after signing the Protocol, the 
Federal Government issued orders to all German Government and government-sponsored insti-
tutions working in Antarctica to adhere strictly to the provisions of the Protocol.

In summer 1994 the German Parliament adopted a ratification act and an implementation act to 
the Protocol. They enabled Germany to ratify the Protocol on 25 November 1994, being the 
eleventh Consultative State to do so.

Under the implementation act, all activities regulated by the Protocol which are organized in 
Germany will require a permit issued by a government authority, the Federal Environmental 
Agency. This permit will only be issued if the proposed activity is in conformity with all regu-
lations of the Protocol.

Within this E.I.A. research activities will be judged by a commission of independent scientists 
having practical experience in Antarctica. The aim is to ensure that adequate account is taken 
in the Federal Environmental Agency's decision of the special conditions and needs of research 
activities in Antarctica.

Any ship employed in an Antarctic expedition or journey organized in Germany will be fully in-
corporated into the environmental impact assessment. This applies irrespective of whether the 
ship sails under the German or a foreign flag.
The implementation of Annex IV proved particularly difficult, as Germany is also a party to 
MARPOL; while the regulations in Annex IV are to some extent identical to the corresponding 
MARPOL regulations, there are also deviations. Germany decided not to include the regula-
tions of Annex IV which are identical to MARPOL into the implementation act as they are al-
ready valid law in Germany anyway. A number of regulations going beyond MARPOL will be 
regulated by ordinances having the same authority as law. In contrast, the implementation act 
itself contains an obligation for all relevant ships to keep a waste/sewage record book, as this 
obligation is not provided in MARPOL.

● Under the implementation act, the many orders and prohibitions contained in the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection shall apply to all participants in activities in Antarctica organized in 
Germany and, in addition, to all natural persons having their domicile or habitual residence in 
the Federal Republic of Germany.

● Under the implementation act, mining in the Antarctic Treaty area is prohibited.

● The implementation act stipulates a great number of sanctions for cases of violation.

● The implementation act will enter into force together with the Protocol on Environmental Pro-
tection.
