ANTARCTIC TREATY
XIXth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XIXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XIX REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XIX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

SEOUL
May 8-19, 1995

XIX ATCM/INF 87
May 12, 1995
Original: English

REPORT OF THE CONVENOR OF THE
INFORMAL GROUP OF TREATY PARTIES IN THE UNITED NATIONS

Agenda Item 5 a
(Submitted by Japan)
Report of the Convenor of the Informal Group of
Treaty Parties in the United Nations

(Provisional Agenda Item 5(a)(vii))
Info paper submitted by Japan
Mr. Chairman,

I am pleased to be here today to report on the developments 
of the "Question of Antarctica" in the United Nations since 
XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in the capacity of 
the Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in the 
United Nations. The resolution on this item was adopted by 
consensus at the 49th General Assembly for the first time since 
1985, after long period of confrontation.

The consensus resolution 49/80 of December 15, 1994, which 
resulted in reasonable contents, is a fruit of the dialogue and 
cooperation between the contracting parties and those countries 
who casted doubt on the Antarctic Treaty System. Taking this 
opportunity, I'd like to thank to other State Parties for their 
constructive attitude in elaborating this resolution together 
with Malaysia.

Mr. Chairman,

The main points of the resolution are as follows;
 
Firstly, it requests the Treaty Parties to extend 
invitations to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to the 
Executive Director of UNEP (operative para.4).

Secondly, the resolution shows Antarctic Treaty System as 
the key actor to manage and to be responsible for Antarctica. For 
example, the entities who are expected to make available 
information on Antarctica as a means of promoting further public 
awareness of the importance of Antarctica has now changed to the 
Treaty Parties (operative.para.7) instead of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations as it was the case in the previous 
resolutions.

    Thirdly, the item "Question of Antarctica" is not included 
in the provisional agenda of the next session, instead it will 
be included in the 51st session (operative para. 10).

    Also attention should be drawn to operative paragraph 9, 
which urges countries whose nationals undertake activities in 
Antarctica (not limiting to the Treaty Parties) to ensure such 
activities to be carried out in a manner consistent with the 
principles of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty. There is no corresponding paragraph in the 
previous resolutions.

    Furthermore, those points such as organizing a seminar or 
symposium with wide international participation and negotiating 
for new convention to establish world park in Antarctica with the 
full participation of international community which appeared in 
the previous resolutions were deleted.

Mr. Chairman,

    The resolution reflects the positive benefits properly which 
the Antarctic Treaty provides for the maintenance of 
international peace and security and promotion of the 
international cooperation. The spirit of cooperation among 
nations which is the key to the future of Antarctica prevailed 
this time. I sincerely hope that the cooperative relationship 
established on this occasion will consolidate and lead to the 
accession of more states to the Antarctic Treaty.
