





Site Guidelines for Horseshoe Island and Detaille Island, Antarctic Peninsula




Site Guidelines for Horseshoe Island and Detaille Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
1. Horseshoe Island is located in Bourgeois Fjord, Marguerite Bay, off the Antarctic Peninsula. The British Base ‘Y’, Historic Site and Monument No. 63, is located on Horseshoe Island. Detaille Island is located in the Lallemand Fjord off the Loubet coast, Antarctic Peninsula. The British Base ‘W’ is located on Detaille Island. Both stations are visited by tour operators and national Antarctic programmes. 
2.  Following the adoption of Site Guidelines by Resolution 5(2005), the United Kingdom has prepared Site Guidelines for Horseshoe Island and Detaille Island, with the assistance of IAATO, and recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM.
Background
3.  Horseshoe Island (67°49’S, 67°18’W) is located in Bourgeois Fjord, Marguerite Bay, off the Antarctic Peninsula. The historic British Base ‘Y’ was built on the island in 1955. It is noteworthy as a relatively unaltered and well equipped British scientific base of the 1950’s, providing a time capsule of life and science of the time. Following a UK proposal, it was designated as HSM No. 63 under the Antarctic Treaty. 
4. Detaille Island (66°52’S, 66°38’W) is located in Lallemand Fjord off the Loubet coast of the Antarctic Peninsula. The British Base ‘W’ was built on the island in 1956. It provides an evocative insight into the way bases were occupied and supported science during the late 1950s, including the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957.  Following a UK proposal, Detaille is also put forward for HSM designation this year. 
5. Horseshoe and Detaille islands are visited infrequently but increasingly by tour operators and by national Antarctic programmes. For this reason the UK, who manages both the sites, has worked closely with IAATO to develop these site guidelines. 
6. The attached site guidelines for Horseshoe Island and Detaille Island are submitted in a format consistent with other ATCM Site Guidelines. 

