





Antarctic Protected Area System: Revised list of Historic Sites and Monuments - Measure 3 (2003). Guidelines for its application






Antarctic Protected Area System: Revised list of Historic Sites and Monuments - Measure 3 (2003)
Guidelines for its application
Introduction

    1. During the XXIV ATCM (Saint Petersburg, Russia, 9-20 July 2001) through Resolution 4 (2001) “Historic Sites and Monuments”, the Meeting established a review mechanism to ensure that the List of Historic Sites and Monuments remains accurate and up-to-date. The entry into force of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty incorporated a new spatial dimension by stating that Historic Sites and Monuments may also be designated as Antarctic Protected Areas or Specially Managed Areas. The resolution provided guidance for the assessments to be conducted by the Consultative Parties and their reporting on the outcome of their review to the UK CEP contact established for this purpose. All the parameters to be included in the assessment process continue to have permanent relevance. 
    2. The XXVI ATCM (Madrid, Spain, 9/20 June 2003) through Measure 3 consolidated the “List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by the Proposing Government or Governments” updating the information and removing sites or monuments which no longer exist. The British Delegation coordinated the preparation of the updated list and did an excellent service to the Parties . Measure 3 noted, in particular, Article 8 of Annex V which includes a provision for Historic Sites to be listed in the legal sense and not damaged, removed or destroyed. Article 8 also specifies that “Any Party may propose a site or monument of recognized historic value which has not yet been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), or which is not located within such Area, for listing as a Historic Site or Monument”.  An option is available for a new designation, either to designate Historic Sites and Monuments as ASPAS (Article 3.2.h) or ASMAS (Article 4, 2.b) or to list the Site or Monument without ASPA or ASMA status. However, in either case they must be classified as Historic Sites or Monuments.
    3. These introductory remarks as well as further comments are intended to contribute to the process of periodic updating and reasonable enlargement, completion and improvement of the Annex to Recommendation VII-9 as modified by several recommendations and measures. The List approved by the XXVI ATCM remains a strong core and a further review does not appear necessary at this time. However, it is important to understand that both Resolution 4 (2001) and Resolution 8 (1995) shall continue to govern, respectively in form and substance, the updating and enlargement procedures of the List of Historic Monuments and Sites.
    4. It may be useful to consolidate the existing provisions on Historical Sites and Monuments, in order to maintain and improve the quality of the protection awarded to the present sites and monuments, and appropriately build-up on the established rules and procedures to expand the List of Historic Sites and Monuments when the need appears for such expansion, or for the reduction of the List when further review indicates that a monument no longer exists or a particular site should be de-listed. To that end, a proposal is made for consolidated “Guidelines for the Application of Measure 3 (2003). These draft “Guidelines” focus on the ATCM List of Historic Sites and Monuments as a management tool, where commemoration is not a ritual exercise but the expression of a mutual commitment to the diffusion of historic Antarctic values. In addition to criteria established in Resolution 8 (1995) by which types of Sites and Monuments may be designated, in-depth analysis of the representative character and the values enshrined in the List of Historic Sites and Monuments should provide an insight into the possibilities for its expansion.  The draft was initially introduced as an Information Paper because, in addition to compiling the texts of existing Measures, Recommendations and Resolutions,  it incorporated new language and suggestions drawb from ATCM Reports and as a logical extension  and application of the existing body of conservation and protection for HSMs, and therefore required further discussion.
    5. The draft is now put forward as a substantive proposal. While several countries indicated interest in this initiative only few drafting suggestions came forward. The current document has benefited from these drafting suggestions and has also suppressed or consolidated some of the previous articles. The current paragraph 5 remains in brackets because, inter alia, the following doubts have been put forward: 
        a. Not all Historic Sites and Monuments require the enhanced protection proposed in this paragraph.
        b. Such protection may be achieved by their designation as ASPAS or ASMAS under articles 2 and/or 3 of Annex V to the Protocol.
        c. Site Guidelines could be developed for those HSM subject to substantial tourist visitation.          
    6. The first point is not contested but the chapeau only invites Parties to “consider...including whenever appropriate” the adoption of any one of these actions. It is true that “buffer zones and other safeguards” may be obtained through the designation of HSMs as ASPAS or ASMAS.  In addition to recurrent discussion of the importance of “buffer zones” or “risk assessments”, and quite independently of the protection granted by Annex V, it seems useful to highlight protective methods and procedures on their own merits. The issue of surveys and visits, or the inclusion of HSMs in the inspections check-lists are only means of implementation of the objectives pursued by Measure 3 (2003) conceived as a management tool. It is useful to recall that the reform to the Antarctic Protected System contained in Annex V was initiated by a sequence of visits and inspections of the sites established under the previous protective mechanisms.
    7. Upon advice received on the matter, references to COMNAP and SCAR have been deleted. Some years ago, at a COMNAP Meeting in Bariloche, Argentina, 8-12 June 1992, R.I Lewis Smith from BAS, presented a very useful paper on the Role of COMNAP in implementing Annex V of the Protocol. The author recalled Article 9 of Annex V and, in particular, the requirement that each Party ensures that the location of the limits of ASPAs, ASMAs and Historic Sites and Monuments are shown on maps and hydrographic charts, and stated that COMNAP should be directly involved in providing this information and ensuring it is readily available. Lewis Smith recommended close collaboration with the CEP and the SCAR GOSEAC. Since then, GOSEAC functions have been mostly transferred to the CEP, but expert groups such as GIANT (Geodetic Infrastructure), EGGI(Geographic information), SCAR Composite Gazeteer, Map Catalogue, KGIS (King George Island Geographical Information System), Cybercartographic Atlas of Antarctica remain relevant.
    8. While mechanisms, tools and instruments exist in the Antarctic domain and both Antarctic science and the Antarctic environment can greatly benefit from further use of their respective capabilities it is an acknowledged characteristic of all human organizations that, in spite of their theoretically interdisciplinary character, their connectivity and harmonization is not always optimally achieved. The appeal to coherence in the various actions suggested in paragraph 5 of the draft, as well as the contents of the last paragraph 8 are already contained in some of the Guides appended to Recommendation XVIII-1 While it seems important that historic values and their special protection become a central concern in the process of educating visitors to Antarctica, to avoid repetition, the last paragraph of the previous draft has been deleted  At the same time, the message in the Protocol itself, that the value of Antarctica as well as of particular areas which should remain untouched and pristine for research should, in our view,  be constantly reiterated.

