





Maximizing the Antarctic IPY legacy





Maximizing the Antarctic IPY legacy
Working Paper
Submitted by Norway and United Kingdom

Summary
The legacy of IPY should reach beyond the pure scientific achievements to enable scientists, policy-makers, and Antarctic stakeholders to continue to work together to understand and to address the big scientific outcomes of IPY. The Antarctic Treaty Parties should take upon themselves the challenge and responsibility for the realization of IPY legacy aspects which are specific of the Antarctic and are of potentially great influence on the future governance of the Antarctic.
It is suggested that the ATCM takes steps to ensure that the IPY work, findings and experiences are used in a best possible manner for Antarctic management and governance. The following steps are suggested: 
    • Continue to support the establishment of a robust and coordinated system of observing systems as a lasting legacy of the IPY (cf. Resolution 3 (2007)).
    • Using experiences gained from the IPY process as basis for developing ideas for improved research coordination and funding across the Antarctic community.
    • Continued support to ongoing recruitment and international capacity building initiatives.
    • Initiate a project with the aim to place the scientific results from IPY in the context of governance, aiming to:
    • conduct a scoping study and analysis of the IPY science program with regard to where it will produce new knowledge that should be brought to the attention of decision makers. 
    • consider mechanisms that would ensure that this knowledge is left as a legacy from IPY (e.g. an IPY-assessment report1).  
    • convene an Antarctic IPY Legacy Workshop to discuss further the potential mechanisms for communication and governance use of IPY research. 
At its meeting in Kautokeino (Norway) 19-20 November 2008 the Senior Arctic Officials of the Arctic Council approved a similar proposal for an IPY Legacy project for the Arctic. The importance of the Arctic Council taking an active role in this regard was recognized.
1. Introduction
The 4th International Polar Year 2007-2008 is the largest international polar research cooperation program ever launched, involving several tens of thousands of scientists on a global scale. IPY aims at making new important progress in the polar sciences, with weight on Arctic issues, but also with a significant portfolio on Antarctic and bipolar issues. IPY has initiated almost 1000 research initiatives worldwide which condensed to more than 200 concrete research projects, typically involving between 5 and 20 countries and up to a few hundred scientists each. Approximately of the 80 projects have Antarctic or bipolar focus.
The IPY lasts for two calendar years, from 1 March 2007 to 1 March 2009, but many major projects will continue beyond the latter date. A full evaluation of the outcome from this initiative will, however, take years and thus will influence polar research over a much longer time frame. Already now it is clear that the projects will yield a wealth of new data and scientific publications, which need to be registered, organized and be made available in an optimum way in order to guarantee the success of this unique research effort.
Already in the initiation phase of the 4th IPY, there was agreement on that the legacy of this initiative should reach beyond the pure scientific achievements to enable scientists, policy-makers, and for the Arctic also residents, to continue to work together to understand and to address the big scientific outcomes of IPY. 
At its meeting in Kautokeino (Norway) 19-20 November 2008 the Senior Arctic Officials of the Arctic Council (AC) approved the initiation of an IPY Legacy project for the Arctic. SAOs expressed strong support for the importance to incorporate results of relevant IPY projects into all work of AC and for the AC to take an active role in fostering sustained IPY legacy. They welcomed a proposal which outlined inter alia i) a scoping study which would focus on placing the scientific results of IPY in the context of society and governance and what should be brought to attention of decision makers and Arctic residents and ii) an AC legacy workshop to discuss approaches needed to bring forward the relevant knowledge and enable societal use of IPY results, including the possibility of an IPY assessment report, with a view to reaching agreement at the 2009 (April) Ministerial Meeting of the Arctic Council.
The Antarctic Treaty Parties should also take upon themselves the challenge and responsibility for the realization of IPY legacy aspects which are specific of the Antarctic and are of potentially great influence on the future governance of the Antarctic. This would be in the spirit of the Edinburgh Declaration (ATCM XXIX (2006)) in which the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties noted and supported the objective of delivering a lasting legacy from the International Polar Year.
2. Key IPY legacy issues relevant to the work of the ATCM 
The following issues have been identified as important legacy issues:
    • Observations and data access/management
    • Communication and management/governance use of research results
    • Recruitment, capacity building and coordinated funding
These legacy issues go beyond the research itself and are of governance interest. The ATCM should consider these three legacy issues, maintaining a focus on the immediate relevance for the future management and governance of Antarctica.
2.1 Observations and data access/management
Notwithstanding the many and frequent reports of Antarctic change, our knowledge of the Antarctic system is limited in many respects: there are temporal, spatial and disciplinary gaps in observing records, and data are often difficult to obtain or even unavailable. Sub-optimal observing and data management hamper our ability to monitor and study environmental change and their regional and global consequences. Only monitoring and research efforts that encompass all of Antarctica and which have a long-term perspective can guarantee that critical changes in the region are identified and understood, and possible mitigation or adaptation measures are taken. 
New data and, thus, a considerable growth of the observational basis for research and monitoring will be a major outcome of the 4th IPY. However, already the previous IPY/IGY in 1957/58 showed very clearly that the value of such periods of intense research only can be fully exploited if there is a critical mass of long-term measurements available, in the context of which the campaign data can be interpreted. Sufficiently long time series to interpret changes in a long-term context are scarce and distributed very unevenly in Antarctica; in some disciplines they are only in their starting phase or completely missing. IPY will help to assess the quality of the existing measurement network and to identify requirements for a more appropriate observation network. 
The ATCPs have in earlier discussions recognized the importance of long-term scientific monitoring and sustained environmental observation in Antarctica, and has inter alia reflected this importance in Resolution 3 (2007). In it, the Parties are recommended to: 
    1) Urge their national Antarctic programmes to maintain and extend long-term scientific monitoring and sustained observations of the Antarctic environment, 
    2) Contribute to a coordinated Antarctic observing system network initiated during the IPY in co-operation with appropriate international bodies, and 
    3) Support long-term monitoring and sustained observations of the Antarctic environment and the associated data management as a primary legacy of the IPY.
2.2 Recruitment, international capacity building and coordinated funding
Securing an adequate and balanced recruitment of young experts and establishing a system for comprehensive/extensive cooperation and scientist exchange programs to promote a culture of mutual understanding across national and discipline borders is an important aspect in ensuring that critical changes in the region are identified and understood, and possible mitigation or adaptation measures can be taken.
IPY has initiated the establishment of new recruitment structures, such as the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS; http://arcticportal.org/apecs/about). 
Coordinated research planning and funding is also a critical issue. Traditionally, research funding (and priorities) is decided at the national level. However, there are a few exceptions, and some of the experiences gained from the IPY process could be of value in developing ideas for improved research coordination and funding. This is an issue that could be moved forward by consultations involving Ministries of Science/Education and National funding agencies.
2.3 Communication and management use of research results
Both the complexity and the volume of measurements and other results of the IPY projects and possible legacy activities require very effective “condensation” and outreach processes in order to become available to administrators, stakeholders and the interested public in an understandable way in due time. 
A number of potential mechanisms for communication and outreach exist. Some examples include:
    • “State of” reports that in a concise and thematically balanced manner updates knowledge on the Antarctic, comprising all thematic areas relevant to the Antarctic Treaty system (an example of such a report form from the other polar region is the State of the Arctic Report/Arctic Report Card - http://www.arctic.noaa.gov/reportcard/about.html).
    • Assessment of scientific findings in the context of governance needs, e.g. an assessment of the IPY findings in context of their relevance for future governance. The Arctic Council’s ACIA-process could be used as a model for such an IPY-assessment report. 
    • Establishment of international outreach platform where new findings and important developments in the Antarctic are presented to authorities, interested experts, media and the public. The IPY Oslo Science Conference (Polar Science – Global Impact) planned to take place June 2010 (see http://www.ipy-osc.no) and other IPY-conferences provide a possible initial element of such a strategy.
It should also be emphasized in this context that IPY has boosted a wealth of contacts between the scientific community and other crucial sectors of society, such as the educational structures, media and art, which have been very important for the visibility of IPY and public awareness on the importance of the polar regions for global change. These experiences should be considered in the legacy outreach aspect.
3. Recommendations 
The ATCM should take steps to ensure that the IPY work, findings and experiences are used in a best possible manner for Antarctic management and governance through the ATCM.  
It is suggested that the following steps could be taken in this context:

Observations and data access/management
In Resolution 3 (2007) Parties were urged to strengthen monitoring and research efforts needed to comprehensively address Antarctic change and to promote the establishment of a circumpolar Antarctic observing network. 
The ATCM should continue to support the establishment of a robust and coordinated system of observing systems as a lasting legacy of the IPY, in order to in best possible manner ensure that critical changes in the region with potentially severe impact on societies are identified and understood. 
Recruitment, capacity building and coordinated funding
IPY has initiated the establishment of new recruitment structures, such as the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS). The ATCM should continue to support such initiatives which are essential in promoting a culture of mutual understanding across national and discipline borders.
Antarctic Treaty Parties should use their experiences gained from the IPY process to consider potential mechanisms for improved research coordination and funding across the Antarctic. One way of moving this issue forward could be to initiate a process of consultations involving Ministries of Science/Education and National funding agencies of the ATCPs.
Communication and societal use of research results
The communication and outreach aspects of the IPY are to a large degree centered on the scientific aspects of the work that has been conducted during the event. The ATCM could play a major role in ensuring that the scientific results are placed in the context of management and governance. The following process is suggested:
    • Conduct a scoping study and analyze the IPY science program with regard to where it will produce new knowledge of governance impact that should be brought to the attention of decision makers.
    • Based on the results of the scoping study, and through consultations between ATCPs, consider mechanisms for bringing this knowledge forward. One alternative could be to undertake an IPY-assessment report.  
    • Since IPY is truly bipolar, the ATCM should in this process also consider if (and how) legacy initiatives like an IPY-assessment could be integrated with the ongoing processes initiated under the Arctic Council. The role of SCAR would need further consideration in this context.
    • On basis of scoping study and consultations (mentioned above), convene an Antarctic IPY Legacy Workshop to discuss further the potential mechanisms for communication and societal use of IPY work. The findings of the scoping study and consultations should be circulated to the participants in advance of the workshop.
    • The workshop should prepare recommendations based on the outcomes of the workshop discussions, and submit to the ATCM for its consideration. 
Norway would, in collaboration with other interested Parties and Organizations, be prepared to take an active role in preparing for and hosting a Antarctic IPY legacy workshop.

