





Development of Environmental Data Services to inform the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process




Development of Environmental Data Services to inform the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process
CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) of new Antarctic activities can be enhanced by the use of existing environmental monitoring data but accessing such data can be difficult.  Accordingly the United Kingdom proposes that the CEP work with SCAR and other bodies as appropriate (in particular COMNAP and CCAMLR) in order to facilitate easier access to, and ensure better co-ordination of, environmental monitoring data and information for development of EIAs.
Introduction

    1. The Antarctic Treaty puts environmental monitoring and environmental impact assessment (EIA) at the centre of Antarctic environmental protection.  EIA is used as a technique to identify and predict the potential impact of a given activity on the environment by (a) collecting information about the environmental effects of an activity, (b) determining the significance of those effects and (c) establishing mechanisms which will minimise adverse impacts. As the CEP has discussed previously, regular and effective monitoring is central to the EIA process.   

 Discussion

    2. The CEP has previously discussed the importance of data management and data sharing for environmental monitoring and considered several papers on this subject (including, most recently, Norway’s  WP29 in 2007 entitled ‘Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica – lessons learnt from the Arctic’ and Australia’s IP 7 submitted in 2008 entitled ‘Summary of Environmental Monitoring and Reporting Discussions’). Both highlighted the requirement for effective centralised data management and accessibility. 

    3. The AT Secretariat has compiled the EIA database which will prove very useful in developing future assessments.  However, activities by Parties to collect environmental monitoring data may not be captured via this process and so may not be readily available to inform EIAs undertaken by others.   Equally, the extent of on-going environmental monitoring across Antarctica is difficult to estimate accurately due to difficulties in accessing environmental monitoring data generated by national operators.  As a result, EIAs may be prepared without the benefit of reference to earlier or ongoing monitoring data or research (Figure 1).   

    4. There are clearly a wide range of activities covering the Antarctic and Southern Ocean, which aim to improve access to data and information including that provided via the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) database. Within SCAR, the management of data and information is carried out by SCAR’s national members, and is coordinated by the Standing Committee on Antarctic Data Management (SC-ADM) and the Standing Committee on Antarctic Geographic Information (SC-AGI).   

    5. The existing and planned activities of SC-ADM for coordinating data services offers the opportunity to greatly improve access to the environmental monitoring data and so enhance the EIA process.  It also provides an existing infrastructure for developing standards and ensuring deposition of data in appropriate repositories for improving data access and sharing.   The use of Geographic Information System (GIS) technology may prove useful by facilitating assessment of impacts across areas of different scales.  

    6. In particular, SC-ADM could help improve the current system by:
    • enabling analysis of long-term trends;
    • allowing comparison with similar environmental monitoring data from other sites;
    • where appropriate, providing base-line environmental monitoring data before activities start;
    • encouraging co-ordinated and regular/systematic collection of environmental monitoring data;  
    • facilitating closer integration of information on environmental monitoring data, Antarctic activities and the EIA process. 
    7. The trend to date has been to prepare EIAs and to carry out environmental monitoring projects on a local scale but, in order to adequately protect Antarctica’s environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic and wilderness values, there is value in considering cumulative events over a range of spatial and temporal scales.  Once all environmental monitoring data is readily accessible it should be possible to develop more easily a holistic assessment of environmental impacts across local, regional and continent wide scales.   

Recommendation
    8. In order to improve the effectiveness of the EIA process, the CEP should work with SCAR and other relevant bodies, including COMNAP and CCAMLR, to improve coordination and management of environmental monitoring data. In the first instance, the UK would welcome consideration of how the SCAR SC-ADM could enhance the EIA responsibilities of the CEP.  We would also propose that the AT Secretariat develop a mechanism to enable all Parties to provide details of the environmental monitoring they carry out. 
 


