





Review of provisions relating to non-native species introductions in ASPA and ASMA management plans




Review of provisions relating to non-native species
introductions in ASPA and ASMA management plans
CEP Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The potential threats to indigenous Antarctic biodiversity from non-native species are well documented and have been discussed by the CEP at previous meetings (including CEP IX).  Guidance to prevent or reduce the risk of such introductions is often contained in ASPA and ASMA management plans but, given the CEP’s agreement to prioritise work on non-native species this year, the UK would suggest that it is timely to review this.  In particular, the UK proposes that: 
    1) the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans update the CEP ‘Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans’ and recommend that site-specific biosecurity measures are put in place where necessary;  
    2) the CEP consider more consistent procedures for controlling non-native species introductions and translocation, across the whole of the Treaty Area. 

Introduction
1.  The introduction of non-native species to ice-free ground and marine ecosystems, and the transfer of locally indigenous biota around Antarctica, present a major potential threat to Antarctic biodiversity.  
2.  The UK has carried out a review of the text in protected area management plans concerning non-native species introductions (details are set out in Information Paper (IP 12): ‘ASPA and ASMA management plans: review of provisions relating to non-native species introductions’).  This review showed that:
    a. Most protected area management plans recognise the risk of non-native species introductions: 98% of ASPAs protecting terrestrial and marine biological values include restrictions on the introduction of non-native species;
    b. There is some inconsistency in the provisions for addressing non-native species introductions across the suite of ASPA and ASMA management plans;
    c. Management plans are only able to propose management techniques or measures to prevent non-native species introductions in very small areas relative to the total area of Antarctic ice-free ground that is vulnerable to such introductions (ASPAs and ASMAs encompass only around 2% and 13%, respectively, of Antarctica’s ice-free ground); 
    d. Currently ASPAs and ASMAs protect only ~0.006% of the Antarctic marine environment, but none of the existing protected area management plans provide measures to address the risk of marine non-native species introductions.
Discussion
3.  The ongoing review of management plans by the SGMP provides a timely opportunity to revisit the existing text and ensure the guidance remains relevant to the impacts of non-native species in the Area under consideration.
4.  The effectiveness of management plans could be improved by inclusion of more consistent and comprehensive guidelines and detailed advice on biosecurity precautions.  This is particularly important in respect of those ASPAs which have non-native species adjacent to or within the Area.  It is feasible that some management plans may inadvertently increase the risk of a non-native species introduction to an Area.  For example, (a) cleaning of potentially contaminated clothing and equipment and/or (b) camping using contaminated equipment at or close to the boundary of a protected Area may result in the deposit of non-native species, which may subsequently spread into the protected Area.  Introductions of non-native species into protected areas cannot be prevented by implementing biosecurity provisions applicable only within those areas because species do not respect management boundaries.
5.  In view of the above analysis, the UK would propose that: 
    • the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans update the CEP ‘Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans’ to include more consistent procedures for controlling non-native species introductions and translocation, and recommend that site-specific biosecurity measures are put in place where necessary.
    • protected areas could benefit from the development and implementation of more standardised procedures for controlling non-native species introductions and translocation that apply more broadly across the Antarctic Treaty Area.  These could include practical biosecurity measures relating to (i) aircraft, (ii) land vehicles, (iii) ships and small boats, (iv) camping equipment, (v) science equipment (vi) clothing and (vii) foodstuffs.  
    • wider consideration should be given to the provision of measures to address the risk of marine non-native species introductions within the Treaty Area.


