





Measure 3 (2003) Antarctic Protected Areas System. Revised list of Historic Sites and Monuments (Proposed amendment to the Annex)







Measure 3 (2003) Antarctic Protected Areas System. Revised list of Historic Sites and Monuments (Proposed amendment to the Annex)

    1. As the original proposing Party and Party undertaking the management of the monument described in number 37 of the Revised List of Historic Sites and Monuments, Chile proposes that the text contained in the Revised List be slightly modified as follows: 

“37.   Statue erected in 1948 at General Bernardo O’Higgins Base (Chile), Cape Legoupil, Trinity Peninsula/Louis Philippe Peninsula, of Bernardo O´Higgins, the first ruler of Chile to envisage the importance of Antarctica. This monument is representative of pre-IGY activities in Antarctica and has a symbolic meaning in the history of Antarctic exploration since it was during O´Higgins government that the vessel Dragon landed on the coast of the Antarctic Peninsula in 1820.”

    2. The proposal to insert the words “Cape Legoupil” before the words “Trinity Peninsula” is based on the fact that the precise location, presently identified in the Revised List by the coordinates 63º 19´S, 57º 54´W, is so named after Ernest-Auguste Goupil (1814-1840) artist aboard the expedition ship Zeléee at the time that the French Antarctic Expedition charted the Cape (27-28 February 1838).

    3. The proposal to add, after the words “Trinity Peninsula” a dash and the words “Louis Philippe Peninsula” is based upon the standard practice, in documents, charts, site guidelines, within the Antarctic Treaty System, when different names are recognized by different Parties to the System. The proposal is to maintain the sequence Trinity Peninsula/Louis Philippe Peninsula in all official languages in the same order.

    4. Chile made a statement on this matter at the XXVI Antarctic Consultative Meeting (Madrid, Spain, on 20 June 2003) but the meaning of the sentence recorded at the end of paragraph 73 of the Report (“A delegation recalled the practice  in matters concerning Antarctic geographic names”) could hardly be understood.

    5. Subsequent consultations between interested Parties at ATCMs XXX when Chile introduced WP 39, erroneously considered as a matter of translation of a place name, and more informal consultations at ATCM XXXI pointed to a different solution which is now formally proposed. The suggestion to refer simply to the Antarctic Peninsula had been considered prejudicial to the name “Trinity Peninsula”. G Hattersley-Smith, “The History of Place-Names in the British Antarctic Territory” describe at great length and meticulous precision the transition of the name “Louis Philippe Land” to Trinity Peninsula. Also, both the United States and Chile have modified the name to “Louis Philippe Peninsula”.

    6. Both geographic names, “Trinity Peninsula” and “Louis Philippe Peninsula” are included in the Composite Gazeteer of Antarctica maintained for SCAR by the Italian Antarctic Programme. The territorial definition “NE part of the Antarctic Peninsula NE of the line Cape Kjellman-Cape Longing is the same for both names. In purely academic reasoning, further accommodation could be made I the sense that what Dumont d’ Urville observed  was mostly the high rocky profile of the Peninsula and adjacent islands, while the major merit of Bransfield was to accomplish a maritime survey of the region. In some ways, Trinity House deserves a name in Antarctica, but also a King of France who set the attention of his expedition on the Antarctic Continent.  

=============================
