





Problems of national control of tourist and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic




Problems of national control of tourist and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic
Globalization of economical, political, nature protection and other types of human activity is an integral part of current international relations. The Antarctic region, the regime of governance of which is established by mechanisms of the international legal acts, is not an exception from this rule. In the last years the Antarctic community was attaching a great deal of importance to matters of regulation of tourist and non-governmental activity in the region. Beginning from ATCM IV, this issue was included to the Agenda of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, and from ATCM XXVII, it was considered at the sessions of a special working group of the Meeting. The tendency for the increase of tourist activity observed for the last few years in the region, testifies to a steady rise of interest of people from different countries, not connected professionally with investigation of the Antarctic. In addition to the purpose to learn more, the Antarctic tourism contributes to development of sports, ecological and outreach activity of man. 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol), which came into force in 1998 and introduced significant constraints for achieving objectives of national Antarctic programs, has naturally also influenced conditions for conducting tourist and non-governmental operations in the South Polar Region and introduction of special procedures for their implementation. Suffice it to recall a special workshop on Antarctic tourism, held in 1992 in Venice, Italy before ATCM XVII, practically in a year after the Madrid Protocol was signed. 
In spite of the fact that pursuant to Madrid Protocol, each Contracting Party has to apply its national procedures for assessment of the impacts of proposed activity on the Antarctic environment or on dependent or associated ecosystems (EIA), such procedures were in reality not adopted in all countries, which have signed the Madrid Protocol. In addition, the existing national procedures on this matter differ significantly in terms of their practical application. So if one group of the Contracting Parties issues official permits to its citizens and legal entities for performing the proposed types of activity in the Antarctic on the basis of licenses for this type of activity, training certificates, letters confirming experience of work in the Antarctic, etc., which are submitted by the EIA applicant, another group restricts itself to the EIA submitted only by organizations conducting scientific research. Cases are known from recent practice when tourist or non-governmental activity of some Contracting Parties is not supported at all with any preliminary documents including the EIA for the given activity in the Antarctic.
It is quite natural that some representatives of international business, registering their companies or agencies in the countries where such legal formalities are absent, gain significant advantages from such situation over their foreign colleagues performing similar work. This is explained by a lack of the need for additional expenses connected with nature protection measures creating thus preconditions for increased profit. In this case, we mean not only the countries that did not accede by present to the Antarctic Treaty, but also some Contracting Parties, where the national legal procedures for undertaking activity in the Antarctic are not clearly prescribed and not legalized by the required acts of authorized bodies of the executive power of these states. This situation seriously complicates the control of activity of citizens and/or legal entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, as in some cases “more convenient” legal acts of the other states or even the absence of such acts are used for performing practical activity with evasion of the adopted national procedure. The citizens or legal entities using such approaches remain under the jurisdiction of its state and, correspondingly, have to keep to their national legislature in the Antarctic. Unfortunately, real control of such actions in those Antarctic regions, where no work of the national Antarctic Program is carried out is practically not feasible. 
This problem can be solved by publishing at the INTERNET-site of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat the official Permits for specific types of activity in the Antarctic issued to the governmental and non-governmental organizations by authorized bodies of the executive power of the states that have signed the Madrid Protocol. In this case, the control for performing such activity can be increased through corresponding administrations of the last port states (sea or air) when going to the Antarctic, which can obtain an objective information about the existence of such Permits at the Secretariat site. 
Internationalization of Antarctic tourism results not only in using sea-going vessels sailing under the “convenient” flags of the states that have not acceded to the Antarctic Treaty, but also in using the mechanisms of sub-chartering of marine vessels. From IAATO data that are annually presented to ATCM, one can clearly determine the list of tourist agencies and ship owners involved in Antarctic ship tourism. In most cases, tourist agencies and shipping companies are granted Permits for conducting tourist operations in the Antarctic region using the adopted national procedures. The shipping companies bear responsibility for the problems of shipping safety, and tourist agencies – for behavior of tourist groups when landing on the Antarctic coast (continent or islands). We know cases of subcharters of the entire Antarctic cruises, when tourist agencies of the other states make up contracts with the general charterer of marine vessel for its temporary use by their tourist groups. Such subcharterers use Permits for conducting tourist operations granted to the general charterer. Since the contract between the subcharterer and the general charterer for ship use is a commercial secret, the real coverage of the issues for possible use of the General Charterer’s Permit remains unclear. In this case, the problem of applying sanctions for disturbance of the Antarctic environment, which can be potentially made by the subcharterer is quite understandable, the more so as this subcharterer is not under the jurisdiction of the state where the agency of the general charterer is registered. In this connection we believe that IAATO can in its internal normative documents consider the practice of subchartering tourist vessels. At the same time, it is necessary for the ATCM to consider at its nearest sessions a legal aspect of this problem and adopt the required legal Measure. Our country, has already raised a similar question in respect of regulating the adventure tourism in the Antarctic at ATCM XXXI in Kiev in 2008 (ATCM XXXI WP50). In addition, we have prepared this document, which further develops this issue. 


