





Lifeboats on Antarctic Tourist Vessels 




Lifeboats on Antarctic Tourist Vessels


Working Paper submitted by the United States



Summary

Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area has increased significantly in recent years, as has the ATCM’s concern over passenger vessel safety after several troubling ship-related incidents.  The United States reviewed in WP43 (2007) a series of steps which could contribute to safer passenger vessel operations.  This paper focuses on a matter of special urgency – the sufficiency of lifeboats aboard tourist vessels – and proposes that open lifeboats not be permitted on any passenger ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Lifeboats must in all instances be adequate to the degree of risk faced by passengers and crew in the event of a mishap, and sufficient in capacity to carry all persons aboard a vessel. A resolution recommending adjustments in current Antarctic lifeboat practice is appended.


The United States has long joined other Consultative Parties to ensure that Antarctic tourism is conducted in a manner consistent with the protection of both the Antarctic environment and the safety of tourists.  In this regard, at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXX in New Delhi, the United States, in Working Paper 43, outlined a series of steps that could be taken to promote safe passenger vessel operations within the Antarctic Treaty area.  This paper offers further thoughts on one of those steps – related to lifeboats – for the consideration of the Consultative Parties.

Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty area has increased significantly over the past few years.  In 2007-08, more than 46,000 passengers visited the Antarctic on 61 commercially-organized tour and small sailing vessels.  This volume of traffic represents an increase of nearly 31 percent over the fewer than 36,000 individuals who visited the Continent on 54 ships in 2006-07.  During the past fifteen years, the number of passengers entering Treaty waters has increased more than four-fold, albeit from a small base and amidst a general increase in global tourism.  This notable growth in tourism has largely occurred during just a few years, and, recently, we have seen a number of troubling ship-related incidents including the sinking of M/S Explorer in November 2007 and the recent grounding of M/V Ushuaia in December 2008.

The overall trend of increases in tourism raises important issues related to safety and shipping that deserve rigorous review and assessment.  This is particularly true given the age and increasing number of ships making the journey to Treaty waters.  Passenger ships that make the journey range from small motor yachts carrying fewer than 12 passengers to large cruise ships capable of carrying thousands.  All of these ships vary in ice classification, length of stay in Treaty waters, and the areas in which they operate.  While some ships are better suited to the Antarctic environment than others, passenger vessel operations in this region raise concerns related to lifesaving appliances and search and rescue (SAR).  These concerns include the use of open lifeboats (OLBs) and partially enclosed lifeboats (PELBs) as well as the associated hazards from inadequate SAR coverage.

The 1983 Amendments to the 1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), which entered into force July 1, 1986, required passenger ships to be fitted with partially or totally enclosed lifeboats (TELBs).  However, on ships built prior to 1986, open lifeboats without canopies were grandfathered, and many are still in use.  The hazard associated with these lifeboats is exposure of their occupants to cold Antarctic air and water temperatures.  Their open construction presents additional hazards when deployed in heavy seas where waves can wash over the rail, swamping the vessel and contributing to onset of hypothermia.  With such exposure, passengers on board may quickly perish in the event of an emergency in anything but the most benign Antarctic conditions.

In addition, many OLBs are not fitted with engines.  While the number of ships still carrying open lifeboats is decreasing as a result of natural attrition, there are still enough ships operating to make this an extremely important issue.  
Even PELBs could be problematic.  PELBs have a rigid canopy over at least the forward and aft 20% of the boat, with the center open and typically fitted with a folding canopy that can be closed for shelter.  The full deployment of the folding canopy is not required by current IMO rules to be demonstrated in severe Antarctic-type conditions, and could be difficult or impossible in such circumstances.  If it were to fail for any reason, the occupants would be insufficiently protected.

TELBs provide a rigid protective canopy enclosing the entire length of the boat.  People on board would be significantly more protected from the environment and have a much greater chance of survival until help arrived.  Access to TELBs may be more restrictive than PELBs; however, both types built to IMO standards meet the same stringent requirements for ease of loading and seating that facilitate the safe evacuation of ships. 

With the increase in tourism in the Antarctic, the potential for increasing numbers of tourist expeditions via ship, and limited SAR coverage in this remote corner of the globe, in the view of the United States the Consultative Parties must take steps as a matter of priority to improve the likelihood of survival for passengers and crew in the event of a ship evacuation.  Presently, ships may carry OLBs, PELBs, or TELBs dependent upon the applicable SOLAS standards in force at the time the vessel was constructed.  Within the harsh Antarctic environment, remote from potential rescue, requiring the evacuation of passengers into OLBs and PELBs may present significant additional risks.  If modern passenger ships in non-polar service are minimally required to carry PELBS or TELBs, then, intuitively, the standard for Antarctic service should be at least as stringent.  For these reasons, the United States believes that notwithstanding SOLAS provisions that allow continued use of open lifeboats, OLBs should not be permitted on passenger ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area. Ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area should be fitted with either PELBs or TELBs, depending on the degree of risk, that provide adequate shelter in the event of a casualty, and there should be a sufficient number of adequate PELBs or TELBs for all persons on board.

To provide additional assurances of the safe recovery of passengers and crew during an emergency, the United States recommends the items on board lifeboats be augmented for ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.  Taking into account remoteness from search and rescue facilities and increased nutritional needs in extreme weather conditions, each lifeboat should be supplied with additional rations to ensure sufficient food and water is available to sustain survivors in the harsh Antarctic environment, consistent with the IMO “time to recover” parameter of five days for remote areas.  In addition, a Search and Rescue Transponder (SART) or Automatic Identification System Search and Rescue Transmitter (AIS-SART), and a handheld radio should be provided aboard each lifeboat. This locating equipment (SART/AIS-SART) and the communications equipment (radio using maritime and aeronautical frequencies) would facilitate homing in on lifeboats should they become dispersed in areas remote from SAR facilities in harsh conditions. 

These proposed measures would significantly increase the probability of a satisfactory outcome in the event of a vessel abandonment in severe Antarctic environmental conditions.  In our view, the ATCP’s that are members of IMO should join together to lead the discussion of these issues at IMO, in accordance with the draft resolution appended hereto.


  Draft Resolution on Sufficiency of Lifeboats
on Antarctic Tourist Vessels


The Representatives, 

Conscious of their responsibilities to ensure tourism is conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible manner consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol;

Aware of hazards confronting passenger ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area and desiring to promote the safety of life at sea; 

Noting an increase in ship-borne tourism activities in the Antarctic Treaty area and the increased risks for marine accidents;

Recognizing the tourism industry’s collaboration in efforts to ensure its activities are sustainable, safe and compatible with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty;

Wishing to minimize the likelihood of casualties due to the exposure of persons to harsh Antarctic weather conditions brought about by the use of an insufficient number or inadequate types of  lifeboats combined with limited SAR availability in the Antarctic region; 

Noting the addition of communications and locating equipment on board individual lifeboats will further enhance survivor detection and rescue in the event of an incident;

Noting the particular risks associated with near shore activities;

Recommend that:

Those that are party to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) cooperate in taking action within the International Maritime Organization to require, with respect to ships undertaking tourist activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, that:

    1. all such ships carry sufficient lifeboats for all passengers and crew, and that each lifeboat be of a suitable type to provide adequate shelter from the environment in the event of a maritime casualty;  
    2. all lifeboats carried by such ships be provisioned with emergency food and water rations in excess of those required outside the Treaty area, taking into account the additional needs of persons adrift in an Antarctic environment; 
    3. all lifeboats carried by such ships be provisioned with the following items not specifically required by SOLAS when operating in the Antarctic Treaty area:
        a. as provided in the second alternative specified in SOLAS regulation III/6.2.2, Search and Rescue Transponder or Automatic Identification System Search and Rescue Transmitter (AIS-SART); and
        b. a two-way VHF radiotelephone apparatus as specified in SOLAS regulation III/6.2.1; and 
    2. the emergency and lifesaving capabilities of all such ships be subject to a safety assessment to ensure the maximum safety and survival of all persons on board in the event of an incident in the Antarctic.



