





Review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 - Svarthamaren





Review of 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 - Svarthamaren
Working Paper
Norway



Summary
The management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142 has been reviewed in accordance with the provisions Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998). No substantive changes to the text of plan have been proposed. Changes made are of editorial nature, and it is suggested that ATCM XXXII adopt the revised management plan for ASPA No. 142.  A cover sheet, explaining the intended effects of the proposal and the history of the ASPA/ASMA, prepared in accordance with Resolution 1 (2008) is found at the end of this working paper.
Introduction
In accordance with the provisions Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1 (1998), Norway has conducted a review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 142: Svarthamaren, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land.
The review process for the ASPA has been completed and is described in this paper. A draft revised plan for the Area is found attached. Changes to the text have been marked for convenience.
The Area
Svarthamaren is protected for its seabird colonies, in particular the colony of the Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica), which constitutes a large proportion of the known world population of Antarctic petrel. The colony is the largest known inland seabird colony on the Antarctic continent. The area was first designated in 1987 (Recommendation XIV-5) as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 23. The management plan was last revised in 2004.
Review of Activities
In the period since the last revision of the management plan for the Area, Norway has issued 2 permits to enter the Area. 
Since 2002 no science has been conducted in the area. No significant management activity has been undertaken for the Area. This level of activity is considered appropriate due to the low use of the Area over this period and the sensitivity of some areas to visitation.  A site inspection was carried out in November 2008. The inspection found that the values of the Area still are intact and that the protected area still serves its purpose. 
Consultation with the Science Community
Norwegian researchers (PIs) who have worked in the Area since its designation have been contacted to gauge whether information in the management plan still is current and whether the values identified have changed since the last revision. In general, the values of the Area were considered more than sufficient to warrant continued protection.
Proposed Revision
The Management Plan text has been modified slightly. 
The major changes include:
Introduction
Modified: 
The whole of this section is new.
Section 5: Maps and illustrations
The maps and figures have been updated to reflect the new naming and numbering system under Annex V.  There is a new map C of the ASPA 142, and a aerial photo of the protected area (Map D)

Section 6 i: Description of area
Both Environments T- Inland continental geologic and U- North Victoria Land geologic are found to be represented at Svarthamaren (2009, Harry Keys, pers. comm.). In the “2007, Environmental Domains of Antarctica” it is described as Environment N - East Antarctic inland ice sheet. 
Section 7: Permit conditions
Added
Clarification noting use of the field station Tor. The station and its immediate surroundings is not part of the protected area, but are located as an enclave in the ASPA. Also removed clarification about fuel storage at Tor for the same reasons.
Other
The bibliography of relevant literature has also been updated.
Conclusion
No substantive changes to the text of plan have been proposed given the enduring nature of the values in this Area and the absence of any other concerns regarding the Area. Changes made are of editorial nature, and it is proposed that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA No. 142 and forwards it to ATCM XXXII for adoption.

COVER SHEET FOR WORKING PAPER ON ASPA # 142

    1. Is a new ASPA proposed? No

    2. Is a new ASMA proposed? No

    3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Yes
        a. First designation: Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
        b. First adoption of Management Plan: Recommendation XIV-5 (1987)
        c. Revisions to Management Plan:
            ▪ Measure XXIII-1 (1999)
            ▪ Measure XXVII-2 (2004)
        d. Current Management Plan: Measure XXVII-2 (2004)
        e. Any extensions of expiry dates of Management Plan: Recommendation XX-3 (1996)
        f. Renaming and renumbering as ASPA # 142 by Decision 1 (2002).

    2. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
        a. Major or minor? Minor
        b. Any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates? None
        c. Any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics? Small changes to Map C: i) additional contour heights added and ii) clearer boundary delineation around Tor field station.  
        d. Any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries? None
        e. Any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? None
        f. Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long):
            ▪ Introduction (added)
            ▪ Section 6 i (addition of text relating the area to the Environmental Domains Analysis – the Systematic Environmental Geographic Framework) 
            ▪ Section 7 (clarifications regarding field stations located as an enclave in the area)
            ▪ Bibliography (updated)
            ▪ Aerial photograph of area (added).

    3. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? N/A

    4. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)? N/A

    5. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? N/A

