





Proposal to add the British hut at Damoy Point, Dorian Bay, Wiencke Island to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments




Proposal to add the British hut at Damoy Point, Dorian Bay, Wiencke Island to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments


This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument (not previously designated as an HSM by the ATCM).

Relevant details:
  
    (i) Name of the proposed HSM – British hut at Damoy Point, Dorian Bay, Wiencke Island, Palmer Archipelago;
    (ii) Description – this well preserved hut, established in 1975, was used primarily as a summer air facility and transit station for British science and logistic until the mid 1990s;
    (iii) Co-ordinates – 64 degrees 49’S, 63 degrees 31’W;
    (iv) Original proposing Party – United Kingdom;
    (v) Party undertaking management - United Kingdom
Proposal to add the British hut at Damoy Point, Dorian Bay, Wiencke Island to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments

United Kingdom Working Paper



    1. Summary

In accordance with paragraph 2 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the UK proposes that the hut at Damoy Point be added to the list of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the ATCM.   

    2. Introduction

Further to Resolution 4(2001) and Measure 3(2003) the UK has carried out a survey of a number of British sites and existing Historic Sites and Monuments on the Antarctic Peninsula.  As a result of this survey the UK has concluded that, at this stage, there would be merit in listing two additional sites – one at Damoy Point and the other at Detaille Island.  This paper follows the guidance set out in Recommendation 1(2008).

    3. Position and Description

Damoy Point is located on Dorian Bay, Wiencke Island, Palmer Archipelago (Latitude 64 degrees 49’S, longitude 63 degrees 31’W).  The existing hut was erected in 1973 and used for a number of years primarily as a summer air facility.  It was last occupied in 1993 and a recent review has concluded that there is no longer any operational requirement for this facility.

    4. Reason for designation 

Built in the early 1970s as a summer air facility, the hut and associated structures at Damoy Point were used as a transit station for personnel and stores when sea ice prevented access to the British research station at Rothera.    The hut and site were subject to a clean-up in 1996/7 and again in 2007/08 when an inspection survey was also carried out to investigate the condition of the hut and artefacts.  Minor repairs were undertaken to make the hut weathertight and any hazardous materials removed.   This well preserved hut and associated artefacts provide a notable and representative example of the infrastructure required to undertake science and logistic operations in the Antarctic Peninsula. 
 


