





On the strategic role of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 in the process of regulation of international relations in the South Polar region of the Earth




On the strategic role of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 in the process of regulation of international relations in the South Polar region of the Earth

International treaties serve as the main source of the international law. The Antarctic Treaty signed on 1 December 1959 in Washington (the USA) by the delegations of 12 nations, has become one of the most important milestones in solving the problems of international relations in the South Polar Region of the Earth. Participants to our XXXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) are celebrating not only the 50th anniversary of this epoch event, but also summarize the results of activity of the Antarctic Treaty System formed and determine perspectives of its further development.  Specialists of different Parties to the Treaty and from other countries carried out in these years a large number of historical, political and legal studies in respect of the effective ATS. These investigations contain sometimes rather controversial conclusions, but in most cases they underline the leading role of the Antarctic Treaty in addressing the main issue of international relations, which is reconciliation of the problem of tension in interstate relations by means of peaceful political-legal instruments. 
Antarctica has always been in the focus of attention of lawyers involved in investigation of the legal status of different territories. The largest number of legal studies in respect of the legal regime of the South Polar Region appeared at the time of increased interest of the states in the Antarctic. Typical stages of the surge of such interest were the periods preceding signature of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959, development of the “Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources” of 1980, "Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities" of 1988, Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991, preparation for discussion of Antarctic problems at the UN General Assemblies in 1983 and 1987. In spite of significant disagreements on the problem of defining the legal status of the Antarctic and a large number of theoretical publications on this issue, standing up for the political positions of their countries, participants to the Washington Conference in 1959 were able to reach a consensus in solving this most complicated problem of the international law. This fact has created conditions for neutralization of the international tension sources in the Antarctic.
Article IV of the Treaty on holding all territorial claims in the Antarctic in abeyance does not maintain but on the contrary eliminates the probability of conflicts over territorial sovereignty of different Antarctic regions. A balance of interests arrived at in the Treaty, serves as a guarantor of stability in the region. This basic provision of the Treaty allows legal practice participants to assume common obligations and jointly govern the activity in the Antarctic without impairing their principal national positions in respect to the status of the Antarctic territories.  
At the same time the Parties to the Treaty, especially from the number of states claiming sovereignty in the Antarctic, drew attention to the fact that the proposed upset of the balance of interests established in the Treaty is fraught with a threat of resuming tension in the Antarctic region. Adaptation to new realia, including those that are caused by the interest of some Parties in the territorial problems of the Antarctic continental shelf, should be based on the Treaty, rather than on its denunciation using other international law institutions.
The success in signing the Antarctic Treaty on 1 December 1959 was ensured by the results of long-term negotiation activity on bilateral and multilateral basis at the preparatory stage preceding opening of the Washington Antarctic conference on 15 October 1959. This work allowed finding a joint agreed decision, which has provided fruitful multiyear existence of the Treaty and development of the ATS established on its basis.     
It is naïve to think now that founders of the Treaty were so far-sighted that as early as 1959 they have intentionally put into it the structures and legal mechanisms that allow revealing and solving the problems appearing in connection with new types of activity in the Antarctic. During the period of creating the Treaty it was impossible to determine the future role of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM) not only in addressing current issues of activity of the Treaty but in matters of its operational and strategic governance. Materials of the Washington Conference show that regular meetings were rather thought to be forums at which one could discuss the actual state of affairs with observance of the basic principles of the Treaty. Practice of work of ATCM confirms that their role at the beginning was sufficiently restricted. It is probably more correct to say that the ATCM participants having gained expertise of successful cooperation in the Antarctic and getting rid of existing doubts and suspicion were able to gradually transform the work of these meetings into an efficient mechanism of collective actions flexibly responding to imperatives of our era. 
The Antarctic Treaty has become an outcome of agreed decisions of the nations, interested in this region. The provisions it contains on the use of Antarctica exclusively for peaceful purposes, its non-militarization and neutralization, freedom of scientific investigation, declaring the Antarctic as a nuclear-free zone, and cooperation of countries for these purposes comprise the basic elements of the international-legal regime of the region. Further development of the existing legal regime should be based on the aforementioned main provisions and with account of other standards adopted on the basis and in development of the Antarctic Treaty.
The success of holding the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in the Antarctic in 1957-1958 has clearly demonstrated a possibility of wide international cooperation in this region despite of discords on matter of territorial sovereignty of some Antarctic regions and significant tension that existed in relations between the East and the West, determined by the “cold war” problems. So, a wide-scale international scientific experiment has become a foundation on which the main principles of the legal regime of governance of the region were based excluding the possibility for political and military interstate confrontation in the Antarctic.
Participation in the IGY was open for any interested country. This principle in no way restricted the capabilities of the countries to carry out programs of their national studies of the Antarctic and therefore the organizers of the Conference in Washington have invited to participate in it only the delegations of countries-participants in the IGY in the Antarctic. This approach cannot in any way be considered discriminatory as was asserted by some developing countries. A greater number of the delegations at the Conference, considering the specific political and legal situation in this region would not be able to provide for working out the final document, which the Antarctic Treaty has become. Using an approach of inviting only the delegations of countries-participants of the Antarctic studies under the IGY program to the Conference in Washington allowed implementing in the future one of the basic organizational principles of the Antarctic Treaty System, which was formalized to a notion of the “Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party”. A country, which carries out significant scientific investigation in the Antarctic on a permanent basis, can have this status. This approach makes it possible to discuss different issues of activity in the South Polar Region and adopt the agreed decisions for its implementation only for those Parties, which have permanently operating National Antarctic Programs and research stations and therefore have practical knowledge of specific conditions of the region. This creates the conditions for restricting excessive politicization of discussions between the Parties to the Treaty. 
The provisions of the Antarctic Treaty about the status of the Consultative Parties and the mechanism of decision-making within its framework (Article IX, paragraph 2) were criticized for not giving an opportunity to the majority of the UN member-countries to attain such status and as a result, participate in decision-making.   
Recognizing that decision-making on matters of providing peace and security, environmental protection, scientific investigation and regulation of other different types of activity in the Antarctic requires special knowledge and competence, the critics of the Treaty noted that such situation exists in many other fields of activity of the international community, but it does not lead to usurpation of the rights by several Parties.
The existing practice of regulation of international relations shows that two- and many-tier systems are not only reasonable but also result in more effective process of decision-making and under some conditions are more justified compared to those envisaging participation of all in decision-making. Such approach was not set up for excluding any country from participating in activity in the framework of the given system. Attaining the consultative status means sharing additional responsibilities and commitments connected with significant financial expenditures, rather than obtaining additional benefits and preferences. 
Another important provision of the mechanism for adoption of decisions at ATCM sessions and its working groups and other elements of ATS is a principle of consensus. This procedural rule does not permit adoption of decision by voting with a principle of using any numeric quota of votes for any decision discussed at the ATCM. Even in the event of the overwhelming majority of the Parties to the Treaty supporting any draft decision, it can be adopted only after it is finally approved by all Consultative Parties. This approach does not allow adopting a discriminant decision in respect of the other participants to the Treaty whatever difficult and prolonged the process of its discussion and agreement might by. In addition, the “principle of consensus” practically blocks the possibility of using some preliminary agreements between the Consultative Parties achieved through a mechanism of membership in different political blocks not related to the work of ATS.     
Article XIII of the Treaty has determined the character of its openness for acceding of any nation, which is a UN member, or any other nation, which can be invited to accede to the Treaty with consent of all Contracting Parties.    
At the present time, 28 of 47 countries, acceded to the Treaty, have a status of the Consultative Party. The number of countries that have acceded to the Treaty and organized their national Antarctic programs began to significantly increase in the period between the 38th and the 42nd General Assemblies of the United Nations when this organization determined its attitude to the Antarctic Treaty System.  
During the years that have passed from the time the Antarctic Treaty was signed, participants to the ATCM have developed a wide range of measures, contributing to achieving the goals and principles of the Treaty and expanding different types of activity in the region. The following documents have come into force: the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1978), the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1982) and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1997). For many years significant efforts were undertaken to develop the Convention on Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activity, which was adopted in 1988. However this act of the international law did not come into force due to a refusal to ratify it by the governments of some Consultative Parties. Instead of this document, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) was prepared and adopted in 1991. This document designates Antarctica as an international reserve devoted to peace and science. In accordance with Article 7 of the Protocol, any activity relating to mineral resources, other than scientific research shall be prohibited. All participants to the Protocol were to undertake practical actions through the mechanisms stipulated in six Annexes to the Protocol to define national procedures for conducting different types of activity in the Antarctic by their citizens, governmental and non-governmental organizations. Any type of claimed activity was to be based on prior assessment of the impact of this activity on the Antarctic environment. The Protocol formulates special rules for conservation of Antarctic flora and fauna, management of disposal of human activity waste and measures for control and prevention of pollution of the marine environment of the region. In subsequent years, the Protocol extended its application to the principles of establishment and control of different types of activity in the Antarctic Specially Managed and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, including designation of Historic Sites and Monuments and measures of liability for environmental damage in cases of emergency accidents.
Management of activity under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980) is provided by a specially organized international Commission (CCAMLR), which functions independently of ATCM and annually presents to ATCM sessions its reports and other materials contributing to the development of international cooperation in the Antarctic, conservation of marine or related to sea ecosystems and management of rational commercial production of seafood. On the contrary, the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) established after the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty came into force in 1998, acts exclusively within the ATCM framework. CEP develops its proposals and recommendations to the Parties pursuant to this Protocol including application of its Annexes.   
The ATCM Recommendations and Measures after they are approved by the governments of the Consultative Parties acquire a binding force. In the practice of work of the ATS, cases are known where some Governments of the Contracting Parties refused to ratify the Recommendations approved at ATCM. The case with the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities that was adopted in 1988 but never came into legal force, can serve as the most known example. It indicates the existence of an effective multilevel system of control for the decisions of political-economical character adopted in the ATS.
The dynamic development of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 allowed making important agreed decisions in respect of different types of activity of practical significance in the region. This made it possible to introduce a notion of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), which was defined for the first time in the preamble of Recommendation XII-6. This recommendation adopted in 1983 in Canberra reads that “the Antarctic Treaty, the numerous Measures adopted in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty and other instruments and acts associated with it constitute a far-sighted and effective system of international cooperation, which promotes international peace and security, increase in scientific knowledge and understanding and effective environmental protection”.
According to one common opinion of all Contracting Parties, the Antarctic Treaty comprises the basis of the System. The idea itself of the need for the System is laid in the Antarctic Treaty. The Antarctic Treaty within the System functions as a mechanism for foreseeing, revealing and solving new problems and due to this, the ATS showed itself to be capable of meeting new interests and attracting new participants. The Antarctic Treaty and the System based on it, present a flexible and dynamic complex, which can be adapted to changes in the current world.
Significance of the main principles from the time of signature of the Treaty has not decreased, but on the contrary, it continues to increase at the present time. The aforementioned principles do not contain elements contributing to achieving new agreements on their basis. Such elements in the Antarctic Treaty are provisions of Article IV on holding all territorial claims in abeyance and Article IX on the mechanism of Consultative Meetings.
Maintenance of status-quo to territorial claims of participants to the Treaty in Article IV showed the way for providing interests of all Parties to the Treaty. Article IV gave a cue to the direction of searching solutions in the future when conditions for developing the types of activity not regulated directly or set forth in the Treaty with insufficient detail will be formed in the Antarctic. Facing the requirement for a more detailed regulation of activity in the Antarctic, or with a perspective of initiating new types of activity in this region, Article IV creates preconditions for seeking compromise agreements suitable for all interested Parties. The Parties confirm unchangeability of their principal positions in respect of sovereignty problem in the Antarctic. The ATCM Recommendations and Measures represent pragmatic decisions of all Consultative Parties. A common agreed approach excludes possible conflicts, chaos or legal prejudices, which can follows from unilateral actions. Thus, the Antarctic Treaty has become a source of international cooperation to address new problems occurring in the Antarctic. 
Article IX of the Treaty contains provisions on the forum where the necessary international agreements are worked out. Paragraph 1 of Article IX reads about convening meetings in the framework of the Treaty for the purpose of exchanging opinions, consulting together on matters of common interest pertaining to Antarctica, and formulating and considering, and recommending measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty. Such meetings were later called the ATCM.
 Due to the mechanism of Consultative Meetings, the Antarctic Treaty, instead of remaining a set of frozen agreed provisions, has transformed to a developing network of decisions and Measures aimed at promoting aims and goals of the Treaty. The principle used in the Treaty for formation of the composition of participants of Consultative Meetings has influenced to some extent the provisions of membership of the corresponding bodies оf the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The factor of conducting corresponding activity is taken into account for membership in these bodies. 
According to practice formed, the decisions of the Consultative Meetings on measures facilitating implementation of goals and principles of the Treaty, are adopted in the form of Recommendations, which in spite of their name have a mandatory rather than advisory character, provided they were approved by all the Consultative Parties (paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty). Complementing and developing the provisions of the Treaty, the ATCM Recommendations and Measures have become “bricks”, of which the “building” of the Treaty System was gradually constructed. In cases where the Consultative Parties came to a conclusion that some fields of activity in the Antarctic required special mechanisms, they were developing corresponding conventions or other agreements (Protocol). Preparing their text, participants to the Consultative Meetings, similar to developing Recommendations and Measures, aimed to provide for these new structures to fit well into the international-legal regime of the Antarctic established by the Treaty, in furtherance of its principles and goals. 
Close linking to the Antarctic Treaty of the Conventions pertaining to conservation of the Antarctic marine living resources and seals and the Protocol on Environmental Protection, signifies that although these Conventions present separate independent agreements, they comprise together kind of a whole, being based on the principles of the Treaty and aiming at strengthening the regime it has founded. 
The especially keen response in the 1980s of the participants to the Antarctic Treaty was caused by the calls to use the United Nations Organization as a forum for revision or replacement of the present Treaty. They drew attention to a danger of formulating such problem in general. The Parties to the Treaty stressed a universal character of the international law principle and importance of paragraph 3 in the Preamble to the UN Charter, according to which all participants of this Organization are determined to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained. In discussing the issues of Antarctic problems at the UN General Assemblies the delegations of countries-members to the Antarctic Treaty asserted that contestation of the open international treaty, attempts to modify or replace it without participation and consent of the Parties to such Treaty are contrary to law and besides create a threat of confrontation and tension in international relations. Introducing a practice of using the UN to contest obligations of the states under open international agreements runs counter to the UN Charter, effective principles and rules of current international law. As a result of the aforementioned considerations, the countries-participants to the Treaty have rejected the idea of establishing a special UN Committee on the Antarctic. Such proposal was considered as an attempt to create an international institute parallel to the Antarctic Treaty with other organization principles. The Parties to the Treaty declared that if the decision on establishing the committee would be imposed on the UN by the majority of the votes, they will not take part in its work. These actions of the Parties to the Treaty allowed the United Nations to formulate its position in respect to the Antarctic Treaty, in which practice of regulation of inter-state relations in the Antarctic, formed in the system of international relations, and mechanisms of the ATS are recognized by the UN to be efficient and meeting the provisions of the Charter of this Organization. Simultaneously, it was proposed that the country-depositary of the Antarctic Treaty (the USA) should present regular reports on the current activity of the ATS at one of the UN committees.
Recognizing the interest of the international community in the Antarctic, the Parties to the Treaty were proposing to solve the problem of involving all countries of the community in development of the regime of this region through the effective mechanisms, and namely, by acceding to the Treaty. As argumentation, reference to the dynamic character of the Treaty was made, and to the fact that ever increasing membership in the Treaty involves the developed and developing countries of all regions and of different social-economic systems. 
As aforesaid, the ATS is a dynamic system flexibly and timely responding to new regional problems. One of them is a problem of regulation of tourist and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic. Noting a natural tendency for increasing interest in the Antarctic region among citizens of different countries, representing a wide range of population categories, also from the countries that have not acceded to the Treaty, the Contracting Parties developed a number of different Recommendations and Measures concerning regulation of tourist and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic. It should be admitted that establishment of efficient mechanisms of such regulation is impossible without participation of different international organizations in the UN structure. Wide interaction with them will allow adopting necessary decisions for meeting the requirements for conservation of the Antarctic environment and associated ecosystems, also from the side of the countries – ship owners (marine vessels and aircraft), which are not participants to the Antarctic Treaty. This approach will probably make it possible in the future to prepare a new international agreement on regulation of tourist and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic, which will become a new component of the ATS. 


