





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 113: Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago









	
ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Specially Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation VIII-1 (1975, SPA No. 17)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 2 (2004)
Any revisions to management plan:

Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2004)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:

Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
Other relevant measures:
Designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin through Measure 1 (2008).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics.
    a) Map 1 replaced to be consistent with ASMA No. 7.
    b) Penguin colony area shown as no longer occupied. 
    c) Restricted Zone encompassing the marine area up to 50 m from the Litchfield Island coastline adopted under ASMA No. 7 added to Map 2.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The description has been updated to include reference to ASMA No. 7, which includes ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island within its boundaries.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
ASMA No. 7 includes ASPA No. 113 Litchfield Island within its boundaries.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    a) Recent census data has shown that Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) are currently extinct on Litchfield Island (Section 6). Recent data on trends in bird and mammal populations within the Area and evidence of response of the marine ecosystem surrounding Litchfield Island to climatic warming;
    b) Evidence of recovery of previously damaged vegetation in response to declining Antarctic fur seal populations was noted (Section 6);
    c) In view of the importance of regionally changing climate patterns, which are affecting the ecology on Litchfield Island, data have been added detailing surface air temperatures at Palmer Station for the period 1974 to 2004 (Section 6);
    d) Policies on aircraft have been updated to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2004) ‘Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica’ (Section 7(i));
    e) minor amendments to format and layout, including addition of an introductory paragraph, to maintain consistency with other plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

