





Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 104




Review of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 104
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
As required by Resolution 1 (1998), New Zealand has prepared a Management Plan in the format specified in Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty for ASPA 104, Sabrina Island 
Sabrina Island, in the Balleny Archipelago, was originally designated as SPA No. 4 in Recommendation IV-4 (1966) on the grounds that “The Balleny Islands, as the most northerly Antarctic land in the Ross Sea region, support fauna and flora which reflect many circumpolar distributions at this latitude and that Sabrina Island in particular provides a representative sample of such fauna and flora.”
Review of Activities
Since the designation of Sabrina Island, five known landings have been made in the Area.  While research has been limited, visits have confirmed the breeding of chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica).  MacDonald, Barton and Metcalf (2002) note that these birds “represent a decided anomaly in the distribution of chinstrap penguins, being on the opposite side of Antarctica, 5000km from any substantial colonies, and nearly 4000km from their nearest known breeding site… The small size and anomalous location of the Balleny Islands chinstrap population clearly warrant further study and the strongest protection.” 
As well as its isolation, this population is unusual in its location within a much larger Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony.  There are only two colonies in the Antarctic Peninsula where chinstraps and Adélies coexist, and in these Gentoos are also present (Mcdonald at al, 2002).
The rapid growth of the Sabrina Island Pygoscelid colony and the nearby Chinstrap Islet colony (9.2% and 15% respectively between 1984 and 2000) is also of considerable interest and “clearly worthy of further study” (ibid; Sharp, 2006).  Other colonies in the Ballenys declined or disappeared during the same period.  Chinstrap penguins observed on Sabrina Island increased from 24 nests in 2000 to 202 adults and 109 chicks in 2006 (Smith, 2006).  These populations may be sensitive indicators of climate change (Sharp, 2006).  
The small size of this ‘outlier’ chinstrap population was a key driver of the original SPA designation (Sharp, 2006), which must have seemed particularly vulnerable as expeditions during the 1950s and 1960s took birds as scientific specimens. Research since the Area’s designation has been far less invasive, and only small botanical, fur and feather samples appear to have been taken.  
There has been considerable research in the Balleny Islands and seamounts area in the last five years, as part of the Latitudinal Gradient Programme, the International Polar Year Census of Marine Life and the New Zealand Ministry of Fisheries’ BioRoss programme.  It will take some time for the collected data to be analysed, but emerging information should greatly improve understanding of the ecosystem to which Sabrina Island belongs and help to guide its future management.
Detailed coastline and terrestrial topographical data is currently lacking.  Map A of the proposed Management Plan is based on the most reliable information available, this being the published navigational chart of the Balleny Islands.
Consultation
The draft Management Plan was circulated to researchers who have visited Sabrina Island, and to other officials and scientists with a particular interest in the Area.  Input was received from the following individuals and organisations.
Kerry Barton, Landcare Research New Zealand 
Steven Emslie, University of North Carolina Wilmington 
John Macdonald, University of Auckland 
Rebecca McLeod, University of Otago 
Polly Penhale, National Science Foundation 
Nick Shears, Marine Science Institute, University of California Santa Barbara

Antarctica New Zealand 
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
New Zealand Department of Conservation
Conclusion
Sabrina Island still has outstanding environmental and scientific value.  It is a representative sample of the Balleny Islands, which are the only oceanic archipelago located within the main Antarctic Coastal Current.  (Peter I Island, some 4000km away, is the only other oceanic island in the Current).  As such, they provide important resting and breeding habitat for seabird and seal species (see Table 1), and are significant in circumpolar distributions of a variety of species.  

The Islands are the only known breeding site for chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) between Bouvetoya and Peter I Islands (a span of 264 longitude), with the majority of breeding pairs found on Sabrina Island. In addition to this anomalous distribution, the Sabrina pygoscelid colony and that on nearby Chinstrap Islet are of scientific interest due to their very rapidly population increase in recent years.

Protection of Sabrina Island is therefore consistent with the requirement of Annex V to identify “areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds”.  In addition it is proposed that, Chinstrap Islet, being a closely associated geographical feature and the site of the next largest pygoscelid colony in the Ballenys after Sabrina, be included within the ASPA designation include Chinstrap Islet.  

The draft management plan attached outlines measures appropriate to protect these values.

ASPA No. 104 Sabrina Island, Northern Ross Sea, Antarctica
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
SPA No. 4, Recommendation IV-4 (1966)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation IV-4 (1966)
Any revisions to management plan:
None
Current management plan: 
None
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 104 Sabrina Island, Northern Ross Sea, Antarctica
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes – there are no maps or figures in the existing management plan, the revised plan includes one map and five figures
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
The previous plan noted that Sabrina Island was 2km from Buckle Island, the revised plan notes that this distance is 3km, in accordance with current charts
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
N/A
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
The existing management plan consists only of a description. This revised plan follows the Annex V format with a description of values to be protected, aims and objectives, management objectives, period of designation, description of the area, special zones within the area, new maps and photographs, supporting documentation and permit conditions.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.


