





Report of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop




Report of the Joint SC-CAMLR / CEP Workshop.

Baltimore, MD, USA.  3 – 4 April 2009.

1.  Introduction.

1.1  The workshop was held at the Baltimore Convention Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, from 3 to 4 April 2009.  The workshop was co-convened by Drs Vyacheslav Bizikov (Russia, Vice Chair SC-CAMLR), Yves Frenot (France, Vice Chair CEP), Neil Gilbert (New Zealand, Chair CEP), and George Watters (US, Convener WG-EMM).

1.2  The workshop conveyed its best wishes to Dr. Carlos Moreno who had been unable to participate at the last minute due to ill-health.  The workshop wished Dr Moreno a speedy recovery and recognised with gratitude the significant contribution of Dr Moreno in the preparation for the workshop.

1.3  The co-conveners thanked the US for hosting the workshop.  The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and CCAMLR Secretariat were also thanked for their assistance prior to and during the workshop.

2.  Background and Terms of Reference.

2.1  Dr Watters on behalf of the co-conveners began the workshop with an introductory presentation that provided a brief history of the relationship between the CEP and the SC-CAMLR.  The introductory presentation focused on the lead up to the workshop as described in previous reports of the CEP and SC-CAMLR and emphasized that the objective for the workshop was to identify and recommend future opportunities for practical cooperation between the two bodies.  It was recognised that the workshop would not make decisions to solve issues surrounding cooperation between the two bodies.

2.2  The co-conveners also reviewed the Terms of Reference for the workshop and the key points for discussion.

2.3  The Terms of Reference for the workshop were:

    i. to develop a shared understanding of the conservation objectives and priorities of CEP and SC-CAMLR;
    ii. to identify areas of common interest;
    iii. to define mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information;
    iv. to identify the lead body on key issues of mutual interest; and
    v. to develop a report and any recommendations for consideration by CEP XII and SC-CAMLR XXVIII.

2.4  Discussion at the workshop focused on:

    i. key objectives, priorities, and challenges for the CEP and SC-CAMLR;
    ii. climate change and the Antarctic marine environment;
    iii. biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment;
    iv. Antarctic species requiring special protection;
    v. spatial marine management and protected areas; and
    vi. ecosystem and environmental monitoring.

2.5  Two keynote presentations set the stage for discussion on the first topic, and shorter presentations facilitated discussions on the other five topics.  Abstracts from all the presentations and recommendations arising from discussion surrounding each topic form the bulk of this report and are provided below.  The presentation abstracts were not adopted or agreed by the workshop as they represent the views of the respective authors only.

2.6  The report was prepared by the co-conveners as well as  Drs A. Constable (Australia, Convener WG-SAM), Y. Frenot (France, Vice Chair CEP), C. Jones (US, Convener WG-FSA), E. McIvor (Australia, Vice Chair CEP), and K Reid (CCAMLR Science Officer).

3.  Keynote Presentations

Abstract of Keynote Presentation 1:  "The Role of science in managing CCAMLR fisheries."
Dr Rennie Holt (US)

Although negotiations establishing the Antarctic Treaty System were completed in 1961 it was recognized that several important issues were left unresolved.  These included the management of seals, harvests of marine living resources, and treatment of environmental issues, among others.  It was not until 1982 that the Commission for the Conservation of Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) was agreed providing management of fishing efforts.  Agreement on the protocol on environmental protection was not reached until the “Madrid Protocol” in 1998.  Both CCAMLR and the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), which resulted from the Madrid Protocol, requires the provision of scientific advice to accomplish its objectives.  It is the objective of this summary to provide a background relative to how the CCAMLR obtains its scientific advice, what types of advice (research undertaken) it receives and how it uses or does not use the advice; similar information relative to the CEP has been provided elsewhere.  I will briefly describe the structure of CCAMLR and its Scientific Committee, fisheries under CCAMLR management, representative research efforts and example research targets studied to meet CCAMLR objectives, how the advice is presented to CCAMLR and how it is used to formulate management decisions.

The total tonnage and value of CCAMLR’s combined fisheries are small compared to many of the world’s major fisheries.  The total volume of catches has never exceeded 700 thousand tones in any year and the majority of that was comprised of Antarctic krill which is a relative inexpensive product per tonne.  Currently, the total catches are less than 200 thousand tones and the other major fishery, toothfish which is a high-value (per tonne) fishery, accounts for less than 20 thousand tonnes.  The current catch limit for krill in the area where it is currently being harvested is about 4 million tones.  When CCAMLR was initiated it was recognized that the Antarctic ecosystem is a krill-centric ecosystem and that large krill populations existed in several areas of the Southern Ocean.  CCAMLR’s major concern, in addition to the unregulated overharvesting and subsequent depletion of several finfish stocks, was the potential of large krill catches and especially the overlap in the krill harvesting areas and the areas used by land-based predator during the reproductive season.  Therefore, CCAMLR adopted an ecosystem approach to management of marine resources where not only the targeted species are managed but also dependant and related species which feed on the targeted species are protected.  This framework is provided in Article II of the Convention. 

CCAMLR obtains its scientific information from several sources including both fishery-dependent (data obtained by CCAMLR observers on fishing vessels) and fishery-independent (results of Members research activities) data.  Members annually conduct monitoring programs and periodic research efforts whose objectives are to provide advice needed by CCAMLR.  Data arise from fishing vessels, research vessels, land-based sites and, less frequently, from aerial efforts.  Species targeted include fish species, seabirds, pinnipeds, whales, krill, zooplankton, etc.  In many cases these data are accompanied by spatially and temporally compatible oceanographic data.  

CCAMLR established a Secretariat to archive and manage the various data sources.  CCAMLR relies upon its Scientific Committee (SC) to provide analyses of the various data and to provide summary scientific advice.  The SC, in turn, has four working groups which report on various topics on an annual basis.  The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) provides advice on standard fish assessments for harvested stock as well as advice on specialized topics such as the recognition and management of vulnerable marine ecosystems and illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing data.  The Working Group on Incidental Mortality Arising from Fishing (WG-IMAF) provides advice to assist the objective of minimizing and elimination of seabird and marine mammal bycatch in the various fisheries.  This advice falls into three major areas; avoidance of bycatch species, mitigation measures, and precautionary limits to reduce the chance of over-exploitation of populations.  The Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) provides advice to the SC on the estimation and distribution of krill stocks, the allocation of krill catch limits to small management units, management of protected areas, occurrence of marine debris in the Convention Area, and information resulting from CCAMLR’s Ecosystem Monitoring Program’s (CEMP) indices, as well as various other issues that may arise (e.g., VMEs, IUU fishing).  The CEMP indices are standardized data indices provided annually by several Members that measure various parameters such as growth, population size, reproductive success, diet and survival of penguins, flying birds, seals and Antarctic Shags.  Indices also exist for environmental parameters.  Information from standardized indices allows comparison at a site over several seasons, among various species, and among various sites.  The Working Group on Statistics, Assessments, and Modeling (WG-SAM) provides specialized technical advice to the other three WGs on issues arising from their use of SAM methods.  It also provides advice to the SC as required.

Finally, several examples of research conducted by observers and scientists of CCAMLR Members are provided and discussions of how these data are used to provide advice to the SC and then to the Commission.  These include not only example resulting from collection of the CEMP indices, but tracking krill year classes over time, relationships among ice cover, krill and salps, etc.


Abstract of Keynote Presentation 2:  "Conservation and environmental protection in the Antarctic:  challenges for the CEP and SC-CAMLR in the face of climate change and the changing global economy."
AJ Press (Australia)

Both the Committee for Environmental Protection and the CCAMLR Scientific Committee have roles and responsibilities established by their respective legal instruments (the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources) and through established practice. 

This address will focus on the roles and responsibilities of the CEP, but acknowledges, and will highlight, the overlapping and complementary roles of the CEP and SC-CAMLR. 

While some have argued that there are distinct jurisdictional separations between the CEP and SC-CAMLR (and there are, in strict ‘black-letter’ readings of the Convention and Protocol), I argue that the challenges of the future will require closer cooperation between SC-CAMLR and the CEP to ensure the conservation of Antarctic species and the protection of the Antarctic environment.

The impacts of climate change are looming large in Antarctica. It is likely that there will be dramatic local shifts in populations and altered ecosystems regionally in Antarctica.  These changes will occur in both the terrestrial and marine environments and they will be interrelated. Antarctica will also be a harbinger of global changes, putting Antarctic science at the forefront of our understanding of global climate change and its impacts.

Emerging industries, changes in the use of natural resources and changes in investment and spending by governments, business and individuals will also have ramifications for the work of both SC-CAMLR and the CEP in the future.


Discussion and Recommendations following the Keynote Presentations.

3.1  The workshop discussed the contents of both keynote presentations, including the structure and functions of the two Committees.  All together, these presentations indicated many similarities, but also some important differences between the CEP and SC-CAMLR including:

    i. different management objectives; the CEP aims to advise on actions related to "protection" while the SC-CAMLR aims to advise on actions related to "conservation" (including rational use);

    ii. different operational structures; the CEP has recently formed its first subgroup (Subgroup on Management Plans), but has mostly relied on intersessional contact groups to address short-term, management-oriented items of work while the SC-CAMLR relies on permanent working groups to address both short- and long-term priorities for scientific work;  and

    iii. different approaches to collecting and synthesizing data; the CEP generally relies on external bodies (e.g., SCAR) to collect and synthesize data while the SC-CAMLR mostly collects and synthesizes data through internal processes.

3.2  Despite these differences, the workshop recommended that both the CEP and the SC-CAMLR aim to:

    i. safeguard the traditions of receiving and providing advice based on the best available science, and

    ii. ensure that the scientific process is not politicized and is transparent.

3.3  The workshop noted that cooperation between the CEP and the SC-CAMLR should aim to provide useful synergies rather than increase the workload and travel requirements of participants to either body and, therefore, recommended that:

    i. joint activities be distinguished from joint information flow, so that the latter would occur regardless of progress on specific activities.  It was noted that the current process of exchanging reports and observers facilitates information flow, and it was further recommended that this process be continued and focused primarily on the five issues of common interest addressed in this report (i.e., climate change, biodiversity and non-native species, species protection, spatial management and area protection, and monitoring).  It was suggested that the reports exchanged between CEP and SC-CAMLR have a common formatting so that readers can easily find information and recommendations of particular interest.

    ii. joint activities be prioritized within an agreed work program that aims to avoid duplication of effort and to coordinate the timing of work separately undertaken by the CEP and SC-CAMLR.  Along these lines, it was suggested that both committees might coordinate the timing of their independent focused workshops where possible and without prejudicing the independent work of either committee (e.g. the Focus Topics covered by the SC-CAMLR's WG-EMM might be coordinated with key milestones in the 5-year work plan of the CEP). 

    iii. after appropriate modification, the CEP and SC-CAMLR consider adopting the approach for coordinating actions on protected areas (Decision 9 (2005)) for other issues of common interest.  Such approaches could allow one body to make substantive progress on an issue while information continues to be exchanged with the other body so that, ultimately, both bodies can agree to potential management actions.

    iv. if additional meetings are required to facilitate coordination, where possible, alternative methods of holding meetings (e.g. video conferencing) be explored.

    v. continuity across the CEP and SC-CAMLR can be facilitated by providing the opportunity for representatives from the CCAMLR and Antarctic Treaty Secretariats to, respectively and from time to time, attend annual meetings of the CEP and SC-CAMLR.  The workshop also noted that having a designated staff member from each secretariat would facilitate information exchange between the two committees.

3.4  The workshop agreed that despite the potential synergies offered by coordination, the workload of both the CEP and the SC-CAMLR is substantial, likely to increase, and potentially unsustainable.  The workshop therefore recommended that Parties and Members endeavour to:

    i. recruit the next generation of Antarctic scientists and train them to contribute to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR;

    ii. provide, within national delegations, continuity across the CEP and the SC-CAMLR by helping individual scientists to participate in work by both bodies and by encouraging national CEP and SC-CAMLR representatives to consult intersessionally;

    iii. identify, for any program of work to address a common issue:
    • the scientific capabilities required
    • the science program that would be sufficient for addressing the issue
    • the timeframe within which the science needs to be concluded, and
    • the mechanisms necessary to achieve a timely outcome.


4.  Climate Change

Abstract:  "Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment:  management implications."
Dr Phil Trathan (UK)

This presentation identifies some of the implications of climate change and how these concerns necessitate that CEP and CCAMLR address a number of key issues if both organisations are to fulfil their international obligations.  It is suggested that in order for CEP and CCAMLR to undertake their respective schedules of work, it will be essential for them to try to determine the relative risks and the attendant uncertainties, impacts and timescales, of the various processes consequent on climate change.  With current levels of understanding, such a risk assessment should be feasible and should provide a focus for future work.  As part of this process, it will be important to focus on issues that pose the greatest threat and where it is possible to reduce uncertainty by the greatest amount.  It is noted that all of the risks described in this presentation probably vary with latitude and longitude, with regional climate change, with local intensity of fishing or tourism, with local foodweb structure, and so on. Therefore, a plan for the future would likely involve delegated responsibility (e.g., to CEP, or CCAMLR, or SCAR) for each of the risks described.


Discussion and Recommendations

4.1  The Workshop thanked Dr. Trathan for his comprehensive and useful presentation for providing a foundation to discussion of this issue.  It noted that climate change could have as yet undetermined implications for the management of activities being dealt with by the two committees.

4.2  The Workshop recommended the committees agree to the following points:

Areas of common interest:

4.3  Both committees have a need to understand the effects of climate change on the marine environment, primarily for the purpose of developing advice to their respective parent bodies on adapting or responding to such effects through the appropriate management of activities in the Antarctic.  This is likely to involve consideration of how uncertainty over climate change impacts could be incorporated into the decision-making procedures.

Mechanisms for cooperation: 

4.4  These include:
        ◦ the establishement or further development of complementary baselines, reference areas, and appropriate indicators to inform an understanding of climate change effects;
        ◦ utilizing available and appropriate global standards for collecting relevant environmental and ecological data;
        ◦ regular exchange of information and / or reports on climate-related actions and outcomes;
        ◦ periodic meetings, where possible, to review and, where needed, evaluate the risks of climate change and ancillary effects on the Antarctic marine environment (considered further below).

Lead body:

4.5  Both committees are in the early stages of considering effects of climate change on their objectives and identifying necessary action in their work plans.

4.6  In considering periodic meetings to assess the risks of climate change and ancillary effects on the Antarctic marine environment, the Workshop recommended the respective committees consider and correspond on the following issues:
    i. the report of such reviews could be similar to a state of the Antarctic marine environment report, which would outline the threats, risk assessments, existing management arrangements and actions that might be needed to manage the threats;
    ii. the approaches to risk assessment and the risks to be assessed;
    iii. the regularity of review meetings;
    iv. responsibilities for undertaking the work, including which national, intergovernmental or non-governmental organisations that might contribute to the work;
    v. a joint work program to deliver such reviews.


5.  Non-native species

Abstract:  "Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment."
Dr Yves Frenot (France).

The introduction and establishment of non-native species in subantarctic islands and in several ice-free areas of the Antarctic continent is now relatively well documented (e.g. Frenot et al. 2005, Chown et al. 2008). By contrast, there are no examples of aliens in Antarctic waters which can be compared to the clear examples of invasion in terrestrial environments. However, the traditional view of the Southern Ocean as an isolated system is now being challenged by the recent discovery at the Antarctic Peninsula of adult spider crabs Hyas areneus from the North Atlantic (Tavares & De Melo 2004), of marine benthic algae (Clayton et al. 1997) and of larvae of subpolar marine invertebrates (Garcia Raso et al. 2005, 2008, Lee & Chown 2007, Thatje et al. 2005).

How did these terrestrial and marine organisms get to Antarctica and how often such arrivals might happen remains two important questions, but anthropogenic transport seems to be the major pathway of these introductions (Clarke et al. 2005, De Poorter 2007, Lewis et al. 2004, 2005, 2006). Because the establishment of non-native species is mainly limited by the temperature, it is likely that the future climate changes will enable new taxa to establish self-maintaining populations in Antarctica (Aronson et al. 2007, Frenot et al. 2005).

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the key international instrument on environmental matters in Antarctica, specifically prohibits the introduction of non-native species, animal or plant, into the Antarctic Treaty area, except in accordance with a permit (Article 4 of Annex II). Such permits are issued only for domestic plants or laboratory animals and plants, including viruses, bacteria, yeasts and fungi. Precautions must be taken to prevent escape or contact with native fauna and flora. In addition, any plant or animal for which a permit has been issued should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or be disposed of by incineration or equally effective means that eliminates risk to native fauna or flora.

Nothing in the Protocol prevents the importation of food into the Antarctic Treaty area provided that no live animals are imported for this purpose and all plants and animal parts and products are kept under carefully controlled conditions and disposed of in accordance with Annex III to the Protocol.

Annex II of the Protocol mentions also the risk of introduction of micro-organisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts, fungi) not present in the native fauna and flora and provides in its appendix C precautions to prevent such introductions (poultry products and non sterile soil).

Antarctic Treaty parties have not ignored the issue of non-native species, but provisions, have been largely aimed at intentional introductions of non-native species.

According to the number of papers presented at meetings and the discussions reflected in CEP reports since the first meeting in 1998 (see ATCM XXXII SP011), the topic of non-native species has long been considered an important issue for environmental protection in Antarctica. The question of the ballast water and associated risk of introduction of species in Antarctica was particularly discussed and ATCM adopted in 2006 guidelines for ballast water exchanges in the Antarctic Treaty area by Resolution 3. It was also agreed to refer the guidelines to IMO for appropriate action, and Decision 2 (2006) was adopted to that effect.

The CAMLR Convention’s approach to the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources is defined by Article II of the Convention. This article specifically mentions the following principle of conservation: “prevention of changes or minimisation of the risk of changes in the marine ecosystem which are not potentially reversible over two or three decades, […], the effect of the introduction of alien species, the effects of associated activities on the marine ecosystem and of the effects of environmental changes, with the aim of making possible the sustained conservation of Antarctic marine living resources.”

Following the Resolution 3 (2006) adopted by ATCM and Resolution MEPC.163 (56) adopted by the International Maritime Organisation, which adopted Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and desiring to extend the application of these guidelines to the whole CAMLR Convention Area, Resolution 28/XXVII was adopted in 2008 with its associated guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the CAMLR Convention Area north of 60°S.


Discussion and Recommendations

5.1  The workshop expressed its thanks to Dr Frenot for his excellent presentation and for highlighting the significant challenges that needed to be addressed on this issue.

5.2  The workshop recommended that the CEP and SC-CAMLR consider the following points.

Areas of common interest:  

5.3  Because non-native species may considerably alter marine biodiversity, this issue remains important for the two committees.  The recent adoption of the Resolution 28/XXVII (2008) by CCAMLR on ballast water exchanges, following the adoption of a similar Resolution (Resolution 3 (2006)) by ATCM demonstrates the interest of CCAMLR for extending such protective measure to the whole Convention area, namely to the part north of 60°S.  Whilst both committees recognize the importance of preventing the introduction of non-native species, the issue does not currently receive the highest priority by the SC-CCAMLR, whereas it is ranked Priority 1 by the CEP in its 5-year work plan.

Mechanisms for cooperation:  

5.4  It is recommended that CEP continues to work on this issue and keeps the SC-CCAMLR informed.  It is also recommended that CEP and ATCM establish a procedure, similar to that used for designating an ASPA when a marine area is involved (i.e. Decision 9 (2005)) to take into account any comments provided by the CCAMLR when applicable.  Finally, the workshop encouraged the use of the SCAR-EBA Database on Alien Species as a tool for sharing the information on this issue.

Lead body:  

5.5  The workshop recommended that the CEP be the lead body on issues related to non-native species.

6.  Species Protection

Abstract:  "Antarctic species requiring special protection."
Mr Ewan McIvor (Australia)

Species living in the Antarctic region are subject to a high level of protection through a range of measures developed in accordance with the objectives and provisions of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) and the Convention on the Conservation of the Antarctic Marine Living Resources (the Convention). This presentation focuses on work by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) to improve the conservation status of particular species requiring special protection.

The 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora allowed for the designation of ‘Specially Protected Species’. Those provisions were carried over into Annex II to the Protocol, on Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. Developing advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) on such species falls within the remit of the CEP. The Convention also provides, in Article IX 2(d), for the designation of protected species, and SC-CAMLR is responsible for advising the Commission on such designations. 

The Convention does not apply to species that live wholly within the terrestrial (including freshwater) portion of the CCAMLR Area. Notwithstanding the relevance of many other provisions of the Protocol to protecting the marine environment (e.g. environmental impact assessment, marine pollution and area protection), Annex II does not apply to species living wholly within the marine waters of the Antarctic Treaty area. By exclusion then, the species that might span the responsibilities of CEP and SC-CAMLR are those that exist part of the time on land (including on ice) and part of the time in the ocean, namely seals, penguins and seabirds.

This arrangement reflects the practical separation of responsibilities between the two bodies. The SC-CAMLR is responsible for advising on the conservation of marine living resources, including the management of fishing activities which are largely focussed on offshore areas, while the CEP is responsible for advising on the management of other activities, including national programs and tourism, which largely focus on the Antarctic continent and near shore marine areas. Where the effects of activities, or the conservation values themselves, traverse this notional demarcation there are opportunities for cooperation, including on the designation and special protection of species.


Discussion and Recommendations

6.1  The workshop thanked Mr McIvor for his presentation, which provided useful background for discussion of the committees’ respective roles, responsibilities and processes with respect to Antarctic species requiring protection.  It was noted that the presentation had deliberately not addressed particular at-risk species or actions to mitigate risks.

6.2  The workshop recommended the committees agree to the following points:

Areas of common interest:

6.3  Maintaining, and where necessary taking actions to improve, the conservation status of Antarctic species remains a key interest of both committees.
6.4  Although both committees have developed measures that promote the protection and conservation of many species, the CEP has only recently given attention to the Specially Protected Species provisions of Annex II, and SC-CAMLR has not designated any protected species under Article IX of the Convention. Each of these mechanisms is applicable to ‘overlap-species’ that live part of the time on the land / ice in the Antarctic Treaty area and part of the time in the ocean, i.e. seals, penguins and seabirds.
6.5  Given that climate change will likely adversely impact Antarctic species, action by the committees to manage human activities should aim to maximise species’ resilience to all external pressures.

Mechanisms for cooperation:

6.6  The CEP already has in place a process for designating and managing specially protected species (the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals for New and Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected Species under Annex II of the Protocol), and WG-IMAF has developed a species risk assessment process. It is recommended that the Committees share information about these existing processes and any tools that they use, to assist with improving consistency and complementarity in the approaches of the two committees to assessing and affording special protection to overlap-species, and other species.
6.7  As the overlap-species are potentially subject to pressures arising from a range of land-based, near shore and offshore activities, both committees will have a role in developing and implementing recovery action plans. The CEP guidelines require consultation with other organisations, as appropriate, when identifying recovery actions (a draft action plan for the southern giant petrel was submitted to CEP XI by New Zealand in WP 30 but was not referred to SC-CAMLR as the species was not designated). It is recommended that consideration be given to developing a framework for CEP and SC-CAMLR collaboration on the development of recovery action plans, similar to the process already in place for consultation on protected area proposals.
6.8  Status assessments should be made on the basis of the best available status and trend data, and decisions should be taken on a precautionary basis. CEP does not directly collect or manage data, but SC-CAMLR does hold information about the overlap species through CEMP and the WG-EMM sub-group on the status and trends of predators. It is recommended that the committees should seek to ensure that relevant data are made available for species assessments, together with information about the limitations of those data.
6.9  It is recommended that the committees also share other relevant information, including standard methods for monitoring the status of species and protection/conservation measures. 

6.10  There is also a need to involve other relevant organisations (e.g. ACAP, SCAR) and experts, as appropriate in the assessment and protection of Antarctic species, and it will be important to ensure there is a clear understanding of roles and expectations.
6.11  It is further recommended that the SC-CAMLR develop a process to inform the CEP of species protection measures that might be taken in the CCAMLR Area.

Lead body:

6.12  The workshop agreed that SC-CAMLR would lead on special protection of wholly marine species, and on species that breed ashore in the parts of the CCAMLR Area outside the Antarctic Treaty area (i.e. sub-Antarctic islands), and the CEP would lead on special protection of wholly terrestrial (including freshwater) species.
6.13  The CEP could take the lead and use existing guidelines to afford special protection to overlap species, provided there is open consultation with SC-CAMLR on action plans concerning CCAMLR-related activities.


7.  Spatial Management and Area Protection

Abstract:  "Spatial marine management and protected areas."
Dr Susie Grant (UK)

The establishment of spatial protection for marine biodiversity has been identified as a priority issue by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR. International commitments have called for the development of representative networks of marine protected areas globally by 2012, and cooperation between the CEP and SC-CAMLR provides a unique opportunity for developing coordinated systems to attain this goal.
 
To determine the types of spatial protection and management that will be most effective and appropriate for achieving a range of conservation goals, there is a need for clear definitions, principles and priorities. Many of these principles have already been established under the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System. This presentation aims to provide information on the different types of marine spatial protection and management that can be implemented in Antarctic waters, including details on:

1.	definition of terms;
2.	objectives of marine spatial protection and management;
3.	examples of measures currently adopted under CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty;
4.	summary of principles agreed by ATCPs and CCAMLR Members with regard to marine spatial protection. 

There is an array of existing tools available to the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members for implementing marine spatial protection, including for example: Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Protected Areas, CCAMLR Closed Areas and Vulnerable Marine Ecosystem (VME) Risk Areas. The presentation examines each of these tools, and uses examples of areas that are currently designated under each category to illustrate their objectives and characteristics.

Some of these areas may allow for multiple uses, or may restrict only a single type of activity. However, it is also important to establish a network of protected areas that provide comprehensive protection for representative examples of major marine ecosystems. Spatial protection and management will be most effective when it can be implemented in the context of broader marine conservation measures. It is therefore critical for marine spatial protection to be considered as part of a harmonized regime for marine conservation across the Antarctic Treaty System. 

Recent progress made by projects such as the Census of Antarctic Marine Life and the CCAMLR bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean will help to ensure that the selection of candidate sites for marine spatial protection can be scientifically robust, based on the most appropriate data and methodologies.

The presentation concludes that a comprehensive spatial protection and management strategy for the Southern Ocean would be most effectively delivered with input from both SC-CAMLR and the CEP.


Discussion and Recommendations

7.1  The Workshop thanked Dr. Grant for the comprehensive and useful presentation, and for providing a foundation for extensive and productive discussions on this issue. 

7.2  The Workshop agreed on the importance of a systematic approach to marine spatial protection and management and noted that CEP and SC-CAMLR had agreed to taking a harmonised approach to the development of a representative system of marine protected areas (CEP IX Final Report, paras 98 to 99; Sc-CAMLR-XXIV, paragraph 3.51-3.52).  In this regard the Workshop noted that:

    • whilst recognizing the differences in contracting Parties to CEP and SC-CMALR and their respective mandates, they have overlapping mandates for advising on the protection of marine areas.  
    • a harmonised approach would provide for 
        ◦ the exchange of data, analyses and methods that may be useful to the other body in identifying areas in need of protection utilizing the existing framework, like Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and CCAMLR closed areas, and
        ◦ simplification of a protected area system to ensure that management of the region would not be too difficult, i.e. fewer larger protected areas would be easier to manage than many smaller ones.
    • a representative system of marine protected areas would serve the purpose of conserving representative components of Antarctic marine biodiversity and could also be designed in such a way to: 
        ◦ act as scientific reference areas, for example to help understand how to manage activities in the face of climate change impacts, and
        ◦ provide areas to increase the resilience of the Antarctic marine ecosystem to climate change or other impacts.

7.3  The Workshop recommended the committees agree to the following points:

Areas of common interest:

        7.4  Given the overlap of CCAMLR area management with ATCM area management, interests, the workshop agreed that both committees should consider representative areas, reference areas and resilience areas with respect to spatial protection and management in the marine environment.

7.5  It was also recognised that principles on which both CCAMLR and ATCM agree include the:
    • Importance of a harmonised approach to protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System;
    • Commitment to increased cooperation at a practical level between ATCM and CCAMLR (ATCM Resolution 1, 2006);
    • The criteria held under ATCM Decision 9 (2005) on ASPAs and ASMAs of interest to CCAMLR;
    • Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, as a basis for identifying a representative system of marine protected areas.

Mechanisms for cooperation: 

7.6  The Workshop endorsed:
    • The sharing of information, expertise and/or further joint meetings, perhaps associated with CEP and EMM meetings, focused on specific themes;
    • The development of mutual region-specific objectives, and further consideration of overlapping areas of interest for marine protection to facilitate increased cooperation;
    • The development of proposals for candidate sites with coordinated input from both SC-CAMLR and CEP;
    • The development by SC-CAMLR of a process reciprocal to ATCM Decision 9 (2005), to inform the CEP of spatial management measures that might be taken in the CCAMLR Area.

Lead body:

7.7  Issues relating to spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity would generally be best led by SC-CAMLR.  However, this does not preclude in any way the development by the CEP of ASPAs and ASMAs which have in whole or in part a marine component. 

7.8  The Workshop recognized that only three years remain to achieve the internationally agreed commitment on the establishment of a representative network of marine protected areas.   In considering cooperative efforts that would assist in reaching this goal, the Workshop agreed that there currently exists sufficient tools that can be used for developing this system, but using these tools will require cooperation at the decision-making level.  The Workshop further noted the existence of a CCAMLR Special Fund to facilitate the process of the identification and establishment of MPAs.

7.9  The Workshop noted that SC-CCAMLR had agreed on a list of 11 priority areas that should be targeted for future work towards a network of MPAs, and noted that these should be the priority.  It was recommended that these priority areas be presented to the CEP, and that they consider using these as potential priority areas under the existing framework.  It also suggested that both committees develop a strategy to achieve these aims in the next three years.


8.  Monitoring

Abstract:  "Ecosystem and environmental monitoring."
Dr George Watters (US)

Ecosystem and environmental monitoring in the Antarctic is expensive, logistically difficult, and technically challenging; nevertheless, both the CEP and the SC-CAMLR must undoubtedly rely on future monitoring efforts to provide the best available scientific advice.  Since both bodies require monitoring for parallel purposes (e.g., to characterize the state of and indentify anthropogenic impacts on Antarctic ecosystems) and it is unlikely that either organization can independently provide complete regional and continental coverage, enhanced future monitoring efforts can undoubtedly be facilitated via practical coordination and collaboration between the CEP and the SC-CAMLR.  Since the power of a monitoring program generally derives from the time-series data it can provide, it seems critical to collect baseline field data even while the details and design of a "deluxe" monitoring program are negotiated.  I propose that a coordinated and collaborative monitoring effort might be catalyzed by holding a focused workshop to explore how the CEP's requirements to monitor the impacts of tourism can be dovetailed with the SC-CAMLR's requirements to monitor the impacts of fishing.

The CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) provides a useful foundation on which to build such a coordinated monitoring program.  The CEMP was established in 1985, and it aims to provide a scientific basis for the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources by 1) detecting and recording significant changes in the marine ecosystem, and 2) discriminating between changes that are due to harvesting commercial species and changes that are due to other sources of variability (e.g., variability in the physical and ecological environment).   Data collection and reporting within the CEMP is the responsibility of CCAMLR Members, but "Standard Methods" have been developed to ensure that information is comparable across sites and species.  The CEMP database is managed by the CCAMLR Secretariat (this includes data validation and processing) while the SC-CAMLR and its Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management review and develop Standard Methods, evaluate results from the CEMP, and advise the Commission on inferences drawn from these evaluations.  Monitoring within the CEMP can be intensive (requiring a substantial national commitment), and at least two issues must be addressed to promote the program's long-term viability.  First, the spatial scale of the CEMP may not be sufficient to fully monitor the impacts of fishing (e.g., in July 2008, CEMP data were reported from only 5 of the 15 small-scale management units among which krill catches in the Scotia Sea may ultimately be subdivided).  Second, the number of sites from which CEMP data are being reported has been declining in recent years.

The CEMP's two guiding principles (detection and discrimination) are consistent with the requirements for monitoring specified in Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, and, undoubtedly, parallel programs to monitor the impacts of fishing and tourism (or other activities of particular concern to the CEP) can provide important synergies.  For example, both the CEP and the SC-CAMLR would likely benefit from the increased spatial coverage of a coordinated monitoring effort.  A wide range of technical details would need to be addressed during the development of a coordinated monitoring effort (e.g., developing and agreeing a suite of useful parameters to be monitored and Standard Methods to collect consistent data), and it seems that such issues could, initially, be discussed in a joint CEP / SC-CAMLR workshop focused on monitoring.  Ultimately, the success of a coordinated effort will largely depend on the ability of the two bodies to collect (via reporting by Parties and Members), manage, and exchange information collected during the course of monitoring.  The CCAMLR (including the Secretariat and the SC-CAMLR with its Working Groups) has substantial experience with these issues, and this experience should be useful in developing a coordinated monitoring effort. 

Finally, it is important to note that the SC-CAMLR also monitors the impacts of fishing by reviewing and analyzing fisheries related data (e.g., the quantities of krill caught and the size compositions of those catches) submitted by vessel operators and independent observers.  Fisheries-related data are collected from new, exploratory, and established fisheries, and data-collection plans and reporting requirements are specified as standard components of the Conservation Measures that regulate fisheries.  Analogous monitoring (e.g., specifying data-collection plans, including independent observers, and reporting requirements for tourism activities) should likely be considered within the CEP's work to develop a coordinated monitoring effort with the SC-CAMLR because it is unlikely that national scientific programs alone will be able to monitor the full scope of future climate and anthropogenic impacts to the Antarctic environment and ecosystems.
Discussion and Recommendations

8.1  The workshop thanked Dr Watters for his useful summary of the monitoring interests and opportunities for both SC-CAMLR and CEP.

8.2  The workshop recommend that both committees agree to the following points:  

Areas of common interest:

8.3  The workshop agreed that monitoring was an important issue to both the CEP and SC-CAMLR in providing advice to the ATCM and CCAMLR respectively on the need for and effectiveness of management measures.  The Workshop recognised that, as with other issues, there were synergies to be gained from the monitoring work conducted by the two bodies, though it also noted that there were important issues of data ownership and sharing to be considered in any exchange of monitoring data. 

8.4  Specific aspects of common interest included monitoring for the purposes of:

    • Characterising the status and trends of key species and their responses to human activity and a changing Antarctic climate;
    • The presence and impacts of non-native species.

Mechanisms for cooperation:

8.5  The Workshop recognised that whilst the CEP did not have the same dedicated data management facilities that exist within the CCAMLR Secretariat that there were data repositories available where monitoring data could be curated and that these needed to be explicitly identified and utilised.     

8.6  The Workshop recalled the extensive discussion on the subject of monitoring within the CEP as well as the outcomes of previous workshops on the issue held by SCAR and COMNAP, as well as the guidelines for monitoring developed by or as a result of those workshops.  The workshop also noted the relevance of previous workshops on the issue of cumulative impacts and monitoring.  It was agreed that this extensive earlier work needed to be recognised and utilised fully.

8.7  It was further agreed that there was extensive monitoring work being conducted in the Southern Ocean by organisations and programmes not under the direct purview of CCAMLR or the ATCM.  Hereto the findings and outcomes to such programmes needed to be identified and used to support the work of the respective bodies.

8.8  The workshop also noted that monitoring is occurring through national programmes and that a more collective understanding of these ongoing efforts was required.  It was also agreed that there was merit in exploring new and innovative ways to augment existing resources dedicated to monitoring.

8.9  The workshop agreed that a useful priority for a future joint meeting between the CEP and the SC-CAMLR would be to consider monitoring requirements.


Lead Body:

8.10  As there is a need for clear objectives for any monitoring programme, in order that the objectives can be clearly articulated to allow the definition of spatial and temporal coverage (and associated costs), the lead body for any particular monitoring programme would depend upon the specific task being undertaken.
 
8.11  The workshop suggested that the CEP might use its current 5-year plan as a means to prioritise the requirements for monitoring such that the high-priority issue of non-native species might provide a model for defining a monitoring programme to address this issue. 


General comments and conclusions

The workshop was considered to be successful in meeting its terms of reference.  As a first meeting between SC-CAMLR and CEP it had provided an opportunity for an improved understanding of the roles and responsibilities of the two committees and several opportunities for improved cooperation had been identified.

The workshop commends its report to the Scientific Committee and CEP and looked forward to ongoing and increasing cooperation between the two committees.

Appendix 1.  List of participants

Party
Name
Position
Argentina
Enrique Marschoff
Representative to CCAMLR
Australia
Ewan McIvor
John Gunn
Andrew Constable

Tony Press
AAD. CEP rep. CEP Vice Chair
AAD. CEP & CCAMLR
Rep. to CCAMLR. Convenor of SC-CAMLR workshop
Advisor
ASOC
Ricardo Roura
Rodolfo Werner
Senior advisor. CEP representative
Representative to SC-CCAMLR
Belgium
Alexandre de Lichtervelde

Annick Wilmotte
Federal Ministry of Environment. CEP & CCAMLR representative
University of Liege. CEP delegate
Brazil
Mariana de Sá Viana
Maria Cordélia Machado
Ronaldo Lima Vieira 
Delegate to CEP
Delegate to CCAMLR and ATCM
Delegate to ATCM/CCAMLR
CCAMLR
Dr Denzil Miller
Dr Keith Reid
CCAMLR observer to ATCM
Advisor
Chile
Verónica Vallejos
Jorge Beguño
Representative to CEP
Head of delegation to ATCM
France
Yves Frenot
Philippe Koubbi
Vice Chair of CEP
Univ Paris VI. Laboratoire d’Océanographie Ville Franche
Germany
Heike Herata
Axel Szelinski
Federal Environment Agency
Federal ministry of Environment
IAATO
Kim Crosbie
CEP representative
India
Rasik Ravindra
N.Khare
Anoop Tiwari
Head of Indian Delegation
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Environmental Officer
Japan
Masami Fujimoto
Hiromi Isa
Yusuke Saito
Kentaro Watanabe
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Fisheries Agency
Ministry of the Environment
National Institute of Polar Research
New Zealand
Harry Keys
James Walker
Neville Smith 
Neil Gilbert 
Advisor of NZ CEP Delegation
Advisor CEP/ATCM
Rep to SC-CAMLR
Chair CEP
Norway
Birgit Njaastad
Norwegian Polar Institute, CEP rep.
Poland
Dr Malgorzata Korczak
DAB PAS
Russian Federation
Valery Lukin 
Valery Masolov
Victor Pomelov
Slava Bizikov
Russian Ant Exp. CEP rep
Polar Marine Geol. Research Exp.
Russian Ant Exp.
Vice Chair of SC-CCAMLR
SCAR
Chuck Kennicutt
Colin Summerhayes
SCAR President
SCAR, SPRI
Secretariat  AT
José María Acero
Assistant Executive Officer
Sweden
Professor Bo Fernholm 
Ann-Sofi Israelson

Swedish Museum of Natural History
Swedish EPA, CEP delegate
United Kingdom
Rob Bowman 

David Agnew 
Phil Trathan
Susie Grant 
CEP rep (Foreign & Commonwealth Office)
Scientific Committee (CCAMLR)
British Antarctic Survey
British Antarctic Survey
United States
George Watters

Christopher D. Jones

Polly Penhale 

Pamela Toschik
Rennie Holt
Aimee Hessert
Convener, WG-EMM, NOAA – Southwest Fisheries Science Center
NOAA – Southwest Fisheries Science Center
US Chair CEP, Natural Science Foundation
Delegate to CCAMLR and ATCM
Invited speaker
US Environmental Protection Agency. CEP delegate
Uruguay
Albert Lluberas
ATCM HoD, UY NAP

Appendix 2.  Work Program

Friday 3 April (0930 – 1800)

Session 1

0930 – 1000
Coffee

1000 – 1030
Welcome and Introduction
Slava Bizikov and Yves Frenot
1030 – 1115
Keynote Presentation - CCAMLR overview; key conservation objectives, priorities and challenges
Rennie Holt
1115 – 1130
Initial comments and discussion

1130 – 1215
Keynote Presentation - CEP overview; key conservation objectives, priorities and challenges
Tony Press
1215 – 1230
Initial comments and discussion

1230 – 1400
Lunch

Session 2

1400 – 1500
Discussion and comment of keynote presentations
Slava Bizikov and George Watters
Session 3

1500 – 1515
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment: management implications
Phil Trathan
1515 – 1600
Discussion and comment
Slava Bizikov and George Watters
1600 – 1630
Tea

Session 4

1630 – 1645
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
Yves Frenot
1645 – 1730
Discussion and comment
Slava Bizikov and George Watters
1730 – 1800
Conclusions and wrap up
Slava Bizikov and George Watters


Saturday 4 April (0900 – 1700)

Session 5

0900 – 0930
Summary of day 1 and Introduction to day 2
Neil Gilbert and Yves Frenot
0930 – 0945
Antarctic species requiring special protection
Ewan McIvor
0945 – 1030
Discussion and comment
Neil Gilbert and Yves Frenot
1030 – 1100
Coffee

Session 6

1100 – 1115
Spatial marine management and protected areas
Susie Grant
1115 – 1200
Discussion and comment
Neil Gilbert and Yves Frenot
1200 – 1330
Lunch

Session 7

1330 – 1345
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
George Watters
1345 – 1430
Discussion and comment
Neil Gilbert and Yves Frenot
1430 – 1500
General review and burning issues
Neil Gilbert and Yves Frenot
1500 – 1530
Tea

Session 8

1530 - 1700
Conclusions, recommendations and workshop report
George Watters and Neil Gilbert


