





Second Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island





Second Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island

1. Introduction
At CEP VII, Germany introduced IP 005, “Research Project Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for desig­nation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas’”. This paper described the below mentioned German three-year research project (2003 – 2006) and introduced it for the first time. Several CEP members expressed their support for the proposal, and indicated that they would willingly assist Germany in the project.
At CEP VIII, Germany introduced IP 016, “Progress Report on the Research Project Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas”. This paper provided an update of the project, noting the excellent co-operation with other Parties in the area through an informal co-ordination group. 
At ATCM XXVIII, “Germany agreed that prior to tabling a draft Management Plan for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island (King George Island) and following a proposal by Chile an International Working Group should be established. This Working Group should be composed of those Parties with stations and/or huts in the area, Parties with an interest in the area as well as Observers to the Antarctic Treaty. It should discuss the issues related to the Draft Management Plan. For this purpose, Germany would organize two international workshops, one in September 2005 and another one in January/February 2006, in order to convene the participants on this issue” (Final Report of ATCM XXVIII, para. 90).
At CEP IX, Brazil, China, Germany, the Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation introduced WP 022, “Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Proposal to establish an Intersessional Contact Group”. This paper reported on the main findings and recommendations of the King George Island Work­shop “Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island” in January/February 2006 as well as on the outcome of the Workshop “Human impact on terrestrial habitats in the Antarctic” in September 2005”. Discussion of this paper is reflected in paragraphs 70 to 75 of the CEP Report.
At ATCM XXIX, “Germany expressed satisfaction on reaching agreement with Chile in principle on developing an ASMA for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. They will jointly convene – via note verbal – an international working group (paragraph 74 of the CEP Report). Germany expressed the hope that a substantive outcome of the group’s work would be presented to the next ATCM. Chile confirmed that it will host a work­shop to prepare the input on this issue for discussion at CEP X.” (Final Report of ATCM XXIX, para. 77).
Pursuant to these understandings an international working group involving government representatives of interested Parties was convened by Germany and Chile in order to discuss management approaches, possibly aiming at drafting a management plan for an ASMA covering the Fildes Peninsula Region (see separate IP 22 rev. 1 by Germany and Chile). 
At ATCM XXX, Germany introduced IP 112 “Possible Modules of a “Fildes Peninsula region” ASMA Management Plan”. Further, Germany and Chile introduced IP 22 rev. 1 “Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island”. Comments of 15 IWG parties to four questions concerning the future management of the Fildes Peninsula Region were reported.
At ATCM XXXI, Germany introduced IP 30 “Final Report on the Research Project “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas“”. It contained a proposal for a “Fildes Peninsula region ASMA Management Plan” which was already presented to CEP X as IP 112 (2007) “Possible Modules of a ‘Fildes Peninsula region’ ASMA Management Plan” and which was uploaded on the IWG web-based Discussion Forum.

2. The international Working Group
At CEP XI, it was agreed to continue discussing the future of Fildes Peninsula in the framework of the International Working Group (IWG) on Fildes. In addition, a meeting of the IWG took place parallel to CEP XI. The IWG-members agreed at the end of their deliberations on the following: 
a) The information and documents already up-loaded on the IWG web-based Discussion Forum opened by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat in 2006, should be used to advance the work during this intersessional period. 
b) As a practical step, IP 112 (2007) and IP 30 (2008), which contain most of the elements for the development of an environmental management approach for the Fildes region should inter alia be used as a basis, in particular the proposed zoning scheme. 
c) The participants of the IWG intend to continue their intersessional work at the web-based Discussion Forum.
The IWG parties and their representatives are listed in Table 1 of IP 22 rev. 1 ATCM XXX. 

3. Tasks of the IWG for the intersessional period until CEP XII in 2009 

The following tasks of the IWG for the intersessional period until CEP XII in 2009 were agreed at CEP XI: 
First Step: until 30 September 2008: 
    • All IWG members were kindly requested to consider whether the three proposed Codes of Conduct up-loaded to the IWG web-based Discussion forum (contained in IP 112 (2007) and IP 30 (2008)) for: 
- the Facility Zone, 
- scientific research, and 
- visitors 
were adequate and sufficient for a first management approach for the Fildes Region.
    • In the event that they believed that the Codes of Conduct should be modified or replaced, they were requested to make the relevant proposals and / or to suggest other or additional Codes. 
    • All IWG members were also kindly requested to prepare clear and detailed comments, corrections and / or amendments as appropriate for the revision of the proposed Codes of Conduct. 
    • Chile would prepare its version of a management scheme based on zoning and Codes of Conduct. 
    • Other Members of the IWG were kindly invited to introduce their own proposals for a multiple protection regime in the Fildes Peninsula region. 
    • All IWG members should feel free to introduce any other matter they deem appropriate for consideration at this stage. 
All the above mentioned material should be up-loaded to the IWG web-based Discussion Forum. 

Second Step: until 30 November 2008: 
On the basis of the comments, corrections and amendments received for the three proposed Codes of Conduct, of the possible proposals for other Codes of Conduct and other possible components in the conceptual framework of a draft management for the Fildes region during the first step, 
    • Germany would incorporate and revise the conceptual approach for the management in the Fildes region and up-load it to the IWG web-based Discussion Forum. 
    • Germany and Chile had offered to arrange a meeting of the IWG in Germany or Chile once the revised conceptual approach would be available.

4. Comments of the parties involved
During the intersessional period of 2008 up to now, little progress was made due to the sporadic participation of IWG members. Only Chile, Russia and the IAATO provided comments and contributions to the above mentioned issues. 
The Russian amendment concerning air traffic management was incorporated in the Code of conduct for the Facility Zone (see Appendix 3 of the Annex). The five concise comments and proposals submitted by IAATO were considered and incorporated in the Code of Conduct for Visitors (see Appendix 4 of the Annex). 
Chile announced the preparation of an alternative management scheme based on Zoning and Codes of Conduct for the Fildes Peninsula Region. Further, Chile proposed to consider the Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Land-based Scientific Research in Antarctica (draft version June 27th, 2007 by COMNAP) and the SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica. Following this proposals, the Code of Conduct for Scientific Research (see Appendix 4 of the Annex) was revised according to the Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica by SCAR. 
According to the IWG work plan (see point 3) Germany revised the conceptual approach for the management in the Fildes Region on the basis of the comments received by the parties involved. The revised Possible Modules of a Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. ***, Fildes Peninsula Region, South Shetland Islands is contained in the Annex. All amendments are underlined.

5. Further Steps
    • The participants of the IWG intend to continue their intersessional work at the web-based Discussion Forum of the CEP. 
    • The IWG convenors proposed to have an IWG meeting during CEP XII in Baltimore. 
    • Germany proposes to hold an extra meeting of the IWG in summer 2009 in order to discuss all relevant items related to the management scheme of the Fildes Peninsula Region including the Annex prepared by Germany. 
Annex: Revised Possible Modules of a Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. ***, Fildes Peninsula Region, South Shetland Islands (all amendments are underlined)
Prepared and proposed by Germany
Preamble
The Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island (King George Island, South Shetlands, Maritime Antarctic) are intensively used for scientific, logistic and tourism-related activities by several nations. This multitude of activities obviously affects the environment in that area and often leads to conflicts of interest between nature conservation, science, logistics and tourism. 
In response to these conflicts, a research project commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency has been conducted since 2003 on the Fildes Peninsula, Ardley Island and associated small islands (the Fildes Peninsula Region, hereafter Region). This project is designed to provide data for a full evaluation of the role and structure of a possible broad‑scale management system which could supplement the existing protection provided by ASPAs to parts of the Region.
Germany is carrying out this project for a number of reasons. One is that German scientists have been regularly present in the Region since 1979. Their activities have been focused particularly on the collection of environmental and biological information. Furthermore, the project can be seen as a result of the joint United Kingdom and Germany inspection programme conducted in the Antarctic Peninsula area in January, 1999. This inspection produced the recommendation that “... consideration could be given towards further enhancing cooperation for example in logistic support, consistency in waste management procedures and a critical examination of scientific programmes to optimise productivity and minimise duplication”. A second inspection was conducted in February 2005 by the United Kingdom, Australia and Peru (XXVIII ATCM, WP 32, Stockholm 2005). This inspection covered the Bellingshausen and Great Wall research stations which lie close to each other near Maxwell Bay in the Region. The team found relatively little co‑operation on science between the stations and no consistent or focused approach to monitoring. The team welcomed the initial consultations that had been made, and the baseline surveys then underway, carried out with the aim of proposing the Region as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area.
The following text includes “Possible Modules of a ‘Fildes Peninsula Region’ ASMA” in order to stimulate discussion of a management system. These modules are not the only ones possible and that the proposal is incomplete. There are, of course, several different possible management approaches and, as well as the proposed modules, all practicable options should be discussed. It should also be emphasised that the development of a management plan can be achieved only in close co-operation with all the Antarctic Treaty signatories represented in the area.
Please note that the proposal has been elaborated according to the “Guide for the preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas” and follows the structure of the Deception Island Management Package.

Table of Contents
Introduction
             1. Description of Values 
             2. Aims and Objectives
             3. Management Activities
             4. Period of Designation
             5. Description of the Area
                i. Geographical Co-ordinates, Boundary Markers, and Natural Features
               ii. Structures within the Area
             6. Protected Areas and Managed Zones within the ASMA 
                i. Protected Areas and Historical Monuments
               ii. Managed Zones within the Area
             7. Code of Conduct
                i. Access to and movement within the Area
               ii. Activities allowed in the Area
              iii. Installation, modification, or removal of structures
              iv. Reporting requirements 
            8. Maps
            9. Supporting documents
Appendix 1: Management Plan for ASPA No. 150 – Ardley Island 
Appendix 2: Management Plan for ASPA No. 125 – Fildes Peninsula
Appendix 3: Code of Conduct for Facility Zones
Appendix 4: Code of Conduct for Scientific Research
Appendix 5: Code of Conduct for Visitors

Introduction
The Fildes Peninsula, Ardley Island and adjacent small islands (hereafter “Region”) forms the south-western part of King George Island, one of the South Shetland Islands in the Maritime Antarctic. The Region is a large ice-free area with important natural, scientific, educational, aesthetic, wilderness and historical values. 
The Region is intensively used for scientific, logistic and tourism-related activities and, during the years since 1968, seven nations (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, German Democratic Republic, Russia, and Uruguay) established research stations and field huts there. In addition, in 1980 Chile built a hard runway capable of handling intercontinental and intracontinental flights for transporting cargo, station personnel, and visitors, between stations in the South Shetland Islands, to the Antarctic Peninsula and South America. Supply, research, patrol and tourist vessels frequently anchor in Maxwell Bay.
Scientific programs underway in the Region include several atmospheric, glacial, geological and biological investigations. Due to its high species diversity, Ardley Island has been designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA, formerly SSSI) with an excluded visitor zone for station personnel and tourists. Two fossil‑rich geological sites are also designated as an ASPA although this designation ceases on 31 December 2010.
Ship-based tourism occurs on a regular basis and combined air and ship tourism has currently established. There are frequent over flights. Sporting competitions (e.g. marathon), glacier walk and camping have taken place in recent years, illustrating the diverse spectrum of non-governmental activities in the area. 
Human activities occurring during the breeding and moulting seasons of birds or seals produce conflicts of interest between nature conservation, science, logistics and tourism. 
The designation of the area as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) offers an integrated strategy to manage these conflicts and to minimise the impact of diverse human activities. 

1. Description of Values 
The Region has important natural, scientific, educational, aesthetic, wilderness and historical values.

i. Natural Value
This large ice-free area contains diverse fauna and flora as well as special geological features, such as fossils and Tertiary rock strata. This peninsula and neighbouring islands (Ardley, Geologists, Two Summit, Dart and Diomedea) are breeding sites for thirteen species of seabirds and four species of seals. Of special interest are the large breeding colonies of Southern giant petrels, Gentoo penguins, skuas and storm petrels. Ardley Island has a varied vegetation particular to the Region of lichen and moss. 

ii. Scientific Value 
The Region is of great interest for science and several nations exploit the easy access to ice‑free areas. The local fauna and flora offers unrivalled opportunities of gaining an understanding of adaptation to extreme environments. In addition, the more than 30 years of research in the Region has produced several long-term sets of environmental data including meteorological and biological observations. Unique international scientific co‑operation has developed, particularly in relation to seabird censuses and behavioural and physiological studies on penguins, skuas and petrels. Likewise, international field research is run in parallel by botanists, marine biologists, microbiologists, geologists, glaciologists, oceanographers, physicists and meteorologists. The concentration of stations offers a platform for communication and interdisciplinary approaches.  

iii. Educational Value 
The Region is a peep hole into the Antarctic ecosystem. The airport offers the opportunity to fly in visitors for a few hours or days to receive a first impression of the Antarctic. Visitors have the opportunity to watch wildlife, to visit research stations and to experience international co-operation in science and logistics. 
INSPIRE (formerly Mission Antarctica) initiated an environmental programme in 2001. Large amounts of scrap from the Russian Station Bellingshausen were removed in a three-year project. In parallel, an education programme is running with international pupils, teachers and sponsors to enhance interest and increase funding for further activities in the locality. A new building, located at Bellingshausen Station, is serving an education base and a model for educational, environmental and energy issues.
In 2004 Chile initiated the Antarctic School Fair where students present research projects und may win the opportunity to travel to Antarctica.

iv. Aesthetic Value 
The Region offers a wide spectrum of habitats and landscapes ranging from small wildlife hotspots to large glaciers, quiet inlets, and volcanic rock formations. The west coast of the Fildes Peninsula faces the winds and strong surges of the Drake Passage, while on the east there are the calm waters of Maxwell Bay. The narrow Fildes Strait, with its strong currents around small islands, allows stupendous views towards the Drake Passage, Maxwell Bay and the glacier on Nelson Island.
v. Historic Value
The sheltered waters of Maxwell Bay offered a relatively easy landing place for early explorers, whalers and sealers, and some traces remain. Near Suffield Point, Fildes Peninsula (62°11´12²S, 58° 54´02²W), a dry‑stone wall enclosing three sides of an area roughly 2.40 by 2.40m was described close to the cliff (Lewis-Smith & Simpson, 1987). Stehberg (1983) excavated this site and found a small iron pot 'of European origin'. Also at Suffield Point, the remnants of a wreaked ship still lie in the water near the Uruguayan station in Maxwell Bay. The remains are probably from a sailing ship built in the second half of the 19th century. A detailed description was given by Uruguay to CEP VII (XXVII ATCM/IP 107). 
Furthermore, three historical sites have been designated and marked in the Area (Nos. 50, 52 and 82 in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments, http://www.ats.aq/documents/cep/HSM_2007_e.pdf). There is a plaque on a sea cliff south-west of the Chilean and Russian stations. This commemorates the landing in February 1976 of the first Polish Antarctic maritime research expedition which involved the research vessel Professor Siedlecki, the trawler Tazar and their crews. There is also a monolith erected to commemorate the establishment on 20 February 1985 of the Chinese Great Wall Station by the First Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition. Finally, there is a Monument to the Antarctic Treaty and Plaque. The monument is located close to the Frei, Bellingshausen and Escudero Bases. The plaque at the foot of the monument commemorates the Signatories to the Antarctic Treaty and successive International Polar Years (1882-1883, 1932-1933 and 2007-2008). 

2. Aims and Objectives
This plan aims to apply current information and best practice approaches to facilitate the orderly management of conflicting interests in the Region. The management plan could minimise the negative effects of human activities on natural values and scientific work. The diverse and intensive use of the Region is expected to continue and increase in the near future. 
For these reasons, the objectives of the management plan are:
    • to improve co-operation and co-ordination of activities between Antarctic Treaty Parties operating in the Region; 
    • to solve existing and avert potential conflicts of interest between logistic, scientific, and tourist activities.

This could also include:
    • reduce unnecessary degradation of natural values by human disturbances;
    • state how the protected values of the Region or of each zone of the Region are to be conserved; 
    • support the use of aircraft, watercraft and land vehicles in a way that minimises environmental impacts;
    • increase the efficiency of scientific and logistic operations caused by more intensive co‑operation and co‑ordination;
    • promote the environmentally compatible dismantling and removal of unused infrastructure (buildings etc.);
    • avoid further construction of all kinds except for scientific purposes;
    • protect sensitive sites within the Region (e.g. breeding and resting sites of birds and seals);
    • manage tourism 
    • improve environmental education within the region (including station members);
    • minimise the risk of introducing into the Region of alien plants, animals and microbes.
3. Management Activities
To achieve the aims and objectives of this Management Plan, the following management activities could be undertaken in the Region:
    • A Fildes Peninsula Region Management Group could be established to
    • oversee the co-ordination of activities;
    • facilitate communication between those working in, or visiting;
    • maintain a record of all activities;
    • disseminate information and educational material on the significance of the Region to those visiting, or working there;
    • monitor the site to investigate cumulative impacts;
    • oversee the implementation of the Management Plan and revise it when necessary.
    • A general Fildes Peninsula Region Code of Conduct, supplemented by Codes of Conduct for Facilities Zones (Appendix 3), Codes of Conduct for Scientific Research (Appendix 4) and Codes of Conduct for Visitors (Appendix 5) could be used to guide and control activities within the Region.
    • National Antarctic Programmes operating within the Region could ensure that their personnel are briefed on, and are aware of, the requirements of the Management Plan and supplemental documents.
    • Tour operators visiting the Region could ensure that their staff, crew and passengers are briefed on, and are aware of, the requirements of the Management Plan and supplemental documents.
    • Signs and markers could be erected where necessary and appropriate to show the boundaries of ASPAs, and other zones. They would need to be informative and unobtrusive. They would also have to be secured and maintained in good condition and removed when no longer necessary.
    • Contingency plans for stations emergencies, oil spills and other accidents with possible significant negative impacts on the environment could be harmonised. They could be made available for station personnel and visitors in the Antarctic Treaty languages (English, French, Russian and Spanish). 
    • Copies of the Management Plan and supplementing documents and maps could be made available for station personnel and visitors in the Antarctic Treaty languages (English, French, Russian and Spanish).
    • The management options required for adjacent marine areas could be identified and evaluated.
4. Period of Designation
The ASMA could be designated for an indefinite period of time.
5. Description of the Area
i. Geographical Co-ordinates, Boundary Markers and Natural Features
General description 
The ASMA proposed comprises the land of the Fildes Peninsula and adjacent islands plus the sea along the coast of this land area extending 0.25 nautical mile (~ 460 m) seaward. This area lies approximately within the range 62°08´16´´S – 62°14´26´´S, 58°50´36´´W – 58°02´45´´W. The marine areas are included following the guidance of the “Working Paper on Guidelines for the Operation of Aircraft near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica” (XXVII ATCM, WP 010, Cape Town 2004). 
The Region is bounded on the northwest by the Drake site in Potrebski Cove and on the north east by a point 0.25 nautical mile east of Nebles Point in Maxwell Bay. The southern border would be the Fildes Strait including all islands north of Nelson Island. The most westerly point would lie ¼ nautical mile westwards of Flat Top Peninsula. This could, furthermore, include ASPA No. 125 and ASPA No. 150. 
The total area of the proposed ASMA would be 63 km2. Of the terrestrial part of this area about 20% is currently covered by the Collins Glacier. 
The suggested name of this ASMA is the Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA.

Geology and geomorphology 
The western part of King George Island is volcanic rock of early Tertiary origin (45-60 Ma, Smellie et al., 1984). Two stratigraphic sequences are distinguished – the Fildes and the Hennequin formation. The Fildes Formation is characterised by weathered olivine-basalts and basaltic andesites, rare pyroxene-andesites and dacites. Flat Top, Horatio Stump and Gemel Peaks are volcanic plugs and represent former volcanic centres on the Fildes Peninsula. The northern part of the Peninsula is formed by the Davies Heights (80‑160 m a.s.l.) above sea level. The southern part is characterised by various elevations and hills. Horatio Stump in the south is the highest point of the Fildes Peninsula (166.60 m a.s.l.). 
Climate
The area belongs to the cold climate region of the maritime Antarctic. Meteorological data of the Russian Station Bellingshausen (http://south.aari.nw.ru/default_en.html) show comparatively high precipitation (~700mm per year) and strong westerly winds. Cyclones with speeds exceeding 100km/hour are typical. Mean temperatures vary between 1.5°C in summer (January/February) and -6.5°C in winter (July/August). Snowmelt starts by the end of October. During winter the surrounding waters are covered with fast sea ice but the duration of ice cover varies greatly between years.
Fauna
Thirteen species of seabirds breed in the Region. In 2008/09 counts indicated over 5,000 pairs of penguins breeding on Ardley Island: Adelie (Pygoscelis adeliae, 545 breeding pairs), Chinstrap (P. antarctica, 8) and Gentoo (P. papua, 5665). The largest breeding sites of Southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) can be found on Dart and Two Summit Island and, with several small colonies, the total population in the Region amounts to ~420 breeding pairs. Brown and South Polar skuas (Catharacta antarctica lonnbergi ~80 breeding pairs and C. maccormicki ~230 breeding pairs, data from 2005/2006) live sympatrically in loose colonies and sometimes hybridise (about 30 mixed pairs). Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata), and Cape petrels (Daption carpense) breed along the rocky coast line in groups ranging from single nests to medium-sized colonies. Wilson’s storm petrels and Black-bellied storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus and Fregetta tropica) breed on scree further inland in colonies up to several hundred to a thousand pairs. Sheathbills (Chionis alba) breed in the southwest part of the Fildes Peninsula. Blue-eyed shags (Phalacrocorax atriceps) have been breeding in the Region in recent years and could have nests on inaccessible islands or rocks. 
Several species visit the Region more or less frequently (South Georgia pintail (Anas georgica), Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) and King penguin (A. patagonicus), Cattle egret (Bubulcus ibis), White-rumped sandpiper (Calidris fuscicollis), Black-necked swan (Cygnus melanocoryphus),Wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans), Black-browed albatross (Diomedea melanophris), Macaroni penguin (Eudyptes chrysolophus), Southern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialoides), Blue petrel (Halobaena caerulea), prions (Pachyptila spp.), Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea), Light-mantled sooty albatross (Phoebetria palpabrata), Soft‑plumaged Petrel (Pterodroma mollis), Pomarine skua (Stercorarius pomarinus), Arctic tern (Sterna paradisaea) and Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica)).
In the summer months more than 600 Elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) and up to 1200 Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) rest and moult in the Region. Furthermore, about 100 Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) and a few Crabeaters (Lobodon carcinophagus) and Leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) visit the coast at regular intervals. In recent years, Crabeater, Elephant, Fur, Leopard and Weddell seals have also been breeding on the Fildes Peninsula. 
Flora
The amount and type of terrestrial vegetation depends on relief, soil moisture content, and the degree of soil enrichment from birds and seals. The Region is home to two flowering plants - Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis).  Some areas, especially Ardley Island, are densely covered by moss carpets. A total of about 175 lichen and 40 moss species have been identified in the Region. Two alien angiosperm species, a grass in the genus Deschampsia and one in Poa have become established.
ii. Infrastructure in the Region
Existing permanent structures
Buildings and other infrastructure elements have been constructed in the Region by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, the former GDR, Russia and Uruguay although a few have since been dismantled and removed.

List of existing research stations and field huts on the Fildes Peninsula and their current population (data from Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes COMNAP and the King George Island GIS Project).
operating nation
name of station 
or field hut 
location
opened
in
population
summer        winter 
Argentina
Ballve
62°12´36´´S   58°56´03´´W
1954
-
-
Chile
Professor Julio Escudero
62°12´05 ´´S 58°57´45´´W
1994
20
1

Presidente Eduardo Frei
62°12´03 ´´S 58°57´45´´W
1969
150
60

Teniente Rodolfo Marsh airport
62°11´37´´S   58°58´49´´W
1982
-
-

Refugio Ripamonti (former GDR hut)
62°12´42´´S   58°55´01´´W
1981
-
-

Base Julio Ripamonti
62°12´36´´S   58°56´06´´W
1994
-
-
China
Great Wall
62°13´01´´S  58°57´43´´W
1985
20
11
Russia

Bellingshausen

62°11´54´´S  58°57´34´´W
1968

35

11


Priroda
62°08´59´´S  58°56´39´´W
1987
-
-
Uruguay
Artigas 
62°11'05´´S  58°54'13´´W
1984
20
9

A further permanent structure is the Laboratory on Cosmic Radiation (Italian-Chilean Project) (62°12´08´´S, 58°57´43´´W).

Minor and semi-permanent structures (subtotal)
    • Light house on Ardley Island erected by Argentina (at Punta Faro, 62°12´37´´S, 58°55´35´´W)
    • Fuel tanks of the Russian Station Bellingshausen (62°11´34´´S, 58°56´06´´W)
    • Russian huts near tanks (62°11´47´´S, 58°56´09´´W)
    • Memorial cross south west of Frei Station (62°12´08´´S, 58°57´37´´W)
    • Wooden beacon near highest point on Ardley Island (62°12´52´´S, 58°55´53´´W)
    • Wooden beacon south west of Frei Station (62°12´19´´S, 58°57´17´´W)
    • Wooden beacon at Point Christian (62°11´55´´S, 58°56´57´´W)
    • Memorial plaque on the former position of the Brazilian field hut “Rambo” (62°09´55´´S, 58°57´56´´W)

6. Protected Areas and Managed Zones within the ASMA 
i. Protected Areas, Historic Sites and Monuments
Within the proposed ASMA, two areas are designated as ASPAs and two as HSMs. In addition, there is a ship wreck that should probably be listed eventually as a HSM.
    • ASPA No. 125 comprising two geologically interesting sites on the Fildes Peninsula (62°10´50´´ - 62°11´28´´S, 58°55´27´´ -58°56´38´´W, and 62°12´30´´ - 62°13´30´´S, 58°57´11´´ - 58°59´32´´W)
    • ASPA No. 150 comprising Ardley Island (62°12´30´´ - 62°13´06´´S, 58°54´53´´ - 58°57´09´´W)
    • HSM No. 50 plaque on a cliff south-west of the Chilean station Frei to commemorate the Polish research vessel ‘Professor Siedlecki’ and trawler ‘Tazar’ (62°12'S, 59°01'W)
    • HSM No. 52 monolith in the Chinese Station Great Wall to commemorate the foundation of the station(62°13'S, 58°58'W)
    • HSM No. 82 monument to the Antarctic Treaty and Plaque located close to the Frei, Bellingshausen and Escudero Bases commemorating the Signatories to the Antarctic Treaty and successive International Polar Years (62º 12' 01" S; 58º 57' 41" W)
    • Ship wreck in Maxwell Bay (62°11´12´´S, 58°54´02´´W; IP107, XXVII ATCM/IP 107)
ii. Managed Zones within the Area
The aim of zoning is to protect the natural and cultural features of the Region by defining suitable areas for the different kinds of activity. The proposed plan divides the ASMA into five types of zone (areas with threatened species, vegetation, sensitive geological features etc.) and defines the kind and amount of human activity appropriate to each. The five kinds of zone are Facility Zones, Restricted Zones, Sensitive Zones, Visitor Zones and Wilderness Zones (see Map 3). The following zoning system is suggested:
Facility Zones 
These zones provide suitable locations in which access and support operations can be conducted and permanent facilities located. These zones should thus incorporate all research stations, the airport, official roads, and all other kinds of infrastructure. Some sea areas and air space should also be included to accommodate the air and sea traffic of the Region. Special management guidelines should be applied in these zones to ensure environmental and human safety (see Map 3 and Appendix 3). 
Visitor Zones
These zones provide appropriate management of low‑impact, short‑term, land‑based visitor activities in the Region. They help balance the need to protect nature while, at the same time, maximising visitor experience and enjoyment. These zones can be safely accessed and offer a range of attractions in close proximity. There is already one Visitor Zone in ASPA No. 150 near the penguin rookery in the northern part of Ardley Island. Further Visitor Zones, including recommended walking routes or foot paths, could be established near the Russian hut “Priroda”, the Chilean and Russian stations, the western coast between the airport and Flat Top Hill, along the beach south of the Chinese station, and east of the Uruguayan station towards Nebles Point (Map 3, see Appendix 6). 
Sensitive Zones
These would include places of special biological interest such as patches of dense vegetation, sites occupied by medium-sized breeding groups of Southern giant petrels, or other seabird and seal sites. This classification would ensure that visitors were aware of the vulnerability of species at these sites. Human activities should be minimised in these zones and permanent facilities should not be installed. 
Possible Sensitive Zones (see Map 3) are:
    • Geologists Island (northern part): breeding site of Southern giant petrels
    • South Fildes opposite Dart Island: breeding site of Southern giant petrels
    • East and south of the Russian hut “Priroda”: breeding site of Southern giant petrels
    • Nebles Point: breeding site of Southern giant petrels
    • dense vegetation
    • Northwest corner and central north beach of Ardley Island: breeding site of Southern giant petrels
Restricted Zones
These comprise areas of natural value that are highly sensitive to damage by human activities. In these areas it is desirable that human disturbance is kept to the absolute minimum. Two Summit Island and Dart Island could be defined as Restricted Zones (see Map 3), because large numbers of Southern giant petrels (IUCN red species list, category ‘Near threatened’) breed on these islands. Human visits to these colonies should be prevented because they would cause nesting birds to fly off the nest and this in turn could allow increased predation on eggs and chicks. Landing helicopters on these islands should also be prevented, a practice that might interest helicopter operators if tourism increases further.  The prevention should extend to helicopter sightseeing as this could also threaten the birds. Zoning as restricted would aid in minimising such problems. To maintain the undisturbed state of areas so zoned, only very important scientific research and unavoidable management activity should be allowed. 
Wilderness Zones
These would cover all areas within the ASMA not classified as Facility Zones, Restricted Zones, Sensitive Zones or Visitor Zones. Management of human activities should aim to maintain the quality of a relatively undisturbed wilderness. Establishing permanent facilities should therefore not be permitted in these zones but scientific research, environmental monitoring and management activities should be allowed. 

7. Code of Conduct
The general management and operational requirements are stated in the following. Additional guidelines are given in the Appendices.
i. Access to and movement within the Region
Access to the Region is possible by sea and air. Vessels enter Maxwell Bay and anchor within about a hundred meters of the research stations. Zodiacs and other boats transport people and cargo to the main landing sites in front of the stations. Air access is usually through the Chilean airport which is capable of taking large and small fixed-wing machines as well as helicopters. It is the operational centre for a large number of stations in the South Shetland area. Therefore, there are frequent transfers of station personnel, visitors and cargo not only to the research stations of the Fildes Peninsula but also to vessels in Maxwell Bay that supply stations in other regions. Regulation of this traffic requires the designated of specific landing sites for planes and helicopters. Landing at other sites in the Region should be only permitted when supporting scientific investigations. All land traffic and pedestrian movement within the Region should be undertaken in such a way as to minimize damage to vegetated ground and to soils. There should be no extension of the road network between the stations and field huts except for scientific purposes. Foot paths for people working in or visiting the area are already established in the Facility zones and Visitor zones but should be kept to a minimum in all other zones.
ii. Activities that may be conducted in the Region
These activities could include scientific research, logistic operations in support of science, management, visitor activity and education. Science is not restricted at any site but in restricted zones it should be allowed only if absolutely necessary. ASPAs guarantee that science should interfere little with other activities. All other activities should be conducted within the designated zones with logistics being concentrated in Facility Zones, and visits and education mainly being carried out in Visitor Zones. This separation of activities reduces cumulative effects on the environment and protects the values of the area. 
All human activities in the Region should take place in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects on the environmental. Collection and removal of material endogenous to the Region is only to be permitted for scientific, management or educational purposes. 
Iii Installation, modification or removal of structures
Special care has to be taken when installing, modifying or removing infrastructure from any site in the Region. Disturbance of wildlife, movement of soil, noise and pollution should be kept to a minimum. No infrastructure should be permanently installed outside the Facility Zones. Environmental impact assessments are essential before any new installation and should be considered by the Region’s Management Group.
Field camps for scientific purposes can be set up temporarily in small areas but require the permission of national authorities. A few sites within Visitor Zones could be used as campsites for tourists but special attention needs to be given to minimising their impact on the environment. Campsites should be located as far away as practicable from wildlife, lakes, streambeds and long-term experiments, to avoid damaging or contaminating them. Individuals or groups should bring sufficient equipment to ensure safety.
iv. Reporting requirements
Reports of activities in the Region should be coordinated and maintained by the Management Group in order to facilitate science and minimise cumulative effects. Inspection visits should occur frequently and reports on these visits should be considered in order further to reduce detrimental human effects on the environment. Any incidents in which protected values of the Region are damaged need to be reported to the Management Group. Tour operators should report their visits to authorities in the stations that want to be visited and to IAATO.  
8. Maps

Map 1: The Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA No. *** located on King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.


Map 2: The Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA No.***

 
Map 3: Proposed zones within the Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA. All areas inside the proposed ASMA that are not classified as one four zone types listed are classified as Wilderness Zone.

9. Supporting Documents
    • Management Plan for ASPA No. 150 – Ardley Island (Appendix 1)
    • Management Plan for ASPA No. 125 – Fildes Peninsula (Appendix 2)
    • Code of Conduct for the Facilities Zones (Appendix 3)
    • Code of Conduct of Scientific Research (Appendix 4)
    • Code of Conduct for Visitors (Appendix 5)


Appendix 1: Management Plan for ASPA No. 150 – Ardley Island 
Ardley Island (62°13' S; 58°56' W) was designated as Site of Special Interest (SSSI) No. 33 through Recommendation XVI-2 in 1991. Chile proposed the designation due to the island’s diverse community of birds and terrestrial plants. It is since been renamed as Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 150. The Area is used for intensive research, but also includes a visitor zone. The area’s management plan is currently under revision (ATCM XIX, 2006). 
Appendix 2: Management Plan for ASPA No. 125 – Fildes Peninsula
The ‘Antarctic Specially Protected Area’ No. 125 (former SPA No. 12 at ATCM IV, 1966, redesignated SSSI No. 5 at ATCM VIII, 1975) has been designated in order to protect two geologically important sites with unique fossil ichnolites and outcrops of Tertiary strata which, in part, are easily accessible (http://www.cep.aq/apa/aspa/sites/aspa125/summary.html).
A scientific survey of fossils in 2003/2004 revealed, apart from the known sites, new fossil localities in the Region. These findings should be taken into account during the current revision of ASPA No. 125.
Appendix 3: Code of Conduct for the Facility Zones
1. Introduction
The Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA contains Facility Zones which include P. Frei and Escudero Stations (Chile), Great Wall Station (China), Bellingshausen Station (Russia) and Artigas Station (Uruguay) and the Chilean airport. It also includes infrastructure outside stations (all field huts, fuel tanks, lakes connected with pipelines for water supply), main roads, and beach areas used for logistic operations. Activities within these zones are to be undertaken according to the following Code of Conduct the aims of which are to: 
    • assure the health and safety of station personnel and visitors;
    • facilitate scientific investigation in the Region by establishing and maintaining supportive infrastructure;
    • protect the natural, scientific and cultural values of the Facilities Zone.
A copy of the complete Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA Management Package will be kept at the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan Stations where relevant maps and information posters about the ASMA will also be available. The Station Leader or the Station Environmental Officer should brief station personnel on arrival about environmental management in the field, the location of protected areas, and the provisions of the ASMA Management Plan. Visitors should be made aware of the content of this Code of Conduct before arriving at the stations.

2. Station operation, construction and removal
2.1. Waste Management
Waste management should be included in the planning of all activities at the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan Stations. The detailed instructions are given in Annex III of the Environmental Protocol. Hazardous material should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty Area. Regular cleaning of rubbish from station grounds and surrounding areas reduces its dispersal into the environment by wind or birds. Cooperation between stations in clean-ups can increase their efficiency. Historical waste sites that cause adverse impacts should be cleaned up as soon as possible.

2.2. Use of water
Water sources need to be separated from any handling or disposal of wastes, fuel or other chemicals. Regular tests of water quality and routine cleaning of water holding tanks are necessary. Used station water should not be disposed of into the environment without treatment. Filter systems need to comply with current standards.
2.3. Generation of power
Regular inspections and modernisation of generators is required to reduce emissions and fuel leaks. Solar and wind power should be used as much as possible to minimize fuel demand.
2.4. Handling of fuel 
The regular inspection of fuel storage facilities, supply pipe lines, pumps, reels and other fuel handling equipment is of high priority. Storage areas should be secured by siting them a safe distance from living quarters and from electrical supplies. In order to avoid incidences of fuel spills, e.g. during fuel transfer, all measures must be considered. Any spills must be treated immediately with sufficient equipment (according to Oil Spill Contingency Plans in each station) with all available help by other stations on site. Oil spills shall be reported immediately to the Management Group. Station personnel should undergo regular emergency training. 
2.5. Prevention of fire 
Flammable substances need to be appropriately labelled. Fire fighting equipment should be available at dangerous sites like fuel stores and vehicle parks. Regular checks of electricity cables reduce the risk of short circuits. 
2.6. Construction and removal of infrastructure 
An Environmental Impact Assessment should be undertaken before any construction or removal of buildings according to Annex I of the Environmental Protocol. To avoid detrimental effects on the surrounding environment, station areas should not be further extended.

3. Traffic management
3.1. Land traffic
Vehicles should only be used around and between the stations when necessary. The existing road network should not be enlarged without a clear scientific or logistic purpose. Appropriate facilities must be provided for secure refuelling and servicing of vehicles. Any wildlife disturbance, vegetation damage, or interference with scientific work should be avoided. 
3.2. Air traffic 
Aircraft will generally take off from and land at the Chilean airport but the helicopter pads at the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan Stations can also be used where there is an operation reason. All air traffic should be conducted within the Facility Zones avoiding all other zones within the ASMA boundary. Special care should be taken when flying over land to reduce potential negative impacts on wildlife. Special guidelines should be followed as stated in the management plan of ASPA No. 150 and adopted ATCM recommendations (see also Harris 2006).
3.3. Sea traffic
Small boat and zodiac use should be restricted to the marine parts of the Facility Zones and only in support of scientific, logistic and tourist operations. All boats need to be operated by more than one person and be equipped with life jackets and VHF radios. Weather conditions need to be suitable to reduce the risk of accidents. For safety a second boat can be used or stay on stand-by for immediate support in an emergency. 
4. Field excursions 
The Station Leader or the Station Environmental Officer will brief field parties on environmental management in the field, the location of protected areas, and the provisions of the ASMA Management Plan. All waste from field parties, except for human waste (faeces, urine and gray water) will be returned to the stations for safe disposal. All field parties will be equipped with VHF radios. 
5. Protected Areas 
ASPA Nos. 125 and 150 are located in the Region. Station members will be made aware of the location of these areas and the restrictions on access to them. Information about the ASPAs including the management plans will be displayed in all stations. 
6. Flora and fauna
Any activity involving the removal or harmful interference with native flora or fauna (Annex II to the Environmental Protocol) is prohibited unless authorised by a permit issued by the appropriate authority. Minimum approach distances to birds or seals should be followed to reduce disturbance. Scientists and visitors should take care near wildlife particularly in the breeding and moulting seasons. Birds are not to be fed on station food. Food wastes should be hidden to prevent scavenging by birds. The introduction of non-native species should be avoided by cleaning clothes, boots and equipment before entering the Region. Each registered introduction of non-native species should be reported to the Management Group.
7. Visitors
Any visits to the Chilean, Chinese, Russian and Uruguayan stations should be arranged by informing the station leaders of the planned activity. Contacts are made via VHF Marine Channel 16. Station Leaders will co-ordinate visits to stations with Expedition Leaders. Visitors will be informed about the principles of this Code of Conduct and the ASMA Management Plan. They should follow visitor guidelines (Recommendation XVIII – 1, IAATO). The station leaders will appoint guides to present station-specific information. These guides should speak a language understood by the visitors.  
Appendix 4: Code of Conduct for Scientific Research
Scientific investigations have priority among human activities in the Antarctic. Science activities in the Region include research on the fauna and flora, on fossils, climate, glaciers, streams, lakes, soils, and local geology and geomorphology. The following guidelines for scientific conduct seek to reduce the environmentally detrimental impact of research in the Region. They are following the Environmental Code of Conduct for Terrestrial Scientific Field Research in Antarctica by SCAR and should be applied by all scientists. 

General Guidelines
Antarctic scientists potentially have a higher chance of carrying alien propagules to Antarctic ecosystems than other Antarctic travelers because their field of study often takes them to alpine or northern polar habitats. In the process of conducting research within these habitats Antarctic scientists can inadvertently pickup propagules on clothing, equipment and equipment cases. If these items are then taken to the Antarctic and they have not been cleaned/ sterilised to remove or kill the propagules, the opportunity to transfer such material to Antarctic ecosystems is created. The ecological potential for establishment of northern polar or alpine taxa is great as such species have pre-adaptations to cold environments. You should take care that your equipment is properly cleaned before it enters the Antarctic.
The implications of human transfer of taxa between locations can range from the modification of genetic structure of populations to changes in local biodiversity and subsequent flow-on effects on community dynamics. Such accidental movement of indigenous biota would also compromise scientific studies of molecular adaptation, regional evolution and biogeography and reduce the inherent value that Antarctica offers as a model scientific system with limited anthropogenic influence. 
Your field activities in Antarctica should be designed to have as little environmental impact as possible.

Before going into the field
Report your planned activity to your National Operator as thoroughly as possible and well in advance, in order to allow a proper assessment of the environmental impact you may cause on the field site(s) you visit, as required by Annex I of the Protocol for Environmental Protection.
Everything taken into the field must be returned to your station for proper cleaning where that is feasible and safe to do so. 
To avoid introduction of alien species, chemical contamination, and transfer of materials between sites,
    • Ensure that all your equipment and clothing, including footwear, is thoroughly cleaned.
    • Avoid taking unnecessary packaging and materials into the field. Remember that several products used for packaging are prohibited in Antarctica, such as polystyrene beads or chips
    • Wherever possible, all precautionary measures should be taken to ensure collection and removal of human waste and grey water.

Once in the field
You should take particular care in areas with sensitive biological or geological features such as bird and seal colonies, roosting areas, vegetated areas, freshwater lakes and ponds, sand dunes, screes, fluvial terraces, ice core pyramids and ventifacts.
Avoid areas where wildlife is easily disturbed, especially during the breeding season. Remember than you are only allowed to cause disturbances to wildlife if scientifically justified and if you have been issued with a permit by an appropriate national authority. 
Even if you have a permit, avoid unnecessary disturbance to Antarctic flora and fauna.
Take only those samples (geological material, biological material, ice) for which you have permits and protect resources by taking as small a sample as needed.
You should map, record (preferably using GPS coordinates), and report to your national operator the location of any spill, camp site, soil pit, drilling site, sampling site, or any other disturbance for the benefit of future researchers.
You should try to minimise your impacts when moving around in the environment:
    • Stay on established trails whenever possible.
    • Avoid walking on vegetated areas, streambeds, lake margins, and delicate rock and soil formations.
    • Restrict ground vehicle usage to snow and ice surfaces, or designated tracks, wherever possible.
    • Where feasible, use recognized helicopter landing sites and ensure that markers for helicopter pads are clearly visible from the air.
    • Minimise the disturbance to wildlife by following the ATCM guidelines for operations of aircraft near concentrations of birds.
    • You should restore any disturbances caused by your activity.
    • Algae and invertebrates live beneath stones. Moving rocks and stones should therefore be minimized. Please do not build cairns.

Management of scientific field sites
Prior to conducting any scientific activity, it is essential that you carefully consider and clearly define the scope of your activity, including its area, duration, and intensity.
Be aware of the cumulative impacts of the activity, both by itself and in combination with other activities within the region. Consider lower impact alternatives to the activity and re-use of existing facilities wherever possible.
In order to minimise environmental impacts of your field activity you should:
    • Choose sites as close as possible to your research station, use existing pathways
    • Limit the number of visitors to your field site to the appropriate number of people required to carry out the fieldwork.
    • Where possible avoid areas that are especially vulnerable to disturbance such as vegetated areas, breeding sites, patterned ground, and water bodies.
    • Re-use existing sites wherever possible.
    • Make sites no larger than needed for the proposed scientific activities.
    • Keep your site tidy during use.
    • Avoid activities which could result in the dispersal of foreign materials into the environment. In particular, avoid the use of spray paint, and conduct activities such as sawing or unpacking inside a tent or hut.
    • Secure equipment from being blown away or stolen by inquisitive birds (e.g. skuas, penguins).
    • Ensure there is the capacity to prevent and respond promptly and effectively to any environmental accident or incident.
Restore sites as far as feasible when your work is complete and take GPS coordinates for future reference. Remember that sites may require subsequent monitoring to comply with the Protocol for Environmental Protection
As it is important to prevent the introduction of foreign materials and contaminants into the
environment:
    • Avoid materials liable to shatter at low temperatures, e.g., polyethylene based plastics.
    • Take care when handling fuel, chemicals and isotopes (stable or radioactive).
    • Store and handle fuel and chemicals using appropriate containers.
    • Use drip trays where possible when handling fuels or other liquids and take special care when handling fuel in high winds.
You should report any environmental accident or incident to your national operator.
If you plan to install equipment in the field:
    • Ensure an environmental impact assessment is undertaken prior to any installation, as required by Annex I of the Protocol for Environmental Protection.
    • Clearly identify any equipment by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation, and state the duration of the deployment.
    • Make sure installations can be retrieved and removed when no longer required, unless it is impractical or result in a higher environmental impact.
Do not displace materials or collect samples of any kind, except for scientific and educational purposes.
When taking samples from live animals ensure that the requirements set out in the “SCAR Scientific Code of Conduct for Experiments on Animals” (in preparation) should be followed.

Field camps
Camping and scientific equipment should be appropriately cleaned before being brought into the Antarctic or before being transferred between sites.
Minimise the environmental footprint of your field camp by:
    • Locating it as far as feasible from lake margins, stream beds and associated fans, and vegetated areas, to avoid damage or contamination.
    • Taking special care to ensure that no food or wastes are accessible to animals.
    • Re-using campsites whenever possible.
    • Keeping it tidy during use and restoring it, as far as is feasible, after use.
    • Using solar and wind power as much as possible to minimize fuel usage.
Ensure that equipment and supplies are properly secured at all times to avoid dispersion by high winds or helicopter downdrafts. Remember that in some locations, high velocity katabatic winds can arrive suddenly and with little warning.
Remember that if you are working in an ASPA or ASMA the management plan may have additional requirements for field camps, and you will need to follow any conditions contained in your entry permit.

Habitat specific guidelines
Lakes and streams
Choose sampling equipment which is the least destructive, when the aquatic or coastal environment is to be sampled. Sample carefully and avoid cumulative impact. Dredges, trawls and box corers should be used to a minimum as necessary for scientifically meaningful results, avoiding excessive and unnecessary sampling.
Aquatic ecosystems in Antarctica are extremely poor in nutrients (except those with animal influence) and thus very sensitive to anthropogenic pollution. All visitors must take care to eliminate or minimize releases of human waste wherever possible.
You should avoid walking in the stream and lake beds, or too close to their margins as this may disturb biota, affect bank stability and flow patterns. When a crossing must be made, use designated crossing points if available, otherwise walk on rocks.
Minimize the use of vehicles on lake ice if possible. If access to the water body is required for scientific research, use non-motorised boats whenever possible.
Ensure that all sampling equipment is tethered or otherwise secured and does not contaminate the water body.
Clean all sampling equipment before using it in another water body in order to avoid cross-contamination. Alternatively, use separate equipment in different sites.
Wherever possible you should use flumes, not weirs, when monitoring streams, or ensure that the stream will remain as it was before the study.
You should try to avoid the use of stable isotope tracers at the complete ecosystem level, use them as much as possible only in closed vessels. You should consider naturally occurring tracers. Radioactive isotope tracers should never be used, except in closed vessels. No stable or radioactive isotope tracers waste should be disposed into ecosystems. You should document any tracer use (location, type of tracer, amount).
To avoid introduction of contaminants or disturbance of the stratification of the water body and its sediments:
    • Do not swim or dive in lakes, unless it is required for scientific purposes.
    • Remove all unwanted water and sediment materials from the site, even on permanently ice-covered lakes, rather than discharging them back into the lake.
    • Ensure that you leave nothing frozen into the lake ice that may ablate out.
    • Consider using ROV’s as a tool for under water and under ice research, both in lakes and coastal/littoral habitats.
Terrestrial environments
Terrestrial vegetation comprises very slow growing species. Damage by trampling will extend for years or even decades. Many terrestrial invertebrate species live in soils and feed on soil algae.
You should use existing paths in order to avoid disturbing large areas of vegetation and soil.
Clean all equipment and footwear, as far as is feasible, between sites to avoid transfer of propagules among sites.
When sampling in vegetated areas, ensure that the vegetation is replaced and the site restored as far as is feasible.
Limit the use of mechanical equipment for sample collection, whenever possible.
When sampling soil in desert areas, use groundsheets to place excavated material on to minimise the extent of damage to the desert pavement. Backfill soil pits and as far as feasible replace the desert pavement materials at the soil surface to restore the site appearance.
Do not disturb or remove rocks, fossils, or ventifacts unless it is absolutely necessary for your research.
Glaciers and ice fields
Remember that the use of water in hot water drills could contaminate the isotopic and chemical record within the glacier ice.
Given that the hydrological systems under glaciers and ice sheets are connected to the wider environment and downstream contamination could occur, exercise caution when using chemical-based fluids to drill to the base of an ice sheet.

Appendix 5: Code of Conduct for Visitors
This code of conduct has been produced for all visitors to the Region including commercial tour operators (IAATO and non-IAATO members), private expeditions, and delegations of National Antarctic Programs when undertaking recreational visits. 
There are a few sites in the Fildes Peninsula Region which may generally be visited: all Facility Zones, the Russian hut “Priroda”, coastal sites south of the airport towards Flat Top Hill, east of the Uruguayan Station towards Nebles Point, the specified area on Ardley Island, and the beach south of the Chinese station (see Map 3). Visits to the stations are only permitted by prior agreement with the station leaders. Visits to other sites in the Region are discouraged. 
The following general guidelines apply to all the above sites visited in the Region:  
    • Visits are to be undertaken in line with the Management Plan for the Fildes Peninsula Region ASMA ***, with Recommendation XVIII –1, and with IAATO visitor guidelines. 
    • All visits should be conducted in a way to reduce any risk to human safety. 
    • Vessels approaching Maxwell Bay must announce their planned activities via VHF Marine Channel 16 to the appropriate stations.
    • Captains of all vessels in Maxwell Bay should wherever practicable contact local authorities to arrange positioning in the anchorage and landing procedures.
    • For commercial tourist operators, no more than 100 passengers may be ashore at a site at any time, accompanied by a minimum of one member of the expedition staff for every 20 passengers. For Ardley Island special requirements need to be considered unless differently stated by specific management plans or guidelines for specific areas (within the ASMA). 
    • In order to prevent biological introductions, carefully wash boots and clean clothes and equipment before landing.
    • In the vicinity of wildlife, walk slowly and carefully. Maintain a precautionary distance of 5 metres from wildlife and give animals the right of way. Increase this distance if any change in behaviour is observed.
    • Where possible visitors should stay in compact groups
    • Do not walk on vegetation like mosses, lichens and vascular plants. Walking on the alga Prasiola crispa (associated with penguin colonies) is permissible as it will not cause it any adverse disturbance. 
    • Do not take biological or geological souvenirs or disturb artefacts.
    • If there is marked path or zone, do not leave it. 
    • Do not leave any litter.
    • Do not write or draw graffiti on any man-made structure or natural surface.
    • Do not touch or disturb any types of scientific instruments or markers.
    • Do not enter any field hut if not permitted.
    • Station leaders should be asked about site-specific guidelines.


