





Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty-seventh meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR; 27 – 31 October 2008




Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty-seventh meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR; 27 – 31 October 2008
Abstract
At CEP IX, the Committee requested that the report of the CEP Observer to the meeting of CCAMLR’s Scientific Committee should be presented as a Working Paper (para 191 of the Final Report of CEP IX refers).  
The Committee for Environmental Protection Chair, Dr Neil Gilbert (New Zealand), was the CEP Observer at the twenty-seventh meeting of the Scientific Committee meeting (SC-CCAMLR) held from 27 to 31 October 2008.  This report highlights the outcomes to the meeting that may be of interest to the CEP.  These include:
    • CCAMLR’s performance review
    • Ecosystem monitoring and management issues including: 
        ◦ Management of protected areas;
        ◦ A review of the status and trends of krill predator populations;
        ◦ Outcomes to a joint CCAMLR / IWC workshop.
    • Fisheries matters including:
        ◦ Fish resources and catch records for the 07/08 fishing season;
        ◦ Illegal unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing;
        ◦ Bottom fishing and Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs).
    • Incidental mortality associated with fishing
    • Marine debris
    • Climate change
The Committee is invited to discuss and comment on the report as appropriate.
CEP Observer’s Report
The Scientific Committee was chaired by the Scientific Committee’s Vice Chair, Dr Kevin Sullivan (New Zealand) and was attended by all CCAMLR Members.  Contracting Parties to the CAMLR Convention were invited to attend and Bulgaria, Netherlands, Peru and Vanuatu were represented.  The Marshall Islands attended as a non-Contracting Party.  Observers from ACAP, ASOC, CEP, COLTO, IUCN, IWC, SCAR, SEAFO and WCPFC also attended.
This report highlights only those issues of particular interest to the CEP including, where applicable, the response of the CAMLR Commission to the recommendations of the Scientific Committee.  The full report of the Scientific Committee meeting will shortly be publicly available on the CCAMLR Secretariat website at www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sr/drt.htm.
Intersessional meetings of SC-CCAMLR
    • The Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) met from 23 July to 1 August 2008, in St Petersburg, Russia.  
    • The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) met in Hobart prior to the Scientific Committee meeting, from 13 to 24 October 2008.
    • The Working Group on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-SAM) was held in St Petersburg, Russia, from 14 to 22 July 2008.
    • An ad-hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fishing (WG-IMAF) was conducted as part of the WG-FSA meeting.
In addition to these regular working group meeting two intersessional workshops were held at CCAMLR’s headquarters in Hobart Australia:
    • A Predator Survey Workshop was held from 16 to 20 June 2008, and
    • A joint CCAMLR – IWC workshop was held from 11 to 15 August 2008.
A brief overview of CCAMLR, including a list of officers is included at Annex A.
Issues arising
CCAMLR Performance Review
As was reported at CEP XI (see ATCM XXXI / WP 23 and ATCM XXXI / WP 28) the CCAMLR Commission decided at CCAMLR XXVI, to undertake a performance review of the organisation.  The CEP Chair participated in the performance review as one of nine Members of the Review Panel.  The Review Panel meeting took place 23-27 June 2008 at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart.
The full report of the review panel is publicly available via the CCAMLR home page www.ccamlr.org
The Scientific Committee considered all of the 107 recommendations contained in the review panel’s report and agreed that three of these should be reviewed as a priority during the 2008/09 intersessional period.  These particular recommendations were those held under Section 2.4 of the review panel report (dealing with marine protected areas); Section 3.1 of the report (dealing with the status of living resources), and Section 3.2 of the report (dealing with the ecosystem approach).
The Scientific Committee further requested its Chair to form a Steering Committee to work during the intersessional period to develop a plan of action to provide direction to the various Scientific Committee working groups on how the three highest priority recommendations can be addressed and how the remainder of the recommendations might be addressed in the future.
CEP / SC-CAMLR interaction
The Scientific Committee welcomed the suggestion made at CEP XI for topics for the planned joint SC-CAMLR – CEP workshop, to be held in Baltimore, USA on 3 and 4 April 2009.  The Scientific Committee endorsed the terms of reference for the workshop, agreed to the establishment of a workshop Steering Committee and encouraged attendance at the workshop by its members.
The report of the workshop will be submitted to CEP XII separately.
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM)
Management of protected areas
WG-EMM reported to the Scientific Committee on its progress in addressing the implementation of spatial management measures to facilitate the conservation of marine biodiversity, based on the bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean.
The Scientific Committee recalled the progress that has been made on the topic since 2000, including scientific research, modelling activities, several workshops, as well as discussions with the Scientific Committee and the CEP.  The Scientific Committee also agreed that the existing benthic and pelagic bioregionalisations are adequate for continuing this work, noting that further refinement may be required.  The Scientific Committee also noted that a number of methods could be used for designating a representative system of MPAs, including, inter alia, bioregionalisation and / or systematic conservation planning.
The Scientific Committee also agreed that it should, as a priority, continue to consolidate views so as to provide a common basis for the development of a representative system of MPAs as agreed by the Commission, and encouraged Members to use appropriate methodologies to further this work.
WG-EMM long-term work plan
The Scientific Committee reviewed a proposal by WG-EMM for revising and structuring WG-EMM’s future agenda and long-term work plan.  The Scientific Committee reaffirmed that four topics require work by WG-EMM over the long-term:
    • The development and evaluation of feedback management strategies for the krill fishery, including work to estimate predator abundance and demand;
    • The development and application of conservation methods including work to identify vulnerable marine ecosystems and defining candidate MPAs;
    • Consideration of the ecosystem effects of finfishing, and
    • Consideration of the effects of climate changes on the Antarctic marine ecosystem.
Status and trend assessment of predator populations (WG-EMM-STAPP)
At its previous meeting the Scientific Committee agreed to establish a WG-EMM subgroup on Status and Trend Assessment for Predator Populations (WG-EMM-STAPP).
To facilitate the work of the group in the intersessional period, a Predator Survey Workshop was held at CCAMLR headquarters in Hobart, 16-20 June 2008.
The Scientific Committee reviewed the recommendations from the workshop which included immediate, short-, medium- and long-term priorities.
The Scientific Committee noted that the work of WG-EMM-STAPP represents a substantial contribution to the work of CCAMLR and for quantifying predator abundance within small scale management units (SSMUs).  Notably this includes:
    • A combined database of penguin count data, comprising data collected under CCAMLR’s ecosystem monitoring programme, the Antarctic Site Inventory and historical data from the literature;
    • The analysis by BAS of data relating to the distribution and abundance of crabeater seals;
    • Identification of geographic areas with poor coverage, where future survey work can be focussed (e.g. east of the Antarctic Peninsula);
    • Attempts towards estimating uncertainty in predator abundance estimates that will be useful for modelling.
The Scientific Committee noted that the ultimate goal of this work is to prepare regional-scale estimates of [krill] predator abundance and consumption, and agreed that future work should also include fish predators.
Joint CCAMLR-IWC workshop
The joint CCAMLR – IWC workshop to Review Input Data for Antarctic Marine Ecosystem Models, was held at CCAMLR headquarters in Hobart from 11 to 15 August 2008.  As input to the workshop, 14 expert groups had been established to prepare review papers on key topics related to the Southern Ocean.  These were:
    • Toothed whales
    • Baleen whales
    • Pack-ice seals
    • Antarctic fur seal
    • Seabirds
    • Fish
    • Squid
    • Krill
    • Primary production
    • Zoo-plankton
    • Sea-ice
    • Ocean processes
    • Exploitation
    • Penguins
Whilst some of these reviews were yet to be completed, the Scientific Committee supported the proposal for a joint publication of all expert group papers and the compilation of data in the metadatabase as primary tasks from the workshop.  The deadline for submission of the final papers is end of June 2009.
The Scientific Committee particularly welcomed the estimates of the distribution and abundance of pack-ice seals resulting from an analysis of SCAR’s Antarctic Pack-ice Seals (APIS) programme data.  The Scientific Committee encouraged SCAR to find ways to undertake the final analyses of the APIS abundance data which remain outstanding.
The Scientific Committee recognised the workshop outcomes as the start of a longer-term process and charged the joint steering group with identifying what future work might be undertaken between IWC and CCAMLR with regard to ecosystem modelling.

Fisheries (WG-FSA)
Fish resources
Fishing took place in 12 fisheries in 2007/08 targeting icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) and krill (Euphausia superba).  Other fisheries for D. eleginoides occurred in the EEZs of South Africa (Subareas 58.6 and 58.7) and France (Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1).  The reported catches in the various fisheries are shown in Table 1, below.
Table 1 - Summary of reported catches for key target species during the 2007/08 fishing season
Target Species
Region
Fishery
Reported Catch
Catch limit
Champsocephalus gunnari
(icefish)
48.3
Trawl
1326
2462

58.5.2
Trawl
199
220
Dissostichus eleginoides
(toothfish)
48.3
Longline, pot
3856
3920

48.4
Longline
98
100

58.5.1 French EEZ

2853
ns

58.5.2
Longline, pot, trawl
1496
2500

58.6 French EEZ

684
ns

58 South African EEZ

54
ns
Dissostichus spp.
48.6
Longline
0
400

58.4.1
Longline
413
600

58.4.2
Longline
217
780

58.4.3a
Longline
9
250

58.4.3b
Longline
141
150

58.4.4
Research
77
0

88.1
Longline
2259
2700

88.2
Longline
416
567
Euphausia superba
(krill)
48
Trawl
125063
620000

58.4.1
Trawl
0
440000

58.4.2
Trawl
0
452000
ns – not specified by CCAMLR





Toothfish
A total of 12,573 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. had been reported as being taken in the Convention Area during the 2007/08 season, compared with 14,024 tonnes in the previous season.
Icefish
The total reported catch limit of mackerel icefish (C. gunnari) for the 2007/08 season was 1,524 tonnes, compared with 3,941 tonnes taken the previous season.
Krill resources
A total catch of 125,063 tonnes of krill in the 2007/08 season was reported at the time of the Scientific Committee meeting, all in CCAMLR Area 48.  In comparison, the total catch for 2006/07 was 104,364 tonnes.  Nine Members announced in advance their intention to fish for krill with a total of 18 vessels in the 2008/09 season, with a total (notified) catch of 629,000 tonnes of krill.
In advising the Commission on the krill fishery, the Scientific Committee:
    • Noted that for the second year running the notifications for catch levels have exceeded the trigger level in Area 48;
    • Recommended a change to the notification form to include more specific information on gear type to be used;
    • Recommended direct measurement of green weight of krill, following concerns raised in the Scientific Committee over conversion factors being used to estimate krill catch;
    • Recommend a change to the relevant Conservation Measure requiring notifications for exploratory krill fishing to be submitted prior to the annual WG-EMM meeting;
    • Recommend adoption of a data collection plan for exploratory krill fishing.
New and exploratory fisheries 
In 2007/08, fishing occurred in seven exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp.  For 2008/09, 12 Members submitted 72 paid notifications for new and exploratory fisheries.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area
The total estimated IUU catch of Dissostichus spp. in the Convention Area during the 2007/08 season was 1,169 tonnes, a decrease on the estimated figure for 2006/07 (3,615 tonnes).  However, the Scientific Committee noted with concern that the IUU fleet is increasingly dominated by gillnet vessels (some of which can be 6nm in length and 80 metres high).  For such vessels the catch rates of toothfish, by-catch of fish and birds and the impact on the benthos is virtually unknown.  As such there were very high levels of uncertainty about the estimate of IUU catch for the 2007/08 season and the Scientific Committee could not conclude that IUU fishing had declined.
The Scientific Committee called for Members to increase their efforts to document IUU gillnet activities in the Convention Area and where feasible to recover operational IUU gillnets or board IUU gillnet vessels and examine the vessel’s catches and logbooks to gain an understanding of this IUU fishing method.
Bottom fishing activities and vulnerable marine ecosystems (VMEs)
As reported last year, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) Resolution 61/105 calls upon States and fisheries organisations to regulate and manage all bottom fisheries in high-seas areas so as to prevent significant adverse impact on VMEs.  
The Commission had charged the Scientific Committee with developing pragmatic and flexible guidelines for:
    1) Identifying VMEs, and
    2) Defining actions taken by vessels which encounter evidence of VME’s during the course of fishing.
The Scientific Committee spent some considerable time evaluating the intersessional work undertaken on the issue by both WG-EMM, and particularly WG-FSA.  WG-FSA provided the Scientific Committee with an update on work it had already undertaken and further work required to develop advice on:
    1) Practical guidelines on identifying evidence of VMEs during fishing activities;
    2) Procedures that could be followed if evidence of VMEs is found
    3) Research and data-collection programs needed to:
        a. Evaluate VMEs and the potential for significant adverse impacts
        b. Develop approaches to avoid and mitigate significant adverse impacts of fishing and benthic ecosystems.
Significant further work is planned on this issue by the Scientific Committee and its working groups.  To further this undertaking the Scientific Committee agreed that it would be useful to hold an expert workshop to consider the issues surrounding bottom fisheries and the need to avoid significant adverse impacts on VMEs.  The terms of reference for the workshop were agreed around the following three questions (and a series of sub-questions):
    1) What habitats and habitat-forming taxa and rare taxa would be consistent with a VME, including methods for assisting in identifying the extent of habitats based on distributions and densities of habitat-forming taxanomic groups?
    2) What methods could be used for identifying potential locations of vulnerable taxa?
    3) What indicators could be used by fishing vessels to signal when they are fishing on VMEs?

The USA offered to host the workshop during the intersessional period (dates and venue to be confirmed).
In parallel the Scientific Committee agreed that further work on identifying VMEs and understanding the risks to VMEs by bottom fishing activities could be undertaken by WG-EMM, whilst WG-FSA was tasked with considering mitigation measures and data collection plans.
Incidental mortality associated with fishing (WG-IMAF)
Marine mammals
The Scientific Committee noted that, for the 2007/08 fishing season:
    • The total extrapolated seabird mortalities in the toothfish fishery were estimated to be 1,355 petrels (91% White-chinned petrels, 7% grey petrels and 2% Macronectes species).  All these estimated mortalities were from within the French EEZ, with 131in Subarea 58.6 and 1,244 seabirds in Division 58.5.1.
    • No albatrosses were observed captured in longline fisheries in the Convention Area for the third consecutive year.
    • A total of 5 seabird mortalities (3 White-chinned petrels and 2 King penguins) were reported during trawling for finfish in the Convention Area; all in the icefish fishery in Subarea 48.3.
    • Nine seal mortalities were recorded in the Convention Area, comprising 2 Antarctic fur seals and 1 crabeater seal in the longline fishery and 5 Antarctic fur seals and 1 unidentified seal in the trawl fishery.
The Scientific Committee noted the ongoing efforts by France to reduce seabird mortality in the French EEZ fisheries and that France continues to reduce its total seabird mortality.  The Scientific Committee welcomed France’s aim to achieve near-zero seabird mortality in the medium term, with reductions to less than 1,000 birds in the near term.
Incidental mortality outside the Convention Area
The Scientific Committee noted the considerably greater levels of mortality of Convention Area seabirds through fishing activity outside of the Convention Area.  In areas adjacent to the Convention Area pelagic longline fisheries continue to pose a serious risk to Convention Area seabirds.  In 2005 the Scientific Committee had advised that the longline fisheries managed by the CCSBT could be taking 10,000 albatrosses per year.
The Scientific Committee noted WG-IMAF’s request to Members to report on incidental mortality of Convention Area seabirds and mammals arising from fishing activity outside of the Convention Area.  Several Members indicated their intention to provide such data.
Seabird by-catch and IUU fishing
Estimates of seabird incidental mortality during IUU fishing within the Convention Area were not prepared this year, as most IUU effort was observed to be from vessels using gillnets and information from which to make extrapolations was not available for this type of fishing gear.
The Scientific Committee expressed serious concerns over the likely seabird mortalities arising from this gear type and requested additional information from Members with a regulated gillnet fishery to provide empirical data that could be used to make estimates in the Convention Area.
Marine Debris
WG-IMAF reported on a general increase in the incidence of marine debris within the Convention Area.
In response the Scientific Committee recommended a number of measures to continue to address and manage the issue, including: changes to the definitions for reporting marine debris; the development of a photo-library of debris found and including photos of fishing gear; inclusion of advice on marine debris in CCAMLR’s dialogue with other international organisations and RFMOs; a publicity poster on the harmful effects of marine debris and the importance of managing garbage, and changes to relevant Conservation Measures to ensure plastic packaging bands are cut before being incinerated.
The Scientific Committee also recommended all Members to provide data on marine debris to the Secretariat, and requested WG-IMAF to undertake an assessment of the provenance of hooks at breeding sites and whether these had come from Convention Area fisheries.
Climate Change
The Scientific Committee advised the Commission that climate change consequences, including: increasing sea temperatures, increasing sea height, changes to global thermo-haline circulation, increasing ocean acidification, the introduction of alien species and increasing accessibility through sea-ice retreat, all carry significant risk to Antarctic marine ecosystems.
The Scientific Committee agreed that the following areas of work would be required if the objectives of the Convention are to be met:
    • To examine the robustness of the scientific advice and the stock assessments advice in the face of increasing uncertainty accompanying climate change; particularly with regard to future population responses and recruitment levels;
    • To examine the need for improvements to current monitoring programmes of harvest and dependent and related species to provide for robust and timely indicators of climate change;
    • To determine whether CCAMLR’s management objectives and performance indicators require modification to remain appropriate in the face of climate change uncertainty.
The Scientific Committee requested its working groups (WG-SAM, WG-EMM, WG-IMAF and WG-FSA) to consider these issues in their respective meetings during 2009.
Australia also notified the meeting of a workshop to be held in Hobart, Australia 20-24 April 2009 on Monitoring Climate Change Impacts: Establishing a Southern Ocean Sentinel Programme.
SC-CAMLR Chair
With the sad passing of Professor Edith Fanta, Dr Kevin Sullivan (New Zealand) chaired SC-CAMLR XXVII.  At the conclusion of the meeting the Scientific Committee elected Professor Carlos Moreno (Chile) as its new Chair.
Next meeting
A CEP Observer has been invited to participate in the next Scientific Committee meeting in October 2009 (SC-CCAMLR-XXVIII).




Annex A
CCAMLR Overview
The principal decision-making body is the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).  The Commission has two standing committees: The Standing Committee on Administration and Finance (SCAF) and the Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance (SCIC).  Like the ATCM, all decisions on matters of substance are taken by consensus.

The institutional features of the Convention comprise, in addition to the Commission, a Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and a permanent Secretariat, based in Hobart, Australia. The Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) has three permanent working groups:

    • Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM):
    • Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) and
    • Working Group on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-SAM). 

In addition an ad hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fisheries (WG-IMAF) carries its activities as part of WG-FSA, and an Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas carries its duties as part of WG-EMM.  From time to time, the Scientific Committee establishes other subgroups to deal with ad hoc tasks.

The current CCAMLR officers are as follows:

    • Commission Chair - Ambassador Don MacKay (New Zealand)
    • SCIC Chair - Ms K. Dawson-Guynn (USA)
    • SCAF Chair - Mrs V. Ramachandran (India)
    • Scientific Committee Chair – Dr Carlos Moreno (Chile)
    • WG-EMM Convener - Dr George Watters (USA)
    • WG-FSA Convener – Dr Chris Jones (USA 
    • WG-SAM Convener –Dr Andrew Constable (Australia)
    • WG-IMAF Co-Conveners - Ms Kim Rivera (USA) and Mr Nathan Walker (New Zealand)

A map of the CCAMLR convention area is provided in Figure 1 below.
More detailed information on CCAMLR and its various institutional bodies can be found at www.ccamlr.org


Figure 1 - Map of the CCAMLR Convention Area








 


