





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 152: Western Bransfield Strait








	
ASPA No. 152 Western Bransfield Strait
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest SSI No. 35 through Recommendation XVI-3 (1991)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XVI-3 (1991)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2003)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Measure 2 (2001)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 152 Western Bransfield Strait, off Low Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998): Management plan to be sent to CCAMLR for approval; superceded by Decision 9 (2005) setting criteria for submission of plans with a marine component to CCAMLR.
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics.
    a) Revision of Map 1 to include new data on important bird colony locations close to the ASPA boundaries, 
    b) scale and position adjustments to provide more optimal coverage of the Area and its surrounding features.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    a) The area of the ASPA has been updated with a correction to 1021 km2; 
    b) Addition of text to describe contemporary research using fish specimens collected within the Area;
    c) minor amendments to format and layout, including addition of an introductory paragraph, to maintain consistency with other plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A


