





Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism for the Next Decade





Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism for the next Decade  
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary 
In ATCMXXXI/WP51 Developing a Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism for the next Decade, the United Kingdom proposed that the ATCM should develop a Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism to form part of the celebrations for the 50th Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty.  ATCM XXXI agreed that Parties would send to the UK, during the intersessional period, proposals for elements of such a Vision to assist with this work.   This paper summarises the submissions received by the UK during the past year and proposes an outline vision for the consideration of the ATCM (at Annex A).

Comments received from Parties 
During the period 28 November 2008 to 12 January 2009, the UK received written contributions from Japan, Uruguay, USA, ASOC (and WWF), Ukraine, the Netherlands, Germany, IAATO and Australia, Annex B summarises the issues raised in these contributions.  Overall, there was much common ground amongst the contributions.  In particular, there was broad agreement to focus on principles of mitigation of environmental and safety risks.  
UK Proposal for a Strategic Vision 
Building on the areas of commonality submitted by those who contributed proposals to the UK during the intersessional period, the UK has developed an outline Strategic Vision for consideration by the ATCM (Annex A).
This proposed Vision aims to establish the broad principles by which the Antarctic Treaty Parties will manage tourism in Antarctica.  Many of the elements included in the Vision have already been enshrined in existing ATCM instruments.  
The UK recognises that some of the broad principles included in this Vision will require further discussion to define their scope and determine how they will be realised.  However, the UK hopes that the ATCM will find this Vision a helpful starting point, and that the Tourism Working Group can then agree which elements of the Vision it wishes to focus on in more detail over the coming years.
The UK proposes that the ATCM endorses the attached Vision as part of the 50th Anniversary celebrations in Baltimore.



Polar Regions Unit
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office
February 2009
Annex A
Strategic Vision for Antarctic Tourism 

Considering the increase in visitation to Antarctica which has taken place since the adoption of the Environmental Protocol and the potential for further expansion;
Committed to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment;
Aware of the responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Parties to ensure that all activities undertaken in Antarctica are pre-planned to minimise any impact on the Antarctic environment;
Committed also to ensuring that all activities undertaken in Antarctica are conducted as safely as possible;
Recalling a range of previous agreements in relation to tourism and non-Governmental activities in Antarctica, including inter alia Recommendation XVIII-1 Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities, Measure 4(2004) Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Resolution 4(2004) Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, Resolution 4(2007) Ship-based Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area and Resolution 5(2007) Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, on the occasion of the 50th Anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty:
Agree to articulate the attached shared Strategic Vision of Antarctic tourism, which will be used to inform and guide further work to underpin the development of a comprehensive, consistent and robust framework to manage Antarctic tourism activities.

 


A Strategic Vision of Antarctic Tourism

For the context of the vision, ‘tourism’ means all forms of recreational activity in Antarctica, including commercial tourism activities as well as the recreational activities of national programme personnel.
General Principles:
    • All tourism activities undertaken in Antarctica will be conducted in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection, including all of its adopted Annexes;
    • Tourism will have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the environmental, intrinsic natural wilderness and historical values of Antarctica.  In the absence of detailed information about potential impacts, decisions on tourism will be made on a pragmatic precautionary and risk assessment basis;
    • Scientific research will be accorded priority in planning and conducting tourism activities in Antarctica;
    • Antarctic Treaty Parties will aim to ensure, as far as practicable, that all tourism activities are regulated in a proactive and consistent way;
    • All commercial tourism organisations operating in Antarctica will be encouraged to co-operate with each other to co-ordinate tourism activities and share best practice on environmental and safety management issues.  

Growth of Tourism:
    • Future growth of tourism will be monitored, managed and controlled;
    • Primacy will be given to tourism activities which focus on the enrichment and education of visitors about the Antarctic environment and its protection;
    • Visitors to Antarctica will be encouraged to travel with experienced organisations which have demonstrated their commitment to the principles of the Antarctic Treaty.

Protecting the Antarctic Environment:
    • Tourism activities will be pre-planned in order to identify and mitigate any risks to the Antarctic environment;
    • Antarctic Specially Managed Areas will be developed to facilitate the management of tourism activities at the regional level;
    • Site Guidelines will be developed for all of the most heavily visited sites;
    • All tourists to Antarctica will be briefed on their environmental responsibilities and operators transporting visitors to Antarctica will ensure that those landing in Antarctica understand the behaviour expected of them whilst undertaking activities in the continent;
    • All tourism activities will be encouraged to follow best practice environmental standards.

Safety of Tourism Activities:
    • Ships visiting Antarctica will comply with relevant provisions and guidelines of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).  The ATCM will co-operate with the IMO to ensure that such provisions and guidelines are up-to-date and in line with best practice, as appropriate;
    • Aircraft activities in Antarctica will comply with relevant provisions and guidelines of the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).  The ATCM will co-operate with ICAO to ensure that such provisions and guidelines are up-to-date and in line with best practice, as appropriate;
    • Organisers of all tourism activities in Antarctica will undertake risk assessment procedures to mitigate safety risks and develop contingency plans;
    • Tourism activities in Antarctica will be planned to be self-sufficient and not rely on national programmes or any other operator without their prior agreement, for search and rescue purposes, in line with Measure 4(2004).

Monitoring and Information Exchange:
    • There will be enhanced information exchange about all tourism activities undertaken in Antarctica, both prior to activities taking place and post visit reports;
    • Working in partnership, Antarctic Treaty Parties and the commercial tourist industry will ensure that the ATCM and the Committee for Environmental Protection have information about all tourism activities undertaken in Antarctica each season;
    • Consideration will be given to the development of an international tourism observer scheme and Antarctic Treaty Parties will aim to undertake more formal Treaty Inspections of tourism activities in Antarctica;
    • The Committee for Environmental Protection will develop consistent protocols to enable systematic environmental monitoring of sites visited by tourists.





ATCM XXXII
April 2009
Annex B
Development of a Strategic Vision for Antarctic Tourism – Summary of Contributions (January 2009)

Summary
All of the contributions received recognised that tourism would continue to take place in Antarctica.  Several highlighted the tangible societal benefits gained from more people becoming educated about the fragility of the continent and the potential anthropogenic threats to its environment.  There was much support for the development of a Strategic Vision and the importance of engaging all those with an interest in Antarctic tourism - including Governments, industry and appropriate non-government organisations – was highlighted.
Parties identified many areas of commonality, particularly in relation to the broad principles of Antarctic tourism – focusing mainly on mitigation of environmental impacts and safety risks.  This provides a helpful and solid basis for future work to ensure that the further development of tourism does not jeopardise these objectives.
However, there were few specific areas where there was yet a clear shared overall vision for tourism development or management measures.  In particular, there were significant differences between those advocating proposals to limit tourist numbers or types of activities in the future, against those who would resist any kind of limit or prohibitions.  
This is an area that will need more discussion before further progress could be made on the more specific elements of a Strategic Vision, as the two are potentially incompatible.  On the one hand, some Parties want to manage tourism through environmental mitigation and risk management; but on the other hand, without specific prohibitions, some activities will have inherent environmental impacts and safety risks which other Parties find unacceptable.  It will be crucial for the Treaty Parties to find a way forward on this conundrum.
Overall, however, the issues raised in this first round of contributions were very similar and this may facilitate setting a clearer agenda for future discussions.  A summary of the kinds of issues identified by those who wrote to the UK follows below:
What the ATCM would wish tourism activities in Antarctica to look like – in terms of, for example, volume, geographic and seasonal limits and diversity
    1. General themes included:
    • Tourism activities must be conducted in accordance with the principles and rules of the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol;
    • Tourism should be conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible way (although it was noted that this statement would benefit from further definition);
    • The values of Antarctica should be protected, including the environmental, intrinsic natural wilderness, historical and scientific values;
    • Scientific research should be accorded priority in planning and conducting tourism activities in Antarctica;
    • Tourism activities should be self-sufficient and not rely on national programmes for safety purposes.

    2. Whilst there was a mixed reaction to whether Antarctic tourism should be defined in the vision, in respect of some of the different types of tourism activities undertaken in Antarctica, comments can be summarised as follows:
Small-Ship Expedition Cruising
In general terms, the responses indicated that the traditional visitation activities of small expedition ship-based cruises to Antarctica were not of major concern to Parties, with the exception of:
    • Potential for non-IAATO operators to start operating in Antarctica; and
    • How to assess cumulative impacts at the more heavily visited sites.
Larger cruise-only vessels
A number of concerns were expressed about the potential safety and environmental impacts of a maritime incident involving a large cruise vessel.  There was a specific proposal that vessels above a certain capacity and/or carrying more than a specified number of persons should be prevented from operating within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Diversification of tourism activities
Possibly the greatest area of concern was the diversification of tourism activities, involving potentially hazardous or environmentally damaging activities.  It was proposed that Antarctic tourism should be value-based rather than activity-based.  Some respondents made specific suggestions that certain types of tourism need to be discouraged or prohibited.
Land-based tourism infrastructure
None of the responses promoted land-based infrastructure in Antarctica.  Several called for a prohibition on all such activities (including in particular the development of hotels), or any tourism activities considered to have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.  However, one response suggested that ‘in rare cases, tourism activities may exceed that level of impact, but in such a case the impacts must be reviewed in accordance with the Environmental Protocol and that such impacts should be kept to a minimum’.
Tourism at Scientific Bases
Several respondents highlighted the need to consider both tourism undertaken by off-duty scientists around research stations, and the management of tourism visitors to scientific bases.  
Air transportation and overflights
This issue elicited few reactions from respondents; however, specific proposals included limiting flight activities and developing seasonal and geographical management provisions for non-governmental aircraft activities in Antarctica.  This is an issue that the ATCM may wish to consider further in respect of the tourism vision.
    3. Whilst several of the respondents focused on the generic principles of Antarctic Tourism, others attempted to set out more specific proposals to address the recent growth in tourism in Antarctica.   These included proposals to consider limits for the overall numbers of non-governmental visitors to specific regions; and the establishment of agreed start and end dates for the annual tourism season.  However, another respondent stated that ‘the limitation of the overall number of tourists or outright prohibition of certain types of tourism activities, irrespective of its type, place, time, impact etc, would not contribute to the effective management of Antarctic tourism’.
How tourism in Antarctica will be managed to deliver such a vision
    4. Issues raised in relation to this question included how the management of the environmental and safety aspects of tourism might be enhanced.  Some respondents suggested that a more comprehensive regulatory framework was needed to manage tourism, whilst others highlighted the need to focus on gaps identified within the current system, which includes industry self-regulation.  A balance of mandatory and hortatory guidelines was suggested by others.  Some of the key issues can be summarised as follows:
Overall Tourism Regulatory Framework
One of the key issues highlighted related to the extent to which each Consultative Party has implemented all of the existing Measures, Decisions and Resolutions into their domestic requirements.  There continues to be a significant difference between the management of tourism activities between Treaty Parties.  Levelling the playing field would help all concerned in the management of activities in Antarctica.
The importance of communication and information sharing between Treaty Parties in assessing Antarctic tourism activities was also highlighted.  
Different views were expressed as to whether an additional ATCM legal framework needed to be established for Antarctic tourism, including a proposal for a legally binding instrument on Antarctic shipping.  One proposal was to consider the CCAMLR approach to establish annual Conservation Measures to set the volume, geographic limits and diversity of tourism for the following season.  Other respondents suggested that existing instruments could be used more effectively, for example through the development of larger scale ASMAs to manage tourism at the regional level.
Whilst self-regulation mechanisms have provided a successful contribution to the overall management of tourism, it was recognised that the industry is not ‘authorising’ activities to take place in Antarctica, so the ATCM must maintain responsibility for the regulation of tourism, working with other experts as appropriate (particularly the IMO).
In general terms, precaution and risk-based approaches were advocated.  
Management of tourism in Antarctica
It was acknowledged that IAATO currently manage vessel-based tourism traffic in Antarctica.  Most respondents welcomed this contribution and highlighted the importance of a comprehensive vessel traffic monitoring and information system.  However, it was also noted that the ATCM must maintain regulation and supervision functions of vessel activities.
With respect to more specific proposals, it was suggested that:
    • Site Guidelines should be supported and strengthened (it was also suggested that they be made mandatory); 
    • Particular Sensitive Sea Areas should be designated in Antarctica.
The issue of accreditation or best-practice certification was also raised as an area for potential further development.
Specific proposals for management of tourism activities
Respondents also flagged a few specific proposals for the management of specific tourism activities.  These included:
    • environmental management training requirements for all crew and Expedition Leaders;
    • a certification standard for zodiac operations;
    • a mandatory obligation to have a certified ice-master on board all vessels;
    • placement of observers on tourism expeditions;
It was highlighted that sufficient preparation and contingency planning, but also quality equipment, information and experience, are crucial factors in minimising safety risks.  
Finally, there was also a call for greater monitoring and enforcement of tourism activities.
How information about tourism activities will be collected, analysed and reported; and how the Antarctic environment will be monitored to identify any potential impacts of tourism activities
    5. Overall, the majority of respondents sought a proactive approach to the gathering of information and monitoring of tourism activities in Antarctica.  Several respondents highlighted the role of the CEP in promoting the study of tourism impacts and developing mechanisms to monitor tourism activities and impacts.  It was noted that a high level of knowledge of what goes on in the field was essential to this work and that the current ‘alert system’ used by IAATO field staff could be integrated into a comprehensive monitoring regime.
    6. Whilst some considered that the Environmental Impact Assessment procedures already provided an adequate basis for the assessment of tourism activities, others noted that additional work needed to be undertaken to analyse cumulative environmental impacts and to consider regional level tourism management measures.  In relation to the latter, it was suggested that the Environmental Domains Analysis work could be helpful.
    7. It was highlighted that the majority of the information about tourism activities currently available to the ATCM has been compiled by the industry itself, through IAATO.  IAATO offered to continue to provide and develop this information.  Other respondents suggested that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat or an ATCM subsidiary body might play a greater role, but the importance of assessing the practical and financial implications of this was noted.  Nevertheless, there may be a greater role that the Competent Authorities individually, or collectively, could play.




Polar Regions Unit
UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office
London, UK
January 2009

