





Propagule transport associated with logistic operations: a South African appraisal of a regional issue




Propagule transport associated with logistic operations: a South African appraisal of a regional issue

Introduction
    1. Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection, on the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora requires that precautions be taken to prevent the introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic Treaty Area. 
    2. The significance of understanding the risks, routes and pathways of introduction of non-native species to Antarctica and its Associated and Dependent ecosystems, and reducing the rates and impacts of introductions, has subsequently been emphasized in a series of resolutions, papers, and activities. These include IP 53 at ATCM XXII on introduction of non-native species in the Antarctic area, WP 28 at ATCM XXVIII on measures to address the unintentional introduction of non-native biota and disease to the Antarctic Treaty Area, Resolution 3 of ATCM XXIX on Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area, WP13 of ATCM XXIX on non-native species in the Antarctic, which reported on the outcome of a workshop held in New Zealand, IP 37  at ATCM XXX on hull fouling as a source of marine invasion, and IP 49 of ATCM XXX on aliens in Antarctica, IP 17 at ATCM XXXI on measures to protect the Larsemann Hills, and IP75 at ATCM XXXI on non-native species incursions at Scott Base.
    3. In the CEP IX Report, the Committee strongly supported the six key recommendations from the New Zealand workshop on non-native species in the Antarctic, set out in WP 13. In recommending that the issue of non-native species in the Antarctic should be given the highest priority consistent with the high environmental standards set out in the Protocol, the WP noted that the issue of invasive alien species requires priority attention in the Antarctic context. The WP also noted that prevention of initial non-native introductions is more effective than response to invasive alien species that have become established. Furthermore, it recommended that a set of comprehensive and standardised guidance and / or procedures should be developed, aimed at all operators in the Antarctic, based on a “Prevention, Surveillance, Response” approach
    4. To contribute to these aims, between 2006 and 2008, South Africa undertook surveys to assess the seed propagule load associated with resupply of their stations on Marion and Gough Island (sub-Antarctic) and the South African National Antarctic (SANAE) IV station (Dronning Maud Land, Continental Antarctica). The main routes of propagule transport within the South African logistics operation are with cargo and expeditioner luggage. In addition, assessments were made of the efficacy of various cleaning approaches for protective clothing in reducing propagule load (see Lee and Chown in press for full details).

Quantification of propagule pressure in cargo
    5. Cargo surveys were carried out on eight voyages to the region, from two different warehouses – one in a weed infested area, and one in a clean area. 
    6. 193 items were surveyed and 800 seeds collected with representatives from 22 families and 57 genera. A significant and substantial difference in the number of seeds found in cargo was found between the two packing locations, with an average of 1 seed per m3 of cargo for items packed in the warehouse in the weedy area and 0.2 seeds per m3 of cargo for items packed at the clean warehouse.
    7. Taxonomic composition of propagules in cargo closely matched the taxonomic composition of the surrounding vegetation with between 70 and 85% of taxa found in the local vegetation also being found in cargo. This indicates that the majority of propagules are from highly local sources.

Quantification of propagule pressure in expeditioner luggage
    8. Expeditioner luggage surveys were carried out on six voyages, and a random sample of c. 20 expeditioners was selected and their field work clothing surveyed. Typically this included hat, gloves, boots, socks, bags, waterproof jacket, waterproof trousers and a fleece. During surveys, all entrained propagules were removed counted and where possible identified to genus level.
    9. 606 seeds were collected from 933 items of clothing originating from 127 passengers. Twenty families and 70 genera were represented. A high proportion of expeditioners surveyed had recently travelled in the Antarctic (47.2%).






Figure 1. Mean (± S.E.) number of seeds found per item in each category of expeditioner luggage.














    10. Number of seeds per item varied significantly with destination (Fig. 1a), with items surveyed on the way to Marion and Gough Islands having substantially higher seed loads than those surveyed on the way to SANAE. Number of entrained seeds also varied significantly with item (Fig. 1b), with socks and bags having the greatest seed loads. Passengers own clothing harboured greater numbers of seeds than clothing which was issued by the South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) (Fig. 1c). Items which contained Velcro® harboured a greater number of seeds than those without it (Fig. 1d). 

Management recommendations for reducing propagule pressure in cargo
    11. For cargo, entrainment and drop-off is greatest when the cargo is being intensively handled such as at warehouses and during loading and off-loading areas
    12. To minimise the numbers of propagules which are entrained in cargo, ideally it should be loaded in an area free from weedy plants and areas of waste ground. Equally, because drop-off is also highest in these areas, careful monitoring and immediate removal of any newly established species will help prevent the spread of aliens into other areas (Frenot et al. 2005)
    13. In the case of warehouses situated close to vacant, weed-infested land, a change to a new warehousing area, or the development of an appropriate spraying programme (if possible given that the land may be under different ownership) is likely to mean much greater costs. However, these costs are likely to be low relative to the costs of eradication efforts. 
    14. Cargo containers can also be designed to have a minimum of surfaces that promote seed entrainment (Whinam et al. 2005), can be inspected and cleaned inside prior to loading, and can easily be sprayed down and inspected prior to transfer to a cargo hold (either aircraft or ship). Such measures typically do not require large infrastructure and personnel investments, and, where expensive containers are to be replaced, they can be phased in as older items age or are damaged.

Management recommendations for reducing propagule pressure in expeditioner luggage
    15. Careful inspection and cleaning of equipment, is currently the most widely employed mitigation measure and should be effective in reducing the propagule load. Especially for transits by ship, typically plenty of time is available for such gear inspections and cleaning. Special attention should be given to personal, non-issued, protective clothing.
    16. For transport by air, inspections should be undertaken in advance of departure from the final, pre-Antarctic destination, because logistics often dictate rapid (or at least unpredictable) deployment in the field. 
    17. Washing is effective at reducing propagule viability in some species but temperature treatments in excess of 80˚C are needed to sterilize seeds. This creates a conflict of interest between performance of clothing and the chance of alien introduction.
    18. An alternative to inspection and washing is to ship new clothing to the research station of interest and to leave it there once it has been used initially (either for the return of long-term visitors or for re-issue to new expeditioners). Although this would not prevent intra-regional movement of propagules, it would prevent the introduction of exogenous species. Research stations would need to be equipped with the means to clean and maintain equipment, but no substantial new infrastructure would be required. This therefore may be the most economically and ecologically sensible way to reduce the flow of alien species into the region with expeditioner clothing.

Conclusions
    19. Cost-effective measures exist for reducing propagule transfer to the Antarctic region on both cargo and clothing. Many of these can readily be implemented with only small changes to operational procedures, thus contributing to the prevention that is so much more effective than responses, as noted by WP 13 to ATCM XXIX.
    20. Further research emphasis needs to be given to intra-regional propagule transfer as new studies continue to highlight the substantial variation in intra-regional genetic diversity at even small spatial scales (Chown & Convey 2007; Rogers 2007).

References 
Chown, S.L. & Convey, P. 2007. Spatial and temporal variability across life’s hierarchies in the terrestrial Antarctic. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 362, 2307-2331.
Frenot, Y., Chown, S.L., Whinam, J., Selkirk, P.M. Convey, P., Skotnicki, M & Bergstrom, D.M. 2005. Biological invasions in the Antarctic: extent, impacts and implications. Biological Reviews 80, 45-72.
Lee, J. E. & Chown, S. L. In press. Breaching the dispersal barrier to invasion: quantification and management. Ecological Applications. 
Rogers, A.D. 2007. Evolution and biodiversity of Antarctic organisms: a molecular perspective. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 362, 2191-2214.
Whinam, J., Chilcott, N. & Bergstrom, D.M. 2005. Subantarctic hitchhikers: expeditioners as vectors for the introduction of alien organisms. Biological Conservation 121, 207-219.

