





Climate Change and the Antarctic Environment: Management Implications




Climate Change and the Antarctic Environment: Management Implications

United Kingdom Working Paper

Summary
This paper highlights some of the implications of regional and global climate change in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and how these may direct the future work and priorities of the CEP.
We suggest that in order for the CEP to undertake its work effectively, it will be essential to determine the absolute risks, uncertainties, impacts and timescales of various processes consequent on climate change.
With current levels of scientific understanding, such risk assessments should be feasible in most areas and these should provide a focus for future work. Much of this effort and many of the consequent management actions will depend upon the development of relevant science and well-targeted monitoring programmes. Given potential overlaps and finite resources, it is important that the CEP, CCAMLR and SCAR continue to work closely together on issues of common interest, for example on investigating the changing relationship between land, ice and ocean and the impacts of climate change and its potential synergies with other human activities and impacts on the wider marine and terrestrial ecosystems.  
Introduction
As noted by the IPCC in 2007, climate change will bring with it a number of real risks for the marine and terrestrial environment.  For example risks to the World Ocean include: increasing sea temperatures, increasing sea level, changes to global ocean thermohaline circulation, increasing ocean acidification, and changes to freshwater content. These are likely to have a number of consequential impacts, including on availability of terrestrial and marine habitat and their foodwebs; these impacts will, in turn, require direct management actions. 
Many of the impacts of climate change will potentially affect species of direct concern to both CEP and CCAMLR, including some of the most iconic and charismatic species in Antarctica as well as both harvested species and dependent species. However, predictions of the timing and magnitude of possible effects are uncertain or unavailable. Therefore, there will be a clear benefit from encouraging the development of science that provides robust baseline descriptions and assessments of terrestrial and marine ecosystems, encompasses ecosystem monitoring activities, and thereby facilitates prediction of future trends and assessment of the principal uncertainties.  This will, in turn, help inform decisions about the appropriateness, timing and extent of future management actions. 
Discussion
Localised impacts of climate change may be exacerbated by human activities.  It is therefore important that the CEP and CCAMLR undertakes careful monitoring of representative sites in order to understand the changes that are already occurring.  Environmental impacts cascading through the marine foodweb will likely lead to reduced breeding success for many iconic species.  In the terrestrial environment, changes in the extent of habitat availability and on biological processes, together with the high likelihood of establishment of alien species, lead to predictions of rapid and large-scale changes in ecosystem structure and complexity. The CEP should therefore consider whether climate change pressures are increasing the sensitivity of particular sites, and /or key species which may call for revised management procedures. 

For example, species that are decreasing as a result of environmental pressures as a result of climate change may require additional protection.  This may be best effected as designation as Specially Protected Species, or protection of key habitats via ASPAs and ASMAs. 
Climate change may lead to consequent changes in habitat through altered temperature, snow and ice cover. These changes may lead to increased risks of introduction and establishment of alien species. The CEP will therefore also need to develop robust guidelines to prevent the introduction of non-native species, and potentially to eradicate any such introduced species.
To improve our understanding of shifting baselines, both CEP and CCAMLR must encourage a greater scientific research effort that encompasses the complete annual cycle of the species and ecosystems of interest, allied with more frequent sampling and a long-term commitment to such effort.  One way of doing so would be to use information from tourist and/or fishing vessels and to design research programmes that utilize such vessels (i.e. not just scientific observations as currently occurs on fishing vessels, but designed research programmes that utilise their operational, spatial and sampling capacity).  For example, CEP and CCAMLR could encourage the development of ship-based monitoring research programmes using tourist or fishing vessels on an annual scale comparable to that from the land-based CEMP predator monitoring. Similarly, CEP must encourage (primarily through national operator research programmes) the identification of core monitoring locations (at continent-wide scale) and establishment and commitment to robust long term ecosystem monitoring programmes, which are a prerequisite for any objective assessment of environmental change and associated risk.  CEP and CCAMLR should also investigate the use of new remote satellite sensing, such as Polar View, to help monitor and predict environmental change.
Conclusion
SCAR’s Antarctic Climate change and the Environment (ACCE) Review Report (IP005) provides a highly valuable summary of current climate change in Antarctica.  With the help of such convincing evidence we are moving into a situation where we can now begin to make reasonably broad estimates of how changes in temperature, precipitation and possibly even ocean acidity and sea ice extent might change under a range of climate scenarios, and to consider possible impacts upon ecosystems and biota. Though such impacts need to be considered in the contexts of both natural variability and of other anthropogenic impacts, such as historical harvesting and the introduction and establishment of alien biota, climate change impacts are likely to become increasingly important within the Antarctic and Southern Ocean management framework.
With current levels of understanding, it should be feasible to undertake a series of risk assessments applicable to both the terrestrial and marine environments which, in turn, will help provide a focus for future work. We therefore propose that the CEP, working with SCAR and CCAMLR, leads such an assessment and the subsequent development of monitoring programmes with agreed protocols, taking into account the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP), in order to facilitate systematic and consistent monitoring of sites where human activities take place.  The availability of more comprehensive information will enable the CEP to determine whether current management regimes remain appropriate in the face of climate change uncertainty.  



