





Site Guidelines for Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula 




Site Guidelines for Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the United States

Summary
Stonington Island is located at the southern end of Marguerite Bay, off the Antarctic Peninsula. Historic Site and Monuments No. 55 (East Base - USA) and No. 64 (Base ‘E’- UK) on Stonington Island are visited increasingly by tour operators and National Antarctic Programmes. 
Following the adoption of Site Guidelines by Resolution 5(2005), the United Kingdom and the United States have prepared Site Guidelines for Stonington with the assistance of IAATO, and recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM.
Background
1.  Stonington Island (68°11’S, 67°00’W) is located in the Neny Fjord, at the southern end of Marguerite Bay, off the Antarctic Peninsula. Until recently, it was connected to the mainland by North East Glacier. 
2. Two Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs) are located on this small island. East Base (HSM No. 55) was established during the United States Antarctic Service Expedition led by Richard E. Byrd (1939-41), and was subsequently occupied during the Ronne Antarctic Research Expedition (1947-1948). 
3. Base ‘E’ (HSM No. 64) was first established by the UK in 1946. During the 1960’s and 1970’s, it served as a staging post for access by dog sledge to the Antarctic mainland. 
4. Visits to Stonington Island by tourist vessels or national programmes over the past decade have been infrequent. However, more tourist vessels are travelling further south into Marguerite Bay, and visits to the island are increasing in number. For this reason, the UK and the USA decided to work with IAATO to develop these site guidelines. Visits to East Base are managed by the US, who proposed the site, and visits to Base ‘E’ are managed by the UK, who proposed this site.
5. The attached site guidelines for Stonington Island are submitted in a format consistent with other ATCM Site Guidelines. 





April 2009
