





Proposal to add the British hut (Base W) on Detaille Island, Lallemand Fjord, Loubet Coast to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments





Proposal to add the British hut (Base W) on Detaille Island, Lallemand Fjord, Loubet Coast to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments


This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument (not previously designated as an HSM by the ATCM).

Relevant details:
  
    (i) Name of the proposed HSM – “Base W”, Detaille Island, Lallemand Fjord, Loubet Coast;
    (ii) Description – sited on a narrow isthmus at the northern end of Detaille island, the main building and associated structures are noteworthy as an example of a relatively unaltered British scientific base of the late 1950s;
    (iii) Co-ordinates – 66 degrees 52’S, 66 degrees 38’W;
    (iv) Original proposing Party – United Kingdom;
    (v) Party undertaking management - United Kingdom
Proposal to add the British hut (Base W) on Detaille Island, Lallemand Fjord, Loubet Coast to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments

United Kingdom Working Paper



    1. Summary

In accordance with paragraph 2 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the UK proposes that Base “W” on Detaille Island be added to the list of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the ATCM.   

    2. Introduction

Further to Resolution 4(2001) and Measure 3(2003) the UK has carried out a survey of a number of British sites and existing Historic Sites and Monuments on the Antarctic Peninsula.  As a result of this survey the UK has concluded that, at this stage, there would be merit in listing two additional sites – one at Detaille Island and the other at Damoy Point.  This paper follows the guidance set out in Recommendation 1(2008).

    3. Position and Description

Built in 1956, Base “W” is situated on a narrow isthmus at the northern end of Detaille Island, Lallemand Fjord, Loubet Coast (latitude 66 degrees 52’S, longitude 66 degrees 38’W).    The site consists of a hut and a range of associated structures and outbuildings including a small emergency storage building, bitch and pup pens, anemometer tower and two standard tubular steel radio masts (one to the south west of the main hut and the other to the east).  

    4. Reason for designation 

Base “W” was established in 1956 as a science base primarily for survey, geology and meteorology and to contribute to the IGY in 1957.   It was evacuated in 1959 when sea ice and weather made relief by ship impossible.  The British personnel closed the station and transferred to Base “Y”, Horseshoe Island (HSM 63).  The site was cleaned up in the 1996/97 season and remains relatively undisturbed.  A recent survey determined that the main hut, and the substantial amount of artefacts and contents that survive, are in very good condition.   

As a relatively unaltered base from the late 1950s, Base “W” provides an important reminder of the science and living conditions that existed when the Antarctic Treaty was signed 50 years ago.   
 


