





Spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity




Spatial protection and management of                               Antarctic marine biodiversity                                    
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Agenda Item CEP 7(e)
1. Summary
This paper is based on a presentation for the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (3-4 April 2009). It provides information on the different objectives and types of marine spatial protection and management that can be implemented in Antarctic waters, including details on:
    1) definition of terms;
    2) objectives of marine spatial protection and management;
    3) examples of measures currently adopted under CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty;
    4) summary of principles agreed by the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members with regard to marine spatial protection and management. 
The Committee is asked to consider two recommendations at the end of the paper, which propose that the Antarctic Treaty Parties should work towards establishing effective spatial protection for marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area by 2012.
2. Introduction
The establishment of spatial protection for marine biodiversity has been identified as a priority issue by both the CEP (CEP IX Final Report, paras 94 to 101) and CCAMLR (CCAMLR-XXIII, para 4.13). International commitments have called for the development of representative networks of marine protected areas globally by 2012 (e.g. United Nations, 2002), and increasing cooperation between the CEP and the CCAMLR Scientific Committee provides a unique opportunity for developing coordinated systems to attain this goal. 
To determine the types of spatial protection and management that will be most effective and appropriate for achieving a range of conservation goals, there is a need for clear definitions, principles and priorities. Many of these have already been established under the instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System, and agreed by both Antarctic Treaty Parties and CCAMLR Members. This paper aims to bring together the relevant information from both CCAMLR and the CEP, so that further progress can be made on establishing effective systems of marine spatial protection. 
3. Definitions
Protection and management of the marine environment and its biodiversity can be achieved through a range of actions designed to minimize adverse impacts. Such actions can be defined on the basis of:
    1) activities (e.g. general rules on the dumping of wastes anywhere at sea)
    2) time-scales (e.g. restrictions that apply only during a sensitive breeding season) 
    3) geographic space (e.g. provisions that apply only within the boundary of a defined spatial area). 
This paper is concerned exclusively with iii) actions that are defined on the basis of geographic space. This refers primarily to ASPAs and ASMAs in the context of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, however it also includes any other type of measure that provides spatially defined protection or management.
In 2008, IUCN agreed an updated definition of the term ‘protected area’:
“A clearly defined geographical space, recognized, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective means, to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values.” (Dudley, 2008)
This definition applies to all types of protected areas, including terrestrial, coastal, freshwater, and marine areas. It supersedes a previous, widely-used IUCN definition relating specifically to marine protected areas (Kelleher, 1999). The new definition recognizes that all types of protected areas have the same overarching goals and fundamental characteristics, although their specific objectives and provisions may vary according to individual requirements.
The term ‘marine protected area’ or MPA has been used extensively worldwide and in the Antarctic context. It can refer to a variety of different types of protection measures, ranging from strictly protected ‘no-take’ areas to multiple-use areas. IUCN defines six categories or types of protected area, ranging from strictly protected nature reserves (Category Ia), to managed areas where the sustainable use of natural resources is permitted (Category VI) (Dudley, 2008). All of these categories fall under the same ‘protected area’ definition above. Similarly in the Antarctic context, there is a spectrum of protected area types (both terrestrial and marine) ranging from strictly protected ASPAs through to managed ASMAs, and other types of spatial protection or management such as measures implemented under CCAMLR. 
The 2005 CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas agreed that the term ‘MPA’ encompassed a range of mechanisms that could be used to help meet the objective set out in Article II of CCAMLR (SC-CAMLR-XXIV, para. 10). This objective is the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources which, for the purposes of the CCAMLR Convention, includes rational use. The 2005 Workshop agreed that the range of potential MPA mechanisms included provisions available under both CCAMLR and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. CCAMLR has more recently referred to ‘marine spatial protection and management’ to provide further clarity and flexibility in encompassing the full range of protected and managed area tools (Report of WG-EMM, 2008). 
4. Objectives of marine spatial protection and management
The IUCN definition above provides a general objective for protected areas, as “the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values”. Clear objectives for marine protected and managed areas have also been defined under both the Protocol on Environmental Protection and CCAMLR.
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection outlines objectives for ASPAs (both marine and terrestrial) in the form of a list of values to be protected, and a description of the types of areas that should be included in the series of ASPAs.
Any area, including any marine area, may be designated as an ASPA to: “protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research.” (Annex V, Article 3.1). The series of ASPAs should include (Annex V, Article 3.2):
    a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;
    b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems;
    c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;
    d) the type locality or only known habitat of any species;
    e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;
    f) examples of outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features;
    g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value;
    h) sites or monuments of recognised historic value, and 
    i) such other areas as may be appropriate to protect the values set out in paragraph 3.1 above.
Annex V of the Environmental Protocol also defines objectives for marine and terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), which are designated to: “…assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve cooperation between Parties or minimise environmental impacts.” (Annex V, Article 4.1).
The 2005 CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas agreed that conservation objectives for MPAs include the protection and maintenance of ecosystem processes, habitats, biodiversity and species (ATCM XXIX WP 7). The 2005 Workshop also identified types of areas that may require protection, as:
    i) Representative areas;
    ii) Scientific reference areas to assist with distinguishing between the effects of harvesting and other activities from natural ecosystem changes, as well as providing opportunities for understanding the Antarctic marine ecosystem without interference;
    iii) Areas potentially vulnerable to impacts by human activities, to mitigate those impacts and/or ensure the sustainability of the rational use of marine living resources, and
    iv) Locations where important ecosystem processes are amenable to spatial protection.
Selection criteria can be used to assist in the identification of protected areas to meet these objectives, by evaluating candidate sites, and prioritizing areas that merit protection. Existing criteria systems were reviewed in ATCM XXX IP53 (2007), which concluded that they are adequate for the selection of Antarctic MPAs across a range of protection and management area categories. 
5. Marine spatial protection and management measures currently adopted under the Antarctic Treaty and CCAMLR
There is an array of tools available to the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members for implementing marine spatial protection and management measures. Table 1 lists these tools, and uses examples of areas that are currently designated under each category to illustrate their objectives and characteristics.
Table 1: Tools for spatial protection and management available under the ATCM and CCAMLR.
Category
Designating body
Objectives / purpose
Number of sites currently designated
Example of current designation
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)
ATCM, with approval from CCAMLR if required under ATCM Decision 9 (2005)
To protect “outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research.”  (Annex V, Article 3.1), including “representative examples of major marine ecosystems” (Article 3.2).
6 marine ASPAs.
11 ASPAs with both marine and terrestrial components.
ASPA No. 161, Terra Nova Bay.
High benthic diversity at species and community levels. Important area for well-established research, extensive marine ecological research carried out since 1985. The area typically remains ice-free during summer, which is rare for coastal areas in the Ross Sea, and makes it an ideal area for research into nearshore benthic communities.
Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)
ATCM, with approval from CCAMLR if required under ATCM Decision 9 (2005)
“To assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between parties or minimize environmental impacts.” (Annex V, Article 4.1)
4 ASMAs with both marine and terrestrial components.
ASMA No. 7, Southwest Anvers Island & Palmer Basin 
Aims to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of the southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin region by managing the variety of activities and interests in the Area. Of particular value are the extensive scientific data sets collected over the last 100 years. Increasing human activity and potentially conflicting interests have made it necessary to manage and coordinate activities more effectively within the Area.
Site Specific Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic
ATCM
“To provide specific instructions on the conduct of activities at the most frequently visited Antarctic sites. This includes practical guidance for tour operators and guides on how they should conduct visits in those sites, taking into account their environmental values and sensitivities” (ATS website)
18 sites, all applying to coastal areas (may also have provisions that extend into the marine environment, e.g. on zodiac cruising/landing)
Whalers Bay, Deception Island 
CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Protected Area
CCAMLR
To monitor the key life-history parameters of selected dependent species which are likely to respond to changes in the availability of harvested species. 
1 CEMP Protected Area with both marine and terrestrial components.
Cape Shirreff (also designated as ASPA No. 149)
Exceptional scientific and monitoring values associated with the large and diverse populations of seabirds and seals breeding within the area, which include the largest Antarctic fur seal colony in the Antarctic Peninsula region. 
CEMP studies include assessment of abundance, survival, feeding ecology and reproduction of seals and seabirds, and monitoring to detect possible adverse effects of fisheries on dependent species.  
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystem (VME) Risk Area
CCAMLR
Areas identified as VME Risk Areas are closed for any fishery until reviewed by the Scientific Committee and management actions are determined by the Commission. Scientific research as agreed by the Scientific Committee shall be allowed in Risk Areas (CCAMLR Conservation Measure 22-07, 2008)
2 VME Risk Areas identified in 2008.
Areas with high diversity of habitat-forming benthic species such as hydrocorals and sponges, off East Antarctica.
Closed Area
CCAMLR
Closed Areas may be designated “for purposes of scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection and scientific study.”  (CCAMLR Article IX, 2g)
Many CCAMLR Statistical Subareas have provisions which close them to fishing for particular species, either year-round or seasonally. 
Taking of fin-fish, other than for scientific research purposes, is prohibited in Subareas 48.1 and 48.2 (Antarctic Peninsula and South Orkney Islands), until at least such time that a survey of stock biomass is carried out, and a decision that the fishery is re-opened is made by the Commission (CCAMLR Conservation Measures 32-02 and 32-3, renewed annually since 1998). 

Table 1 demonstrates the potential for all of the defined objectives for marine spatial protection and management to be achieved using existing tools. The examples show that protected and managed marine sites have already been designated under each of these categories. 
Some of these areas may allow for multiple uses, or may restrict only a single type of activity. However, it is also important to establish a network of protected areas that provide comprehensive protection for representative examples of major marine ecosystems, as required by the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The designation of marine ASPAs is of most relevance in this context. However, at present, such areas are very limited in both size and distribution, and improvement of this system should therefore be a particular focus of the CEP. 
Spatial protection and management will be most effective when it can be implemented in the context of broader marine conservation measures. For example, efforts to protect the breeding areas of albatross species will only be effective if additional measures are in place to prevent incidental mortality associated with fishing. It is therefore critical for marine spatial protection to be considered as part of a harmonized regime for marine conservation across the Antarctic Treaty System. 
Of course, some types of areas are clearly of specific interest to either the CEP or CCAMLR, but not to both bodies. For example, small-scale, coastal marine ASPAs with no potential for marine resource harvesting are not of interest to CCAMLR, as highlighted in ATCM Decision 9 (2005). Equally, CCAMLR may implement spatial protection measures that are specific to a particular harvesting activity, which are of no relevance to the CEP. However, the establishment of a representative network of protected areas, containing examples of major marine ecosystems – including for example offshore areas – will require the designation of areas that are of interest to both bodies.
Figures 1 to 9 illustrate the potential for coordinated spatial protection and management measures to be implemented across the Antarctic Treaty System. Figure 1 shows an imaginary region where (it is hypothetically assumed) there is a range of different conservation values and activities. Figures 2 to 8 show the range of different types of spatial protection and management measures that ATCPs and CCAMLR Members would be able to implement in order to address specific conservation objectives for this imaginary region. Figure 9 brings all of these measures together to illustrate how they might be used to create a comprehensive system of spatial protection throughout the region.




Figure 1: This map shows an imaginary “Island A”, on which there are two research stations, and a site of tourist interest. Long-term scientific research is carried out at a site of high benthic diversity off the south coast of the island. Predator breeding colonies are located along the south coast, and there is an area known to be important for predator foraging offshore to the southeast. There is frequent ship traffic to the southwest of the island, and a range of scientific activities are also undertaken in this area. Further offshore to the southwest is a series of seamounts which provide habitat for sensitive benthic communities.










Figure 2: An Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) is designed to coordinate multiple activities both in the terrestrial environment of Island A (including the research station and the area of tourist interest), and in the marine environment (shipping, scientific activities etc.) 




Figure 4: Island A is surrounded by a CCAMLR Statistical Subarea. Fishing for certain target species is prohibited in this particular Subarea to allow stock recovery, but other types of harvesting are allowed, in accordance with CCAMLR Conservation Measures. 









Figure 3: An Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) is designated to give additional protection to long-term research in this small benthic area.







Figure 5: The eastern part of the ASMA is an area of high importance for predator foraging, and is a representative example of a major pelagic bioregion. This is therefore given additional protection under a CCAMLR Conservation Measure which limits all types of fishing. Fishing is permitted in the western part of the ASMA, in accordance with the provisions of its management plan, and with CCAMLR Conservation Measures.


            
Figure 6: Several seamounts have been identified as Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs). These areas are given protection from bottom fishing activities through the designation of a closed area under a CCAMLR Conservation Measure.





Figure 8: This site on the south coast of Island A is designated as a CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Protected Area, to ensure that monitoring activities are not disturbed.




Figure 7: In recognition of their diversity and high scientific interest, a particular group of seamounts is given additional protection through designation as an ASPA. This ensures that they are protected from all activities (not just bottom fishing), and allows for activities such as scientific sampling to be regulated through the ASPA permitting process.



Figure 9: This diagram shows the full combination of spatial protection and management measures, as described in Figures 1 to 8. Areas designated and managed under the ATCM / CEP are shown in red, and those designated and managed under CCAMLR are shown in yellow.

Figure 9 demonstrates how different measures might be established within the same region to address specific objectives. These measures complement each other and contribute to a broader marine conservation plan for the region.
The approval of both CCAMLR and the CEP would be required for some of these individual designations; however others could be implemented by one body independently. Overall, a spatial protection and management strategy for the whole region would be most effectively delivered with input from both CCAMLR and the CEP.
6. Summary of principles agreed by the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members
The previous sections demonstrate that the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members have both agreed on the requirement to develop systems of marine spatial protection and management, and that together they have a comprehensive suite of existing tools available to achieve this goal. Both bodies have previously highlighted the importance of cooperation on this topic, and of a harmonised approach to the development of marine spatial protection across the Antarctic Treaty System (CEP IX Final Report, para 98; SC-CAMLR-XXV, para 3.52)
ATCM Resolution 1 (2006) encouraged increased cooperation at the practical level between the ATCM and CCAMLR. This is critical to ensure that areas of interest to both bodies can be most appropriately protected. Decision 9 (2005) on ASPAs and ASMAs with a marine component provides one mechanism for this practical cooperation, and the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop further illustrates the commitment of both bodies to the achievement of this goal. 
The agenda for the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop highlights a number of topics where the CEP and SC-CAMLR have shared interests relating to marine species, environments and activities. These topics must also be considered in the context of spatial protection and management, for example protected areas might be used to build resilience in adapting to climate change. 
The scientific information available for identifying marine spatial protection has improved significantly during recent years. Considerable progress has been made by CCAMLR on developing a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, providing a scientific basis for the selection of representative and vulnerable marine areas for protection. CEP Members have been involved in this process, whilst at the same time developing the Environmental Domains Analysis for terrestrial areas, which may have relevance to the selection of coastal protected areas. CCAMLR is also continuing to develop methodologies for identifying Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems, as well as the use of biodiversity data in systematic conservation planning for protected areas (e.g. Information Paper 11). As part of the International Polar Year, the Census of Antarctic Marine Life (CAML) has contributed significantly to understanding and knowledge of Antarctic marine biodiversity. The progress made through these steps will help to ensure that the selection of candidate sites for marine spatial protection and management is scientifically robust and based on the most appropriate data and methodologies.
In 2002, nations at the World Summit on Sustainable Development agreed a commitment to establish comprehensive, effectively managed and ecologically representative networks of marine protected areas by 2012 (United Nations, 2002). The requirement to establish a representative system of marine ASPAs under Annex V (Article 3.2) corresponds closely to the global commitment to establish comprehensive, effectively managed and ecologically representative networks of marine protected areas. 
With only three years remaining until 2012, the CEP is now in a position to make significant progress towards this target. It has an established set of definitions, objectives and tools for marine spatial protection, as well as a strong scientific basis for selecting these areas. It is further strengthened by the opportunity for practical cooperation with CCAMLR on this topic.
7. Recommendations
Taking into account the previously agreed definitions and principles that have been highlighted in this paper, the Committee on Environmental Protection is encouraged to consider for approval by the ATCM, the recommendations that Parties should:
    1. Work towards the establishment of effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area by 2012, through the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) under Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
    2. Cooperate as far as possible with CCAMLR and SCAR to ensure that such measures are implemented on a scientific basis, and with the aim of achieving harmonised protection for Antarctic marine biodiversity across the Antarctic Treaty System.


References
Dudley, N. (ed.) 2008. Guidelines for applying protected area management categories. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
Kelleher, G. 1999. Guidelines for Marine Protected Areas. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK.
United Nations. 2002. Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 Aug- 2 Sep 2002). United Nations, New York. 




