





Regulation of biological prospecting under the Antarctic Treaty system




Regulation of biological prospecting under the Antarctic Treaty system
Working Paper submitted by Australia and New Zealand
Abstract
Antarctic biological prospecting activity is subject to the principles and regulatory arrangements of the Antarctic Treaty system.  These ensure that Antarctic biological prospecting: occurs with the permission of a Treaty Consultative Party; is subject to prior assessment of the potential environmental impacts; and is conducted under strict environmental guidelines.  They also require freedom of scientific investigation and free exchange of scientific results from Antarctica.  This paper describes the current controls over Antarctic biological prospecting and recommends that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopt a Resolution highlighting the adequacy of these controls.
Introduction
The Antarctic Treaty system (ATS) provides comprehensive regulation for the protection of the Antarctic environment.  All activities in the Antarctic are subject to control, based on the principles of the Antarctic Treaty and their environmental impacts.  The definition of biological prospecting is not material to the question of regulation, as individual activities can be adequately regulated within the ATS on their own merits.  However, as a general illustration, biological prospecting activities are generally regarded to include the search for genetic resources or biochemicals with commercial or industrial application.  The activity necessarily involves sampling of biota.
Antarctic biological prospecting has been under consideration by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties since ATCM XXV in 2002.1  ATCM XXVIII in 2005 adopted Resolution 7 (2005): Biological Prospecting in Antarctica that emphasised the need to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area and, as appropriate, to exchange information and views annually relating to that question.  ATCM XXX in 2007 established an informal Intersessional Contact Group (ICG), working until ATCM XXXI in 2008.  
The ATCM, through: the advice received from the ICG; inputs from Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in various working and information papers; and information provided by UNEP, continues to be cognisant of developments within other international forums concerning biological prospecting.
The ATS is adequate and effective in regulating biological prospecting activity in the Antarctic environment.  The components of the ATS operate together to regulate Antarctic biological prospecting in the manner described below.
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol)
Subject to the effect of Article 4 of the Protocol, all activities in the Antarctic region are subject to the overarching environmental principles set out in Article 3.  Specific mechanisms promote these principles, including the environmental impact assessment process (Annex I to the Protocol); provisions for conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora (Annex II to the Protocol); and area protection and management (Annex V to the Protocol).  Antarctic biological prospecting activities are subject to these principles and measures.  Article 4 of the Protocol provides that the Protocol does not derogate from rights or obligations under other agreements of the ATS.
General environmental principles
Under Article 3(1) of the Protocol, Contracting Parties accept that the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems are “fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area”.  Article 3(2) of the Protocol requires all such activities to be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and further elaborates how such activities are to be planned and conducted.  Except for those activities regulated exclusively under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) (see below), Antarctic biological prospecting activities are required to be planned and conducted in a manner consistent with these principles.
Environmental impact assessment
Article 8 of the Protocol requires prior environmental impact assessment (EIA) in accordance with Annex I to the Protocol, for certain categories of activities (including scientific research programs and tourism).  The Protocol also requires that any proposed changes to these activities must also be subject to the EIA process.  Antarctic biological prospecting activities are generally subject to the EIA procedures in the Protocol.  
The only activities that Australia and New Zealand foresee as potentially falling outside the scope of EIA requirements are activities involving the larger scale harvesting of marine living resources for bioactive constituents.  However, as discussed below, these activities are adequately regulated under CCAMLR.
Conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora
Annex II to the Protocol incorporates additional mechanisms for the protection of fauna and flora in the Antarctic.  Article 3(1) of Annex II prohibits the taking of native birds or mammals, or significant quantities of native plants, except in accordance with a permit.  It also regulates activities which would adversely affect the habitats of native mammals, birds, plants or invertebrates.  Article 3(2) of Annex II allows Contracting Parties to grant permits to take or harmfully interfere with fauna and flora.  The ability to grant such permits is limited to the purpose of facilitating scientific study, and is subject to specified environmental considerations.
Where Antarctic biological prospecting constitutes the taking of, or harmful interference with, fauna and flora and can be characterised as being for scientific purposes, it may be permissible under the ATS in accordance with the above requirements.  However, any biological prospecting activities falling within the scope of Annex II to the Protocol which are characterised as being for commercial rather than scientific purposes cannot be the subject of a permit, and are therefore prohibited.
Due to the effect of Article 4 of the Protocol, Annex II also does not impinge on the ability to take marine living resources in a manner consistent with the requirements of CCAMLR.  Krill, for example, are a common object of biological prospecting and the taking of krill would only be regulated under Annex II to the Protocol to the extent that it harmfully interferes with the habitats of native mammals and birds.  Such activity could also be regulated, if required, through the provisions for area protection under Annex V to the Protocol.
Annex II to the Protocol is under review and the ATCM is currently considering a proposal to amend the definition of “taking” to include the taking of native invertebrates (NB: the definition of “native invertebrates” in Article 1 of Annex II to the Protocol includes only terrestrial and freshwater species – i.e. not oceanic species.  This approach acknowledges CCAMLR as the primary instrument to regulate marine living resources).
Area protection
If biological prospecting activities were to create the potential for unacceptable damage to an important, unusual or highly localised species (including invertebrates and micro‑organisms), or to an area of outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, the area protection provisions of Annex V to the Protocol could be used to protect the species (or representative samples thereof) or area.  
Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCAMLR provides for the conservation (including rational use) of marine living resources south of the Antarctic Convergence.  It restricts harvesting to sustainable levels, with consideration given to dependent species, dependent and associated ecosystems, and long term risks.  The Convention does not specify the purpose for which marine living resources might be harvested, and as such harvesting associated with biological prospecting is within the Convention’s ambit.  Its Commission is empowered to adopt conservation measures to conserve and regulate the harvesting of Antarctic marine living resources, including marine living resources targeted for the purpose of biological prospecting.
The operation of the Protocol complements CCAMLR without derogating from rights or obligations arising from it (Article 4(2) of the Protocol).  Nonetheless, parties to CCAMLR agree to observe measures recommended by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties to protect the Antarctic environment (Article V of CCAMLR).  This creates a seamless and coordinated framework for regulating activities.
Freedom of Scientific Investigation
Although immaterial to the question of regulation, there are a variety of definitions of “bioprospecting”, which is a branch of biotechnology.  All bioprospecting however involves the collection, screening and describing of biological material.  These are scientific activities.

Freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica is one of the core principles of the Antarctic Treaty (Article II). The opportunity to conduct scientific research in Antarctica, and access for the purpose of collecting of biological material there, is available to all States—accession to the Treaty is open to any State which is a Member of the United Nations, or any State invited with the consent of all the Consultative Parties. (Article XIII).  

The principle of freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica is not unconditional.  One of the key conditions is that “to the greatest extent feasible and practicable… scientific observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available” (Article III(1)(c) of the Treaty).  This sharing of the outcomes of scientific investigation is usually undertaken through publication in scientific journals and papers presented at conferences.

In the case of bioprospecting, further stages following collection may include discovery, product development, manufacturing and marketing.  These occur outside Antarctica and often many years after the accessing and collection of biological material in Antarctica, and often by an entity not involved in the collection activity. 
Intellectual Property and Commercialisation
The discovery of a commercial application for biological material collected in Antarctica may lead to a patent being granted.  A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention.  Under the World Trade Organisation Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), the invention must be new, involve an inventive step and be capable of industrial application.  WTO Members must allow patent owners to exclude others from making, using or selling a patented product, using a patented process and using or selling the product obtained directly from a patented process, during the fixed term of the patent.    Under TRIPS, the patent owner must disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to be carried out by others.

It is difficult to see any inconsistency with the requirements of Article III.1.c of the Treaty from the creation of intellectual property related to Antarctic biological material in this way.  The objects of patents are not “scientific observations and results from Antarctica” but rather inventions associated with biological material that has been collected there.  Furthermore the patent owner is obliged to publish the full details of the invention, making this information freely available.

An additional consideration is that as the discovery, product development, manufacturing and marketing stages of the bioprospecting chain occur outside Antarctica, domestic law would seem to be the most appropriate way to regulate them, as is the case at present. 
Conclusion
The ATS is a regulatory framework tailored to the unique aspects of the Antarctic area.  It includes comprehensive regulation of activities which could adversely affect the environment.  The Protocol regulates activities (including most aspects of biological prospecting) through its general principles and measures including EIAs, the conservation of fauna and flora and area protection.  Any aspects of biological prospecting not covered by the Protocol would fall under the regulation of CCAMLR, whose Commission is empowered to regulate the harvesting of specific marine living resources.  Some aspects of the commercialisation of biological prospecting are also covered under the ATS, through provisions for sharing research results, with other commercialisation issues appropriately left to existing domestic legal frameworks.  
The attached draft resolution highlights the adequacy of the Antarctic Treaty system in regulating biological prospecting activities in the Antarctic environment.  The Resolution is commended to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.
Resolution XX (2009)
Regulation of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area
The Representatives,
Convinced of the benefits of scientific research in the field of biological prospecting for the progress of humankind;
Reaffirming the importance of the Antarctic Treaty with regard to scientific activities relating to biological prospecting, in particular, Article II, which provides for the freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica, and Article III(1)(c), which provides that to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, scientific observation and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and made freely available;
Reaffirming also the importance of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in the regulation of scientific activities relating to biological prospecting, in particular the overarching principles of Article 3, and mechanisms to promote these principles including the environment impact assessment process of Annex I, the provisions for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora set out in Annex II and the area and protection management arrangements of Annex V;
Reaffirming also the importance of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in the conservation (including rational use) of marine living resources south of the Antarctic Convergence, in particular the capacity to regulate any harvesting of marine living resources relating to biological prospecting;
Recalling Resolution 7 (2005) on biological prospecting in Antarctica, in particular its emphasis on the need to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Recommend that their Governments:
    1. note the comprehensiveness of existing Antarctic Treaty system arrangements for governing the conduct of scientific research and harvesting of marine living resources in the Antarctic region;
    2. ensure that all biological prospecting activity proposed by their nationals and national Antarctic programs is managed as an authorised activity under existing Antarctic Treaty system arrangements;
    3. acknowledge that existing Antarctic Treaty system arrangements are adequate to address the environmental aspects of biological prospecting in the Antarctic region; and
    4. continue to co-operate in strengthening the regulatory frameworks within the Antarctic Treaty System, as deemed necessary by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.

