





Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area





Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand to ATCM XXXII, Baltimore, 
6 – 17 April 2009.

ATCM Agenda Item 11

Summary
Ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area has increased significantly. The Parties have expressed their concern at the risk of a serious humanitarian and environmental maritime incident occurring. It is increasingly apparent that further regulation is required for the safety of passengers and the protection of the Antarctic environment. New Zealand proposes to host an Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area in Wellington from 9 – 11 December 2009.  Draft Terms of Reference for the meeting are attached to this paper for consideration by the Consultative Parties. The goal of the ATME would be to accelerate consideration of the issues involved so that useful recommendations could be provided to ATCM XXXIII.


1. Introduction
Ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area has increased significantly over the last few years. According to IAATO, the number of passengers visiting Antarctica has increased from 12,000 in 2000-01 to more than 46,000 in 2007-08.1 Passenger vessels visit not just the Antarctic Peninsula, but also more remote locations such as the Ross Sea and the Dumont D’Urville Sea. 

Recent maritime incidents in Antarctic waters have been seen by many Parties as a “wake-up call”. In the most recent Antarctic summer season the MV Ocean Nova grounded in Marguerite Bay in February 2009 and in December 2008 the MV Ushuaia grounded near Cape Anna. In November 2007 the MS Explorer sank apparently after colliding with ice (the report of the formal investigation into this incident by the Liberian authorities is awaited). In Resolution 6 (2008) the Parties expressed their concern at the risk of a serious humanitarian and environmental maritime incident occurring in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

It is increasingly apparent that further regulation is required for the safety of passengers and the protection of the Antarctic environment. At ATCM XXXI New Zealand offered to host an Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic in Wellington. Parties welcomed this offer.  It was agreed that the terms of reference for the meeting would be discussed at ATCM XXXII. New Zealand has identified by means of consultation via the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat the dates 9 – 11 December 2009 for holding the meeting.

2. Work to Date
The Parties’ consideration of tourism in Antarctica gained considerable impetus from the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-governmental Activities hosted by Norway in Tromso in March 2004.  The ATCM Tourism Working Group was subsequently established at ATCM XXVII at Capetown in May 2004.  ATCM XXVII also saw the adoption of Measure 4 (2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area and the associated Resolution 4 (2004).  Decision 4 (2004) on Guidelines for Ships Operating in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters was also adopted.

At ATCM XXVIII in Stockholm Measure 1 (2005): Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection – Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies was adopted following more than ten years of negotiations.  In addition Decision 8 (2005) on the Use of Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) in Antarctica was adopted.    ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh saw the adoption of Resolution 3 (2006) on Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area.

At ATCM XXX in New Delhi in 2007 the ATCM intersessional contact group (ICG) on prevention and mitigation of maritime incidents with passenger ships in Antarctic Waters was established. Resolution 4 (2007) on Ship-based Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area was also adopted which discouraged landings from vessels carrying more than 500 passengers. 

Discussions at ATCM XXXI in Kyiv reflected increasing concern of the Parties.  A presentation by representatives of the Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica of the International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO/HCA) suggested “that the main question relating to a major accident involving a tourist vessel was not if it would happen, but when.”2 

A number of Parties and Experts provided papers on ship-based tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area at ATCM XXXI including: 

    • Rules Governing ships in the Antarctic (Chile, IP 8); 
    • Passenger Ship Safety – Development of Statutory Instruments Over Time and Key Requirements to Vessels as Function of Age and Size (Norway, IP 115) 
    • The Intersessional Contact Group on Issues Concerning  Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters (Norway, WP 36);  
    • Antarctic Shipping (ASOC, IP 58);
    • A Decade of Antarctic Tourism: Status, change, and actions needed (ASOC, IP 41); 
    • Summary Report and Outcomes of IAATO’s Marine Committee Meeting on Vessel Operations, Safety and Related Issues (IAATO, IP 81);
    • Regulation of Antarctic Tourism – A Marine Perspective (IAATO, IP 83). 

At Kyiv Resolution 5 (2008) on Improving Hydrographic Surveying and Charting to Support Safety of Navigation and Environmental Protection in the Antarctic Region and Resolution 6 (2008) on Enhancing the role of Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres with Search and Rescue Regions in the Antarctic Treaty Area were adopted.

Further work relating to ship-borne tourism has been undertaken since the meeting in Kyiv. The Intersessional Contact Group, coordinated by Norway, on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters continued its work on the prevention and mitigation of a maritime incident in Antarctic waters. Chile has also hosted a workshop (12-14 August 2008), Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic, bringing together National Programmes and the Rescue Coordination Centres of countries with search and rescue responsibility in the Southern Ocean.

Since 2004 the ATCM has invited the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) to develop regulations on ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area.  ATCM XXVIII (2005) requested the International Maritime Organization to examine mechanisms for restricting the use of Heavy Fuel Oil and ATCM XXVII (2004) asked the IMO to consider the Guidelines for Ships operating in Arctic and Antarctic ice-covered waters.  Both items continue to be under review at the IMO. 

The ATCM has undertaken in the past five years in particular a considerable amount of work on the regulation of ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area including its potential impacts on the Antarctic environment. It has also sought to cooperate with the (IMO) where that body has the necessary expertise.  New Zealand offers to host the proposed ATME in the hope that it will serve to accelerate the development of a coordinated body of recommendations to be conveyed to ATCM XXIII in Uruguay. 

3. Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism
Recommendation IV-24 (Santiago, 1966) provides for a Meeting of Experts to be convened to discuss practical problems relating to Antarctica. As noted, at ATCM XXXII Parties welcomed New Zealand’s proposal to host an ATME on ship-borne tourism in the second half of 2009. According to Recommendation IV-24, the terms of reference for the Meeting should be agreed in advance by the Consultative Parties. Draft Terms of Reference are accordingly attached at Annex ‘A’ for consideration at ATCMXXXII.

As indicated to Treaty Parties through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (Circular Number 28/2008), New Zealand proposes to host the ATME from 9 – 11 December 2009 in Wellington. Subject to the ATCM’s agreement to this proposal a website for the ATME will be established shortly providing key details and a registration facility. 

4. Scope of the meeting
As the draft terms of reference (attached) indicate, it is proposed that the meeting consider:

    • Trends in ship-borne tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area over the past 10 years, including maritime incidents, and future projections;
    • Maritime Safety in the Antarctic Treaty Area;
    • Protection of the Antarctic Environment;
    • Cooperation between the ATCM, IMO and IHO.
5. Attendance
It is proposed that invitations be extended to the Representatives of the Consultative Parties, and Non-Consultative Parties and Observers and Experts including the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), the International Maritime Organisation (IMO), the World Tourism Organisation (WTO), the World Conservation Union (IUCN), the International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO), the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) and Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) with Search and Rescue Responsibilities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. 


 

