





The effect of marathons held on the Antarctic continent




The effect of marathons held on the Antarctic continent


Summary 

The steady increase in tourism in the Antarctic over the past decade has led to the organisation of an increasing variety of activities of this nature, including marathons. As they are not subject to any international regulation, these events end up stymying Antarctic operators and the authorities responsible for granting permission for such events to be held on or near their Antarctic bases. These marathons, which have been held in different parts of Antarctica for the past ten years or so without first obtaining the necessary documentation, are run in such a way that they disrupt scientific research on Antarctic bases and constitute a danger to both tourists and the Antarctic ecosystems. This WP invites the Consultative Meeting to express its views on these and similar activities and adopt measures to control or restrict them. 

Aims:

a) Discuss the advent of new, large-scale tourist activities in Antarctica.  
b) Regulate or restrict the holding of marathons and similar events on Antarctic soil, and define measures to control or restrict the practice.

Points for consideration:

    1. Marathons are large-scale sporting events that require the mobilisation and transport of vast amounts of equipment to Antarctica (boats, motorcycles, signage), which end up affecting the work of the bases located close to where the event is being held. In some cases, medical assistance is requested for participants or athletes, at times even leading to emergency medical evacuations, which in turn can disrupt an Antarctic Program’s scheduled activities. 

    2. The running of marathons jeopardises the application of Resolution 4 (2007), as it dangerously approaches the maximum limit permitted for simultaneous disembarkations at a single point; the rule governing the number of guides required (1 for every 20 tourists) is not respected, and on occasions more than two vessels may be disembarking tourists at the same disembarkation point at the same time. 

    3. The adverse weather conditions and irregular terrain, both inherent characteristics of the Antarctic, can be a major source of accidents, to the point where existing capacities for rescuing victims and transferring them to the mainland may be exceeded. In addition, health risks related to the practice of this high-performance sport, such as respiratory and heart problems, cannot be treated properly, and this can have unfortunate consequences.   

    4. There is uncertainty as to who should be deciding on these matters, as they affect a number of institutions with interests in the Antarctic, and in some cases even affect more than one base. Organisers of these events are profiting from the lack of regulation in this area.  

    5. Sporting events of this nature cannot be considered to be completely unrelated to tourism. It has be demonstrated in the past that there is a danger that visitors/runners will not respect the limits set by the organisers. This desire to explore increases the risk of accidents, especially if there are not enough guides and support staff present to monitor the established route. 

Proposal:
 
-	At the last meeting in Kiev, the Chilean delegation informally expressed its concern about the holding of such events to representatives of some of the bases located in Fildes Bay, King George Island and to representatives of the IAATO. Now, it is formally requesting that the Consultative Meeting express its views on the running of marathons on Antarctic soil and/or to establish measures to regulate or restrict the practice, taking into consideration the points expressed above.  

-	Another objective of this proposal is to put an end to the development of other forms of large-scale tourism and leisure activities, which are similar in nature and which constitute a danger both to human lives and to the continent’s natural environment. 

-	Similarly, if these activities were to be restricted or measures were adopted to control them, this would also solve the problems related to the lack of a harmonised international authorisation procedure for such events, and could lead to more detailed rules on the submission for approval of environmental impact assessments.


­­­______________

