





Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic





Towards Improved Search and Rescue 
Coordination and Response in the Antarctic
Working Paper submitted by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
to ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, USA, April 2009) under agenda item 9 “Safety of Operations in Antarctica” 
Abstract
Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) of five countries share responsibility for the coordination of Search and Rescue (SAR) over the Antarctic region.  Antarctic RCCs and operators have worked together for a long time. They held in August 2008 a workshop  Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic. 
The report of the successful, productive workshop is provided at Annex B. The workshop participants adopted a number of Recommendations and decided on a range of Actions (Refer Annex B, Appendix 1).  An outline progress/status report on Actions is provided at Annex A. 
The ATCM is asked to consider the adoption of a Resolution incorporating those Recommendations from the workshop that were directed to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. 
Introduction
Under international maritime and aeronautical agreements, Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) of five countries (Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa) share responsibility for the coordination of Search and Rescue (SAR) over the Antarctic region.  
A description of SAR arrangements and systems in place was provided by COMNAP in 2008 in ATCM XXXI IP099 Search and Rescue in the Antarctic.  This paper and other SAR-related resources are available on the COMNAP web site's SAR section at www.comnap.aq/sar.
Antarctic RCCs and operators have worked together for a long time, though links have often remained informal and on a mostly national level. The situation continues to evolve positively with stronger links being forged. 
The current increase in maritime and air traffic can be of concern in relation both to the capability to respond and to the possible impact on National Antarctic Programs. Of particular concern are very large passenger vessels – their rescue would require considerable assets and resources and could cause major disruptions to nearby stations and vessels and the research programmes they support.
In response to these concerns, COMNAP and RCC authorities decided to convene a workshop to:
    • Improve understanding of the nature and activities of RCCs and National Antarctic Programs, and how they can work together;
    • Review the nature of maritime, aeronautical and land traffic in the Antarctic region and the challenges it poses for Search and Rescue; and
    • Explore options for improved Search and Rescue coordination and response in the Antarctic.
2008 SAR Workshop
The workshop, Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic, was held in Valparaiso / Viña del Mar, Chile, 12-14 August 2008. It was hosted by the Chilean Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR) in collaboration with COMNAP.  
The workshop focused on practical issues in an open and collaborative spirit and was very productive. The report of the workshop outlining key discussions and outcomes is provided at Annex B. 
Discussions centred on the following key topics:
    • Links between RCCS
    • Links between RCCs and National Antarctic Programs
    • Links between RCCs and their national Antarctic agencies
    • Contact list and communication protocols
    • Information on potential rescue assets
    • Ship position reporting
    • Advance schedules
    • Library of information
    • Land SAR
    • Long Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT)
    • Automatic Identification Systems (AIS)
    • Prevention
Discussions were assisted by the development and review of three hypothetical SAR scenarios (refer Annex B, Appendix 2):
    • Large passenger vessel evacuation off Antarctic Peninsula
    • Commercial airliner crash landing in Mary Bird Land
    • Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) – hard landing of big cargo aircraft at snow compacted runway 
Workshop participants adopted a number of Recommendations and decided on a range of Actions to be progressed over the following year (Refer Annex B, Appendix 1).  An outline progress/status report on Actions is provided at Annex A. A follow up workshop will be reconvened in July/August 2009, in particular to expand on land SAR. 
Recommendations
Workshop participants adopted a number of Recommendations directed to Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. 
The ATCM is asked to consider the adoption of a Resolution incorporating the following relevant Recommendations from the workshop: 
    • That Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties recognise the importance for Search and Rescue of 
        ◦ maintaining up to date information on all stations, other ground facilities (camps, refuges, airfields...), ships and aircraft;
        ◦ providing advance information on ship and aircraft schedules; and
        ◦ all Antarctic ships ensuring that their positions are available to at least the MRCC of the region they are navigating in.
    • That Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties resolve that all ships flying their flag or used as part of their National Antarctic Program should while in the Antarctic Treaty Area, as far as possible, report their position to at least one of the MRCCs of the 5 countries [with SAR responsibilities over the Antarctic (Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa)], recognising that official MRCCs have systems in place to ensure confidentiality of this information.
    • That Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties encourage ships to liaise with vessels they encounter in the Antarctic Treaty area to promote the use of position reporting systems.

Annex A: Outline Progress/Status Report on Workshop Actions
Conventions
    • “the 5 countries”: refers to the 5 countries with SAR responsibilities over the Antarctic: Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa. 
    • “the RCCs of the 5 countries”: refers to all relevant Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) of these 5 countries. 3 countries have each one Maritime RCC (MRCC) and one Aeronautical RCC (ARCC). The other 2 countries (Australia and New Zealand) have each one single  Joint Maritime and Aeronautical RCC (JRCC). 
    • “the 5 National Antarctic Programs”: refers to the National Antarctic Programs (NAPs) of these 5 countries.  
Action list

Action
Progress / Status 
Links between RCCs
1
5 countries to continue pursuing bilateral SAR agreements for both maritime and aviation
In progress. A number of bilateral agreements are already in place.
2
5 countries to consider establishing a single regional SAR agreement (Maritime and Aeronautical) , which could for example, at least initially, be a simple agreement restricted to exchange of information, communication protocols and aviation coordination arrangements – noting that a number of maritime and aeronautical bilateral agreements are already in place   
In progress.
Links between RCCs and National Antarctic Programs
3
COMNAP to draft a paper and recommendations for increased collaboration in SAR between National Antarctic Programs and relevant RCCs, using the draft Arctic SAR Memorandum of Understanding as a guide
In progress. To be tabled at the next COMNAP Annual General Meeting (Punta Arenas, 03-06 Aug 2009)
4
Each of the 5 NAPs to consult with their RCCs and the other NAPs operating in their area to discuss potential communication and collaboration between each other for SAR purposes
In progress.
Contact list & communication protocols
5
COMNAP and RCC Australia to develop, maintain and make available a list of relevant contacts, by 15 October 2008 
Done. List is now incorporated in COMNAP's new Antarctic Communications Directory.
Information on potential rescue assets
6
IAATO to make its current information about its members' ships available to the MRCCs of the 5 countries
Done. 
Now done on a routine basis.
7
COMNAP to work with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to develop and coordinate their relevant information systems and resources (including EIES, InfoX, AFIM and ATOM) so as to best maintain information on stations, ships and aircraft and make the information available to the RCCs of the 5 countries
In progress. 
Ship Position Reporting
8
COMNAP to feed information from their ship position reporting system to the MRCCs of the 5 countries
Done. 
Now done on a routine basis.
9
IAATO to take steps to ensure that the MRCCs of the 5 countries have a reliable access route to the IAATO vessel positions
Done. 
Now done on a routine basis.
10
COMNAP, IAATO and AMVER to explore ways in which their respective position reporting systems could communicate with, and support, each other
In progress. IAATO vessel positions from the IAATO vessel tracker are now made available to AMVER routinely.
Advance Schedules
11
IAATO to to provide its members' pre-season ship schedules to the MRCCs of the 5 countries
Done. 
Now done on a routine basis.
12
COMNAP to work with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to develop and coordinate their relevant information systems and resources (including EIES, InfoX, SPRS) so as it can feed information on advance schedules of participating National Antarctic Program vessels to the RCCs of the 5 countries
In progress.
Library of information
13
COMNAP to integrate such a library in its new system – target implementation date: 01 Jan 2009
In progress. Basic, interim   info section available at www.comnap.aq/sar . 
14
RCCs, NAPs and IAATO to forward to the COMNAP Secretariat any material they consider worth incorporating in this library.
Ongoing.
Automatic Identification System (AIS)
15
Uruguayan National Antarctic Program, in collaboration with others to continue working on AIS options for SAR purposes, and report back on progress to COMNAP, the RCCs of the 5 countries and the ATCM
In progress.
Annex B: Report – Antarctic SAR Workshop (12-14 August 2008)
See attachment.

