





Report of the continued Intersessional Contact Group on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters





Report of the Continued Intersessional Contact Group on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters

The 31st ATCM established terms of reference whereby the ICG was tasked with continuing its examination of issues related to the prevention and mitigation of a maritime incident in Antarctic waters.  An initial risk assessment had earlier been employed by the ICG to identify hazards associated with the operation of vessels in the Treaty area which were of priority concern to the Parties.  These hazards included:  

    1. Unknown submarine topography and inaccurate charting;
    2. Localized or extreme weather conditions;
    3. Variable ice conditions;
    4. Inexperienced crews;
    5. Deficiencies in search and rescue coordination, coverage, and assets; and
    6. Tender operations.

Norway served as convenor of the re-tasked ICG, and Australia, France, India, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States, IAATO, and ASOC actively participated in the ICG’s work by submitting written comments.  Others may have followed the discussion intersessionally as well. 
Event Tree Analysis
In order to refine its initial risk analysis, it was proposed that the ICG consider Event Tree Analysis (ETA), which could be used to identify gaps in existing control measures which are both relevant to the previously specified hazards and of potentially greatest consequence.  ETA methodology develops visual models, known as Event Trees, to portray how, proceeding from an initiating event, certain control measures may either prevent or mitigate undesirable outcomes.  These visual models link initiating events to specific consequences through incident chains that are unique pathways through a series of control measures.  Once the incident chains are assembled, control measures in question may be qualitatively analyzed with a view to determining their effectiveness.  Absent or ineffective control measures can then be highlighted and appropriate recommendations made.  By applying the ETA methodology, the ICG sought to identify regulatory inadequacies or gaps, highlight their potential to yield undesirable outcomes, and provide a rational basis for possible referral of matters of concern to the ATCM or, with ATCM support, to the International Maritime Organization or other expert bodies through Parties who are also Member States of the those organizations.
Twenty-four different initiating events were nominated, each of which that could occur with grave consequences in the presence of the six hazards listed above.  From these, seven were chosen for development into Event Trees because they potentially posed either the greatest or most Antarctic-specific threat to passenger vessel operations in the Treaty Area.  Explanations for the selection of specific initiating events of concern are summarized below.

    • Grounding was chosen as the initiating event for Hazard #1 (Unknown Submarine Topography) both because of its relative likelihood and its high potential for harm to life and the environment. 
    • For Hazard #2 (Localized or Extreme Weather Conditions), Collision with Ice was selected as the initiating event of greatest concern.  This initiating event acknowledges the frequent presence of ice in Antarctic sea lanes and the often associated phenomenon of low visibility.
    • Stranding, or becoming stuck in ice, was selected as one of two initiating events for Hazard #3 (Variable Ice Conditions) on account of the distinct possibility of a vessel encountering ice floes in the Antarctic and that ice’s potential to cause significant damage to a vessel.  A second initiating event of concern to ICG participants in connection with Hazard #3 was the possible disabling of a vessel on account of a damaged propeller.  An encounter with ice floes carries the potential for damaging a vessel’s propeller, thus reducing its maneuverability and its ability to safely navigate in heavy weather.
    • Navigational Errors was selected as the most likely and problematic initiating event for Hazard #4 (Inexperienced Crew).  Navigational errors can happen anywhere, but navigational errors in the Antarctic operating environment can result in especially grave consequences.
    • Loss of propulsion was chosen as the initiating event of greatest concern for Hazard #5 (Deficiencies in Search and Rescue (SAR) Coordination, Coverage, and Assets).  In the event a vessel loses propulsion and cannot be readily repaired, the need for SAR will be paramount given the remote and inhospitable nature of the Antarctic environment.
    • In some cases, passenger vessels are utilizing small, rigid-hull, inflatable boats (RHIB) as tenders, or small landing craft, to transfer passengers and crew to shore.  Due to the inherent hazards of potentially navigating through ice, and the unforgiving Antarctic environment, Capsizing was chosen as the initiating event of greatest concern for Hazard #6 (Tender Operations).  RIBs are highly maneuverable and their small size enables them to enter shallow bays and other areas with limited hydrographic charting.  Despite their flexibility, the consequences are dire if an RIB were to capsize while separated from its mother vessel.   

Event Trees were constructed for each of the seven initiating events identified above, applying existing control measures identified by the ICG participants.  Consequences were then determined for a succession of possible incident chains, based on physical conditions and success or failure of relevant control measures.  The Event Trees developed during the analysis are attached at Annex I.
In order to derive useful information from the Event Trees, a number of incident chains pertaining to each hazard and flowing from each designated initiating event were examined.  Attention was focused on those incident chains where a succession of independent control measures were deemed to have failed, thus creating a cascading effect which correlated highly to more adverse outcomes.  The incident chains most closely examined were those in which more than half of control measures failed, or in which more than a third of control measures failed in the specific case of Hazard #6 (tender operations).  Where the failure of a single control measure was most commonly encountered in the context of several control measures having failed; an attempt was made to identify potentially weakest link among those incident chains which led to the most adverse consequences.
It was suggested that there are limits, of course, as to how useful an attempt could be to locate “weak links” in the absence of more quantitative analysis of the actual probability of a control measure failing.  Assigning those probabilities with any measure of confidence requires more consultation among those who operate passenger vessels in Antarctic waters and maritime regulators than was possible through a web-based intersessional contact group.  Nonetheless, some ICG participants suggested that some general conclusions could be reached which could usefully guide consultation among experts as the process of risk analysis proceeds beyond discussion of this working paper and its recommendations at the 32nd ATCM. 
Possible Deficiencies in Current Control Measures
While not all participants necessarily agreed, the conclusions drawn from event trees presented to the ICG suggested that incidents of concern were characterized by a succession of control measure failures which showed a recurrence of possibly absent or inadequate control measures in five key areas: Training, Search and Rescue (SAR), Lifesaving, Vessel Construction, and Other.  
Training
Potential gaps identified in this category concerned the adequacy of officer and crew training, as well as possible deficiencies in a vessel’s Safety Management System (SMS).  While officer and crew training were only explicitly identified as a possible regulatory gap in Hazard #4, it was argued that these were applicable to all six hazards.  The IMO Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers Code (STCW Code) outlines specific training requirements for officers and crew.  It was noted that while the IMO has recommended that ships operating in Arctic waters have as part of their crew an individual who is specially trained to direct the movement of a ship in ice-covered waters, neither those guidelines nor the STCW Code mandate geographically specific training or experience (e.g., ice navigation or capacity for medical treatment of hypothermia on vessels operating in Polar Regions) that may better prepare mariners for unique environments.  
Another potential regulatory gap identified by the ETAs may be compliance with the IMO’s International Safety Management Code (ISM Code).  In accordance with the ISM Code, a vessel must have a Safety Management System (SMS), which requires the development of policies and procedures, and the retention of maintenance and training records.  This SMS requires regular review and update by ship owners and operators, and periodic verification by Flag States.  The IMO has approved guidelines recommending that ships operating in Arctic ice-covered waters carry an operating manual and training manual for recommended ice navigators, but those guidelines are not mandatory and are not now applicable to Antarctic waters.  It was suggested that failure to appropriately consider Antarctic operations in these SMS reviews and updates of safety policies, procedures and training programs could result in equipment malfunction, vessel disablement, environmental damage, or loss of life.
Search and Rescue
A possible inadequacy identified for SAR was lack of coverage, or the scarcity of regional SAR resources.  This inadequacy was identified in incident chains for all six hazards.  It was highlighted that due to remote operating areas and unpredictable weather patterns, SAR operations in the Antarctic are difficult and, at times, impossible to render in a timely fashion.  Analysis focused on what steps could have been taken to assist SAR resources in quickly locating lifeboats launched in the event passengers and crew needed to evacuate a vessel.      
Lifesaving
Potential inadequacies identified in this category included the use of open or partially enclosed lifeboats, and the sole use of personal floatation devices for passengers in freezing waters.  This deficiency was present in five of the six hazards.  All vessels are required to carry enough lifeboats to safely disembark all passengers and crew in the event of an emergency.  However, depending on the date of construction, vessels may either carry open lifeboats, partially-enclosed lifeboats, or fully-enclosed lifeboats.  In the event of a vessel sinking, passengers and crew may be required to board open lifeboats in adverse weather conditions, a very likely circumstance which would markedly decrease the likelihood of survival unless sufficient SAR resources are nearby.   
A similar inadequacy included the reliance on personal floatation devices (PFD).  These devices are designed to help the wearer remain afloat, but lack crucial protection against exposure.  Without appropriate exposure protection and with an average summer air temperature of - 21 degrees Celsius and water temperature of 1 degree Celsius it was suggested that the sole use of a PFD for protection against the Antarctic environment was insufficient, even during the Austral summer when virtually all Antarctic tourism occurs.  It was also noted that protection from such exposure in the harsh Antarctic environment was essential to prevent the loss of life until SAR resources could arrive.
Vessel Construction
Potential inadequacies and gaps associated with this category include the sufficiency of ship hulls and tender or small landing craft construction.  Currently, there is no international requirement that vessels operating in the Antarctic be constructed with ice-strengthened hulls, or any requirement limiting a vessel’s operation in the vicinity of ice when not built with an ice-strengthened hull.  Additionally, depending on a vessel’s length, it might not be constructed with a double bottom hull over its entire length.  This potential inadequacy was identified in four of the six hazards.
Another potential inadequacy in this category was the arrangement and/or design of the RIBs used to transport passengers from the vessel to shore, or on wildlife excursions.  Depending on the number of passengers on board and the specific RIB design, some passengers must sit on the sponsons, or sides of the craft, while in transit with only a hand hold to keep them from falling overboard.  If such a fall overboard were to take place, it was suggested that the consequences could be dire.     
Other
This category included other possible inadequacies that did not fit squarely into the categories above.  Such inadequacies include accurate charting, and weather and ice forecasting.
The need for accurate charting in the Antarctic is a well known and understood inadequacy.  As vessels push into new, unexplored areas to provide passengers with memorable experiences, it was suggested that they are exposing the vessel and passengers to potentially fatal consequences if their charts were inaccurate.  This inadequacy was present in incident chains for four of the six hazards.
Weather and ice forecasting were identified as a potential inadequacy in incident chains for all six hazards due to the extreme Antarctic environment.  Vessels rely on a combination of methods to determine current weather conditions.  These include, but are not limited to Navigational Text (NAVTEX), INMARSAT and weather information collected from other vessels or land-based stations.  NAVTEX and INMARSAT coverage varies and may not be available throughout the Antarctic region.  Additionally, the variability of weather and ice conditions in the Antarctic means that what one vessel or land station experiences may not be representative of what is actually occurring in the vicinity of the vessel requesting information.  Without accurate meteorological information, vessel crews are handicapped in their ability to take proactive measures to ensure the safety of their vessel while in the presence of a hazard. 
Conclusion
The ICG has made significant strides in its continued efforts to identify, understand, and address the risks associated with passenger vessel operations in the Antarctic.  These efforts have included the suggestion of hazards which might be of priority concern to the ATCM given their potential for exposing passengers to severe consequences.  These hazards could be used as the starting point for identifying some potential gaps or inadequacies in existing control measures.  Event Tree Analysis was used to locate potential regulatory deficiencies in several scenarios that carried a high likelihood of adverse consequences.  Some of the ICG participants suggested that areas where regulatory gaps raised highest anecdotal concern were training of officers and crew for operations in Antarctic waters, inadequate SAR coverage, the use of open lifeboats, and inaccurate charting.  
The proponents of the ETA process acknowledged the qualitative nature of this analysis, but believed awareness was the key to initiating change.  They suggested that with the identification of areas where regulatory gaps and inadequacies seemed most glaring, the ICG could continue forward by 1) examining more closely the body of existing control measures to determine what specific deficiencies might most urgently need to be addressed, and 2) evaluating the usefulness of closing those regulatory gaps through cost-benefit analysis.  It was noted that both tasks would require an appropriate forum for in-depth quantitative consultation between vessel operators and vessel regulators. 
Next Steps
In follow-up to its work, the ICG proposes that the ATCM continue to consider what issues related to tourist vessels should be referred for expert review and that Parties pursue through their representatives at the IMO consideration of the sufficiency of control measures related to the technical specifications of vessels engaged in polar activities.
To convey the urgency the ATCM attaches to the Parties working in this latter connection, some ICG participant proposes that the ATCM adopt one or more resolutions encouraging Parties to pursue through the IMO efforts to close regulatory gaps identified by the ICG through the Event Tree Analysis described above.
Norway (joined by other Parties to be determined) will submit an information paper to the Maritime Safety Committee’s 87th session in 2010 alternatively the Sub-Committee on Design and Equipment in 2010. The information paper will report on the work of the ICG and its identification of possible regulatory gaps bearing on the technical specifications of vessels engaged in polar activities.  The information paper is not in any way intended to delay efforts currently underway in the IMO to extend to Antarctic waters Guidelines for ships operating in Arctic ice-covered waters (MSC/Circ.1056-MEPC/Circ.399).  Instead, the purpose of submitting an information paper to the IMO will be to call attention to general areas of possible regulatory deficiency that are of concern to the ATCM so that Parties or others may undertake to place on the Maritime Safety Committee’s agenda items exploring these concerns.  It would also afford Parties or others an opportunity to urge the Committee to place a matter before relevant IMO sub-committees for consideration within their respected areas of expertise.
The ICG notes that New Zealand is proposing to host an Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on ship-borne tourism in Wellington in December 2009. Draft Terms of Reference will be put up for adoption at ATCM XXXII. The group furthermore notes that the ATME could be a vehicle through which discussion of relevant topics can continue intersessionally. 



