





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the revision of List A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” appended to Resolution 5 (1995)





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group 
on the revision of List A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” appended to Resolution 5 (1995)

Introduction
At XXXI ATCM (Kyiv, 2008) Argentina presented Working Paper 54 “Proposal to revise the inspection checklists contained in Resolution 5 (1995)”. In agreement with WP 54, ATCM XXXI (Kyiv, 2008) decided to establish an open-ended web-based ICG to review, with support from the Secretariat, Checklist A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” contained in Resolution 5 (1995), as the first step towards reviewing all the checklists contained in this Resolution. 
The following terms of reference were agreed for this group: 
    • Identify which questions in Checklist A seek information that should already be provided by Parties to the Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange System; 
    • Consider the possible updating of the Checklist by rewording these questions and/or by adding new ones to enable the checklist to facilitate the inspection of permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations, and suggest which questions might more appropriately be answered by direct observation and which questions could be preliminarily answered by consulting the documents and information regarding the base in question. 
    • Submit a report with a draft revised checklist to the next ATCM, mindful that questions should not be deleted if the information sought is currently unavailable in other databases or information exchanges, and that the report should not preclude inspection teams from asking questions in addition to those contained in any checklist. 
Argentina agreed to be the convenor of the ICG and to report progress to ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009). 
Intersessional activities
A first draft document has been posted in the ATCM Forum by mid-September, 2008 and comments from interested Parties were received until mid-November, 2008. The following Parties and observers have actively contributed with comments to this first draft document prepared by Argentina during this first round of discussions: Australia, France, India, New Zealand, United Kingdom, United States and COMNAP. 
During this first intersessional period, the ICG was able to address the first term of reference agreed by the ATCM, i.e, Identify which questions in Checklist A seek information that should already be provided by Parties to the Antarctic Treaty Information Exchange System; and it began the process of discussing the second one: Consider the possible updating of the Checklist by rewording these questions and/or by adding new ones to enable the checklist to facilitate the inspection of permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations, and suggest which questions might more appropriately be answered by direct observation and which questions could be preliminarily answered by consulting the documents and information regarding the base in question. 
The document summarizing all views expressed during this first round of exchanges is available at the ATCM forum hosted by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (http://forum.ats.aq/atcmforum/). It contains the original Checklist A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” appended to Resolution 5 (1995), plus a summary of the changes proposed so far for each section or question and the reasons currently provided by participants for such proposals. When consensus has not yet been reached on a proposed change, it has been clearly pointed out.
For each question the main sources of information available to help answer that question were also indicated. For the purpose of this document, an “Off site Source” corresponds to a source of information which can be accessed both prior and after the inspection (although this should not prevent inspection teams to access other off site sources not listed), while an “On site source” corresponds to a source of information which can only be accessed while the inspection team is visiting the station (bearing in mind that other ways of obtaining/checking in situ information not listed here can exist). 
It can be noted that the main sources of off-site information identified were the electronic information exchange systems developed by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and by COMNAP (EIES and infoX), two complementary systems that are in active development. 
Conclusions
The ICG has made significant progress on what turned out a comprehensive and detailed review of Checklist A, despite the unusually brief intersessional period between ATCMs XXXI (Kyiv, 2008) and XXXII (Baltimore, 2009). The work has highlighted the potential benefits and importance of making available a clear and consistent checklist. It may take long before we have another opportunity to revise Checklist A, and the ICG has considered it needed more time to appropriately fulfill the mandate given by the XXXI ATCM (Kyiv, 2008). Different approaches appeared during the review (some more oriented to policy, some more oriented to the practicalities of detailed technical assessments) and additional time would allow to reconcile these different, but not incompatible, approaches, and to develop a consensus on proposed changes to Checklist A.  
Recommendation
In summary, the ICG recommends that the ATCM agree to allow this group to continue its work for another intersessional period to fulfill the mandate given by XXXI ATCM (Kyiv, 2008) and submit a report with a draft revised checklist to the XXXIII ATCM (Punta del Este, 2010). 
