





Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica: Draft Project Scope




Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica: Draft Project Scope
Working Paper submitted by Australia, France and New Zealand
Summary
ATCM XXXI expressed its interest in the Committee for Environmental Protection’s (CEP) proposal to examine the environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica.  The CEP Chair and Vice-chairs have developed a draft project scope to address this issue as well as a proposed management approach for the study.
The CEP is invited to discuss and comment on the proposal and agree a way forward for conducting the study.
1. Introduction
Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica have expanded significantly in the last few decades.  But to date there has been no detailed study of the environmental impacts of these activities, including by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).
At the 31st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXXI, Ukraine, 2008), the Meeting welcomed the CEP’s advice that it had identified as a high priority in its five-year work plan consideration of the environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities. The Meeting requested the CEP Chair convey to Committee Members its interest in the results of this and other relevant work, and looked forward to progress reports at upcoming Consultative Meetings (ATCM XXXI Final Report (203)).
At ATCM XXXI, Parties also recalled that the issue of cumulative impacts of tourism had been raised several times in both the CEP and the ATCM (ATCM XXXI Final Report (206)).
During its 11 meetings the CEP has discussed a range of issues related to tourism and non-governmental activities including, for  example, assessment of possible cumulative impacts, strategic environmental assessment, limits in ship capacities, the number of people at key landing sites, and site specific guidelines.
Against that background, it would appear to be timely for the CEP to undertake dedicated work on the environmental aspects of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.
2. Proposed project on Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica
In accordance with the priorities of the CEP’s five year work programme the CEP Chair and Vice- Chairs have developed the attached project proposal for the CEP to undertake, so as to provide the ATCM with a report on the environmental aspects and impacts of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities, as an aid to the Treaty Parties’ ongoing discussions on tourism management.
The draft project scope was posted on the CEP Discussion Forum on 24 October 2008, and is reproduced below.  In response comments have been posted by two Members (India and the United States), both of whom expressed support for the study.  The full comments posted by these two Members are available via the Discussion Forum.

3. Recommendation
The CEP is invited to discuss and comment on the draft project scope attached to this Working Paper and agree a way forward for conducting the study.
Appendix A
Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica: Draft Project Scope
Objectives
The study aims to:
    • Provide a status report on Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities as a baseline from which to view future change (including in tourism and non-governmental activities themselves, as well as environmental standards and management responses);
    • Provide an assessment of actual and potential environmental impacts of tourism;
    • Identify and where possible assess the effectiveness of existing management controls.  This should include those controls implemented through the Protocol, and ATCM decisions, as well as those implemented by IAATO and by Parties individually;
    • Identify relevant research and monitoring activities and the outcomes and findings of such projects;
    • Identify new analytical methods or approaches to analyzing existing data and information; and
    • Where appropriate, make recommendations for the future management of the environmental aspects of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.

Scope
The study and report will be divided into three elements as outlined below:
Part 1.  The Status of Antarctic Tourism and Non-governmental Activities.
The first part of the study will provide a synthesis of the status and trends of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.  This will include an overview of changes in these activities over the last four decades in terms of:
    • overall trends; 
    • the range of tourism and non-governmental activities undertaken (both within and outside of IAATO) and associated visitor numbers;
    • visitor locations: a summary of the sites that have been, or are being visited and visitation frequency;
    • transport modes, including the number and types of vessels and aircraft  being used to transport visitors to and within the Antarctic;
    • transport routes, including shipping routes, aircraft corridors and overland traverse routes;
    • control mechanisms in place through the Antarctic Treaty, IAATO and by Parties individually.

This part of the report will be supported by a series of maps, charts and figures in order to provide a clear visual representation of changes in the footprint of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.
Part 2.  Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Antarctic Tourism and Non-governmental Activities.
The second part of the study will provide an assessment of the environmental aspects and impacts of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities.  Environmental impact assessments conducted under Annex I to the Protocol for tourism activities will be a key source of information for this assessment, which will include a review of:
    • the ways in which tourism and non-governmental activities interact with the environment;
    • research and monitoring effort that has been or is being undertaken to assess tourism impacts.  (The focus of this will be research and monitoring undertaken since 1991 (i.e. since the adoption of the Environmental Protocol));
    • actual or potential environmental impacts arising from tourism and non-governmental activities (perhaps using case studies from key visitor sites), including cumulative impacts;1
    • existing management controls (particularly site guidelines and EIA processes) and, where possible, their effectiveness; and
    • gaps in knowledge and uncertainties.
Part 3.  Responses and Recommendations.

The final part of the study will make recommendations about matters that may require further consideration.
Process and timetable
It is important that CEP Members engage in the development and consideration of the report, and that it is considered to be a CEP product.  To achieve that it is suggested that the Committee agrees on the scope of the study, receives regular progress reports and has an opportunity to peer review the final report.
Project Management Group
To maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of the project planning and implementation, it is proposed that the CEP establish a project management group comprising representatives of perhaps no more than 10 CEP Member countries who are willing to commit time, data and information, resources (e.g. mapping and graphic production) and / or expertise.  Ideally the project management group will include representatives from a range of Member nations, including some representatives of those countries actively involved in authorizing and managing tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica.
It will be important for this group to work openly and transparently and to provide regular progress reports to the Committee as a whole.  To achieve these requirements the process set out in Table 1 below is suggested.




Table A.1.  Suggested timetable for undertaking the project
What?
When?
Scope sent to the CEP for consideration
Due deadlines for CEP XII
Committee discussion and refinement of the scope
CEP XII, April 2009
Project Management Group agreed by the CEP
CEP XII, April 2009
Progress report sent to ATCM
ATCM XXXII, April 2009
Project commences
May 2009
Progress reports provided to the CEP
July, October 2009, January 2010.
Final draft report submitted to CEP XIII
Due deadlines for CEP XIII
Committee discussion of final draft report
CEP XIII, June 2010
If approved, final report sent to ATCM XXXIII
June 2010
Resources
Whilst the project management group will be responsible for coordinating the project and for ensuring the Committee as a whole is informed of progress being made, it will require an individual to undertake much of the tasking.  If it seen as helpful, New Zealand is willing to employ an individual on contract to facilitate the study under the direction of the project management group.
 

