





Initiative to Extend the Boundary of the International Maritime Organization’s Antarctic Special Area Northward to the Antarctic Convergence




Initiative to Extend the Boundary of the International Maritime Organization’s Antarctic Special Area Northward to the Antarctic Convergence 


Working Paper submitted by the United States



Summary

In WP48 (2008), the United States proposed as a possible item for inclusion in the ATCM’s long-term agenda the protection, in its entirety, of the ecosystem encircling the Antarctic continent.  On the 50th anniversary of the Treaty, and in recognition of a growing appreciation for the environmental interconnectedness of Antarctica and its surrounding seas, the United States proposes in this working paper that Parties to the Treaty that are also Parties to MARPOL 73/78 coordinate action within the International Maritime Organization to amend Antarctic Special Area provisions to extend its boundary northward to the Antarctic Convergence.  A resolution recommending such collaboration is appended. 


The United States, at ATCM XXXI in Kyiv, identified a number of possible themes for the long-term agenda of the Treaty Parties (Attachment to WP48). It proposed that the Treaty Parties should commit themselves, as part of such an agenda, to the protection, in its entirety, of the distinct and distinctive ecosystem that encircles the continent of Antarctica.  To quote excerpts from WP48:

“One of the significant achievements of the early operation of the Treaty was the recognition that the Antarctic continent is encircled by – and in fact inextricably linked to – a distinctive ecosystem whose northern limit is the Polar Front or Antarctic Convergence.  (The Convergence is the oceanic transition zone where northward flowing and colder Antarctic waters sink beneath warmer sub-Antarctic waters.  This zone, which fluctuates in time and space, is located north of the area of the Antarctic Treaty – in some areas as far as 10 degrees farther north – and forms a biological “boundary.”) 
Recognition of the unity of this ecosystem and the need to manage it as a whole was the impetus to the negotiation of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).  CCAMLR – whose area of application is defined by reference to the Antarctic Convergence – is one of the first international agreements to incorporate an ecosystem approach to resource conservation. 
From the perspective of the Treaty itself, an ecosystem approach has underpinned much of its work in seeking to manage the impacts of human activities and protect the Antarctic environment.  The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Environmental Protocol), particularly in its detailed annexes, takes such an ecosystem approach.  And yet, the area to which these provisions apply stops short (at 60 degrees South) of the full geographic extent of the ecosystem.  There is therefore the possibility that the ecosystem as a whole could be adversely affected by activities (which would be prohibited in the Antarctic Treaty area) taking place between 60 degrees South and the Antarctic Convergence.  It should be recalled that IAATO has already recognized this problem and adopted a measure providing for IAATO member vessels to observe the prohibitions on discharge set forth in Annex IV of the Environmental Protocol everywhere south of the Antarctic Convergence.”

The United States recognizes that extension of legally binding measures applicable to the entire area south of the Antarctic Convergence cannot be undertaken under the Antarctic Treaty, whose ambit extends to the area south of 60 degrees South Latitude, absent an amendment to the Treaty. While the United States does not suggest that we amend the Treaty, we believe that there are significant opportunities for the Treaty Parties to pursue this objective through voluntary coordination of policies and actions and through cooperation in relevant international fora.

The United States believes that an initial and important step can be launched at this ATCM by calling for the extension of the restrictions on discharges from vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area northward to the Antarctic Convergence.  At present, these restrictions, applicable to the area south of 60 degrees South Latitude, are mandated both by Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol and by the Antarctic Special Area provisions of MARPOL 73/78. (The establishment of the Antarctic Special Area by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) - adopted in November 1990 and entered into force in March 1992 - was a result of a coordinated initiative by the Treaty Parties pursuant to Recommendation XV-4 adopted at ATCM XV in Paris in 1989.  A primary rationale of this initiative was to bind vessels beyond those subject to the jurisdiction of the Parties to the Treaty.) 

The United States therefore proposes that ATCM XXXII call for the Parties to the Treaty that are also Parties to MARPOL 73/78 to coordinate action within the IMO to amend the Antarctic Special Area provisions to extend its boundary northward to the Antarctic Convergence.  The United States further proposes that, for the purposes of the Special Area, the location of the Antarctic Convergence be defined as the line defining the northern limit of the CCAMLR area, as set forth in Article 1, paragraph 4 of the Convention.  Finally, in recognition of the variability of the Convergence in time and space, the United States additionally proposes that Parties, working in cooperation with industry, assess the feasibility of individual vessels observing the Special Area provisions whenever they find, by measurement of seawater temperature, that the Convergence is located farther north, and report their findings at the next ATCM.
Draft Resolution Urging Parties to
Cooperate in the International Maritime Organization to Extend the Antarctic Special Area
Northward to the Antarctic Convergence

The Representatives,

Reaffirming their commitment to the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems;

Noting that the Antarctic Treaty, per its Article VI, provides that the Treaty applies to the area south of 60°South Latitude;

Noting further that the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, per its Article I(1), applies to the Antarctic marine living resources of the area south of 60° South latitude and to the Antarctic marine living resources of the area between that latitude and the Antarctic Convergence which form part of the Antarctic marine ecosystem; 

Reaffirming further the conservation principles of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources;

Recognizing that the Antarctic marine ecosystem includes the waters south of the Antarctic Convergence;

Recalling that the Antarctic Special Area defined in Annex I, regulation 1.11.7, and the Antarctic Area defined in Annex II, regulation 13.8.1, and the Antarctic Special Area defined in Annex V, regulation 5(1)(g), of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by its Protocol of 1978 (MARPOL 73/78), define the Antarctic area as the “sea area south of latitude 60º S” (MARPOL Special Areas);

Acknowledging the value of cooperation as among parties and through the International Maritime Organization to prevent marine pollution;

Recommend that: 

1. Those Parties that are party to MARPOL 73/78 cooperate in taking action within the International Maritime Organization to secure the amendment of the Antarctic Special Area to extend its boundary northward to the Antarctic Convergence, which should be defined for this purpose as the line defining the northern limit of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) area, as set forth in Article 1, paragraph 4 of the Convention, and 

2. The Parties assess the feasibility of individual vessels observing the Special Area provisions whenever they find, by measurement of seawater temperature, that the Convergence is located farther north, and report their findings at the next ATCM. 


