





Report of the CEP Observer to the XXXth SCAR Delegates Meeting held in Moscow, 14-16 July 2008 





Report of the CEP Observer to the XXXth SCAR Delegates Meeting held in Moscow, 14-16 July 2008


Abstract

This report summarizes the reports and conclusions made during the XXXth SCAR meeting, held in Moscow, July 2008. Section 5 deals with the session devoted to the relationship between SCAR and the ATCM/CEP. But, throughout the meeting, issues relevant to the ATCM or CEP were discussed, for example in section 2.2 (SSG Life Sciences, code of conduct), 2.4 (JCADM), 2.6 (King George Island Science), 3 (ACCE, code of conduct for sub-glacial exploration), 4 (collaboration with other bodies).


Observer’s Report

1. General Matters

1.1. During the CEP XI meeting in Kiev it was decided that, at the invitation of SCAR, a CEP observer should attend the SCAR meeting in Moscow. H. Decleir, the Belgian delegate to SCAR, was designated as its observer. A special session (section 5 of this report) was devoted to the relationship of SCAR with the ATCM/CEP. However throughout the meeting it was felt that scientific research and environmental matters in support of the ATS prevailed.

1.2. The XXXth Meeting of the SCAR Delegates was held in Moscow, Russia, from 14-16 July 2008.  The plenary sessions were led by C. Rapley, President of  SCAR and in accordance with procedures from the past the remaining meeting was split up in a meeting of the Delegates Committee on Scientific Affairs (chaired by M. C. Kennicutt) and a meeting of the Delegates Committee on Administration and Outreach (chaired by A. Meloni). 

1.3. After Malaysia had been admitted to Full Membership of SCAR and Romania to Associate Membership, delegates and members from 33 countries participated in the discussions. In addition, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) was admitted to Union Membership.

2.  Review of the SCAR Standing Scientific Groups (SSG’s) and JCADM (Joint SCAR-COMNAP Committee on Antarctic Data Management)

The delegates reviewed progress and plans of these Groups and adopted their reports:

2.1 SSG Geosciences

Two new Action Groups were created (‘GPS for Weather and Space Weather Forecasting’; ‘Cold Seeps and Hydrothermal Mounds’), one new Programme Planning Group (‘Solid Earth Responses and Influences on Cryospheric Evolution, SERCE’) and one Expert Group (‘Sub-Ice Geological Exploration, SIEGE’).

One highlight was the 4-yearly SCAR ISAES (International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences) in Santa Barbara, while concerns were raised regarding the absence of SCAR involvement in the IPCC; it was concluded that SCAR should take steps to obtain observer status within the IPCC Working Group1.

2.2 SSG Life Sciences

Two previous Expert Groups were merged into a new ‘Birds and Marine Mammals Expert Group’, one Action Group changed to an Expert Group (‘Continuous Plankton Recorder, CPR’), while the Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine  will look at pathogenic microbiota and birds as vectors for Lyme disease.

An important item for the CEP was the amendment with the help of COMNAP of the ‘Code of Conduct for Fieldwork’ to be presented as an IP for ATCM/CEP 2009. It was also realised that another code of conduct is needed for research in sub-glacial aquatic environments.

Two External Recommendations were made: one regarding the National Committees to urge their national funding agencies to contribute to SCAR-MarBIN funding, the other to urge researchers to give careful consideration as to whether flipper bands should be used on penguins.

2.3 SSG Physical Sciences

Two new Expert Groups were created (‘International Partnership in Ice Core Sciences, IPICS and ‘ICESTAR’, the latter as from 2010) and two new Action Groups (‘Polar Atmospheric Chemistry at the Tropopause’- PACT and ‘GPS for Weather and Space Weather Forecasting’). From 2010 the ‘Antarctic Astronomy and Astrophysics’ Expert Group will become an SRP (Scientific Research Programme).

Delegates decided on two Actions, one to provide more focus on chemistry and acidification of the Southern Ocean and the other to provide new Terms of Reference for the ISMASS (Ice Sheet Mass Balance) Expert Group in line with the ice sheet modellers.

Concern about the continuation of basic weather, sea and upper air observations, led the delegates to adopt 5 external recommendations in support of the maintenance of these observations, replacing recommendations taken previously.

2.4 JCADM (Joint SCAR-COMNAP Committee on Antarctic Data Management)

JCADM consists now of 31 member nations, has built up an Antarctic Master Directory containing 4726 dataset descriptions, while downloads averaged 4000 per month. The first newsletter was issued in June 2008. An independent review group gave a positive review.  COMNAP withdrew its financial contribution of $ 3300/yr. The delegates decided that SCAR will provide an extra allocation of $ 3300/yr and that JCADM shall become a SCAR Standing Committee (SCADM). The delegates decided also on the creation of an Action Group on SCAR Data and Information Management Strategy (AG-SDIMS) with representatives of SCADM and the 3 SSG’s and prepare a phased implementation plan including resource implications.

2.5 Cross Linkages

Two workshops were held to promote cross linkages between SCAR’s subsidiary bodies and a new workshop will be organised.

2.6 King George Island Science

A workshop for coordination of scientific research on King George Island was held with representation of each operation agency and external recommendations formulated to support upper air (radiosonde) observations and a wide range of systematic climatic data. In collaboration with SCAR, COMNAP was asked to discuss at its meeting a coordinated approach to King George Island science based on the Svalbard area experience. If successful this could serve as a model for a broader South Shetland Islands approach, while possible integration with the Admiralty Bay ASMA was also advocated.


3. Review of the SCAR Scientific Research Programmes (SRP)

On basis of the significant progress made by all 5 SRPs, delegates approved ACE (Antarctic Climate Evolution), AGCS (Antarctica and the Global Climate System), EBA (Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic) and SALE (Sub-glacial Antarctic Lake Exploration) for 4 additional years and ICESTAR to the end of 2009, after which it will become an Expert Group.

The draft ACCE (Antarctic Climate Change an the Environment) review, intended to be a southern hemisphere equivalent of the successful ACIA (Arctic Climate Impact Assessment) has been and will be further circulated for comments and is thought to be a landmark volume.

Seen the common interest, a Cross-SSG Action-Group was established to ‘Predict Changes in the Physical and Biological Environment of the Antarctic’ between the SSG-Life sciences and the SSG-Physical Sciences.

An Action Group with members from SALE and representatives from the 3 SSGs was formed to develop a code of conduct for the exploration of sub-glacial hydrological systems and to present a preliminary draft to the SCAR executive Committee in 2009.

A new SRP, ‘Antarctic Astronomy and Astrophysics Scientific Research Programme, (AAA-SRP) was approved, beginning in 2010.

4. Collaboration between SCAR, IASC and the IPY

4.1 IPY

Generally, IPY was a success, 215 projects of which 180 scientific and 400 Million US$ of new funding. Education and Outreach has also been a success (‘Polar days’, ‘Association for Polar Early Career Scientists”- APECS) while this was less so with regards to Data and Information Management. SCAR’s Executive Committee should pursue the question how to deal with the legacy of IPY.

4.2 SCAR and IASC (International Arctic Science Committee)

SCAR formed a Bipolar Action Group (BipAG) to advise SCAR and IASC on the way forward after the IPY, such as:
    • establish links between SAON (Sustained Arctic Observational Networks) and PAntOS (Action Group on Pan-Antarctic Observations System)
    • SCAR and IASC to prepare themselves as coordinators for the IPY data legacy
    • SCAR and IASC to go for observer status with the IPCC

Delegates welcomed the Memorandum of Understanding signed in St Petersburg between SCAR and IASC with respect to APECS (Association for Polar Early Career Scientists), with IACS (International Association of Cryospheric Sciences) and with WCRP (World Climate Research Programme).


5. SCAR and the ATCM

The delegates discussed two important reports with respect to SCAR’s work in relation to the ATS, i.e. the Report of the Standing Committee on ATS (SC-ATS) and the Report on the work of the Action Group on ‘SCAR and the ATS in the 21st Century’ which met in Cambridge in May 2008.

5.1 Report of the Standing Committee on ATS (SC-ATS)

Delegates noted the hard work by SC-ATS in preparing for the ATCM in Kiev, especially by S. Chown. SCAR’s input provided two Working Papers and 5 Information Papers, including SCAR’s Lecture. These papers as well as the Lecture were very well received. The CEP accepted the SCAR recommendation that according to the IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria, the southern Giant Petrel population south of 60° South is of Least Concern. 

The SC-ATS planned activities for the 2009 ATCM/CEP contain a wide range of issues and bear witness of the increasing work load:
(i)  persistent organic pollutants; (ii) biodiversity and environmental domains analysis; (iii) alien risk assessment; (iv) conservation planning assessment; (v) management plans considerations; (vi) bioprospecting; (vii) aliens in Antarctica; (viii) climate change update; (ix) SCAR annual report; (x) IPY report (xi) Code of Conduct for fieldwork.

The delegates discussed also the necessity to keep the high profile of SCAR’s Lecture at the next ATCM in Baltimore, which will celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty.

5.2 Report on the work of the Action Group on ‘SCAR and the ATS in the 21st Century’

Delegates heard the Report of Clive Howard Williams on the work of the Action Group on SCAR and the ATS in the 21st century and the meeting in May 2008 at SPRI in Cambridge:

SCAR was designated as Official Observer to the Antarctic Treaty in 1959 and has remained a primary source of high quality scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty System. The increasing demands of the growing ATCM and the evolving CEP, have placed an increasing burden on SCAR. The SC-ATS as originally configured, funded and staffed, is inadequate to meet the growing demand. SCAR relies on volunteers to accomplish its mission. SCAR’s science can be ‘policy-related’, but not ‘policy-directed’. The Action Group agreed that it would be useful to both SCAR and the CEP to clarify SCAR’s role and mandate and this clarification should extend to the ATCM and CCAMLR.

Delegates endorsed the report’s key Recommendations and Actions to be taken:

(i) Increase funding to facilitate the provision of timely advice in key areas
(ii) Prepare a paper for next ATCM/CEP on SCAR’s role and capabilities
(iii) Interact with CEP to establish how SCAR may respond to CEP plans, and hold regular discussions with CEP about upcoming issues.
(iv) Inform ATCM/CEP about SCAR’s products and services.
(v) Consider providing an annual Antarctic report card (especially on climate change and its effects)
(vi) Re-engage with evaluating the scientific aspects of management plans.
(vii) Urge national committees to connect with ATS national representatives regarding SCAR contributions and promoting links.

The delegates endorsed also an Action to facilitate links between SC-ATS and the SSGs, the SSGs should develop lists of experts who could provide advice on key topics to SC-ATS in the development of papers for the Treaty Parties.

5.3 Marine Pollution

As a response to the sinking of the M/S Explorer in December 2007, the Executive Committee formed an Action Group on Antarctic Fuel Spills to provide scientific advice on the possible trajectory and effects of an oil spill from sunken vessels.

6. Links with COMNAP

The President of COMNAP, J. Retamales, present as an observer, reported on new developments in COMNAP allowing closer liaison with SCAR. SCAR is preparing a strategic view of where Antarctic Science is going in the future to be presented at the next CONMAP meeting in August 2009.

7. Other reports

SC-AGI, the Standing Committee on Antarctic Geographic Information held its first meeting in Buenos Aires. The number of national representatives had increased to 25. Actions should be taken to increase that number. Noting the success of the SCAR Map Catalogue and of the SCAR Gazetteer, the delegates approved the continuance of the Standing Group.

The SCAR History Action Group held four meetings. The delegates noted the excellent contributions from the Group and considered it appropriate to let them continue as an Action Group for another two years.

The Open Science Conference (OSC) in Moscow was highly successful: 1150 attendees, 526 oral presentations and 542 posters. The number of parallel sessions (11) should be reduced, the registration cost lowered.  Delegates decided that plans for future OSCs should go ahead but that consideration should be given to possible in-house management, switch to a cycle of 4 years and, in parallel, investigate an alternative model of a pattern of OSCs interspersed with Biology and Earth Science symposia.

Delegates noted that many achievements have been made against the targets in the Strategic Plan 2004-2010. The Executive Committee was asked to appoint an external Review Panel to report on the extent to which SCAR has, since 2004, achieved its objectives.

The mainstay of the ‘Capacity Building Education and Training - CBET’ Programme is the Fellowship Programme. Recently, SCAR has assisted the development of the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists, APECS, which SCAR co-sponsors with IASC. Delegates agreed to invite APECS to send a representative to future SCAR meetings and that ideally the representative should come from the country where the meeting is held.

8. Other Business

To celebrate SCAR’s 50th anniversary, D. Walton and P. Clarkson are co-editing a SCAR book “Science in the Snow”, while delegates also decided to sponsor an English version of the French film “Enterrés Volontaires”. Three SCAR medals were awarded in 2008. Delegates decided to take measures to give the SCAR medals a higher profile. 

Four SCAR fellowships were awarded in 2007-2008 and three in 2008-2009, while one additional fellowship will be awarded during the same period by the International Polar Foundation (IPF) under the IPY 6th Continent Initiative Programme. National Committees were asked to contribute extra resources to the SCAR Fellowship Programme.

9. Future Meetings

Delegates thanked Argentina’s offer to organize the XXXI SCAR meeting in 2010 in Buenos Aires. The USA offered to host XXXII SCAR in 2012, followed by Spain in 2014 and then Malaysia.

10. Elections

M.C. Kennicutt (USA) was elected President and R. Ravindra (India) and A. Huiskes (Netherlands) were elected Vice-Presidents. C.G. Rapley becomes Past-President for 2 years.










