





Proposal to Make Binding Certain Limitations on Landing of Persons from Passenger Vessels




Proposal to Make Binding Certain Limitations on Landing of Persons from Passenger Vessels


Working Paper submitted by the United States



Summary

Resolution 4 (2007) recommended that Parties, consistent with their national law, discourage or decline to authorize tour operators that use vessels carrying more than 500 passengers from making any landings in Antarctica.  The Resolution further recommended that Parties encourage or require tour operators to (1) coordinate so that no more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time, (2) restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to no more than 100 persons, and (3) maintain a minimum ratio of one guide to twenty passengers while ashore.  For reasons discussed in this Working Paper, the United States believes that the recommendations contained in Resolution 4 (2007) should be made mandatory.  A draft Measure is appended.


The Consultative Parties in recent years have taken steps to respond to the increasing upward trend in tourism, particularly ship-borne tourism, in Antarctica.  These steps recognize that provisions specific to tourism are needed in addition to the measures applicable to all activities in Antarctica set forth in the Environmental Protocol.  Among these steps are a growing number of Site Guidelines aimed at managing visitor impacts at sites subject to visitation in light of the sensitivities and environmental values of those sites.
In addition, the United States proposed at ATCM XXX in New Delhi, and the Meeting subsequently adopted as Resolution 4 (2007), language recommending that Parties, consistent with their national law, discourage or decline to authorize tour operators that use vessels carrying more than 500 passengers from making any landings in Antarctica.  That Resolution further recommended that Parties encourage or require tour operators to (1) coordinate so that no more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time, (2) restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to no more than 100 persons, and (3) maintain a minimum ratio of one guide to twenty passengers while ashore.  These general provisions apply to all visitation in Antarctica, at sites for which Site Guidelines have been adopted and those for which they have not yet been adopted.
It should be noted that all of these tourism-specific provisions are recommendatory, rather than binding in character.
The United States believes that the time has arrived to incorporate the recommendatory   provisions of Resolution 4 (2007) into binding obligations in a Measure adopted under Article IX of the Treaty.  A draft Measure to that end is appended to this Working Paper. Adoption of such a Measure, in the view of the United States, would serve both immediate and longer term objectives of the Consultative Parties with respect to tourism in Antarctica.
First, it would contribute to a more level playing field for those engaged in bringing visitors to Antarctica by ship.  The provisions of Resolution 4 (2007), and the Site Guidelines, are drawn from rules established by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and applicable to its members.  There are tour operators, however, who are not members of IAATO and, at a minimum, there are perceptions that IAATO and non-IAATO vessels are subject to differing requirements.  A binding measure would make clear that all operators are subject to the same standards in this regard.
Second, the United States believes that ship-borne tourism has reached levels at which it is important for Consultative Parties to recognize that additional legally binding  tourism-specific steps, set up to complement  the Environmental Protocol, are required to ensure that tourism is conducted on terms consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty.  The general restrictions on landings are an important first step. Their adoption as binding measures would also signal Consultative Party preparedness to accept responsibility for direct and effective enforcement of these provisions. It would place the Consultative Parties in a stronger position to deal with efforts to conduct tourist activities in Antarctica by operators not subject to the jurisdiction of one or more Parties.
Finally, adoption of the proposed Measure would establish minimum general standards for ship-borne landings in Antarctica.  As such, it would reflect an initial step in elaborating further rules that may be seen as necessary by the Consultative Parties to properly regulate Antarctic tourism. In addition, it would constitute an element of precaution as the Consultative Parties move forward with consideration of additional rules including, as appropriate, more stringent provisions on landings.
 The United States believes that the 50th anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty is an opportunity to reflect on and act in accordance with principles of anticipatory management.  Such principles certainly apply to issues such as tourism and protected areas and, for this reason, the United States has identified them as among possible themes for the ATCM’s long-term agenda (WP 48 (2008)).  From this perspective, the proposed Measure to make mandatory the guidelines enshrined in Resolution 4 (2007) is a step in this direction.
 
Attachment

Draft Measure on
Landing of Persons from Passenger Vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area


The Representatives,

Noting the increasing trend in tourist activities in the Treaty area and the possible impacts of such activities on the Antarctic environment, including its wildlife, and on the conduct of scientific research;
Conscious of their responsibilities to ensure that tourism is conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible manner consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty; 
Acknowledging the tourism industry’s collaboration in efforts to ensure that its activities are sustainable and compatible with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty;
Aware of hazards confronting passenger vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area and desiring to promote the safety of life at sea; 
Wishing to minimize the likelihood of marine oil spills due to incidents involving large tourist vessels in Antarctica; 
Recalling Resolution 4 (2007);

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:

That Parties shall require its operators organizing tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, 
    1) to refrain from making any landings in Antarctica from vessels carrying more than 500 passengers; and
    2) in the case of vessels carrying 500 or fewer passengers,  
    a) to coordinate with each other with the objective  that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time;
    b) to restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to 100 or fewer, unless otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures  and to maintain a 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio, unless otherwise specified in applicable ATCM  measures or resolutions.
For the purposes of this Measure: 
    1. “Operator” means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non-governmental, which organizes activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area.  An operator does not include a natural person who is an employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of, or who is in the service of, a natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non-governmental, which organizes activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, and does not include a juridical person that is a contractor or subcontractor acting on behalf of a State operator.
    2. An operator of the Party means an operator that organizes, in that Party’s territory, activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, and
        a. those activities are subject to authorization by that Party for the Antarctic Treaty area; or
        b. in the case of a Party that does not formally authorize activities for the Antarctic Treaty area, those activities are subject to a comparable regulatory process by that Party. 

