





Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans




Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Terms of Reference #1 to #3: Review of Draft Management Plans
Working Paper submitted by Australia on behalf of the SGMP

Abstract
In accordance with its Terms of Reference #1 to #3, the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) reviewed the four draft management plans referred by CEP XI for intersessional review. This paper reports on the review process and conveys the SGMP’s advice that the CEP: approves the revised management plans prepared by Chile for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) 125 Ardley Island and ASPA 150 Fildes Peninsula; approves the revised management plan prepared by Korea for a proposed new ASPA at Narębski Point; and notes that the United States will further amend the management plan for ASPA 106 Cape Hallett and prepare a revised version in 2010.
Introduction
The CEP’s proposal to establish a Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) was approved by ATCM XXXI (Final Report paragraph 94). 
The Terms of Reference for the SGMP, outlined in Appendix 3 of the CEP XI Final Report, include: 
    1) Examine any draft new or revised Management Plan to consider, in consultation with relevant experts if appropriate:
    • whether it is consistent with the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol, particularly Articles 3, 4 and 5, and with relevant CEP guidelines;
    • its content, clarity, consistency and likely effectiveness;
    • whether it clearly states the primary reason for designation; and
    • whether it clearly states how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole. 
    2) Advise proponents of suggested amendments to the draft Management Plan to address issues in relation to 1) above.
    3) Submit a Working Paper to the CEP with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of each new or revised draft Management Plan, identifying where the Plan reflects comments received by Members, and where they have not been, the reasons for not doing so.  The Working Paper is to include all revised Management Plans and the information required by the ATCM’s Legal and Institutional Working Group.
    4) Provide advice to the CEP as necessary for the purpose of improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.

This Working Paper reports on the SGMP’s activities under Terms of Reference #1 to #3. The SGMP’s activities under Term of Reference #4 are detailed in WP 8 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Term of Reference #4: Improving Management Plans and the Process for Their Intersessional Review. 
Operation of the SGMP
As agreed at CEP XI the SGMP was convened by one of the CEP Vice-chairs, Ewan McIvor from Australia (CEP XI Final Report paragraph 44). Through a note sent to all CEP contact points on 29 July 2008, CEP representatives were invited to nominate to join the SGMP, on the understanding that SGMP members would be expected to:
    • participate for several consecutive intersessional periods so as to achieve continuity in membership and improved institutional knowledge; 
    • participate in the review of all Plans except those they have proposed; and
    • in addition to reviewing draft management plans, contribute to providing advice to the CEP on improving management plans and the process for their review, in accordance with Term of Reference #4.  
During the 2008/09 intersessional period the group was comprised of 17 members, including representatives from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Germany, IAATO, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Romania, SCAR, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States.
The SGMP conducted its work remotely, via the Discussion Forum, and followed a schedule consistent with the timeline in Appendix 3 to the CEP Final Report:

Period
Action
Timing
Intersessional period
    • Antarctic Treaty Secretariat posts all draft Management Plans referred for intersessional discussion to the online Discussion Forum.
As soon as possible following CEP meeting
24 July 2008

    • Interested CEP Members indicate their interest in participating in the SGMP.
15 August 2008

    • Interested CEP Members and Observers post comments on draft Management Plans via the Discussion Forum.
3-6 months following CEP meeting
3 October 2008

    • SGMP considers draft Management Plans in accordance with its Terms of Reference and prepares a report with recommendations for proponents.  SGMP report is translated and posted to the Discussion Forum.
31 October 2008

    • Interested CEP Members suggest issues for consideration by SGMP regarding Term of Reference #4 (improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review).
31 October 2008

    • SGMP considers advice to the CEP under Term of Reference #4.
31 October 2008 to 2 February 2009

    • Draft Management Plans are revised by proponents in response to comments provided by Members, Observers and the SGMP, and posted to the Discussion Forum.
60 days prior to CEP meeting.
5 February 2009
Working Paper deadline
    • SGMP convenor submits Working Paper with recommendations for the adoption or otherwise of draft Management Plans.
45 days prior to CEP meeting.
20 February 2009

    • As appropriate, SGMP convenor submits Working Paper with advice to CEP on improving Management Plans and the process for their intersessional review.
20 February 2009
CEP meeting
    • Consideration by CEP of Working Paper containing SGMP’s recommendations.
6-9 April 2009

Review of draft management plans
Four draft management plans submitted to CEP XI were referred for intersessional review by the SGMP:
    • ASPA 106: Cape Hallett, Victoria Land (United States, ATCM XXXI/WP 13)
    • ASPA 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands (Chile, ATCM XXXI/WP 47)
    • ASPA 150: Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island (Chile, ATCM XXXI/WP 46)
    • ASPA (new): Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island (Republic of Korea, ATCM XXXI/WP 3)
Four SGMP members kindly volunteered to coordinate comments on the draft management plans, and to prepare draft advice to proponents using a standard checklist (developed by the Trial Informal Group during the previous intersessional period). All SGMP members were given the opportunity to comment on the draft advice before the final advice was prepared, translated into each of the official Treaty languages, and forwarded to the proponents. The SGMP’s initial advice to proponents was circulated to all CEP contact points on 11 November 2008, and made available to all CEP Members on the CEP Discussion Forum. The following sections provide a summary of the group’s review of each plan.
ASPA 106: Cape Hallett, Victoria Land
In its initial advice to the United States in November 2008 the SGMP noted that, with minor modifications, the management plan submitted to CEP XI as WP 13 would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in guiding management of the Area. The group noted that this is a mature management plan with provisions that have been periodically refined and updated since the Area was designated in the 1960s. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion Forum but, in particular, clarification was sought on the suitability of conducting tourism at sites adjacent to the Area, on provisions allowing access for ‘educational purposes’, and on whether the proposed flexible Area boundary (following a line 5 m from the seaward edge of the breeding colony of Adélie penguins) would create undesirable difficulties with administration, compliance and enforcement.
Separate to the SGMP, comments on the draft management plan were submitted by Ecuador.
In response the United States advised that it welcomed the SGMP’s comments, and was planning to prepare a revised draft management plan detailing a fixed Area boundary. Establishing a revised boundary and preparing new maps would require further field work, including surveying, which would delay resubmission of the revised plan until 2010. The United States has discussed those plans with New Zealand and it has been agreed that, given the low level of activity at the site, the threat to site integrity by the delay will be very low. 
ASPA 125: Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
In its initial advice to Chile in November 2008 the SGMP noted that, with suggested amendments, the management plan submitted to CEP XI as WP 47 would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in guiding management of the Area. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion Forum but, in particular, the group suggested that the proponent include more details about preferred access routes to the sub-areas and the specific locations of fossil outcrops.
Separate to the SGMP, comments on the draft management plan were submitted by Germany.
In February 2009 Chile submitted a revised draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s comments. Following additional minor revisions, the SGMP considered the revised management plan and concluded that its comments had been adequately addressed by the proponent.
ASPA 150: Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island
In its initial advice to Chile in November 2008 the SGMP noted that, with suggested amendments, the management plan submitted to CEP XI as WP 46 would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in guiding management of the Area. The group noted that the proponent had made significant improvements to the version of the management plan submitted to CEP X as WP25, including the clarification regarding tourist access to the adjacent visitor area. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion Forum but, in particular, it suggested the plan would be more effective with the addition of further details on preventing the introduction of non-native species, and greater emphasis on preventing accidental overflights of Ardley Island by aircraft using Marsh airfield.
Separate to the SGMP, comments on the draft management plan were submitted by Ecuador, Germany and Uruguay.
In February 2009 Chile submitted a revised draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s comments. Following additional minor revisions, the SGMP considered the revised management plan and concluded that its comments had been adequately addressed by the proponent.
ASPA (new): Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island 
In its initial advice to Korea in November 2008 the SGMP noted that, with suggested amendments, the management plan submitted to CEP XI as WP 3 would adequately address the provisions of Annex V and relevant CEP guidelines, and was likely to be effective in guiding management of the proposed Area. The group congratulated the proponent for preparing a plan largely consistent with the Guide to the preparation of management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and existing ASPA management plans. The SGMP’s full advice is available on the Discussion Forum but, in particular, it recommended that the proponent clarify the rational for protection, the status of place names used in the draft plan, the location and extent of important features, and any relevant supporting documentation. 
Separate to the SGMP, comments on the draft management plan were submitted by Ecuador.
In February 2009 Korea submitted a revised draft management plan and a separate document explaining its responses to the SGMP’s comments. Following additional minor revisions, the SGMP considered the revised management plan and concluded that its comments had been adequately addressed by the proponent.
Coversheets
Appendix 1 to this Working Paper contains introductory comments by the proponents, and coversheets prepared in accordance with Resolution 1 (2008).
Advice to the CEP
The SGMP suggests that the CEP:
    1) Approves the attached: 
    • revised management plan prepared by Chile for ASPA 125, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands (Attachment A); and
    • revised management plan prepared by Chile for ASPA 150, Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island (Attachment B).
    • revised management plan prepared by Korea for a new ASPA at Narebski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island (Attachment C). 
    2) Notes that the United States plans to undertake further field work at ASPA 106 Cape Hallett and to finalise the revised draft management plan in 2010.
Appendix 1. Coversheets and introductory comments prepared by proponents
Introduction prepared by Chile:
Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (25 de Mayo)
 
    1. Fildes Peninsula was designated as a Site of Special Protected Area, SPA No 12, in 1966 after a proposal by Chile. The aim was to protect the avian ichnofossils and flora fossils founded in Fossil Hill area, due the proximity of these unique fossils to permanent stations. In 1975, the Area was redesignated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest, SSSI No 5, and in 2002 it was included as ASPA No 125.
    2. A revision of the management plan and a new definition of zones and boundaries for the ASPA are now submitted, based on paleontological criteria, giving more value to the in situ outcrops and the quality and uniqueness degree of the fossil content.
    3. The main change involves inclusion of five new areas and the modification of the actual two areas considered as ASPA  No 125.
    4. The changes to the current management plan, related to those presented previously, include the following:
        a) An Introduction section was included.
        b) New information was added to section 1, to describe the values to be protected. Part of the toponymy was clarified. A title to the table presenting the plan families was included.
        c) New text was included in section 2, to clarify the ideas.
        d) In section 3, new sentences were included to clarify the ideas in the second bullet and in the last paragraph. Toponymy was included.
        e) In section 6.i new information was included in the general description, and the zones are presented in a simpler and clear way. The information regarding vegetation and vertebrates was separated.
        f) Sections 6.ii, iii and iv, were modified according to the Guides to the Preparation of Management Plans.
        g) New text was included in section 7 to clarify the ideas.
        h) A new section 7.i was included.
        i) New text was included in section 7.ii, second bullet.
        j) The sections 7.iii, iv, v, vi and vii were corrected, according to the Guide.
        k) New text was included in section 7.vi.
        l) New text was included in section 7.vii to clarify ideas.
        m) In section 8, some references were corrected.
        n) The maps are enclosed to this management plan as new archives, presenting only the list of them as Annexes.

    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN ASPA OR ASMA 
ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? No 

    2) Is a new ASMA proposed? No 

    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Yes, ASPA 125 Fildes Peninsula

    • First designation: SPA 12 (Fildes Peninsula) - Recommendation IV-12 (1966)

    • First adoption of management plan: Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) (Redesignation as SSSI 5 Fildes Peninsula)

    • Any revisions to management plan: No

    • Current management plan: Recommendation VIII-4 (1975)

    • Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan: Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XVI-7 (1991)

    • Renaming and renumbering as ASPA 125 by Decision 1 (2002). 

    4)  If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

(i) Major or minor? Major. This is the first version of the management plan for this Area in the Annex V format.

(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates? Yes. The proposal includes the modification of the two existing areas comprising ASPA 125, plus the addition of six new areas.

(iii) any changes to the maps? Yes. If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics? Yes. Several new and more detailed maps are included.

(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries? Yes, as summarised above.

(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site. No.

(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long). As mentioned above, there are major changes to the management plan, which is the first version for this Area in Annex V format.

    5)  If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? n/a
Introduction prepared by Chile:
Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 150 
Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island (25 de Mayo)


    1. After a proposal by Chile, Ardley Island was designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest, SSSI No. 33, under Recommendation XVI-2 (1991).  The aim was to protect the diverse range of bird species that breed on the island, with a view to studying the ecology of and the factors affecting the populations.  
    2. Initially, the Area was under protection until 2001. In that same year, protection was extended until 2005 under Measure 3 (2001).  A revised Management Plan for Ardley Island, consisting of amendments to the plan established in 1991, was submitted to the ATCM in 2005. However, Chile withdrew the document after deciding that it required further changes. Under Measure 4 (2005), protection of the Area was extended until December 2010. 
    3. A new revision of the management plan is now submitted on the basis of information collected by researchers from the University of Jena in Germany, the University of Chile, the University of the Americas and the Chilean Antarctic Institute.  
    4. The main change involves exclusion of the originally designated “tourist area” from the boundaries of the Specially Protected Area. This area is located below 1 m asl (coastal zone) from the Faro (Lighthouse) Point to the beginning of Braillard Point.
    5. The changes to the current management plan, related to those presented previously, include the following:
        o) In the introduction section part of the text was modified, according to the suggestions received. This section describes the Protected Area and excludes the “tourist area”, with the new boundaries. 
        p) The text in section 1 was modified to clarify the values for which the Area is being protected.  
        q) In section 2, the last objective making reference to tourist visits was deleted.
        r) In section 3, new management activities were included.
        s) The maps and figures presented in section 5, were modified
        t) In section 6i, the area comprising the Protected Area was modified. The area originally described as a “tourist area” (Map 3) was excluded. In addition, part of the information previously presented was modified, according the suggestions received.
        u) In section 6ii, the description of the “tourist area” was deleted, as it is outside of the protected area described in this document. 
        v) In section 6iii, structures in the Area are presented in greater detail.
        w) In section 6.iv the distance to ASPA No 125 was corrected.
        x) In section 7i, the introductory text was modified. As well, the texts under the On foot section was modified. 
        y) In the same section, information on Overflights was modified in accordance with the Guidelines established under Resolution 2 (2004).
        z) The text of section 7.ii was modified to complement the ideas.
        aa) The text in section 7.v was modified to clarify restrictions on the introduction of materials and organisms in the Area.
        bb) In section 7.ix in the second point was included the exchange of information to other Parties for the monitoring activities.
        cc) The text in section 7.x was only modified in style, and is now presented in two paragraphs. 
        dd) In the section 8 the suggested references were included. 
    6. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN ASPA OR ASMA 
ASPA 150 Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands

    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? No 

    2) Is a new ASMA proposed? No 

    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? Yes, ASPA 150 Ardley Island

    • First designation: SSSI 33, Recommendation XVI-2 (1991)

    • First adoption of management plan: Recommendation XVI-2 (1991)

    • Any revisions to management plan: No

    • Current management plan: Recommendation XVI-2 (1991)

    • Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan: Measure 3 (2001), Measure 4 (2005)

    • Renaming and renumbering as ASPA 150 by Decision 1 (2002). 

    4)  If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: 

(i) Major or minor? Major. This is the first version of the management plan for this Area in the Annex V format.

(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates? Yes. The Area boundary has been changed to exclude the previously designated ‘tourist area’, comprising the area below 1 m above sea level (coastal zone) from the Faro (Lighthouse) Point to the beginning of Braillard Point.

(iii) any changes to the maps? Yes. If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics? Yes. Several new and more detailed maps are included.

(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries? Yes, as summarised above.

(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? No

(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long). As mentioned above, there are major changes to the management plan, which is the first version for this Area in Annex V format.

    5)  If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? n/a 
Introduction prepared by the Republic of Korea:
Revised Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Management Plan for Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island
1.  Introduction
At CEP XI (Kyiv, 2008) the Republic of Korea submitted WP3 proposing the designation of  Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island as a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) under Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by presenting moving pictures on the natural features of the site.
Narębski Point is rich in flora and fauna, of which the abundance of some species is exceptional. There are large numbers of Chinstrap and Gentoo Penguins and the breeding areas of seven other birds including the nests of the Southern Giant Petrel. The cover of mosses and lichens is very extensive with high species diversity. In addition, 1 flowering plant species and 1 algae species were found in the Area. As such, the Area provides exceptional opportunities for scientific studies of terrestrial biological communities. The topography of the Area, together with the abundance and diversity of fauna and flora, gives the Area exceptional aesthetic value.
The Management Plan aims to protect the unique terrestrial ecosystem found in the Area from human interference.
2.  Intersessional Review
Comments regarding the draft Management Plan were received from the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP). The SGMP conducted a detailed critique of the plan, using a checklist, and provided specific comments on further improvement and clarification of the plan. The Republic of Korea responded to each comment with a brief explanation of the changes made or rationale for keeping the original text.
Some examples of modifications include an addition of introduction, refinement of description of values to be protected, revisions of aims and objectives and activities that may be conducted, amendments on the commented texts, adding a new access route to the Area from the sea, revision of maps for clarity, and the addition of a bibliography.
3.  Management Plan Submission
This Working Paper has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of Annex V to the Protocol and the Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed areas or Historic Sites and Monuments appended to Resolution 1 (2008) of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXXII. This proposal for a new ASPA does not relate to any existing ASPA or ASMA nor does the proposed ASPA contain any marine area.

 The Republic of Korea submits this revised Management Plan for approval by the CEP and ATCM.
TEMPLATE A: COVER SHEET FOR A WORKING PAPER ON AN ASPA OR ASMA 
Proposed ASPA Narębski Point, Barton Peninsula, King George Island

    1) Is a new ASPA proposed? Yes 

    2) Is a new ASMA proposed? No 

    3) Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA? No

    • First designation: n/a

    • First adoption of management plan: n/a

    • Any revisions to management plan: n/a

    • Current management plan: n/a

    • Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan: n/a

    • Renaming and renumbering as ……….... by Decision 1 (2002). n/a

    4)  If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment: n/a

    5)  If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area? No

