





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 121: Cape Royds, Ross Island





ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No.1 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975)
Any revisions to management plan:
Management Plan revised through Recommendation XIII-9 (1985), which extended the boundaries to include a 500 m wide coastal strip to protect the seaward access and nearshore feeding ground of Adélie penguins, as well as projected research on the Cape Royds inshore marine ecosystem. 
Measure 1 (2002) further extended the Area to include the entire Adélie penguin colony.
Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2002).
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Measure 2 (2000).
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998): Management plan to be sent to CCAMLR for approval; superceded by Decision 9 (2005) setting criteria for submission of plans with a marine component to CCAMLR.
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major: change to marine boundary; additional values.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. Research on foraging patterns of Adélie penguins from Cape Royds conducted since the marine component of the Area was adopted has shown that the marine area as it had been designated is not significant as a penguin feeding ground, and the penguins forage more widely than had previously been known. In addition, projected research on the Cape Royds inshore marine ecosystem has not occurred to the extent that had been anticipated, and currently few studies are being carried out on the Nototheniid fish population at Cape Royds.
In view of these factors, and because specific values related to the marine environment adjacent to Cape Royds remain undescribed, the marine boundary has been redefined in this management plan to focus more particularly on the area immediately surrounding the Adélie penguin colony. This marine component immediately adjacent to the Cape Royds penguin colony has been retained because it includes the primary access route of the penguins to the colony, which could otherwise be subjected to unnecessary disturbance from both visitors and local helicopter activity in the vicinity.
The boundary changes have been proposed to reflect more accurately the values under special protection at Cape Royds and in recognition of site management needs, and are designed to be of sufficient size to protect the values for which the site is designated.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics.
    a) Map 1 replaced to reflect proposed revision to the marine boundary.
    b) Secondary helicopter landing site has been removed from Map 2.
    c) minor updates made where appropriate to maintain consistency with maps already adopted for ASPA No. 157 Backdoor Bay.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Changes to marine boundary as described above.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
The changes proposed do not affect ASPA No. 157 Backdoor Bay or HSM No. 15 Shackleton’s Hut, which are adjacent to ASPA No. 121.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    1. Additional values related to terrestrial and freshwater ecology within the Area have been identified since the last management plan review. These values include: 
        a. the importance of the Area for the most southerly observation of snow algae, dominated by Chlamydomonas;
        b. the importance of Pony Lake as a type locality for original descriptions of a number of species of algae collected on the British Antarctic Expedition of 1907-09;
        c. the importance of Pony Lake for the unusual presence of fulvic acid Dissolved Organic Matter (DOM) that is almost entirely microbially-derived, a sample of which has been used as a reference for the International Humic Substances Society;
        d. the very low diversity of soil organisms, which makes it valuable for comparisons with other, more favorable, habitats.
    2. In addition, new data and publications have become available to allow minor updates to the management plan text and maps.
    3. Minor changes proposed include:
        a. Policies on aircraft have been updated to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2004) ‘Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica’.
        b. References to the Secondary helicopter landing site identified in the existing management plan have been deleted from the text and maps on advice that this site, which is located within approximately 300 m of the colony, is too close and should not be used;
        c. More explicit recognition of the historical value of Shackleton’s Depot which is located within the Area;
        d. minor amendments to format and layout, including addition of an introductory paragraph, to maintain consistency with other plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

