





Visitor Site Guide for Cape Royds, Ross Island




Visitor Site Guide for Cape Royds, Ross Island

Working Paper submitted by New Zealand and the United States

Abstract
In accordance with Resolution 5 (2005), New Zealand and the United States have drafted a visitor site guide for Cape Royds. The guide aims to minimise the risk of visitor related pressures at this site of outstanding historic, natural and scenic value. It is proposed that the attached site guide be adopted by means of a resolution and that the secretariat publish the guide as it has done for the existing site guidelines.
Background
In accordance with Resolution 5 (2005), New Zealand and the United States have drafted a visitor site guide for Cape Royds (attached). Cape Royds is one of the most visited sites in the Ross Sea region with approximately 900 visitors per year on average. Visitors from tour ships comprise the largest proportion of the visitors to Cape Royds, with visitors from the nearby Scott Base and McMurdo Station also contributing a significant proportion of the total. 
The site has outstanding historic, natural and scenic values including the historic hut and associated artefacts from the British Antarctic (Nimrod) Expedition led by Sir Ernest Shackleton, and the southernmost Adelie penguin colony. While the key sensitivities at the site are already protected by two Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA 121 Cape Royds, Ross Island and ASPA 157 Backdoor Bay, Cape Royds, Ross Island), the guide aims to further support visitors minimising their impacts. The guide collates the key points of the two management plans (such as the site sensitivities and the code of conduct) in a practical way, facilitating compliance by visitors. Adding to the complexity of the site is that recreational visitors are not permitted inside ASPA 121.
We note that the informal intersessional discussions on the existing site guides and the 5 year review of the Management plan for ASPA 121 are to be discussed at this meeting. We are happy to modify this guide in accordance with the adoption of any changes to the ASPA management plan or with any recommendations from the work on site guides.
It is proposed that the attached site guide be adopted by means of a resolution and that the secretariat publish the guide as it has done for the existing site guidelines.
