





Revision of maps and text for the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 7: Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin





Revision of maps and text for the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 7:
Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin

    1. Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin was originally designated through Measure 1 (ATCM XXXI, Kyiv, 2008), following a proposal by the United States of America. The Area was designated to manage considerable and increasing scientific, tourist and logistic activities and protect a wide range of important natural, scientific and educational values.  These grounds for designation are still relevant.
    2. No substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan are proposed, although new data have become available to allow minor updates to the maps. The boundaries of the ASMA and descriptions of the Area remain the same as in the existing Management Plan.
    3. Minor changes proposed include:
    4. updates to the maps to reflect the adopted ASMA number (No. 7);
    5. revision of Map 4 to include new topographic data, adjust the Operations Zone boundary to reflect recession of the permanent ice cover, and a minor amendment to the western boundary of the Restricted Zone on Bonaparte Point;
    6. insertion of text providing more specific guidance for pedestrians within the Restricted Zone on Bonaparte Point.
    7. The revised maps and text for insertion are provided for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.
Revision of maps and text for the Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 7:
Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin

Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 7 Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin was originally designated through Measure 1 (ATCM XXXI, Kyiv, 2008). The Area has a wide range of important natural, scientific and educational values and is an area of considerable and increasing scientific, tourist and logistic activities. The aim of the Management Plan is to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of the southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin region by managing the variety of activities and interests in the Area.
New topographic data for Gamage Point (Map 4 Palmer Station Operations Zone) has become available since plan adoption, and this has now been incorporated into an updated version of Map 4. In addition, a minor revision is proposed to the western boundary of the Restricted Zone on Bonaparte Point (Map 4), to accommodate essential operational needs for replacement of the mooring that forms the present northwestern boundary point. The revised western boundary of this zone would follow the line of longitude of 64°03'20" to the northern coastline of Bonaparte Point in Hero Inlet, resulting in an eastward shift by 25 m of the northwestern corner of the Restricted Zone. This minor boundary change is considered more practical and has been assessed as presenting no significant implications for the several pairs of resident south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) that nest on the ridge top of Bonaparte Point, which are largely habituated to human activities in the area.
The updates made to Map 4 are as follows:
    • A more precise definition of the coastline (including distinction between high and low tide lines) and of the edge of the Marr Ice Piedmont (which has retreated since the earlier map data were compiled) is included;  
    • The boundary of the Operations Zone shown on the map was revised to comply with the definition of the Operations Zone in the Management Plan, which states that it extends to the permanent ice edge of the Marr Ice Piedmont. A slight reduction to the map scale was made to incorporate all of the ice-free area; 
    • New topographic contours were added, and minor updates made to several buildings, antennas, and their associated labels; and
    • The western boundary of the Bonaparte Point Restricted Zone follows the line of longitude of 64°03'20" to the northern coastline of Bonaparte Point at Hero Inlet.
Since these updates are all local to Gamage and Bonaparte Points, there are no significant changes to the other maps attached to the plan. However, all maps have been updated to show the adopted ASMA number and to reflect the change from ‘proposed’ to final adopted boundaries.
The improved maps will aid in the implementation of the Management Plan for those conducting activities in the Area, and ensure that the maps and the plan remain fully consistent.
A minor change to the text of the management plan is proposed under Appendix A Supporting Guidelines and Data subsection Restricted Zones. It is proposed to insert the following text as a third bullet in this subsection: 
    • Access to the mooring adjacent to the Restricted Zone on Bonaparte Point should be by small boat when ice and weather permit. If it is necessary to approach the mooring from within the Restricted Zone, walk as close to the coastline as possible to avoid south polar skua (Catharacta [skua] maccormicki) nesting territories on the ridge crest.

