





Amendments to the Rules of Procedure for the Committee for Environmental Protection




Amendments to the Rules of Procedure for the Committee for Environmental Protection
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Abstract
The Rules of Procedure for the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) have not been revised since their adoption at ATCM XXII in 1998. Australia proposes amendments to the Rules of Procedure to reflect current work practices, and provides a draft Decision for adoption by the ATCM. For similar reasons, Australia also suggests that the Committee advises the ATCM to take the necessary steps deem other earlier Decisions relating to the CEP website, and handling of CEP documents, as obsolete.
Background
The CEP first met in 1998, in conjunction with the twenty second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). ATCM XXII adopted Decision 2 (1998) Rules of Procedure for the Committee for Environmental Protection. There have since been no changes to the Rules of Procedure. Rule 24 states, however, that ‘The Committee may adopt amendments to these rules of procedure, which shall be subject to approval by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.’1
Suggested amendments to the CEP Rules of Procedure
Since the CEP Rules of Procedure were adopted in 1998 there have been several changes to the Committee’s work practices, including changes arising from:
    • the establishment of the Secretariat, with its roles and responsibilities for facilitating the Committee’s work;
    • the use of online discussion forums and other enhancements to the Committee’s intersessional and other general work practices; and
    • the ATCM’s adoption of guidelines for submission of documents to the ATCM and CEP. 
Attachment A to this Working Paper contains an annotated version of the current CEP Rules of Procedure, outlining suggested amendments to reflect these changes. Attachment A also contains a draft Decision for ATCM approval of the suggested amendments. 
Review of other CEP administrative procedures
It is good organisational practice to periodically review the Committee’s administrative procedures, and to recommend that the ATCM update them as appropriate. In Australia’s view, the following procedures could be considered obsolete as a result of decisions by the ATCM:
Decision 1 (1999) – CEP website
This decision reflects the ATCM’s agreement that the home country of the CEP Chair should operate a CEP website. The decision is obsolete following the establishment of the website maintained by the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty.
Decision 2 (2001) – Guidelines on Circulation and Handling of CEP Documents
This decision outlines guidelines for circulation and handling of CEP Documents. The decision was superseded by the adoption at ATCM XXV of Revised Guidelines for Document Translation and Distribution (Final Report Appendix 1) and the promulgation by the Secretariat of a Manual for the Submission of Documents to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection.
Note: The suggested changes to the CEP Rules of Procedure in Annex I to this paper include adding a paragraph to reflect the agreement in Decision 2 (2001) that Observers referred to in Rule 4(c) may only submit documents for circulation to the meeting as Information Papers. This provision is reflected in the ATS Manual referred to above, but is not reflected in the guidelines contained in Appendix 1 to the ATCM XXV Final Report and as such should be retained.
Recommendations
Australia recommends that the Committee:
    1) adopts the ‘Revised Rules of Procedure for the Committee for Environmental Protection (2009)’ outlined in Attachment A and, forwards the revised Rules to the ATCM for approval; and
    2) agrees that the provisions of Decision 1 (1999) CEP Website and Decision 2 (2001) are no longer current, and requests the ATCM to take the necessary steps to render those Decisions obsolete.

