





Bioprospection: Baselines and parameters





I.        The role of Antarctic institutions:       

1)	The ATCM and Antarctic bioprospecting:

This paper provides a tentative and basic analysis of the state of the arts concerning bipoprospecting within the context of the Antarctic Treaty System. At present the matter is addressed by Resolution 7 (2005) adopted at the Stockholm XXVIII ATCM, which  reaffirms the importance of Article III (1) of the Antarctic Treaty, recalls the regulatory nature of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and contains two recommendations:
    a) that their governments draw to the attention of their national Antarctic programmes and other research institutes engaged in Antarctic biological prospecting the provisions of article III (1) of the Antarctic Treaty;
    b) that their governments continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate”.

While a substantial mass of information has been introduced by a number of Consultative Parties, the UN University, IUCN,  ASOC and other sources, at successive ATCMs the debate has not been focused or aimed at a serious political consideration of a matter which probably represents the most serious challenge to the integrity, the nature and the relevance of the Antarctic Treaty System. The XXX ATCM (New Delhi 2007) reluctantly agreed to establish an informal open-ended web-based Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) working until ATCM XXXI. However, at the next ATCM XXXI (Kiev 2008) the ICG was formally disbanded due to the lack of clear terms of reference. Instead, the Meeting asked SCAR to prepare a paper at ATCM XXXII in response to the following questions:
        a) review the most recent published research that may involve biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty region and provide an assessment of these efforts from discovery to development to commercialization to product use, based on fundamental scientific principles.
        b) Provide a survey of ongoing biological prospecting research being undertaken within the SCAR community.

SCAR noted in this connection, that its review of recent research would involve a review of existing databases. At the time, Chile asked SCAR to clarify its present position with regard to previous resolutions and statements issued by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and its working bodies. SCAR replied it had not revisited those resolutions. Neither the question nor the answer by SCAR were mentioned in the ATCM Report. However, the SCAR record is significant in this context and should be taken into account.

2)	 The SCAR Record:

At the Twenty-fifth Meeting of SCAR (Concepción, Chile, July 1998) Recommendation SCAR XXV-2 was adopted:

   Concerning biological prospecting;
     Recognizing that the Antarctic marine ecosystem has a high biodiversity and is rich in groups of interacting organisms which elsewhere in the world have proved of pharmaceutical value;
                  Noting the increasing international interest in the worldwide exploitation of  biodversity for chemical compounds of use to mankind, and
                 Recognizing that the international legislation for controlling access to genetic  resources is based on sovereign rights which do not appear to be applicable in    the Antarctic Treaty area south of latitude 60º S;
                  SCAR recommends that National Committees be aware of:
        ◦ the possible detrimental direct and indirect effects of any direct collection of Antarctic species for the identification and commercial exploitation of secondary metabolites, enzymes or other useful molecules.
        ◦ The possibility of patenting of gene sequences from Antarctic organisms of commercial use.
        ◦ The lack of any legislation under the Antarctic Treaty System specifically focused on these matters.

At the Twenty-seventh Meeting of SCAR (Shanghai, China, July 2002), the report noted under agenda items 6 & 7 the remarks of the Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs (GOSEAC) that “”Bioprospection occurs at two levels, viz. the study of genetic materials and determination of commercially important genetic codes and the harvesting of in situ organisms for the extraction of biochemicals. A patent had been filed for a protein (marinomonin) isolated from a bacterium collected from an Antarctic lake sediment. Such patent efforts might well restrict the use of this knowledge by Antarctic scientists. While no current instance of harvesting for biotechnology is known, there are obvious environmental ramifications of the taking of animals and plants as a commercial venture. No action is recommended at present, but it was noted by GOSEAC that developments related to bioprospecting should be closely monitored as they might develop into important pressures on Antarctic resources. The Working Group noted that the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) might need to be extended to include regulation of  bioprospecting, and indeed all the provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity. D. Walton noted that SCAR would have to put a paper forward to the ATCM setting out that it is important for the Treaty to adopt the measures of the Convention on Biological Diversity. The Group discussed the likely impact of this research in the Antarctic Treaty Area and concluded that significant impacts are unlikely. The Group agreed that a recommendation in this regard should be made to SCAR XXVII.” The outcome was disappointing as Recommendation XXVII- Biol 3 concerning the CBD was not adopted,  the very dry and mostly administrative report of SCAR XXVII to ATCM XXV (Warsaw, 2002) skips the matter entirely and the relevant working paper (WP-024) drawing the ATCMs attention to the CBD model was withdrawn. The proactive role of the GOSEAC  was never entirely endorsed by SCAR, with the single exception of the above mentioned SCAR XXV-2, whose role as warning and guidance could hardly be considered effective or realistic.

At the XXVIII ATCM (Stockholm, 2005) SCAR introduced IP 85 (Biodiversity in the Antarctic) accompanying the SCAR Lecture. This useful text was submitted again as a working paper (WP 37) to assist in the discussions being held during ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh 2006). 

3)	The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP):
        
Consideration of the subject was initiated at CEP V under agenda item 4 (d) “Matters covered by Annex II (Conservation of Fauna and Flora) with a paper submitted by the UK  (WP-043) on “Biological Prospecting in Antarctica”. After a lively discussion by delegates and ASOC, and a remark in paragraph 61 in the CEP Report, the issue was classified as clearly deserving consideration by the ATCM.
While members were encouraged to submit papers on biological prospecting to CEP VI, there was no further response from CEP Members. The ATCM responded by urging Parties to be prepared to consider these matters at XXVI ATCM.
As a result two important Information Papers were submitted to the XXVI ATCM (Madrid 2003): IP-47, “Bioprospecting in Antarctica. An Academic Workshop”, by New Zealand and IP-75, “The International Regime on Bioprospecting: Existing Policies and Emerging Issues for Antarctica”, by the UK and Norway, containing a comprehensive review of the topic by Sam Johnston and Dagmar Lohan.  The discussion was significant and the Committee agreed to refer the legal and political issues to the ATCM whose response was the inclusion of the issue as item 17 of the preliminary agenda for ATCM XXVII. However, at that time, both the CEP and the ATCM were seized of a single document: IP-106. “Industry involvement in Antarctic Bioprospecting“, by UNEP. Germany noted the need for a more profound consideration by the CEP, and the ATCM registered the increasing interest on this topic and its treatment in other international for a.   

4)	The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP):

Advice from COMNAP has not been requested by the ATCM. However, COMNAP, as the organization grouping national Antarctic programmes has an important advantage compared to SCAR in its outreach concerning support and responsibility for the scientific community active in Antarctic fieldwork. Its network of environmental officers (AEON) is an asset and a resource base worth considering, and the new COMNAP Constitution, which bases its future institutional development on responses to challenges and issues through ad hoc groups and strategic development, facilitates the ATCM recourse to COMNAP expertise.

5)	The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources (CCAMLR):

The Canberra Convention has a consolidated area of application extending to boundaries which roughly coincide with the Antarctic Convergence. It applies both to the area south of 60º South latitude and to Antarctic marine living resources of the area between that latitude and the Antarctic Convergence which form part of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. Going beyond the underlying perceptions of claimant and non claimant countries which are, for this issue largely irrelevant except for the question of title to the resources, while the comprehensive scope of the Convention is the Convergence, the common denominator is the Antarctic marine ecosystem and the complex relationship of Antarctic marine living resources –which include all species of living organisms- with each other and with their physical environment.
Biological prospecting was considered   at the Commission Meeting in 2008 in response to a paper submitted by IUCN entitled “Paper on Biological Prospecting in the Southern Ocean. A Role for CAMMLR“, which led some Parties to suggest that CCAMLR examine this matter more seriously. Under the terms of reference provided by the Commission, the CCAMLR Performance Review was not invited to consider the issue. 

Conclusion 
The global review in this working paper points to the rather minor role played by the Antarctic institutional framework, while WPO 1 submitted by the Netherlands and other Parties on Regulatory Gaps within the covers in a more meticulous and incisive manner all relevant developments within the System. The common diagnosis is that the Antarctic institutional framework is not seriously engaged or appropriately aware of the serious challenge involved in the unregulated development of Antarctic bioprospecting. While our view is that Antarctic Institutions are not performing their role under the Treaty and the Protocol, Workshops held at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, N.Z. and Baarn, Netherlands, seem to share this concern. 

II	Baselines and parameters:

1)	Scope:

It is important to foresee the implications of the equivocal reference in both Resolution 7 (2005) taken by the ATCM, and Recommendation XV-2 by SCAR to the Antarctic Treaty Area.  The reference to 60º  South Latitude is quite inappropriate in a legal, political, historical and biogeographic context. While the International Hydrographic Office has adopted such boundary, it has done so for strictly navigational purposes, and from a scientific point of view the boundaries of the Southern Ocean remain undefined. This limitation has been slightly modified in the request made to SCAR by ATCM XXXI already referred to, by applying the concept of “the Antarctic Treaty Region”.

At the start of the process which led, through Viña del Mar and Madrid, to the Environmental Protocol, Chile submitted at ATCM XV (Paris, 1989) a working paper (WP7) whose fourth paragraph reads: “As embodied in Article 2 of CCAMLR, the ecosystem as a whole approach “should apply to all activities affecting the Antarctic environment. That is, the effects of any activity must be considered in light of its potential effect on the ecosystem as a whole, not merely on one part that is directly affected. Direct effects on one individual species or habitats may generate repercussion having related impact on other related species or habitats”.

While the Protocol, as ancillary instrument to the Treaty, is in principle  bound by the 60º S boundary, the key to its overarching legal impact is contained in the mention in Article 4 (2) that “Nothing in the Protocol shall derogate from the rights and obligations to other international instruments in force within the Antarctic Treaty System”. Other precedents are CCAS where the 60 S boundary applies but a reporting obligation covers the “area of floating sea ice north of 60º S” (Article 5 (7). CRAMRA, in its Article 5, considers a plurality of areas of  application: 60º S minus the “deep seabed” but plus the “continental shelf” as defined by international law and the derogation of the 60º S limit for other Articles “insofar as they relate to possible impacts outside the area, including “impacts on dependent and associated ecosystems”. There is a constant reference in the Environmental Protocol to the dependent and associate ecosystems, and possible impacts on them, and its further expansion in cooperation matters to areas adjacent to the Antarctic Treaty Area, as well as in the consistency provisions of Article 5. In a more explicit manner, Article 8 of Annex IV to the Protocol, on Prevention of Marine Pollution, states: “In implementing the provisions of this Annex, due consideration shall be given to the need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent and associate ecosystems, outside the Antarctic Treaty Area”. 

As the CEP Report to the XXVI ATCM (Madrid, 2003) paragraph 174 recollects: “Chile stressed the value of the precautionary ecosystem approach to issues raised by bioprospecting in Antarctic marine areas and recalled that CCAMLR encompassed all living organisms in the Southern Ocean”. At that ATCM, Chile provided its Comments through a Non-Paper entitled “Notes on Bioprospecting and Antarctic Research”.

The essential definition of Antarctic bioprospecting must focus on all the terrestrial and marine living resources included within the Antarctic Ecosystem and consider the area of application in terms of its scientific foundation and its functional and operational effectiveness as has been the case of CCAS, CRAMRA, CAMMLR and the Protocol.

2)       Entitlement:

It has been stated that the legal title to Antarctic organisms used for biological prospecting is based on Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. SCAR Resolution XXV-2 mentions “sovereign rights” as not applicable to the area south of 60º S. Both statements must be qualified. It is also exact that negotiations concerning CCAMLR and CRAMRA reconfirmed Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty. But the meaning of a reaffirmation or reconfirmation, in practical terms, consists in recalling that claimants, basis of claim countries and non-claimants share the same rights and obligations under a different perspective. Treaty practice needs to be further developed instead of avoiding raising the issues concerning article IV.
Title and the exercise of jurisdiction are different matters. All States Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the Protocol, CCAMLR and other instruments of the System possess a collective jurisdiction, essentially addressed to the values and objectives of the Treaty and the Protocol, including the conservation and protection of the Antarctic Environment. Such protective jurisdiction over Antarctic resources applies as well to their rational use, as is the case of CCAS and CCAMLR, and would have been the case for CRAMRA, before the indefinite prohibition of mining activities by Article 7 of the Protocol. 

Article IV of the Washington Treaty has inter alia the following implications:
    (a) Equality of access to exploration, scientific research and all other peaceful uses of Antarctica to its Treaty Parties.
    (b) A collective jurisdiction on resources for their protection and/or their rational and sustainable use. CRAMRA and CCAMLR are quoted as examples of attempted or successful regulation but the same principle is applied to Antarctic ice. 
    (c) The effective protection of all juridical positions.

All the above elements are pertinent to the discussion of a regulatory framework for bioprospecting. The fact that claimant States will obviously and mostly defend their position in matters concerning extractive industries cannot be interpreted as meaning that Article IV does not or may not apply to the application of economic uses to Antarctic organisms within a particular area. As well as the present use of Antarctic organisms by non-Antarctic Parties, under intellectual property instruments which not only contradict Article III of the Treaty, but constitute an appropriation of benefits derived from Antarctic organisms which challenges the whole of the Antarctic Treaty System. The unregulated use of those organisms without some recognition of the interest of a State in a particular area is detrimental and undermines Articles II, IV, X and undermines Article III as well as the objectives contained in the Preamble, including “the interest of all mankind”.

Recognition is conceptually different from benefit-sharing or other economic consequences. CRAMRA recognized the maritime spaces established by international law, including the continental shelf as defined in Article 76 of the UNCLOS, as well as its delimitation in order not to intrude in the deep seabed, a decision which does not necessarily deprive the Treaty System of its overarching interest in the protection of the marine environment. At ATCM XXXI (Kiev, 2008) this issue was raised in paragraph 302 of the final Report where Argentina recalled certain gaps on knowledge concerning bioprospecting activities, and both Argentina and Chile recalled their position that “all maritime spaces of the law of the sea applied”. 

Certainly, CRAMRA would not have defined the continental shelf in the specific terms and language of Article 76 of the UNCLOS, or established Regulatory Committees for areas of mining prospection under a modality which took into account the respective interest of States or recalled the UNCLOS definition of continental shelf, if such provisions had not benefited all Treaty Parties equally, through the interrelated mechanisms it contained.  Enhancing the importance of these features, should not overlook the fact that beyond the environmental concerns which mining activities arise, a distinction is made in articles 16 and 37 on the availability of data and the kind of commercial information which the Operator had obtained through prospection and could retain for a certain period.  

In terms of bioprospecting, if we fail to recognize a firm link of an organism to a specific area, we would not be consistent with the fundamental premise of defining a global area for the Antarctic Ecosystem where Antarctic organisms must be protected, and their use must be regulated by the Treaty System. The Antarctic Treaty Region, encompassing the Antarctic Continent and its islands, also includes distinctive biogeographic regions which should be defined and considered in any regulatory framework. Having made this general assessment, which includes the necessity to define a region roughly equivalent to the Antarctic Convergence and the Polar Front, emphasis must be stressed primarily on the appurtenance of living organisms to Antarctica in all its terrestrial domain and for the Southern Ocean, already defined as “an integral part of the Antarctic Environment” (Recommendation V-3), and fully complying with the CCAMLR definition of “Antarctic Marine Living Resources”.

3)	External Contributions to an Antarctic Bioprospecting Regime: 

A number of proposals have mentioned the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) as a relevant model for an Antarctic instrument dealing with bioprospection. The first indication in that respect comes from the Convention itself when it provides that its provisions  “shall not affect the rights and obligations of any Contracting Party deriving from any existing international agreement, except when the exercise of hose rights and obligations would cause a serious damage or threat to biological diversity” (Art. 22 (1). A first step indicates that the Biodiversity Convention recognizes the Protocol as the instrument most appropriate for the protection of Antarctic Biodiversity. While the GOSEAC initial suggestion of including the Biodiversity relevant articles in an Annex to the Protocol has merit, the context in which these provisions apply requires careful discrimination. 

One must remember that the CBD includes diversity between species, genetic resources and ecosystems. Certain difficulties arise concerning the definitions of these terms and their clarification is indispensable for the construction of any regulatory regime. The CBD contains the requisite of “prior informed consent”, also a feature of the Bonn Guidelines on Access and Benefit Sharing (2002). This concept should be examined whithin the Antarctic context, as possible additional guidance provided to the bioprospector, to the terms already included in the “permit” or “authorization” regime established by the Protocol. Attention has been drawn to the 1977 Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of Microorganisms for Purposes of Patent Procedures and to the 2001 International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. Examination of these treaties point towards the development of a concern for fairness and equity in international law, but also to the difficulty of reconciling any of those instruments to the assumptions underlying the concept of “intellectual property” drawn upon the 1994 WTO(GATT)/WIPO Tripps Agreements, particularly with regard to access to resources, with the “common market for science” installed by Article III of the Antarctic Treaty. 

An interesting but yet unsatisfactory model to the limitations or prohibitions of the grant of patents or other intellectual property rights is the 1973 European Patent Convention establishing a European Patent Office (EPO) which contains a requirement for order public and morality, and the prohibition of the grant of patents in respect of “plant or animal varieties or essentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals”. However, EPO jurisprudence demonstrates that while it is feasible to raise objections on the basis of environmental grounds the prospects for success are extremely limited. Still more negative is the decision taken by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in Case c-377/98, Netherlands v. European Parliament and EU Council (2001): Contradicting the Netherlands, the Court argued that the mere protection of biotechnological resources was not detrimental to developing countries from which the genetic resource originates, nor to national or international efforts to preserve biodiversity and equitable sharing of the benefits.



III.	Some parameters for an Antarctic bioprospecting regime:

The general outline of a political solution to the present situation where Antarctic resources are the prey of external actors, public or private is absent.  The efforts of Antarctic researchers are not rewarded and are curtailed by the present commitment to make freely available their scientific observations and results in a manner which fosters rather than disciplining this appropriation of knowledge, as it is not sufficiently matched by reciprocity, protection from outsiders and free-lancers, and does not respond any more to the high ideals of the IGY or even the present International Polar Year (IPY).

As previously stated, the Antarctic Treaty Parties must rise to this challenge, as they did, and in the manner they did (Preparatory Meetings & Omnibus Recommendations, and probably Interim Measures as well).
  
Some steps can be taken in that direction. Within the Enquiry conducted by SCAR on behalf of the ATCM, the issue of sizes of all Antarctic samples, location where taken from and the names of species identified, which should be entered in national databases   is certainly very important; since the 2006-2007 Antarctic season the Chilean Antarctic Institute has started gathering this information. On a global scale, the Data Base established by Belgium should be praised.

The Antarctic Treaty scientific community has a long tradition of cooperation and data sharing in their endeavors. Lewis Wolpert, professor of Applied Biology at University College, London, (The Unnatural nature of Science. Faber & Faber Ltd. London, 1992) maintains that a certain number of rule apply to the conduct of research in fields such as molecular biology, which involve sharing laboratory materials which may allow other researchers than those involved in the initial investigation of certain genes or proteins, to further pursue their investigation. If this types of codes are being voluntarily introduced in the external scientific community, while many of them might be mandatory already in the Antarctic scientific community, it is important to make the point that, beyond the concern for the unique Antarctic environment, the basis exists for striking a balance not only from the environmental but also, more significantly, for the rights of humanly as a whole to share in the Commonwealth of Science.

This remark is interesting from the perspective of equitable sharing by the scientific community as a whole. But it does not, any way, deprive us from the sense of urgency to put some order inside our own house, particularly in the matter of standardized authorizations, raised by Anne Choquet “In search of a legal regime for bioprospecting in Antarctica” (IP 13) introduced on her behalf by France. It is quite significant that both Anne Choquet, within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System; and Harlan Cohen, “Bioprospecting of genetic resources in the polar regions” at the International Conference on the World Ocean in Globalization (Oslo, August 2008) have chosen to model some of their remarks on the Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources (CRAMRA). Notes contained at the Netherlands Intergovernmental Meeting of Experts on Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area” (Baarn, February 2009) in a paper on “Gap Analysis of the Antarctic Treaty System regarding the Management of Biological Prospecting” also underline the usefulness of the CRAMRA in providing some useful guidance or precedence for addressing biological prospecting.

Another remark in the initial paper by Johnston and Lohan, introduced by the UK and Norway as an Information Paper (IP.) and also mentioned in Anne Choquet´s essay is the UNCLOS approach to marine research, both in the International Area and in areas of national jurisdiction. It is quite obvious that ocean space must be treated as a whole, but also that fragile ecosystems must be protected as well as the marine environment.

Again, the environmental concern is right and must be upheld, but the potential of the ocean for genetic resources is enormous, and recognizing the efforts towards sustainable exploitation, the critical role of the ocean, and the Southern Ocean in particular, in regulating global climate has been constantly emphasized by the Antarctic Community. Bioprospecting activities in the marine environment are not in line with UNCLOS definitions of Marine scientific research, or the obligation of States or international organizations under UNCLOS Article 262 and IMO Resolution A 672  (16) to ensure that scientific research installations bear identification markings indicating the State of registry or the international organization to which they belong. While this obligation is rarely complied, it remains insufficient to regulate in any effective way marine bioprospecting which does not require permanent or semi-permanent installations to be carried on.

The existence of gaps in the Law of the Sea is no confort for Antarctica, but it provides food for thought to the intent that a regime for Antarctic Bioprospecting will require innovative thinking and creative approaches to test, modify and improve existing legal frameworks, and above all to enforce regulations over the immense extension of the Antarctic Continent, its huge continental platform and large offshore areas.




