





The Finnish Chairmanship of the Arctic Council 2017-2019 “Exploring common solutions”










The Finnish Chairmanship of the Arctic Council 2017-2019 “Exploring common solutions”
			
Information Paper submitted by Finland

The Arctic Council is the leading intergovernmental forum for the Arctic region. Since its inception, the Arctic Council has focused on sustainable development and protection of the Arctic environment as affirmed in the Ottawa Declaration (1996). The Chairmanship of the Council rotates every two years among the eight Arctic States. Finland served as Chair for the second time in 2017-2019. 
Overarching themes and priorities of the Finnish Chairmanship

The two overarching themes were the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and climate change in the Arctic. Finland’s four priorities were environmental protection, meteorological cooperation, connectivity and education. During 2017-19, the Arctic Council made progress and achieved results in all these areas. 

The UN 2030 Agenda is global in scope and applies to the Arctic as well for the benefit of people and the environment. Climate change continues in the Arctic more than twice the rate of the global mean with considerable impacts on ecosystems and societies.  

As confirmed by the Arctic Climate Update 2019 that was one of the Working Group deliverables to the Arctic Council 2019 Rovaniemi Ministerial Meeting:
    • The observed and projected annual average warming in the Arctic continues to be more than twice the global mean
    • Arctic annual surface air temperatures in 2014 - 2018 exceeded those of any year since 1900
    • Arctic winter sea ice maximums in 2015 - 2018 were at record-low levels
    • The volume of Arctic sea ice present in the month of September has declined by 75 percent since year 1979
    • Warming temperatures are affecting the Arctic terrestrial landscape and marine environments
    • Melting Arctic glaciers are the largest land-ice contributors to the global sea-level rise
During its Chairmanship, Finland highlighted the reduction of black carbon emissions as a useful tool to mitigate climate change in the Arctic and allocated resources to this work. The Arctic Council Expert Group produced a report on the current and projected emissions of black carbon and methane in the Arctic States and some Observer States as well as recommendations for the reduction of these emissions. Finland allocated funds to different regional and global initiatives that reduce black carbon emissions from e.g. gas flaring, heat production and transportation.

The Arctic Council Working Groups produced important information on the state of the Arctic environment and sought solutions to reduce pollution, to mitigate climate change and to conserve biodiversity in the Arctic. Among others, the Council adopted a report on the status of Arctic freshwater ecosystems as well as a study on marine litter; advanced conservation of Arctic migratory birds in cooperation with Observer States; and adopted best practice recommendations for Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) in large-scale projects in the region. Finland organized an Arctic Environment Ministers’ meeting in October 2018 to promote search for solutions to common environmental challenges. Visibility of Arctic issues also enhanced in multilateral events concerning climate, environment and sustainable development.

Finland introduced meteorological cooperation as a new topic for the Arctic Council. Improved meteorological observations assist in enhancing climate science as well as in producing services that improve the safety of the people in the Arctic region. The meteorological institutes of the Arctic States and the World Meteorological Organization offered their expertise to the Arctic Council. The Arctic Council Working Groups and the incoming Icelandic Chairmanship welcomed the opportunity to utilize this cutting-edge expertise in their work.

The Arctic Council continued its efforts to improve digital connectivity and produced for the Rovaniemi Ministerial Meeting a report with recommendations for future work to attract investments in this field. The Arctic Council and the University of the Arctic initiated a project emphasizing the crucial role of teachers and modern teaching methods for equal access to inclusive good quality education.

A growing concern in the region is the increased risk of wildfires, a topic that is now on Finland’s initiative higher on the Arctic Council agenda. 

Strengthening the Arctic Council

The three agreements negotiated under the auspices of the Arctic Council have entered into force. During Finland’s Chairmanship, practical exercises implementing the agreements for Search and Rescue and Oil Pollution Prevention in the region were carried out successfully. The Arctic Council also contributed to the harmonized implementation of the International Maritime Organization’s Polar Code. The inaugural meeting of the Parties to the Agreement on Enhancing Scientific Cooperation in the Arctic was held in Helsinki in March 2019. 

Finland as a Chair continued the previous practice in offering opportunities to the Observers to participate in the Council’s work via dedicated Observer sessions. A second round of Observer reviews was performed during 2017-19. The Observer status of all 18 reviewed Observers was reaffirmed. International Maritime Organization (IMO) was admitted as a new Observer to the Arctic Council.

A Memorandum of Understanding between the Arctic Council and the Arctic Economic Council was signed to strengthen the cooperation in promoting sustainable economic development in the Arctic.

The Council also made an effort to enhance its strategic planning. During the Icelandic Chairmanship, a review of different components of the Council will be conducted. In addition, the Council decided to take a more holistic look on marine issues via dedicated meetings on marine issues.

Finland introduced a concept of sustainable meetings in co-operation with the WWF. Environmental considerations were systematically observed in all practical arrangements of the meetings. This initiative produced guidelines that are available to be used in any meetings.  

Ministerial Meeting

In the Arctic Council Ministerial Meeting in Rovaniemi on 6-7 May 2019, Finland handed over the Chairmanship to Iceland for 2019-21. Foreign Ministers of all Arctic States took part in the meeting, alongside with the representatives of the six Permanent Participant organizations representing the indigenous peoples of the Arctic. 

The Ministers signed the Rovaniemi Joint Ministerial Statement committing to peace, stability and constructive cooperation in the Arctic. Foreign Minister Timo Soini issued a Statement by the Chair presenting the main achievements in the Arctic Council’s work in 2017-19. 

