





Modernisation of Australia’s Antarctic Program









Modernisation of Australia’s Antarctic program
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan sets out Australia’s Antarctic interests and vision for future engagement in Antarctica (see ATCM XXXIX/IP111). The Strategy and Action Plan outlines commitments to modernise and upgrade infrastructure and assets to support the Australian Antarctic Program. This paper summarises progress on key modernisation activities since the launch of the Strategy and Action Plan in 2016. For each of these activities the objectives and provisions of the Environmental Protocol, including environmental impact assessment requirements, are incorporated into the project management. Australia would be pleased to provide further information and consult with other Parties regarding opportunities these modernisation activities present for enhanced international collaboration.
Australia’s new Antarctic icebreaker
In ATCM XXXIX/IP111 Australia reported that a new world-class research and resupply Antarctic icebreaker is a key deliverable in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan. ATCM XXXIX/BP9 provided more detail on Australia’s plans to acquire and sustain a new state-of-the-art Antarctic icebreaker to replace the RSV Aurora Australis. 
The new vessel takes its name, RSV Nuyina, from a Tasmanian Aboriginal word for the southern lights. The Nuyina will provide a state of the art platform to conduct multidisciplinary science, both in sea ice and open water. It will also deliver personnel, cargo and equipment to and from Antarctic and subantarctic stations.
Construction of the new icebreaker is well progressed, with delivery expected in mid-2020. A launching ceremony was held in August 2018, when the hull was floated in dry dock at Damen Shipyards in Galatz, Romania, before it was transferred into a wet dock for further construction. 
As at May 2019, all steel sections are in place up to the main mast and main cargo cranes installed (see Figure 1). Commissioning of vessel systems is well underway, with Harbour Acceptance Tests scheduled for the second half of 2019. Following successful completion of the harbour testing program, Nuyina will be sent into the Black Sea for sea acceptance trials, and subsequent deployment north from Norway for special sea trials that will include icebreaking trials and acoustic noise measurement. Following acceptance testing, the vessel will be delivered to Hobart, Tasmania.
Further information about the Nuyina is available from the Australian Antarctic Division website. 

Figure 1. RSV Nuyina under construction at Damen Shipyards, Galatz, Romania, April 2019 (Photo: Rob Bryson (AAD))
Traverse and mobile inland station capability to support deep field research
Australia reported in ATCM XXXIX/IP111 that a key deliverable in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan is to develop modern and flexible infrastructure, including restoring traverse capabilities and establishing mobile stations in the Antarctic interior.
Australia is renewing its capability to undertake overland traverse and major scientific programs at remote locations. The capability will initially be used to support Australia’s involvement a multi-year scientific campaign, being undertaken in collaboration with international collaborators, to search for the Earth’s longest continuous ice core climate record. 
The Australian Antarctic Program has commenced procurement of traverse heavy vehicles and equipment, and is working closely with international partners to design and build the ice core drill. Design work is also underway for sleds, traverse, mobile inland station and scientific infrastructure; and fuel transport modules.
Australia is planning to commence deployment of traverse equipment to Antarctica in the 2019-20 summer season, with the mobile inland station and ice core drilling infrastructure planned to be deployed in the 2020-21 summer season. Drilling for the million year ice core is expected to occur from the 2021-22 to 2025-26 seasons.
Further information about the traverse capability to support scientific research is available from the Australian Antarctic Division website.

Figure 2. First Caterpillar Challenger heavy traverse tractor delivered to William Adams in Hobart. The tractor fleet will undergo a series of Antarctic modifications in preparation for deployment to Antarctica (Photo: David Reilly (AAD))
Modernising Australia’s Antarctic research stations
In ATCM XXXVI/BP8 Australia reported that it would be investigating options for addressing the requirements for refurbishment or rebuilding of stations and associated infrastructure, and would report to future meetings on progress with these activities. Australia also reported in ATCM XXXIX/IP111 that a key deliverable in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan is to develop modern and flexible infrastructure, including progressing options for more efficient and flexible use of existing research stations.
Following a review of Australia’s Antarctic asset base in 2017-18, the Australian Antarctic Program has commenced a process to modernise and upgrade its research stations and supporting infrastructure. Master plans for stations and major facilities are in development and will outline new infrastructure works, predicted station capacity requirements and an asset renewal and replacement program. 
The station modernisation program will enhance Australia’s science support capabilities with research stations and supporting infrastructure that is more efficient, flexible and can cater to Australia’s long term logistics needs and scientific objectives. Subject to environmental approvals, the implementation of the station modernisation program will commence by 2026. Priorities include:
    • Modernising fuel storage, water supplies, energy provision, and communication technology;
    • Upgrading heavy vehicles and mobile equipment;
    • Enhanced medical services;
    • Improvements to environmental sustainability;
    • Improving operational assets such as boats, field huts, and aerodromes;
    • New scientific equipment and infrastructure.
Year round aviation access
In ATCM XXXVI/BP8 Australia reported that it had started to investigate alternative/additional options for intercontinental aviation services, including consideration of options for intercontinental airframes and alternative landing areas in the proximity of Australia’s stations. Australia subsequently reported in ATCM XXXIX/IP111 that a key deliverable in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan is to further scope options for expanded aviation capabilities to establish a year-round aviation capability between Hobart and Antarctica. In May 2018 the Australian Government announced its intention to construct a 2700 m paved runway near Davis research station to enhance Australia’s ability to undertake world class Antarctic science, subject to environmental approvals.
Australia is progressing towards the establishment of the first year-round aviation access capability in East Antarctica. Field investigations by the Australian Antarctic Program have identified a suitable site approximately 5 km from Davis research station. The new aerodrome would be suitable for jet aircraft capable of making return flights between Hobart and Davis research station without refuelling, and would complement Australia’s existing summer-only blue ice runway at Wilkins Aerodrome near Casey research station. Infrastructure required for the operation and construction of a year-round aerodrome would include an air traffic operations facility, terminal buildings, hangars, runway lights, emergency response facilities and fuel storage.
Providing year round aviation access to East Antarctica would bring long term benefits for scientific, logistical and emergency response capability, in addition to new opportunities for international collaboration.
Further information about the year-round aviation access project are available from the Australian Antarctic Division website.
New Antarctic and science precinct in Hobart
Australia reported in ATCM XXXIX/IP111 that a key deliverable in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan is to build Tasmania’s status as the premier East Antarctic Gateway for science and operations. The Australian, Tasmanian and Hobart governments have agreed to create a state-of-the-art Antarctic and Science Precinct at Macquarie Point in Hobart. The Precinct will build on Hobart’s capability as an international gateway to Antarctica, with the objective of attracting national and private Antarctic and Southern Ocean institutions using the combined capacity of Hobart’s existing world class expertise.
Further information about the new Antarctic and science precinct is contained in the Hobart City Deal available on the Tasmanian Department of Infrastructure website.

