





Turkish Scientific Projects at Belgium’s Princess Elisabeth Station in Antarctica









Turkish Scientific Projects at Belgium’s Princess Elisabeth Station in Antarctica

Information Paper submitted by Turkey 

Summary

On the context of the Third Turkish Scientific Expedition (TAE-III) to Antarctica; collaboration with the Belgian’s Princess Elisabeth Antarctica station is reported.
Turkish Scientific Projects at Belgium’s Princess Elisabeth Station in Antarctica

Belgian Antarctic Station, Princess Elisabeth Antarctica (PEA), is an international base for many projects such as geological investigations, meteorite search and microbiological sampling expeditions, climate change, geological and glaciological surveys. During the 2018-2019 Antarctic season, over 40 scientists visited the PEA station for various scientific tasks. 

Polar Research Center (PolReC) of Istanbul Technical University coordinated two joint projects between Turkey and Belgium for the 2018-2019 Antarctic season. First, Asst. Prof. Dr. Mehmet Yesiltas (Kirklareli University, Department of Space Sciences) was chosen to perform reconnaissance trips to potential meteorite stranding areas for future expeditions. With the expertise and guidance of Mr. Alain Hubert, founder of International Polar Foundation, Dr. Mehmet Yesiltas visited multiple areas such as blue ice fields and mountain ranges within the Sor Rondane Mountains in East Antarctica to assess the potential of those areas for meteorite accumulation. 

Second, Assoc. Prof. Dr. Naki Akçar (Bern University, Institute of Geological Sciences) successfully completed his second field campaign in the nunataks at Mount Nils Larsen within the DEAIS (Deglaciation of the Eastern Antarctic Ice Sheet) Project. During 10 days field camp, he collected 35 rock surface from erratic boulders deposited on the moraines for cosmogenic nuclide analysis, which will be processed at the Surface Exposure Laboratory of the University of Bern for accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) analysis at ETH Zurich. In addition, he successfully completed the data collection for the digital elevation models of Dry Valley, Ketelers Glacier, Utsteinen and Pingvane Nunataks with unmanned aerial vehicle.

Both projects mentioned above were successfully conducted and completed with financial support of the Ministry of Industry and Technology. We would like to thank to the IPF and the PEA station staff and Belgium authorities for their support and kind hospitality. We do believe in that such cooperation may be of interest to Non-Consultative Parties that currently do not maintain Antarctic bases but strive to conduct “substantial scientific research activity” for the attainment of Consultative Status. 


