





Follow-up the Recommendations of the Inspections at Vernadsky station since 1999








Follow-up the Recommendations of the Inspections at Vernadsky station since 1999
Information Paper submitted by Ukraine
Background
Akademik Vernadsky station (former the UK Faraday station), located on Galindez Island in the Argentine Islands Archipelago (Lat. 65°15′ S; Long. 64°16′ W), was transferred to Ukraine under the Agreement signed between the Governments of the UK and Ukraine in July 1995. Since Ukraine taking full possession of the station on 6, February 1996, the facility was subject to five inspections carried out in accordance with Article VII (3) of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty – in 1998/1999, 2000/2001, 2004/2005, 2014/2015, and 2018/2019 seasons.
This Information Paper shows that Ukraine, regardless of time delay, however sequentially follows-up the recommendations prepared by each inspection over the last 20 years, since the station was inspected for the first time in 1998/1999 season. 
The joint Inspection by the UK and Germany, 1998/1999
For the first time Vernadsky station operated by Ukraine had been inspected on 16 January 1999, by the United Kingdom and Germany Observers. Seven previous Inspections of Faraday station under the UK operation had been in 1993 (Italy and Republic of Korea), 1989 (France and Germany, and separately by New Zealand), 1987 (Chile), and in 1985, 1975 and 1964 (US).
The 1999 Inspection report concluded that Vernadsky station is “unusual as a permanent research station in Antarctica insofar as it is operated by a non-Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty, and one which has yet to accede to, or ratify, the 1991 Environmental Protocol”. To this end, consideration should be given by Ukraine to ratification of the Environmental Protocol, and thereafter if appropriate to seek Consultative Status within the Antarctic Treaty.
Following this recommendation Ukraine has acceded to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty itself and its five Annexes (under the Law of Ukraine No2284-ІІІ as of February 22, 2001) which entered into force for Ukraine on 24 June 2001. After that, since June 4, 2004 Ukraine was recognised as the Consultative Party (by the Decision 2 (2005). Finally, in accordance with the Decision of the Government of Ukraine No. 441 “On Implementation of the Measures approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting” as of 21 June 2017 Ukraine has approved the Measure 1 (2005) “Annex VI Liability arising from environmental emergencies to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty”. 
In addition, the Observers remembered the concern expressed in the 1993 Inspection report which has recommended that “the fuel tanks should be replaced with new double-skinned steel tanks”. Although replacement of the bulk fuel tanks by 1998/1999 season had been a principal condition of the 1995 UK-Ukraine Agreement, the Observers noted that this work had been delayed, and only a foundation for a new fuel storage tank had however been built to the south of the main building by that time.
The US Inspection, 2000/2001
The 2001 US Inspection report contains general recommendations, which were related in a varying degree to all 11 stations inspected in that season. However, in the section of the report directly related to Vernadsky station, the Inspection team suggested “that, as was the practice for Palmer Station, the number of tour ship visits to the station be limited, with these visits coordinated through the annual meeting of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)”.
With regards to this suggestion, there was an Memorandum of Understanding signed between the IAATO and the National Antarctic Scientific Center in November, 2009, which, inter alia, allows tour ships visits when there is no potential disturbance of the station work schedule (however, Ukrainian representative did not attend the IAATO annual meetings yet). 
Subsequently, in pursuance of the 33th ATCM recommendations (ATCM XXXIII Final Report, points 242-148) Ukraine presented its policy (Guidelines) regarding visits of tourists and non-governmental expeditions to Vernadsky station in an attempt to minimize impacts on station activities. These Guidelines were revised in March 2011 and now it clearly states the level of availability of infrastructure and personnel to serve tourist activities. The Guidelines were presented for Parties’ consideration in format of the CEP Visitor Site Guidelines, facilitating tourist vessel expedition crew comprehension and use (ATCM XXXIV Information Paper IP-110 with the attachment). A copy of these Guidelines is available at Vernadsky station, in order to ensure a broader access to them. 
The joint Inspection by the UK, Australia and Peru, 2004/2005
The Inspection conducted jointly by the United Kingdom, Australia and Peru have visited Vernadsky station on 1 March 2005, and provided with five clearly defined recommendations: 
• The “Braithwaite” tanks should be replaced as soon as possible with modern, safe fuel tanks with secondary containment (e.g. bunding or double skinned), as agreed in the MoU
Because of the lack of resources, Ukraine couldn't provide this work in due time. Nevertheless, this commitment has now been achieved. To this end, Ukraine introduced at the ATCM XXIX (Edinburg, 2006) the Working Paper No 36 “The Replacement of Fuel Tanks at Vernadsky Station” as a kind of non-technical resume of the planned activity in addition to the relevant CEE. Taking into consideration the unsatisfactory technical conditions of old fuel tanks, the decision was taken to start building and mounting works in 2006-2007 season in order to prevent the appearance of environmental emergency situation. At the ATCM XXX (New Delhi, 2007) Ukraine introduced Information Paper No 30 and provided with a presentation on the construction works. 
Some CEP Members suggested that Ukraine might present an update of this activity, including activity regarding the old fuel tanks, at the next CEP meeting (CEP X Report, items 73-80). In response to this Ukraine informed in Kyiv (2008) that the old fuel tanks with capacity 145 m3 and 33 m3 are took out of service and the waste fuel and sludge were carefully removed without causing pollution (ATCM XXXI IP-102). Due to financial and technical difficulties to remove old fuel tanks, an innovative solution to use them as a storage facility for dry solid materials (after draining, cleaning, and modifying the empty tanks by a door fitting in a side wall) was found.
• An oil spill contingency plan should be prepared for Vernadsky station, oil- spill response equipment provided, and suitable training and exercises undertaken
In accordance with the COMNAP Fuel Manual, an Oil Spill Contingency Plan was developed at Vernadsky Station, which provided with regular contingency exercises, both theoretical and practical, to test oil spill contingency planning and response at least twice a year – in winter and summer.
In 2014 the revised Station Commanders Handbook was developed and put into operation. This document describes in detail all the features of staff life at the station. In addition, there are a complete set of safety instructions and field operations at the station.
• Consideration should be given to enhancing the communication facilities (e.g. more frequent access to e-mail), to assist the management of the station and domestic arrangements
During the first decade of Vernadsky station operation by Ukraine the access to e-mail was indeed limited to two times per week, but now e-mail communication is practically unlimited with the total Internet traffic up to 30 Gb per month.
• BAS and UAC (Ukrainian Antarctic Center) should develop jointly a Management Plan, including visitor guidelines, for HSM No. 62, ‘Base F’ (Wordie House), as required by the MoU
The HSM No. 62, ‘Base F’, (Wordie House) is managed jointly by the UK and Ukraine. The first draft of the CEP Visitor Site Guidelines for Wordie House (Winter Island) were discussed at the ATCM XXXI in Kyiv, 2008 (ATCM XXXI WP-002), and after some corrections were finally adopted by Parties at the ATCM XXXII in Baltimore, 2009 (ATCM XXXII WP-019). 
• A useful addition to the station’s infrastructure would be an elevated helipad set away from the aerial arrays
Due to financial and technical difficulties a helipad has not yet been established, although the 2001 Inspection report indicated that there was an area suitable for helicopter-landings away from the aerial arrays.
The joint Inspection by the UK and the Czech Republic, 2014/2015
On January 4, 2015 Vernadsky station was inspected by the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic Observers. After the visit they have developed four defined recommendations: 
• Improvements to pollution control management are required, with more comprehensive oil spill equipment and improved storage for the free standing fuel drums to stop any potential leaks from entering the sea or the surrounding ground area; and
• Wastes, particularly general waste including food waste, should be stored in a covered area where it cannot be accessed by birds or other wildlife. Alternatively, the station should consider installing a small incinerator for waste food products
The State Institution National Antarctic Scientific Centre developed a plan of Vernadsky station modernization, which carries out repairs of existing and creation of a new infrastructure at the station until 2020 in accordance with the requirements of the State Special-Purpose Research Program in Antarctica for 2011-2020. The document referred to planned technical improvements of both engineering and communication systems as well as scientific equipment, including enlarging of laboratories. 
Taking into account the inspection observations, in particular, installation of a compact incinerator for solid waste, production of closed wooden storage for bags with compacted food waste in order to prevent access to the local fauna, production of metal pallets for barrels of gasoline and diesel fuel waste is planned. 
However, the difficult political and economic situation in Ukraine since 2014 did not allow to realize the plan of modernization in full yet. But Ukrainian Antarctic Program constantly takes steps to modernize the station as far as possible, depending on the available financial opportunities.
• Ukraine should consider installing a sewage and grey water treatment plant at the station to prevent potential marine pollution. In the interim, monitoring should be undertaken to establish any impact on the local environment
In accordance with point 1, Article 5 of the Annex ІІІ “Waste disposal and waste management” to the Environmental Protocol “sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be discharged directly into the sea, taking into account the assimilative capacity of the receiving marine environment”. Moreover, in accordance with para (b) of this point, such wastes, generated in a station where the average weekly occupancy over the austral summer is approximately not more than 30 individuals, shall not be treated by maceration.
At Vernadsky station the average occupancy over the austral summer is approximately not more than 20-24 individuals, and this amount can really be exceeded only for a short period of time depending on the enabled scheme of the planned field works as well as rotation of expedition teams. Thus, Ukraine, in general, meets the commitments of the Environmental Protocol concerning disposal of waste in the sea. 
Nevertheless, taking into consideration general commitment to reduce as far as practicable the amount of wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic Treaty area to minimize impact on the Antarctic environment (Article 2 of the Annex ІІІ to the Environmental Protocol), Ukrainian Antarctic Program’s leadership considers a possibility to install an additional equipment for sewage treatment within the technical improvement plan for Vernadsky station.
• All building works should be subject to an environmental impact assessment and the documentation held on the station for inspection
EIA procedure (mostly preliminary environmental assessment and initial environmental assessment) is applied to ensure that no construction takes place at the station without the clear and documented approval of the State Institution National Antarctic Scientific Centre and other appropriate authorities. 
In addition, the Vernadsky Station Technical Passport was developed, which allows learning in more details about all the facilities and life support systems available at the station. This voluminous document has been prepared in Ukrainian and is currently being translated into at least one official language of the ATCM. 
The joint Inspection by Argentina and Chile, 2018/2019
The last Inspection conducted jointly by Argentina and Chile (with an observer from Uruguay and one from the Republic of Korea) have visited Vernadsky station just a few months ago, on  February 22, 2019. That is why the prepared recommendations (concerning organisation of biology research laboratories, the installation of fire and smoke alarms and control sensors in those facilities that do not have these equipment, as well as storage the food, instruments and paints in separate places) are under consideration of how it should be put into practice in appropriate manner.
Moreover, the Inspection team noted that it is advisable to consider the undischarged recommendations presented in the Inspection carried out during the 2014-2015 season regarding waste management, to avoid impacts that current practices have on the environment and wildlife. In this connection, Ukraine agrees with inspection’s general recommendation to design for the station a clear plan in order to follow-up the recommendations indicated by the previous inspections (ATCM XLII WP-039). The “Checklist A: Antarctic Stations and Subsidiary Installations” (Resolution 3, 2010) also should be competed in advance and be available for inspection, as it provides a useful means of self-assessment to help determining the station’s compliance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its Environmental Protocol. It is no doubt, that the inspection process is crucially important as a tool to improve station operations. 
Conclusion
It is no doubt, that the inspection process is crucially important as a tool to improve station operations. In this connection, Ukraine states their intention to enhance its science program and provide new scientific facilities (e.g. laboratories) and corresponding logistic support, depending on the available resources, in order to meet all recommendations of inspections conducting as one of the main obligation under the Antarctic Treaty.
