





2019/2020 PROANTAR Research Projects








2019/2020 PROANTAR Research Projects

 PROANTAR
The Brazilian Antarctic Programme (PROANTAR) is a State Programme whose objective is the production of scientific knowledge about Antarctica and how the Antarctic continent relates to rest of the global climate system. The Programme guarantees the presence of the Brazilian scientific community in Antarctica since the summer of 1982/83. Scientific research is decentralized and carried out by several universities and research institutions, so that to allow the understanding of the phenomena that take place in Antarctica and their influence on the Brazilian territory. The Program promotes, in an interdisciplinary and interinstitutional way, research in the area of geosciences, physical sciences and life sciences that has global repercussions, besides providing important information for the country’s development.
The National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) has been participating in the scientific objectives of the Programme since 1991 and is responsible for funding scientific research in Antarctica. Together with the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation and Communications (MCTIC), it is responsible for promoting and coordinating scientific research carried out by the scientific and technological institutions. The logistic implementation of PROANTAR is conducted by the Interministerial Commission for the Resources of the Sea (CIRM), under the Navy (Ministry of Defense/MD). The Ministry of the Environment (MMA), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE), among other institutions of the public sector (PETROBRAS) and private (Oi Telefonia) are also partners in the Programme.
 In December 2018, CNPq, in partnership with the Brazilian Navy (SECIRM), MCTIC, Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES), MMA and the National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FNDCT) selected 17 research projects that fulfil the recommendations of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the document named Antarctic Science for Brazil - Action Plan 2013 to 2022 (available at http://www.ufrgs.br/inctcriosfera/ files / BrazilianActionPlanEnglish.pdf).
Representing a total investment of about R$ 15 million (US$ 4 million), the support also involves the granting of 41 postgraduate scholarships provided by CAPES. Projects cover environmental, climate, medical and technological issues. The supported researches are related to climate change, oceanic ventilation and carbon cycle, absorption of atmospheric carbon dioxide, effects of climate change on Antarctic marine ecosystems, research of microorganisms from the marine environment with biotechnological potential, of substances for use in medicine, industry and agriculture, fossil record, biological, neurobiological and social aspects related to the people who participate in the expeditions in the Antarctic in confinement regime, among others.
 The selection of the projects was oriented to guarantee better projects, with researches of interest for the Brazilian society. Research in the Antarctic continent contributes, for example, to a better understanding of climate change, weather forecasting, monitoring of pollution on the planet, and so on. Among the new projects supported by PROANTAR there is one on mental health in Antarctic isolation and a multistage study of organic carbon and metals in the subantarctic ecosystem.
 Following the work that has been carried out for almost 30 years, in April 2019, CNPq held a monitoring and evaluation workshop for the newly selected PROANTAR projects. The 17 coordinators of the research projects were gathered at the headquarters of CNPq for details on logistics, legislation and monitoring of research in Antarctica.
 In addition to the 17 new research projects, PROANTAR is also represented by a National Institute of Science and Technology of the Cryosphere (INCT of the Cryosphere), that gathers 9 laboratories and whose main objective is to integrate the national scientific community that study the role of glaciers, ice sheets, sea ice and permafrost in Antarctica and the Andes.

 Adding all the teams of research projects and the INCT of Cryosphere, there are hundreds of researchers from doctors to undergraduate students and also dozens of institutions of several regions of Brazil and dozens of international institutions.
The following are the projects for OPERANTAR XXXVIII (2019/2020) (Operation Antarctica):

Coordinator
Project name
Institution
Contact
1. Carlos Ernesto Goncalves Reynaud Schaefer
TERRANTAR NETWORK: Permafrost, soils, climate change and teleconnections in Antartica and
Southern Andes
Universidade Federal de Viçosa
carlos.schaefer@ufv.br
2. Jefferson Cardia Simões
 Chemical and climatic variability in the ice cores records of Pine Island Glacier
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
jefferson.simoes@ufrgs.br
3. Jandyr de Menezes Travassos
Geophysical study of Pine Glacier and of its coupling to bedrock  (GeoPine) 
Universidade Federal do Pará
wavefrontgeo@gmail.com
4. Eduardo Resende Secchi
Response of the pelagic ecosystem to climate change in the Southern Ocean (ECOPELAGOS)
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
edu.secchi@furg.br
5. Mauricio Magalhães Mata
Ocean ventilation processes and carbon cycles in the Northern Antarctic Peninsula (PROVOCCAR)
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande
mauricio.m.mata@gmail.com
6. Luciano Ponzi Pezzi
Antarctic Modeling Observation System (ATMOS)
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais
luciano.pezzi@inpe.br
7. Gerson Fauth
Paleocene-Miocene climate evolution: Southern Ocean and Antarctica Peninsula connections (PALEOCLIMA)
Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos
GERSONF@unisinos.br
8. Fabiano Lopes Thompson
Sponges as biosensors of global change and as a source os inovation in biotechnology (MICROBIOMAS)
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
fabianothompson1@gmail.com
9. Luiz Henrique Rosa
Antarctic Mycology 2 (MycoAntar): Catalog of Antarctic fungi for studies of systematics, dispersion and connections with South America and bioprospecting of substances for use in medicine, industry and agriculture.
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais
lhrosa@icb.ufmg.br
10. Moacyr Cunha de Araujo Filho
Biocomplexidade e Interacoes Fisico-Quimico-Biologicas em Multiplas Escalas no Atlantico Sudoeste
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco
moa.ufpe@gmail.com
11. Alexander Wilhelm Armin Kellner
Paleobiology and Paleogeography of South Gondwana: Interrelationships between Antarctica and South America (PALEOANTAR)
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
kellner@mn.ufrj.br
12. César de Castro Martins
The multiple faces of organic carbon and metals in the sub-Antarctic ecosystem: space-time variability, connections with environmental factors and transfer between compartments (CARBMET)
Universidade Federal do Paraná
ccmart@ufpr.br
13. Marcelo de Araujo Carvalho
Paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic evolution of the Antarctic Peninsula: correlation between the eastern and west margins and South America based on paleoflora (FLORANTAR)
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
mcarvalho@mn.ufrj.br
14. Filipe de Carvalho Victoria
 Antarctic bryo-technology as an alternative for drug production (NEVA)
Universidade Federal do Pampa
neva@unipampa.edu.br
15. Jairo Werner Junior
 SAUDEANTAR - Dimensions of mental health in Antarctic isalation: study of affective-cognitive processes, diagnostic and preventive model and presencial and remote assistance (matrix support)
Universidade Federal Fluminense
jairowerner100@gmail.com
16. Rosa Maria Esteves Arantes
Medicine, Physiology and Antarctic Anthropology (MEDIANTAR). Surviving on the limit: from extreme Physiology to health management in Antarctica
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais
rosa.esteves.arantes@gmail.com
17. Wim Maurits Sylvain Degrave
A new continent for health studies (FioAntar): Microbiota and Antarctic viruses, their pathogenic and biotechnological potencial, and systems for detection os possible future impacts on human and animal health
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz
wim.degrave@fiocruz.br


For further information on current research projects, as well as opportunities for international cooperation, please write to proantar@cnpq.br.
