





Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Financial Security 









Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Financial Security 
Information Paper submitted by the International Group of P&I Clubs

Background

    1. The International Group of P&I Clubs (IG) welcomed the opportunity to attend the ATCM XL in Beijing in 2017 to discuss Annex VI to the Antarctic Treaty’s Protocol on Environmental Protection and the financial security provisions contained therein and the scope of third party liability cover provided by the member P&I Associations of the IG.

    2. As background information, the 13 principal underwriting associations comprising the IG provide third party liability insurance cover for approximately 90% of the world’s ocean going tonnage. The insurance cover provided by the Clubs is extensive and includes cover for liabilities of a shipowner arising from ship sourced pollution damage. The Rules on Club cover, that define the scope and terms of cover, are publicly accessible via the websites of each of the 13 Clubs (www.igpandi.org/group-clubs). Although the policy terms that are embodied in each of the Clubs’ Rules are individual to each Club, they differ little between the Clubs.  Many of the vessels operating in Antarctic waters maintain P&I cover with a member P&I Club of the IG.

    3. The IG appreciated the opportunity to discuss a number of issues at the ATCM XL related to Annex VI as set out in document IP 87 submitted to the meeting and the further opportunity to inform the ATCM XLI in Buenos Aires in 2018 that the IG was continuing to analyze the issues raised in IP 87 and would welcome a further opportunity to discuss at the ATCM XLII in order to assist implementation and application of Annex VI.

    4. The IG has, with the assistance of the Comité Maritime International (www.comitemaritimeorg), analysed those issues and provides the comments below.

Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: Financial Security 

    5. At the ATCM XL, the IG commented in IP 87 that:

The limits contained in Clause 9 of the Annex appear to represent a minimum requirement.  If this is correct, then in a jurisdiction that is a party to the Liability Annex (so to speak) where lower limits (e.g. the 1976 LLMC Convention) are applicable, the lower limits will be superseded by the Annex VI limits and in a jurisdiction where higher limits (e.g. the 1996 LLMC Protocol as amended in 2012) are applicable, such higher limits will prevail. 

    6. Consideration has been given to the interplay between the limits contained in Clause 9 of Annex VI (the “Annex”) and in the LLMC regimes (the 1976 LLMC Convention and the 1996 LLMC Protocol, both of which are in force on a global basis). The limits set out in Clause 9 (1) of the Annex are in keeping with the 1996 LLMC Protocol limits as were adopted at the time of the adoption of the Protocol in 1996.  The Protocol limits were subsequently increased by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) in 2012 effective 2015 in all State parties to the Protocol.  As a result, in States that are party to the 1996 LLMC Protocol with the amended limits, or indeed in States party to the 1976 LLMC Convention (with lower limits than the 1996 LLMC Protocol), there are now different limits of liability compared with those contained within the Annex.  There is also the possibility that this disparity could be exacerbated in the future by virtue of both the 1996 LLMC Protocol and the Annex containing mechanisms to increase the limitation amounts contained within both instruments. 

    7. Therefore, it is important to ensure that there is clarity as to which limits are to apply in a situation where the Annex is applicable post entry into force.

    8. Clause 9 (2) (a) of the Annex provides that as long as the right to limit liability under any applicable international limitation of liability treaty, for example under LLMC, are as high as those referenced in Clause 9 (2) (a) of the Annex, then the Annex does not affect the application of such limits. Therefore, where the applicable LLMC limits are at least as high, or are higher than, the Annex limits then such LLMC limits may be applicable.  Applying this to the 1996 LLMC Protocol as per the 2012 increases, then the application of those limits would not be affected by the entry into force of the Annex.

    9. However, this does not automatically mean that where the limits in the LLMC are lower than the Annex limits – as is the case as per the 1976 LLMC Convention – that the higher limits in the Annex will apply. Clause 9 (2) (a) does not prescribe this to be the case. That Clause only prescribes the situation where the LLMC limits are equal or higher than the Annex limits, and therefore could leave open the question as to what would happen in a situation where the Annex limits are higher. 

    10. In such a scenario, it may be for the individual State concerned to determine which limits will be applicable under statute.  By way of example, if a State party to the 1976 LLMC Convention is also a State party to the Annex, and an action is brought before the courts within that State that falls within the scope of both the 1976 LLMC Convention for limitation purposes and the Annex, then the court will need to determine whether the lower limits of the LLMC 1976 or the higher limits of the Annex will be applicable if the question remains unclear in the domestic legislation (if there is any) giving effect to the Annex. Without further guidance, the situation may remain unclear.

    11. Individual States may therefore, when incorporating the Annex into domestic law, take measures to ensure that the matter is clarified so that a Court or Tribunal considering claims that fall under the scope of the Annex are guided by the domestic implementing legislation to determine which limits are applicable.  The Antarctic Act 2013 in the UK provides for such an example of domestic implementing legislation that has addressed this matter. Paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Act sets out the Annex limits as the limits applicable under the Act.  Paragraph 2 of the Schedule states that where the LLMC and the Annex limits are both potentially applicable, then it is the higher of the two limits which are to be applied. 

    12. In conclusion on this point, the IG hopes that individual member States will consider addressing this scenario in their domestic implementing legislation giving effect to the Annex and Clause 9 (2) (a) in particular, as has been the case in the UK, although the IG also notes that it was the intention of States when originally agreeing the limits contained in Clause 9 (1) of the Annex that they would keep in line with any subsequent increases to the LLMC limits once the Annex had entered into force. 
    13. At the ATCM XL, the IG also commented in IP 87 that:

It is unclear how Clause 9(2) of the Annex will operate.  The Clause provides that the Annex shall not affect the liability or right to limit liability under any applicable international limitation of liability treaty.  Presumably, this primarily means the existing LLMC regimes that are in force.  However, the LLMC regimes do not contain their own jurisdiction clauses. 

    14. As explained above, as long as the LLMC regime limits are higher than the Annex limits, the Annex should not affect either a) the application of the LLMC limits in cases that falls within the scope of the Annex or b) the application of a reservation made under the LLMC by a State party to exclude limitation from certain claims.  However, where the LLMC regime limits are lower than the Annex regime, then the present wording could cause confusion as to which limits should be applied subject to any measures taken by a State when implementing the Annex.

    15. The Annex has its own jurisdiction regime. Clause 7 of the Annex states that “…a Party that has taken response action pursuant to Clause 5(2) may bring an action against a non-State operator for liability pursuant to Clause 6(1) and such action may be brought in the courts of not more than one Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business of his or her habitual place of residence”.
    16. The LLMC Convention and Protocol does not contain specific jurisdiction clauses in a similar manner and, whilst the LLMC regime envisages limitation to be invoked primarily as a response by a defendant shipowner, in practice a limitation action may also be brought or a limitation fund may be established on a pre-emptive basis by a shipowner in the event of an incident.

    17. In terms of actions brought against a non-State operator for response costs incurred as per Clause 7 of the Annex, jurisdiction may be established in a State party to the Annex in accordance with Clause 7 and the courts may apply the limits as contained within Clause 9 of the Annex if limitation is relevant (or the limitation regime of another application treaty such as LLMC and subject to the issue raised in the previous section in this paper).

    18. However, at the same time, a non-State operator may also justifiably seek to establish a limitation fund or commence limitation proceedings in a State party to the 1976 LLMC Convention (with a limitation regime whereby the limits are lower than those contained in the Annex) where that State is not a party to the Annex (and where the application of Clause 9 (2) (b) - that refers to the application of another limitation regime not affecting the jurisdiction Clause in Article 7 - would not be in force).

    19. This raises the question as to whether the courts in such a circumstance would stay proceedings in light of the other related proceedings if already commenced, and whether the courts would recognise any such related proceedings.  Such a scenario may be less likely given the specific jurisdiction clause contained within the Annex, but it remains a possibility and may be a scenario simply to take note of at this stage given that there will remain differing numbers of States parties to the 1976 LLMC Convention and the Annex when it enters into force and that some State parties to the former may not be a State party to the latter.

    20. Attention is also drawn to the proviso contained within Clause 9 (2) (a) of the Annex and which sets out the limits applicable under Clause 9 (1) (a). Under Clause 9 (4) of the Annex, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is able to amend the limits every 3 years. If and when the limits in Clause 9 1 (a) and (b) are increased by the operation of Clause 9(4), then States may wish to note that if the proviso wording in Clause 9 (2) (a) remains as drafted at the same time as any increase in the limits, it would continue to refer to the previous Annex limits as currently contained in Clause 9 (1). In order to avoid such a scenario, it may be more appropriate for the proviso in Clause 9 (2) (a) in due course not to set out the limits as such, but simply to refer in a dynamic manner to the limits as contained within Clause 9 (1) (a) itself. This would mean that whenever the Annex limits are amended, the proviso would follow suit.  However, this is mentioned only for information purposes at this stage and for future consideration.

    21. At the ATCM XL, the IG also commented in IP 87 that:

Whilst Clause 7 of the Annex seeks to address where actions may be commenced against the relevant operator it is also unclear how this dovetails with Clause 9 (2) of the Annex and the LLMC regime.  For example, does the reference in Clause 9 (2) to an operator’s “liability or right to limit liability” refer to such a right that exists in the Party that took response action, or where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or is habitually resident, or does it mean the “Party of that Operator” as per Clause 2 (d) of the Annex?

    22. According to Clause 7 of the Annex, the Party that has taken response action pursuant to Clause 5 (2), that is the Party of the operator who did not take prompt and effective response action, and other Parties, may bring an action against a non-State operator for liability primarily in the courts of not more than one Party where the operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence. In situations where the operator is not incorporated in a Party or does not have its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence in a Party, the action may be brought in the courts of the Party of the operator within the meaning of Clause 2 (d).

    23. The Annex includes definitions in Clause 2 of the “operator” and of the “operator of the Party”.

    24. According to Clause 2 (c), the operator means any natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non-governmental, which organises activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area. An operator does not include a natural person who is an employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of, or who is in the service of, a natural or juridical person, whether governmental or non-governmental, which organises activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, and does not include a juridical person that is a contractor or subcontractor acting on behalf of a State operator.

    25. According to Clause 2 (d), the terms “its operator”, Party of the operator” and “Party of that operator” shall be interpreted in accordance with the definition of the “operator of the Party” as per Clause 2(d), that is an operator that organises, in that Party’s territory, activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, and: (i) those activities are subject to authorisation by that Party for the Antarctic Treaty area; or (ii) in the case of a Party which does not formally authorise activities for the Antarctic Treaty area, those activities are subject to a comparable regulatory process by that Party.

    26. From the perspective then of establishing jurisdiction and where actions may be commenced, Clause 7 provides that the Party that has taken response action, only, can bring an action against a non-State operator and only before the courts of the Party where that operator is incorporated or has its principal place of business or his or her habitual place of residence. When the operator is not incorporated or does not have its principal place of business or his or her place of residence in a Party, only then may the action against the operator be brought before the courts of the Party where the operator organises, within that Party’s territory, the activities to be carried out in the Antarctic Treaty area, as per Clause (2) (1) (d) of the Annex. 

    27. It is noted that the above is not to be affected by the limitation provisions contained within the Annex since Clause 9 (2) (b) of the Annex provides that nothing in Clause 9 (2) (a), which states that the Annex shall not affect the liability or right to limit liability under any applicable international limitation of liability treaty, shall affect the application of Clause 7 (1).

    28. It is the IG’s understanding that the criterion used in Clause 7 (1) must be applied in order to determine a Party’s right to bring an action against a non-State operator in the courts as mentioned above. 


    29. The IG welcomes the opportunity to discuss the above matters.


