





Annual Report for 2018/19 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 








Annual Report for 2018/19 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
General Information 
Our Membership
COMNAP was formally established on 15 September 1988, by the then 22-Member programs from the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. We bring together the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to Antarctic science on behalf of their respective governments. Today, COMNAP is an international association whose Members are the 30 National Antarctic Programs from the countries of Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Belarus, Republic of Korea, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States and Uruguay. The National Antarctic Programs of Canada (from August 2016), Malaysia (from August 2017), Portugal (from August 2015), Switzerland (from April 2018), Turkey (from April 2018) and Venezuela (from August 2015) are COMNAP Observers. The COMNAP Annual General Meeting XXXI will be held 29–31 July in Plovdiv, Bulgaria, hosted by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute, with support from the Ministry of Education & Science of the Republic of Bulgaria.
Our Purpose
COMNAP's purpose is to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Programs’ efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating international partnerships, and through information exchange.
COMNAP strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' expertise and their first-hand Antarctic knowledge. COMNAP has been an active contributor to ATCM and CEP discussions, contributing 34 Working and 114 Information Papers to date. 
Our Leadership
COMNAP is a Member-driven organisation with an elected Executive Committee. Kelly Falkner (US Antarctic Program) continues in her three-year term as Chair; Vice Chairs are Javed Beg (National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research, India), John Guldahl (Norwegian Polar Institute), Agnieszka Kruszewska (Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences), and Uwe Nixdorf (Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, Germany). Michelle Rogan-Finnemore is the Executive Secretary. The University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, hosts the COMNAP Secretariat. 
COMNAP Highlights and Achievements for 2018/19
Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXX (2018)
11–13 June 2018, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany
The 30th AGM was hosted by the Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research. In addition to exchange of pre-season information, the topics of environment, safety, marine platforms and science facilitation dominated discussions. Some key outcomes:
    • Environment
    • Understanding plastic sources and how to reduce plastic in the Antarctic terrestrial and marine environments. Four key recommendations to National Antarctic Programs resulted, see Environment Expert Group. 
    • Acting to reduce the risk of introduction of non-native species, including through review and updating of the Checklists (jointly with SCAR) and through a survey of stations for the monitoring and presence of non-native flies (see COMNAP ATCM XLII IPXX Report on the extent of sewage treatment plant infestations across the Antarctic Treaty area: Survey results).
    • Continuing efforts to further reduce fossil fuel use in operations through the sharing of the process and findings of a comprehensive study at Australia’s Casey Station. Promotion of energy efficiency practices and technologies at stations was a key message.
    • Safety
    • Focussed discussion on preventing harassment in the Antarctic resulted in an agreement to share harassment prevention and response policies amongst Members.
    • Marine platforms
    • Shared science and operations capabilities of new or under construction vessels soon to be deployed.
    • Science facilitation
    • Focus on Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) and Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP), with COMNAP agreeing to share vessel information with SOOS and to encourage all Members to support the YOPP Antarctic Special Observing Period.

“Facilitation of Internationally Collaborative Antarctic Science” 
18th COMNAP Symposium –14 June 2018
COMNAP Symposiums are open, biennial events, usually held on the margins of the AGM. The overarching theme of the 18th Symposium aligned with the outcomes of the COMNAP Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) project that confirmed big science is not possible in the Antarctic without collaborative facilitation of that science.  Symposium Proceedings publication: COMNAP Symposium 18 Proceedings.

“Implementation of Multi-national Polar Projects” 
COMNAP Mini-Symposium – 19 June 2018 
The COMNAP Mini-symposium at the SCAR Open Science Conference, Davos, Switzerland, explored the critical nexus between science community and science support community, as identified in the SCAR Horizon Scan and the COMNAP ARC projects. The focus was on several coordinated, long-term observation, monitoring and research programs underway that will provide the community with access to new data, from polar areas that are currently not monitored, or are under-monitored. These included the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC), the Ross Ice Shelf Programme, the Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling project (SOCCOM), SOOS, and YOPP.  Discussion explored the key roles that National Antarctic Programs play as science support organisations. 

COMNAP Antarctic Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop IV
14– 17 May 2019
COMNAP continually works on the topic of safety in partnership with Member National Antarctic Programs and with the five Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) that have SAR Antarctic responsibilities. This is recognised through ATCM XXXVI Resolution 4 (2013) Improved Collaboration on SAR in Antarctica, in particular, recommendation 7a, which states that the Parties: “support COMNAP to continue to foster collaborative discussions and vital sharing of information regarding SAR matters including through: holding triennial workshops on SAR…and inform future ATCMs on the results of these workshops;”. The workshop was co-hosted by JRCCNZ Maritime New Zealand and Antarctica New Zealand.  See COMNAP ATCM XLII IPXX Final Report from the SAR Workshop IV.
Air Operations Expert Group & Remotely Piloted Aircraft systems Working Group (RPA-WG)
The COMNAP Air Operations Expert Group drafted the COMNAP ATCM XLII IP002 Overview of Aviation Activity to inform ATCM discussions for the Working Group 2 discussion to take place at this ATCM.  The RPA-WG reviewed and updated the COMNAP Antarctic RPAS Operator’s Handbook. The current version is available from https://www.comnap.aq/Publications/SitePages/Home.aspx (under “Operational Guidelines”).  

Efficiency taskforce: Peninsula
Established to explore and create new collaboration mechanisms for advancement in logistics efficiency in the Peninsula region, by proposing a more efficient and balanced exchange system. All National Antarctic Programs working in the Peninsula are invited to participate.  An initial meeting of five programs took place in Istanbul, Turkey. The taskforce is now reviewing seasonal personnel and cargo requirements to determine where logistics efficiencies can be introduced.

COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship 2019 
www.comnap.aq/SitePages/fellowships.aspx
The fellowship aims to assist early career professionals to undertake a project. To date, thirteen COMNAP fellowships have been awarded. For 2019, IAATO joins the fellowship scheme by providing a new opportunity which will support an early career person to work on an environment topic.  CCAMLR, COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR work together to promote this range of opportunities.
COMNAP Products and Tools
COMNAP Database
Developed via the US Polar Geospatial Center with the support and leadership of the US National Science Foundation Office of Polar Programs, and with input from all COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs, the database includes facilities, vessels, program, and RCC information. The data is used to inform the range of COMNAP products including e-AFIM, ATOM and the Station Catalogue. Data related to all European Union countries’ Antarctic facilities was shared with the European Polar Board and EU-Polarnet for the European Polar Infrastructure Catalogue 2019.Cooperation continued with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to reduce duplication and increase compatibility across the database and the EIES. 
Publicly available data at https://www.comnap.aq/Members/SitePages/Home.aspx and also at https://github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/comnap-antarctic-facilities/releases and https://github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/comnap-antarctic-vessels.
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (e-AFIM)
e-AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published in PDF format as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per Resolution 1 (2013). Releases are at least twice per Antarctic season and are available to all subscribers by way of a link to the most current version (2018-02). 
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS) – formerly the Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS) www.comnap.aq/sprs/SitePages/Home.aspx  
CATS is a voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship and aircraft positions developed by the Australian Antarctic Division for COMNAP. CATS was operational for the 2018/19 season and at its peak use, reported positions on 55 assets (4 rotary-wing aircraft, 22 fixed-wing aircraft and 29 vessels). We invite greater use of the CATS from all vessels and aircraft working in the Antarctic Treaty area in support of National Antarctic Programs and related operations.
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) 
www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/ATOM.aspx
ATOM is the handbook of contact details to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 refers. COMNAP Members and SAR authorities have access via the COMNAP website and via the CATS. 
Search and Rescue (SAR) Webpage    
www.comnap.aq/membersonly/SitePages/SAR.aspx
As per Resolution 4 (2013), COMNAP established a SAR webpage in consultation with RCCs which includes SAR contacts and is regularly updated. 
_______
www.comnap.aq




Attachment 1: COMNAP officers, projects, expert groups and meetings
Table 1: COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and Vice Chairs are the elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP EXCOM, currently as:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
Kelly K. Falkner (USAP) kfalkner@nsf.gov  
AGM 2020
Vice Chairs
Javed Beg (NCPOR) javed.beg@ncaor.gov.in  
AGM 2019

John Guldahl (NPI) john.guldahl@npolar.no
AGM 2019

Agnieszka Kruszewska (PAS IBB) agnieszkak@ibb.waw.pl 
AGM 2020

Uwe Nixdorf (AWI) uwe.nixdorf@awi.de
AGM 2020




Executive Secretary
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore     michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq  


Table 2: COMNAP Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM Officer (oversight)
Antarctic Roadmap Challenges (ARC) 
Working Group
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Kelly Falkner
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS)
Robb Clifton
John Guldahl
Database 
Steve Foga & Andrea Colombo
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Non-native fly: survey of Antarctic stations
Anoop Tiwari & Hyoung Chul Shin
Agnieszka Kruszewska
Review of Checklists for Supply Chain Managers (jointly with SCAR)
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Agnieszka Kruszewska 
Symposium Proceedings: Facilitation of Internationally Collaborative Antarctic Science
Uwe Nixdorf (Symposium Convener)
Kelly Falkner
Antarctic Sunlines

Adele Jackson
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Efficiency Task Force: Peninsula

Antonio Quesada
Agnieszka Kruszewska
Table 3: COMNAP Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group Leader
EXCOM Officer (oversight)
Air Operations
(includes the RPA-WG)
Paul Sheppard
John Guldahl 
Advancing Critical Technologies
Felix Bartsch (to 1 Dec 2018) & Pavel Kapler
Uwe Nixdorf
Environmental Protection
Anoop Tiwari & Hyoung Chul Shin
Agnieszka Kruszewska
Education, Outreach & Training
Dragomir Mateev
Javed Beg
Joint Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine (JEGHBM)
Anne Hicks 
Javed Beg
Marine Platforms
Miguel Ojeda 
Kelly Falkner
Safety
Simon Trotter 
Agnieszka Kruszewska
Science Facilitation
Robb Clifton
Kelly Falkner

Meetings 

Previous 12 months
10–13 June 2018, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXX (2018), hosted by the Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research at Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
14 June 2018, COMNAP 18th Symposium “Facilitation of Internationally Collaborative Antarctic Research”, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
18 June 2018, Joint COMNAP/SCAR Executive Committee Meeting, Davos, Switzerland.
19 June 2018, COMNAP Mini-Symposium at POLAR2018 “Implementation of Multi-national Polar projects”, Davos, Switzerland.
27–28 August 2018, COMNAP Executive Committee Meeting, Alexandria, Virginia, USA.
12–14 September 2018, COMNAP Peninsula Task Force Group Meeting, Istanbul, Turkey.
14­–17 May 2019, COMNAP Antarctic Search and Rescue (SAR) Workshop IV (2019), Wellington/Christchurch, New Zealand.


Upcoming 12 months

29–31 July 2019, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXXI (2019), hosted by the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
29 July 2019, Joint COMNAP/SCAR Executive Committee Meeting, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
30 July 2019, Joint Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine Meeting, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
31 July 2019, COMNAP Education and Outreach Half-day Workshop “Communicating the Importance of our Antarctic Activity”, Plovdiv, Bulgaria.
November 2019, COMNAP Executive Committee Meeting.

