





Approximate list, scope and character of response actions in the Antarctic as identified by the Antarctic Treaty System bodies


English version provided by the author





Approximate list, scope and character of response actions in the Antarctic as identified by the Antarctic Treaty System bodies
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
In 2017 the delegation of the Russian Federation presented the IP147 ATCM XL Approximate List, Scope and Character of Response Actions in the Antarctic. It highlighted the need to start within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) a substantive discussion on response actions by exchanging relevant national practices prior to the entry into force of the Annex VI Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies to the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
On our part we have looked at how this issue had been approached within the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS).
The obligation to provide emergency response actions in the Antarctic is enshrined in general terms in Article 15 of the 1991 Protocol and is referred to in its Annex VI adopted in 2005 at the ATCM XXVIII (the latter has not yet entered into force since the approval by all Consultative Parties is required).
Besides Annex VI does not provide supplementary rules and procedures on how to calculate the costs of response measures, their scope and character. However the following developments on this issue could be pointed out within the existing ATS bodies.
During the elaboration of the Annex VI the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and the Scientific Committee on the Antarctic Research (SCAR) on the basis of analysis of multi-year data, received from the national Antarctic operators, presented at the ATCM XXVI a document which provided a description of the worst-case scenarios. It included information on types of the environmental emergencies and possible response actions, as well as outlined possible approaches to determining the scope and methodology of calculating response actions costs. This data is included in the Antarctic Environmental Monitoring Handbook prepared by COMNAP and SCAR. It may be applied by National Antarctic Programs and by other operators with an aim of identifying methodologies of monitoring their own activities, that negatively affect environment.
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) further discussed topics related to the elimination of environmental emergencies consequences, clean-up, waste collection and removal from the Antarctic, cost reimbursement to operators taking part in response actions on minimization of damages to the Antarctic environment. These issues were also touched upon workshops and within intersessional contact groups.
The ATCM XXXVI resulted in adoption of the updated Clean-Up Manual, which provided guiding principles and practical guidelines as to the response measures necessary for waste disposal, in particular arising from environmental emergencies.
At the same ATCM New Zealand submitted a report of the Intersessional Contact Group having discussed issues related to the elimination and remediation of damages to the Antarctic environment. The ATCM XXXVI Final Report noted the need to take into account its recommendations, including the prevention of the environmental damages and its remediation, by planning activities in the Antarctic and preparing the environmental impact assessment.
It is important to note the information from several countries, reported at the ATCM XL, that the elaboration of a list of response actions was not necessary since according to their national legislations the relevance of measures including the scope of the reasonable response measures is subject for proceedings before a judicial body.
At the ATCM XL there was adopted Resolution 6 (2017) Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area for more detailed regulation of tourist and other non-governmental activities. The Non-Native Species Manual presented by CEP in 2017 also outlined issues on the response actions such as prevention, monitoring and response to introduction of non-native species.
In the light of the above and given the specifics of the Antarctic as well as the increasing activities in the region the Russian delegation finds the official entry into force of the Annex VI crucial for the region. While each Consultative Party is in the process of joining the Annex, we would like to propose that we should rely on the experience already existing within the ATS and those criteria having been already approved by relevant decisions therein with regard to the elaboration of the approximate list, scope and character of response actions in the Antarctic, as well as by development of the methodologies of calculation of the costs of such measures.
We call upon all Consultative Parties to continue their work aimed at adopting common approaches to the regulation of such a sensitive and important issue for the environment of the southern polar region. Previous experience has proven that the ATCM, as well as the ATS in general, had always managed to find effective and at the same time mutually acceptable decisions on the most difficult issues on its agenda. For our part, we are ready to further contribute to this process.

