





The Monument to Faddey Bellingshausen, Leader of the Russian South Polar Expedition

English version provided by the author








The monument to Faddey Bellingshausen, Leader of the Russian South Polar Expedition
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Introduction
Two hundred year anniversary of the discovery of the great southern continent to be named Antarctica only in 1886, will take place in early 2020.
The first humans to sight the before unknown coasts were the sailors of the Russian South Polar Expedition, 1819-1821 on board the sloops “Vostok” and “Mirny” under leadership of Faddey Bellingshausen, British sailors onboard brig Williams with Edward Bransfield and William Smith as leaders, as well as American seal hunter Nathaniel Palmer onboard sealing ship Hero. Further research of the region conducted by other sailors during XIX century allowed an understanding of the discovered in early 1820 lands as a part of the integrated sixth continent.
In commemoration of the outstanding geographical discovery of XIX century the Russian Federation is planning to erect and to inaugurate in 2019/2010 summer season a monument to Captain second rank, baron Faddey Faddeevich Bellingshausen, by birth Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen at the territory of the same name Russian Antarctic station.
In honour of Bellingshausen were named the following places: a sea in Southern Ocean, a glacier at Queen Maud Land, a cape at Sakhalin island, Russia, one of the Tuamotu archipelago islands, Polynesia, Russian Antarctic station at King George island (Vaterloo) of South Shetland Islands, one of lunar craters, one of asteroids.
Description and installation site of the monument at Bellingshausen station
The monument oriented towards Brandsfield Strait will be erected at 10 to 15 meters from the living quarter on the mixed sand-and-shingle plage of northern Ardley cove, Maxwell Bay. Coordinates of the proposed erection site are: 62°11.9´ S, 58°57.5´ W. Elevation above sea level – 1.6 meter.
The life-sized bronze statue (figure 1) facing the sea will be mounted on the concrete bottom with four fixed signs in Antarctic Treaty governing languages (Russian, English, Spanish, French). The sign reads as follows:
Faddey Bellingshausen
Leader of the Russian South-Polar Expedition
1819–1821
Captain second rank
He was one of the first to sight Antarctica
The monument dimensions are 215×135×115 cm, weight – 425 kg. The piled concrete foundation will be made of six metal tubes drilled into the ground and fixed to each other with steel framework and additional metallic reinforcement. The metal tube diameter is 12.5 cm, length – 3 m.
The author of the monument is Alexey Leonov, sculptor (Moscow).
The location of the monument within walking distance from the station buildings will enable the Bellingshausen personnel to keep watch on the monument condition at all times. At the same time the erection of the monument will not have an impact on research or logistic operations either at Bellingshausen or at neighboring stations (Chile, China, Uruguay).
Since the monument of 1 sq. m in area is planned to be installed on the irreversibly changed station territory, the mounting activity impact on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems at preliminary stage is estimated as less than minor. So, the initial environmental evaluation (IEE) is not needed. The activity can be carried out under Permit No 3/2017/019 issued by the competent Russian Federation authority (Roshydromet) in accordance with national procedure.
Figure 1 – Monument to Faddey Bellingshausen

Historical note
During the period from 5 to 11 February 1821 the sloops “Vostok” and “Mirny” of the Russian South-Polar Expedition with Bellingshausen as a Leader performed cartographic survey of South Shetland islands, which were mapped before, from 16 to 22 January 1820 by the British Bransfield and Smith expedition onboard the ship Williams. At that time Russian sailors could not obtain an official information about British observational research and because of this they assigned the discovered islands with their own place names widely met on Russian geographic and navigation maps. As a rule, all these names were devoted to the most important battles of Patriotic War against Napoleon, 1812-1814 and to famous Russian naval commanders.
On the 6th February 1821 the sloop “Vostok” was visited by seal hunter Nathaniel Palmer who was sealing in this area onboard the boat Hero. During this meeting Palmer briefed the Russian captain about cartographic survey carried out by British sailors onboard Williams and his own voyages south of South Shetland islands. However, it is likely that he had no thoughts of giving clue of the new seal rookeries, that is why the American seal hunter did not mention his own discoveries of new unknown islands in November 1820 and January 1821. 
In one way or another, South Shetland islands became the first place in Antarctica where Russian and American sailors met and shared new information.
Bellingshausen Antarctic station named after Faddey Bellingshausen, Leader of the Russian South- Polar expedition who was the first to see and to map some coasts of to-be Queen Maud Land, Alexander I isl., Petra I o., some of South Shetland islands, was founded on 22 February 1968 and became the first research station on Maxwell Bay coast.
Conclusion
The erection of the monument to the outstanding Russian sailor at the station named after him, at the most tourist- and expedition-visited island will be of great historical, cultural and educational significance and will contribute much to the popularity of the Antarctic discovery history.

