





Report on the 20th and 21st edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol between Argentina and Chile


English version provided by the authors





Report on the 20th and 21st edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol between Argentina and Chile (PANC)

Background
The Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol (PANC) has its origin in 1998, when Argentina and Chile determined the need to coordinate their efforts in the Antarctic SAR areas of responsibility of both Parties, established in the “International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue” of 1979 (SAR Convention), which also requires cooperation and coordination among neighbor States.
Since its creation, the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol has performed its activities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). For this reason Argentina and Chile include the participating vessels in their respective pre-season information, notifying other Parties of its configuration.
Likewise, both Parties have permanently informed the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings about the PANC’s activities through Information Papers (IP), providing details on support and rescues carried out each season. These reports can be found in IP 26 ATCM XXVI; IP 121 ATCM XXXIV; IP 109 ATCM XXXVI; IP 99 ATCM XXXVII, IP 109 ATCM XXXIX and IP 125 ATCM XL, among others.

Mission, organization and assignments
The combined permanent directive dictated by both States establishes the mission as:
“Conform a Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol, between November 15th and march 31st of each year, to conduct activities and exercises of search, recues, salvaging, control and pollution countermeasures, with the objective to safeguard navigation, human life at sea and to contribute in keeping pollution out of the water, in the area included in the Antarctic Treaty, south of 60°S, in the sector delimited by the parallel 60°S and the meridians 010°O and 131°O”.
For the execution of the SAR missions in the area of operations of the PANC, the SAR Coordination Centers (MRCC) in Ushuaia and Punta Arenas have service and Antarctic support vessels and other means at their disposal, with the objective to handle the emergencies that might arise. Likewise, the secondary SAR Coordination Center (MRSC) in Puerto Williams contributes as well with ongoing operations. 
Aside from the fundamental purpose of the PANC, the Antarctic Service Vessel fulfills the following complementary activities, which are done, as long as they do not interfere with the ultimate purpose of the patrol.
    • Aid to the navigation: a) Meteorological support to the vessels and ships navigating in the area of the patrol, b) a mobile weather station, incrementing and contributing to the available information to elaborate the forecast for the area, through the meteorological services of both countries and c) maintenance of maritime signalizations of both countries within the area of PANC.
    • Sanitary assistance: the units that integrate PANC have the capacity to provide sanitary support of low level complexity, and have a physician on board to take care of emergencies. 
    • Support to Antarctic scientific community: through the transport of personnel and/or scientific equipment between bases or stations.
    • Logistics: through the resupplying of bases and stations, from both countries or from third states.

The “Comando del Area Naval Austral”, headquartered in the city of Ushuaia, and the “Comandancia en Jefe de la Tercera Zona Naval”, located in the city of Punta Arenas, have the responsibility of managing the Antarctic Patrol in alternative stages of 34 and 35 days. 

Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol 2017/2018
Argentina and Chile, through its MRCCs, the “Comando del Área Naval Austral”, in Ushuaia, and the “Comandancia en Jefe de la Tercera Zona Naval” in Punta Arenas, integrated the 20th edition of PANC, between November 15th 2017 and march 31st 2018.
During the aforementioned period, the MRCC of both navies maintained continuously an “antarctic service vessel” with Search and Rescue capacity and the necessary elements to control and fight pollution, in addition to another vessel with similar characteristics to support the former one. These ships where the “Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas”  and the “Aviso ARA “Puerto Argentino” of the Argentine Navy and the vessels “ATF “Lautaro”, “AP “Aquiles”, “AP “Oscarl Viel”, “OPV “Marinero Fuentalva” and “ATF “Galvarino”, of the Chilean Navy.

The stages of the 20th PANC where as follows:
    • ALPHA, between November 15th and December 18th 2017:
Antarctic service vessel: “Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas”, up to November 24th, AP “Aquiles”, from November 24th to December 4th, AP “Oscar Viel” from December 4th to 13th , OPV “Fuentalba”, from December 13th to 17th and ATF “Lautaro” from December 17th to 18th.
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Lautaro”.

Highlighted activities:
    • Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    • Support given to Antarctic base operators, both national and foreign, including transport of personnel and general logistics.
    • Potential spills in the area of the sunken vessel “Explorer” and fishing trawler “Kai Xin” were verified, with no remarks. 
    • Hydrographic tasks and maintenance of existing maritime signalization in the area of responsibility were carried out. 
    • Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas” carried out protocol visits and logistical support to a total of 4 stations of 3 different nationalities.
    • The Chilean Navy units conducted protocol visits and logistical support to a total of 8 stations of 4 different nationalities.

    • BRAVO, between December 19th 2017 and January 22nd 2018:
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “Lautaro”.
Antarctic support vessel: Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas”.

Highlighted activities:
    • Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    • Support given to Antarctic base operators, both national and foreign, including transport of personnel and general logistics.
    • Potential spills in the area of the sunken vessel “Explorer” and fishing trawler “Kai Xin” were verified, with no remarks. 
    • On January 14th, ATF “Lautaro” provided support to the yacht “Novara” (from Newport, with flag of the United Kingdom), stranded on Deception Island.
    • Protocol visits and logistical support were provided to a total of 9 stations of 5 different nationalities. 


CHARLIE, between January 23rd and February 26th 2018:
Antarctic service vessel: Aviso ARA “Puerto Argentino”.
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Lautaro”.

Highlighted activities:
    • Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    • Potential spills in the area of the sunken vessel “Explorer”, fishing trawler “Kai Xin” and the polar vessel ARA “Bahía Paraíso” were verified, with no remarks. 
    • Medical assistance was provided to the cruise ship “Le Boreal”, upon request.
    • Protocol visits and logistical support were provided to a total of 4 stations of 1 nationality. 


DELTA, between February 27th and March 31st 2018:
Antarctic service vessel: OPV “Marinero Fuentalba”, from February 26th to March 15th and ATF “Galvarino”, from March 15th to 31st.
Antarctic support vessel: Aviso ARA “Puerto Argentino”.

Highlighted activities:
    • Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    • Potential spills in the area of the sunken vessel “Explorer”, fishing trawler “Kai Xin” and the polar vessel ARA “Bahía Paraíso” were verified, with no remarks. 
    • Protocol visits and logistical support were provided to a total of 11 stations of 4 nationalities. 

The results of the joint efforts of the 20th PANC were:
    • Total nautical miles navigated: 14.643,3 MN (27.119,4 Km)
    • Time at sea: 162 days.
    • Total vessels assisted: One (1) to the North American yacht “Novara”, provided by the ATF “Lautaro”.
    • Maritime traffic: Radio contact was established with 238 vessels of third parties in SAR area, providing support to navigation and meteorological information. 
    • Exchange visits and logistic support activities were performed with a total of 11 stations from 6 different nationalities (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Poland).
    • Pollution monitoring took place in three areas (ARA “Bahía Paraíso” shipwreck 1989, M/V “Explorer” shipwreck, 2007, and “Kai-Xin” sinking 2013), verifying the lack of spills or any other event that could affect the Antarctic environment.


Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol 2018/2019
The 21st PANC was carried out between November 15th 2018 and March 31st 2019, carrying out the following relevant activities in each of the service and support stages:
Stages of Service and Support:

    a. ALFA, from November 15th to December 18th 2018:
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “Lautaro”.
Antarctic support vessel: Aviso ARA “Estrecho San Carlos”, from November 15th to December 7th. Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas”, from December 8th to 18th. 

Highlighted activities:
    1. Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    2. Support given to Antarctic base operators, both national and foreign, including transport of personnel and general logistics.
    3. Monitoring of areas of sunken passenger vessel “Explorer” and fishing trawler “Kai Xin”, not detecting any presence of fuel/oil.
    4. Hydrographic tasks and maintenance of existing maritime signalization in the area of responsibility were carried out. 

    b. BRAVO, from December 19th 2018 to January 22nd 2019:
Antarctic service vessel: AP “Aquiles”, December 20th to 26th. Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas”, from December 26th 2018 to January 24th 2019. 
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Lautaro”. 

Highlighted activities:
    1. Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    2. Support given to Antarctic base operators, both national and foreign, including transport of personnel and general logistics.
    3. Monitoring of areas of sunken passenger vessel “Explorer” and fishing trawler “Kai Xin”, not detecting any presence of fuel/oil.


    c. CHARLIE, from January 23rd to February 26th 2019:
Antarctic service vessel: OPV “Fuentalba”, from January 23rd to February 5th. ATF “Lautaro”, from February 5th to 17th. AP “Aquiles”, from February 17th to 26th.
Antarctic support vessel: Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas” 

Highlighted activities:
    1. Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    2. Support given to Antarctic base operators, both national and foreign, including transport of personnel and general logistics.
    3. Monitoring of areas of sunken passenger vessel “Explorer”, fishing trawler “Kai Xin” and polar transport ARA “Bahía Paraíso”, not detecting any presence of fuel/oil.
    4. Hydrographic tasks and maintenance of existing maritime signalization in the area of responsibility were carried out.

    d. DELTA, from February 27th  to March 31st  2019:
Antarctic service vessel: Aviso ARA “Islas Malvinas”.
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Lautaro”. 

Highlighted activities:
    1. Conducted patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
    2. Support given to Antarctic base operators, both national and foreign, including transport of personnel and general logistics.

The results of the joint efforts of the 21st PANC were:
    • Total nautical miles navigated: 17.286,8 MN
    • Time at sea: 162 days.
    • Total assistances provided: 24 stations/camps from 14 different nationalities.
    • Maritime traffic: Radio contact was established with 210 vessels of third parties in SAR area, providing support to navigation and meteorological information. 

The efforts of the 21st PANC were oriented towards the following aspects:

    A. Maritime safety:
    1. Safety of navigation.
    2. Observations on Antarctic cartography.
    3. Maintenance, installation and updates on aids to navigation.
    4. Implementation of the Polar Code.
    5. Updates on radio communications and capabilities of the GMDSS.
    6. Signals and false alarms COSPAS – SARSAT.
    7. SAR cases and maritime assistance.
    8. Presentation of maritime safety information (ISM), including weather forecasts and meteorological and glaciological conditions. 

    B. Pollution
    1. Remarks on special prescriptions for the usage or transport of fuels in the Antarctic region (MARPOL rule 43).
    2. Pollution resulting from normal operations or from a collision, stranding or sinking of vessels and platforms:
        2.1 Pollution from noxious liquid substances in bulk.
        2.2 Pollution from waste waters.
        2.3 Pollution from waste emanating from vessels.
    3. Atmospheric pollution generated by vessels.
    4. Monitoring of pollution in shipwreck areas.
    5. Exercises in pollution countermeasures.
    6. Use of dispersants, absorbing materials, skimmers and containment barriers.

Final comments 
The tasks carried out during the 20th and 21st PANC have once again evidenced the importance of the joint efforts, both from Argentina and Chile, in support of the international Antarctic community that operates in the area of responsibility of this Antarctic region. This joint effort allows for the execution of PANC, and at the same time, contributes to a rational use of both countries’ resources.
The intention of Argentina and Chile is to continue conducting PANC annually, contributing to the safeguard of life at sea, the safety of navigation and the preservation of the Antarctic environment. 


The Maritime Rescue Coordinator Centers of both countries are:
    • ARGENTINA/ANAU
MRCC USHUAIA
PHONE / FAX	:	00-54-2901-431098
EMAIL			:	mrccushuaia@armada.mil.ar

    • CHILE/TERZONA	
MRCC PUNTA ARENAS
PHONE		:	00-56-61- 201161	
FAX			:	00-56-61- 201172
EMAIL			:	mrccpuntaarenas@directemar.cl


