





Biological Prospecting in Antarctica by ROICE Team – ROMANIA








Biological Prospecting in Antarctica by 
ROICE Team – ROMANIA 
Summary
Romania, through this IP, presents the research interest and studies in West Antarctica, King George Island, Barton Peninsula, following the results obtained after three scientific expeditions carried out by the National Institute of Research & Development for Biological Sciences (INCDSB) - ROICE team together with the researchers of the Korean Polar Research Institute (KOPRI).
Background
Interest in Antarctic scientific research is rising with a growing recognition of the importance in understanding processes with global implications in correlation with climate change. 
While significant advances have been made in recent years, Antarctica’s biological and ecological domains remain, to a large extent, unexplored. Antarctic life scientists strive to understand the evolution and diversity of life in Antarctica and in the Southern Ocean to determine how these processes have produced unique ecosystems. Comparable surveys are not available for the terrestrial environment and they remain a high priority for Antarctic life scientists.
There is a growing body of evidence that Antarctic organisms, ecosystems and biodiversity are responding to global changes.
Executive Summary
In the context of global investigations of climate change and pollution in various terrestrial and aquatic habitats, in particular, their impact on the Antarctic environment, together with the increased interest in psychrophilic microorganisms with scientific biotechnological potential and the results obtained so far in the ROICE research projects implemented, our research team is interested in continuing the research directions started in the ROICE 2015, 2016 and 2019 expeditions. Environmental changes due to recent glacier retreat phenomenon and biological and chemical pollution are expected to challenge the structural and functional variability of ice, snow and soil microbiomes. Thus, for a comprehensive evaluation of these effects, a multiannual investigation is essential. 
Considering this, Korean Polar Research Institute hosted the Romanian research team and made common studies in all three years mentioned above.
The ROICE 2019 expedition has continued the major objectives described in the ROICE 2015/2016 expedition, namely: 1) Investigating the impact of glacier retreat on perennial ice-embedded microbial communities; 2) Investigating the snow microbial diversity as a possible indicator of an air transfer of microorganisms and pollutant agents; 3) Isolation and characterization of cold-adapted microorganisms from snow, ice, fore field and subglacial streams, etc.
The research activity followed:
1. Spatial and temporal shifts of glacier/forefield microcosms from King George Island in relation with ice/soil physicochemical parameters. Sampling perennial ice and glacier fore field for a comparative analysis of the microbial diversity and metabolism. 2. Resilience of subglacial water flow paths microcosms from King George Island: spatial and temporal variations of the structural and functional microbial diversity of under glacier streams. Re-sampling subglacial water flow paths at the interface permafrost/glacier on King George Island for structural and functional diversity analyses based on SSU rRNA and functional genes. 3. Dynamics of snow-embedded microcosm on King George Island. 4. Screening of ice, snow, fore field and subglacial streams from King George Island for cold-adapted microorganisms. 
Antarctica is a remote and harsh environment that provides a unique opportunity to investigate and exploit the biodiversity of unexplored psychrophilic and psychrotolerant microbial communities. 
Currently, regarding the concern on Antarctic environment, there is a clear global scientific interest for (micro) biological prospecting in Antarctica, as these communities are likely to contain unusual and phylogenetically divergent microorganisms with unique adaptations to extreme environmental conditions (of temperature, pH, pressure, nutrient concentration, etc.), which might be correlated in some cases with synthesis of uncharacterized natural products: antibiotics, cold active enzymes.
The National Institute of Research and Development for Biological Sciences is an important research life science institute in Romania, which promotes fundamental and applied researches. Its mission is to excel in life sciences studies, through integrated research approaches in biological sciences and, in collaboration with Romanian and international partners, to understand the life processes.
INCDSB and the KOPRI have signed a Framework Agreement for a 5-year period, allowing researchers of our institute to benefit from the facilities of Antarctic stations of the partner institute. This agreement aims to develop close cooperative relationships in polar sciences, between the two parties, in both scientific and logistic directions, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and that of the Madrid Protocol. 
Biological prospecting
The lack of efficient antibiotics and the increased spread of antibiotic resistance genes represent pressing global health problems. If they are not tackled properly and no new antibiotics are developed, antibiotic resistance will become the leading cause of mortality by 2050. Natural products are an important source of novel antibiotics in modern medicine and have made a serious impact on global health so far.
Microorganisms from extreme environments are a prolific source of diverse bioactive metabolites, which provide the majority of the most important products, like bacteriocins and antibiotics.
One of the objectives of the ROICE Romanian expeditions to Antarctica was to isolate new bacterial strains for scientific purpose. As a result, several bacterial strains were deposited in a culture collection at INCDSB branch from Cluj-Napoca and compared to those deposited in the GenBank database (National Center for Biotechnology Information – www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov): a new strain with optimized growth parameters was isolated and characterized being deposited in the culture collection as J. lividumROICE36 strain.
Janthinobacterium sp. strain ROICE36 was isolated from snow samples collected from King George Island in West Antarctica during the Romanian Scientific Expedition in Antarctica—ROICE 2015.
The strain was isolated only for scientific purpose, aiming mainly to a better understanding of cold environment adaptation of microorganisms.
Conclusion
Biological prospecting in Antarctica is a complex matter that can encompasses both scientific and commercial interests and which can be inter-correlated. The Antarctic Ecosystem is fragile. The ROICE expeditions have collected samples only for scientific purposes. The impact of small samples, which were removed from the Antarctica and have been studied in research laboratories in order to identify their taxonomic and biochemical properties outside of their environment, is one low and does not affect this environment.
We consider that it is useful for scientific reasons that all the samples collected from Antarctica must be traced in transparent manner and also to be included as metadata in the Electronic Information Exchange System. That will contribute to improving the exchange of information between scientists regarding the samples collected in the Antarctic area and also “ex-situ”.

