





Norwegian Antarctic Aviation Operations









Norwegian Antarctic Aviation Operations


The Norwegian operational and logistical assignment related to the Norwegian National Antarctic Program is managed by the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI).  A comprehensive part of NPI’s activity is the management and operation of Troll Research Station in Dronning Maud Land (DML) in Antarctica. This includes the aviation operations in and out of Troll Research Station. 

Troll Airfield in central Dronning Maud Land (DML) was established by NPI in 2005 after a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. The airfield facilitates intercontinental flights in and out of Antarctica with a range of long-range wheeled aircrafts as well as intracontinental flights. A typical intercontinental flight will start in Cape Town and end at Troll Airfield, covering a distance of 4.338 km

Throughout a typical Antarctic summer season, NPI operates 10 to 15 intercontinental flights Cape Town - Troll - Cape Town. The number of flights and type of aircraft used is based on the institute’s needs. Aircraft used range from Boeing 757 and 737, Airbus 319, IL-76, C-130 (Hercules) to smaller Business Jets such as Falcon 7X and Gulfstream 550. In addition, there are around 20-50 intracontinental operations each season by smaller aircrafts such as Basler and Twin Otters, as well as helicopters (Bell 212 and 412) via Troll.


Government regulations

For operations under the Norwegian Antarctic Program NPI works together with the relevant air-operators to meet the requirements set by their national regulating administrations to obtain a flight permit to Troll Airfield. The requirements depend on the aircraft used, and the country of registration.  The standard we follow with regards to the formal requirements to the operator are based on the ICAO regulations that are relevant for operations in Antarctica.  

Approvals and certifications

NPI requires that all approvals and certifications as well as insurances are valid prior to operating to and from Troll Airfield. Since the regulations are somewhat different depending on country of registration, the intent is to operate only with aircrafts and operators that meet a recognised level that meets the requirement from the national civil aviation authorities and NPI requirements.
Since Antarctic flight operations are very much dependent on mutual trust and understanding, we work closely with the pilots and operators to improve our operations and infrastructure even if it is not formally required for the specific approval of an assignment. 

Flight following and monitoring

The “normal way” of flight following and flight monitoring has been HF and Airband VHF check-ins. In addition, satellite communication is used as a supplementary communication to the required mandatory radio system. Moreover, we have daily emails from DROMLAN on flight operations as well as schedules for planned flight operations to maintain an overview of operations in the Dronning Maud Land Area, with a special focus on flights to and from Troll Airfield 

Most operators and aircrafts use their own satellite-based tracking system. However, these tracking systems are not publicly available, so normally only the aircraft operator can monitor the flight. Troll Station / Troll Airfield operates a public ADS-B transceiver. This is a device that can both transmit and receive communications (a combined radio transmitter and receiver) with the data publicly available. This enables us and everyone else to monitor all air traffic by aircrafts with ADS-B transceiver installed and turned on in the Dronning Maud Land area. 

Our experience

Aviation operations executed in the Antarctic continent are not regulated by the same mechanisms and international agreements as the rest of the world. NPI, as the operator for the Norwegian Antarctic programme, has tried to establish a standard within the program based on best practice as well as some of the established ICAO standards as a baseline for air operations under our Antarctic program. 

In our experience we have been able to achieve an increased level of operational quality, and better safety for our air operations at a relatively low cost.

