





Report on the extent of sewage treatment plant infestations across the Antarctic Treaty area: Survey results









Report on the extent of sewage treatment plant infestations across the Antarctic Treaty area: Survey results
Information Paper prepared by COMNAP
Summary
A COMNAP survey was undertaken with the purpose to identify any flies present in station sewage treatment facilities across the Antarctic Treaty area. At the time of the survey, no flies were found at facilities on continental Antarctica, but there is an update as to non-native fly extent at facilities on King George Island. 
Background
At ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX (2016) WP052 Non-native flies in sewage treatment plants on King George Island, South Shetland Islands was jointly presented (CEP 10a) by the Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom, Chile and Uruguay.  WP052 recommended inter alia that the CEP “…asks COMNAP to report on the extent of sewage treatment plant infestations across the Antarctic Treaty area and investigate practical methods of infestation prevention, monitoring and response.”  The CEP expressed support for the recommendations in the paper and COMNAP agreed to report back on the topic (see Antarctic Treaty Final Report of the Thirty-ninth Consultative Meeting, paragraphs 234–238).
This paper presents the results of a survey of COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs in regards to extent of station sewage treatment plant infestations across the Antarctic Treaty area and summarises examples of prevention, monitoring and response.
Survey
COMNAP co-ordinated a survey sent to all thirty (30) COMNAP Member National Antarctic Program Managers between January 15, 2019 and February 15, 2019.  This time period was chosen to coincide with the Antarctic summer season when most Antarctic facilities are occupied. The survey was developed in consideration of a previous questionnaire that had been presented at CEP XX (2017) in WP026 Inter-Parties’ Action Plan to Manage the Non-Native Flies in King George Island, South Shetland Islands (Republic of Korea, Chile, United Kingdom, Uruguay) which included an attachment entitled “A Short Questionnaire On Non-Native Flies (mosquitos, Trichocera maculipennis) at Antarctic Stations”.  The focus of that short questionnaire, as stated in the Working Paper, was “the overwintering stations on King George Island” and referring to the non-native Diptera species, with a focus on Trichocera maculipennis.
The focus of the COMNAP survey was all COMNAP Member, open, stations within the Antarctic Treaty area, and the current presence of any fly (native or non-native) species. The COMNAP survey instructed each Manager of a National Antarctic Program (MNAP) to request someone at their Antarctic stations to complete the survey, so that they were in a position to physically inspect the facilities at the time the survey was taken.  
The opening question of the survey was “Can you currently observe a fly/flies at this station or facility: Yes or No”. If the answer was “no”, then the survey was complete and no further responses were requested, although respondents were free to add any additional comments.



Results of COMNAP Survey
All of the thirty (30) COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs responded to the survey request.  With one (1) National Antarctic Program responding that they did not have a station, so they did not complete a survey. 
In total, COMNAP received responses for fifty-one (51) of the sixty-eight (68) open Antarctic stations1 in the COMNAP database, so for 75% of all Antarctic stations. 
Of the fifty-one (51) stations we received responses for, six (6) of those responded “yes” to question 1 of the survey. Two (2) of those six (6) affirmative responses said that the fly they saw at their facility was Parochlus steinenii, a native fly species.2 All six (6) of the “yes” responses were from stations on King George Island. No “yes” responses to question 1 were received from any continental Antarctic stations.
In addition, not in response to question 1 but, in the comments section of the survey, one (1) station on King George Island commented that they had identified a non-native fly species at their station in the past and that it was not presently observed and that the sewage system was being monitored after eradication measures.3 
Also in addition, Lycoriella ingenua has been recorded at Australia’s Casey station since 1998 in the waste water treatment plant and in sub-floor spaces; and, while they were not “currently observed” as per the survey wording, the Australian Antarctic Division noted in the comments section of their returned survey that they might well still be present, also noting that continuing monitoring is in place and that eradication attempts appear to have been successful at this point in time. 
Based on the results of the Antarctic-wide survey, no indications of Trichocera maculipennis are reported on continental Antarctica.  Using the results of the COMNAP survey, we reprint with updates the table 1 “Flies that have colonised sewage treatment plants of station around Maxwell Bay, King George Island” originally presented in ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX (2016) WP052.
Prevention, Monitoring and Response
COMNAP and SCAR are working together to update the Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic Programmes for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native species (2011).  All COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs are encouraged to refer to these Checklists (available in several different languages) in addition to CEP guidance. Many National Antarctic Programs have in place procedures for non-native species monitoring, and in the event of observation, response protocols.
Argentina, Chile, Germany, Poland, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation and Uruguay all stated that they are part of a joint monitoring programme on King George Island (see also ATCM XLI / CEP XXI (2018) IP050 “Joint monitoring activities during 2017/18 summer season to manage non-native flies in King George Island, South Shetland Islands” jointly submitted by Uruguay, the Republic of Korea, Poland, and the Russian Federation). Many indicated that they are also carrying out scientific research on the fly species with two programs explicitly offering to share data and inviting collaborative research.
The Republic of Korea’s National Antarctic Program is willing to share its experiences in using UV traps for the eradication of non-native flies with any Antarctic facility, and assist with molecular and water sample analysis for non-native flies. The Australian Antarctic Division stands ready to share advice as to eradication procedures used and lessons learned in response to the Lycoriella species at Casey Station. 







No.
Species
Station
Date introduced
Notes
References
1
Trichocera maculipennis
Artigas Station, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island

2006?
Early eradication attempt unsuccessful.  Species observed in the surrounding environment.
Volonterio et al. (2013); COMNAP survey response also stated that the native species Parochlus steinenii are present in nearby lake.
2
Unidentified fly
Frei Station, Fildes Peninsula, 
King George Island

Pre-2009/10 season
Larvae still persist in the sewage treatment plant.  
V. Vallejos, pers. comm., quoted in
Peter et al. (2013), Sect. 3.1.4.
3
Trichocera maculipennis
King Sejong Station, Barton Peninsula, King George Island
2013/14
Eradication initiated in October 2015, but following facility cleaning the flies were detected again in December 2015
J. H. Kim, pers. comm.;
COMNAP survey response also stated that the native species Parochlus steinenii are present around lakes, in moss flora and on land everywhere.
4
Trichocera maculipennis
Bellingshausen Station (Russian Federation), Fildes Peninsula, King George Island

2019
Joint monitoring programme began a few years ago. Traps for monitoring in place-no flies trapped in living quarters, food storage or waste collection room. Main swarm is observed at the stream and around sewage water tank. This is the first documented observation of this fly in the station.
COMNAP survey response 11 February 2019; Russian mosquito specialist Dr Przhiboro (Zoological Institute of the Russian Academy of Science) is involved in research.
54
Trichocera annulata (80% certainty)
Escudero Station (Chile), Fildes Peninsula, King George Island
?
The fly is also observed outside the station. Joint monitoring programme in place. 
COMNAP Survey response 15 January 2019. 
Reprinted [adapted] from ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX (2016) WP052 Non-native flies in sewage treatment plants on King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Republic of Korea, United Kingdom, Chile and Uruguay, page 5.

