





Projected distribution of Southern Ocean seabirds and fisheries due to climate change








Projected distribution of Southern Ocean seabirds and fisheries due to climate change

Information Paper submitted by Portugal, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom 


Summary
Albatrosses and petrels are long-lived animals that cover huge areas of the Southern Ocean, including within the Antarctic Treaty area.  However, they are threatened by a wide range of factors, including fisheries bycatch and climate change. Recent research, described in this paper, shows that the distribution of seven large seabirds of the Southern Ocean will shift towards Antarctica, as will fisheries movements until at least 2100, under a context of climate change. Under such scenarios, there will be an increased risk of seabirds being caught by fisheries, and further fisheries management will be needed, particularly in the most sensitive areas, under a monitoring framework.


Background
Seabirds of the Southern Ocean, and in particular albatrosses and petrels, are amongst the most threatened birds in the world. These species breed in Antarctica (including the area under the jurisdiction of the Antarctic Treaty) and the sub-Antarctic islands, thus scientific information about their status is much needed. Two of the most recognizable threats to albatrosses and petrels are mortality from interactions with fishing vessels and climate change. Important Bird Areas (IBAs) have been identified across Antarctica by Birdlife International, based on whether the number of breeding birds exceeded certain thresholds for particular species, and efforts to examine the representation of IBAs in the existing Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) system have been made (see ATCMXXXVIII WP40, IP127; ATCMXL WP37, IP16). Furthermore, recent work has monitored bird populations to inform subsequent management actions (ATCM XXXVIII Final report, Resolution 5 (2015); CEP XVIII (para. 244)). These efforts focused on the distribution of bird breeding grounds but did not include foraging areas at sea, where seabirds face several threats including fisheries bycatch. This information paper aims to highlight recent research evidence that shows how the at-sea distributions of some key species of albatrosses and petrels in the Southern Hemisphere will change in the future along with fisheries, under a climate change context. Results may be of relevance to organizations, such as the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources (CCAMLR), and Parties involved is these organizations that are also directly engaged with the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

Conclusions
Tracking data from seven large seabird species of the Southern Ocean (black-browed albatross Thalassarche melanophris, grey-headed albatross T. chrysostoma, northern giant petrel Macronectes halli, southern giant petrel M. giganteus, Tristan albatross Diomedea dabbenena, wandering albatross D. exulans and white-chinned petrel Procellaria aequinoctialis), and on fishing effort in two types of fisheries (characterized by low or high-bycatch rates) were collected.  The data were used to model associations with environmental variables (bathymetry, chlorophyll a concentration, sea surface temperature and wind speed) through ensemble species distribution models. We then projected these distributions according to four climate change scenarios built by the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) for 2050 and 2100. The resulting projections were consistent across scenarios, indicating that there is a strong likelihood of poleward shifts in distribution of seabirds, and several range contractions (resulting from a shift in the northern, but no change in the southern limit of the range in four species). Current trends for southerly shifts in fisheries distributions are also set to continue under these climate change scenarios at least until 2100; some of these may reflect habitat loss for target species that are already over-fished. It is of particular concern that a shift in the distribution of highly threatened seabird species such as white-chinned petrel, grey-headed and wandering albatrosses would increase their overlap with fisheries where there is a high-bycatch risk. Under such scenarios, the associated shifts in seabirds’ distribution and increases in bycatch risk will require much-improved fisheries management in these sensitive areas to minimize impacts, especially on declining populations.





Figure 1. Risk of increased seabird-fishing spatial overlap as a result of change in distribution in future scenarios of climate change.


Reference
Krüger L, Ramos JA, Xavier JC, Grémillet D, González-Solís J, Petry MV, Phillips RA, Wanless R, Paiva VH (2018) Projected distributions of Southern Ocean albatrosses, petrels and fisheries as a consequence of climatic change. Ecography 41: 195-208 DOI: 10.1111/ecog.02590
