





Report of the activities carried out by the Argentine Antarctic Institute – 2018

English version provided by the author








Report of the activities carried out by the Argentine Antarctic Institute – 2018 

Information Paper submitted by Argentina

Introduction 

This report contains a summary of the results of the work of the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) during 2018. 

The IAA is a scientific-technological institution dependent from the National Antarctic Directorate (DNA), within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship, guided by the political legislation of the Argentine Republic.  It is an active player of Argentina's National Scientific and Technological System, and is pioneer on an international level with the undertaken Antarctic research. 


Production of the Argentine Antarctic Institute

The IAA staff is composed of 60 researchers from a diverse range of scientific disciplines who coordinate and carry out Antarctic research projects. Notwithstanding, over 70% of the activities carried out by the IAA in Antarctica are conducted jointly with researchers from National universities and scientific-technological organizations, while approximately 60% of its projects include some kind of international scientific cooperation in association with National Antarctic Programs, as well as universities and research centers from more than 20 countries. 

A summary is provided below, containing the results achieved by IAA during 2018 in terms of scientific production, capacity building, scientific advisory, training and outreach activities: 


    a) Scientific production: IAA researchers published 74 scientific peer review articles, four book chapters, and made 127 presentations in national and international conferences. Also worth mentioning is that article production for 2018 is the highest annual production ever for the institution. The IAA’s annual production is continuously growing since 2010, and has almost reached 200 articles between 2016 and 2018.

    b) Scientific conferences: Special emphasis is given to the successful organization of the workshop “Biological processes in Antarctic ecosystems”, organized by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the IAA in Buenos Aires (September 2018), with the participation of over 50 scientists from all over the world, and 14 teachers from 7 countries. 

    c) Capacity building: The improvement of the proficiency of IAA human resources is proven by the presentation of eighteen theses, including Bachelor's, Master's and PhD degrees, in Antarctic scientific affairs under the guidance of IAA personnel. It´s worth noting that during 2018 IAA personnel obtained 3 new PhD’s and 2 Bachelor’s Degrees.

    d) Research career: an Antarctic researcher specialized in biotechnology and biochemistry has been selected for the researcher career at the Argentina’s National Council for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET) –main institution dedicated to the advancement of science and technology in Argentina- for the development of a plan regarding biology and biotechnological potential of Antarctic fungus, to be carried out at IAA.

    e) Scholarships: An IAA researcher was awarded one of the 2018 SCAR Early career Fellowship scholarships which has enabled him to join a project team for six months at the National Natural Sciences Museum of Madrid, Spain, conducting a project on parasite diseases in Antarctic penguins in the context of climate change. Furthermore, Argentina’s National Council for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET) awarded a post-Doctoral scholarship to develop an area of study associated with bio-remediation of contaminated soils in low temperature areas.  

    f) External financial support for research projects: two IAA researchers received an allowance corresponding to the Call for Projects of Scientific and Technological Research (PICT, 2017), of the Secretariat of Science, Technology and Innovative Productivity of Argentina (Fondo para la Investigación Científica y Tecnológica, FONCyT); while another group of IAA researchers have been awarded with an allowance corresponding to the Cooperation Program managed by the Secretariat of Science, Technology and Innovative Productivity of Argentina and the Federal Ministry of Education and Research of the Federal Republic of Germany (BMBF), to continue with the development of a joint program between the IAA and the Alfred Wegener Institute (Germany). 

    g) Scientific advisory: IAA researchers prepared 16 reports submitted to international fora on Antarctic affairs, which in turn generated Working and Information Papers presented to the ATCM, SCAR and CCAMLR, mainly. Among the latter, it is worth highlighting the work carried out by IAA researchers in the processing of data and the preparation of a Conservation Measure proposal for the establishment of a Marine Protected Area in the Antarctic Peninsula. This proposal was jointly presented with Chile during the last CCAMLR meeting (October 2018), complementing a preliminary presentation introduced in 2017, following a five year-long process. Two IAA researchers were part of the Argentine delegation at the Scientific Committee and Commission Meetings at CCAMLR. 

    h) Training: On a national level, IAA researchers were part of numerous training activities in different Antarctic disciplines, created for military logistics personnel, teachers and tourism guides. 

    i) Participation in academic and research events: IAA personnel was invited, with full or partially financed expenses from external sources, to participate in more than a dozen of academic events in Argentina as well as abroad. This included events in Japan, Australia, Germany, Switzerland, United Kingdom, USA and Ghana. It´s worth mentioning a three-month stay of an IAA researcher at the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), to attend a workshop on special data analysis. Likewise, in November 2018, a glaciologist from the IAA was invited to participate in Operation Icebridge, organized by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), which consisted of a number of flights over the Antarctic Peninsula to obtain glaciological information, departing from Ushuaia. The acknowledgement of the work of IAA researchers was also reflected by the election of two researchers to be part of permanent committees of research forums: one researcher was elected Vice-chair of CCAMLR's Scientific Committee, while another one was chosen to be member of the Scientific Committee of the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS), an international initiative of the SCAR and the Special Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR).

    j) Outreach activities: Finally, the IAA participated in numerous outreach activities, with the goal to inspire and attract young future researchers in the Antarctic. Among the activities, it is worth highlighting the production of a series of short videos called “Pasión Antártica” (Antarctic Passion), which consisted of 5 episodes, posted on Twitter as of December 2018 (also translated into English). This series is focused on the scientific activities conducted by Argentina in Antarctica, with a particular emphasis on the work of young IAA researchers. 


Conclusion

To summarize, the work of the IAA in terms of scientific production, capacity building, scientific advisory, training and outreach activities, remains robust and thriving, revealing a work potential that requires maintaining active lines of investigation currently in progress.

This report shows an important number of valuable achievements and a continuity in participation and presence of IAA researchers in the main scopes of Antarctic scientific activities, as well as in multilateral Antarctic fora, providing a solid scientific backing to Argentina's position and interests in Antarctica. 


For more information, we recommend visiting the website of the National Antarctic Directorate: www.dna.gob.ar  


