





The Environmental Impact Assessment Feedback Process: Review of Modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station (1998 CEE)








The Environmental Impact Assessment Feedback Process: Review of Modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica (1998 CEE)

Information Paper submitted by the United States

Summary 

The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) implements the environmental impact assessment (EIA) feedback process identified in Resolution 1 (2016): Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica by conducting periodic field reviews of new and on-going projects to determine if the EIA documents prepared prior to implementing a project adequately identified impacts and if mitigations are effective in reducing environmental impacts.  In addition, the field reviews offer project teams an opportunity to identify issues, improvements, and mitigation alternatives.  
The National Science Foundation (NSF) proposed to modernize the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station through reconstruction and replacement of key facilities. The South Pole Station Modernization (SPSM) project began in 2000/01 and was required to provide the support capabilities to meet operational and scientific needs at the South Pole for the next 25 years.
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station is in Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 5. The ASMA was designated to maximize valuable scientific opportunities at the Pole, protect the near-pristine environment, and ensure that all activities can be conducted safely, environmentally responsibly, and without disruption to scientific programs. The ASMA also serves to promote and assist with the planning and coordination of human activities at South Pole to manage actual or potential conflicts among different values (including those of different scientific disciplines), activities, and operators.

SPSM was reviewed in 2016 by comparing operations and resulting impacts to the conditions described in the Modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica, Final Environmental Impact Statement (NSF, 1998; CEE-equivalent EIA).  In general, SPSM operations were found to be consistent with the impacts identified in the environmental document.  

Introduction
In 1997, Treaty Parties adopted ATCM XXI Resolution 2 (1997): Procedures for Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation follow-up. The resolution identified three steps for reviewing projects following completion of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE). These steps are review activities, record changes, and report to Parties the outcome of prior two steps. In 2016, Consultative Parties adopted ATCM XXXIX Resolution 1 (2016): Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica. The resolution provided additional guidance on fulfilling obligations of the Protocol related to environmental impact assessment. This resolution specifically identifies and more fully describes a feedback process (described in the 1997 resolution) to monitor projects once the EIA documentation is completed. The process includes monitoring, identifying changes to the activity, and review.
The USAP implements the EIA feedback process by conducting field reviews of newly implemented and on-going projects to determine if the EIA conducted prior to implementing a project adequately identified potential impacts and if mitigations are effective in reducing environmental impacts.  These EIA reviews fulfil the monitoring requirements identified in Article 5 of Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Protocol) and U.S. regulations (45 CFR 641.21).  In addition, EIA field reviews are consistent with Section 3.6 (Monitoring) of the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment on Antarctica (Resolution 1[2016] Annex).
The objective of this paper is to describe the process the United States uses to review on-going projects as they are implemented.  The review of SPSM is used to illustrate the process and actions that result from the reviews.  

Planned Project Scope and Intensity 

The CEE for SPSM discussed the construction of the new station that was designed to be modular in construction, elevated above the snow surface, and provide berthing for 150 people during the austral summer and 50 during the winter (NSF, 1998). Construction was expected to occur over a six-year period. In addition, the project included relocating the existing elevated dormitory, converting it to a science facility and constructing a new lab.

Station reconstruction activities involved a number of LC-130 logistical support flights to deliver construction personnel, cargo, and fuel to the South Pole. Station operations during the reconstruction period were to include regular operations, ongoing research, and maintaining berthing and other support services to the regular station population and construction personnel.  The CEE indicated that a Summer Camp would be used during SPSM to supply supplemental berthing during peak population periods and would be removed shortly after construction was completed.

Following the completion of new elevated station, it was projected that sustaining station operations would require the following resources annually:
    • 1,569,000 liters of fuel 
    • 255 LC-130 aircraft flights
    • 2,639,541 liters of freshwater (measured as wastewater discharge) 

Inspection

In November 2016, the environmental impact assessment specialist deployed to the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, inspected selected station components, and interviewed the station management and operations personnel regarding the station resources, equipment, operations, and science support capabilities. The environmental impact assessment specialist also reviewed the station data characterizing fuel consumption, logistical support flights, and materials released to the environment for the five years preceding the inspection.

Findings

Construction of the new station began in the 2000/01 operating season and was completed during the 2005/06 operating season. Completion of exterior details and demolition of obsolete station structures occurred over the next several years. The new elevated station was formally dedicated on January 12, 2008. 

The elevated station configuration was completed as designed and incorporated a series of subsurface arches for industrial support facilities. The Summer Camp remained available for several years after station construction was completed to support staff needed for construction of other major scientific research projects at the station. The camp remained inactive for several more years before being decommissioned. It was observed that the majority of the camp structures were demolished or repurposed by the 2016/17 operating season. 

The new Laboratory was constructed as planned as part of SPSM. The elevated dormitory module was renovated as a science facility and was subsequently dedicated to Project IceCube. 

Station Operations

The following sections describes various operating characteristics of the station following completion of SPSM compared the characteristics described in the CEE and by the bullets above (referenced as sustaining operations). Several major scientific research construction projects were initiated following completion of SPSM. Therefore, the most recent five-year period (2012/13 – 2016/17) after these projects were complete was selected as a basis of comparison for sustaining station operations. 

Station Fuel Use

Annual station fuel (diesel) use for sustaining operations is consistent with CEE projections of 1,569,000 liters per year, as indicated by fuel consumption for the five operating years as shown in Figure 1. Since fuel consumption is directly related to exhaust emissions, local air quality was not impacted beyond levels predicted in the CEE. 

It is noted that slightly higher fuel consumption realized during the 2012/13 operating year was due in part to the final phase of several major scientific research construction projects including Project IceCube, the South Pole Telescope, and the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN). The additional fuel use and resulting impacts attributed to these projects was evaluated in several separate environmental impact analysis documents (NSF 2004a, 2004b, 2012).  

Figure 1.  Amundsen-Scott Station Fuel Use (2012/13 – 2016/17)




Logistical Support Flights 

Logistical support flights to the South Pole for the SPSM project, normal operations, and other major construction projects were conducted within the capabilities of airlift resources available to the USAP. The development of overland traverse resources to the South Pole (NSF 2004c) beginning in the 2006/07 season reduced the number of logistical support flights to the South Pole thereby yielding fuel savings. Because USAP traverse resources to support the station were developed several years after the CEE was finalized, the use of these resources was not planned in the CEE analysis. Figure 2 illustrates the number of LC-130 flights to the South Pole for the five-year period preceding the inspection. Even considering the number of flights displaced by the use of the overland traverse platform, the number of flights to the South Pole is significantly less than the 255 flights projected in the CEE. Therefore, the resulting air emissions are also less than projected. 

Figure 2.  Logistical Support Flights to the South Pole (2012/13 – 2016/17)


Wastewater Discharge 

During sustaining operations, the CEE projected that 2,639,541 liters of wastewater would be discharged annually. Figure 3 illustrates the volume of wastewater discharged at the South Pole for the five years preceding the inspection. It is noted that the wastewater was only released to the subsurface sewer bulbs associated with the main station since the Summer Camp facilities had already been removed from service. The slightly higher wastewater discharge which occurred during the 2012/13 operating year was due in part to additional personnel at the station supporting several scientific research construction projects. However, the quantity of wastewater discharged each year is consistent with CEE projection. Therefore, no significant changes to the predicted nature and extent of impacts to the ice sheet resulting from the frozen wastewater are expected.

Figure 3.  Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station Wastewater Discharges (2012/13 – 2016/17)



Waste Management 

Waste (e.g., non-hazardous construction debris) generated during SPSM activities were containerized or bundled as needed and securely stored to prevent their release to the environment. Waste generated by sustaining station operations, including hazardous wastes, has been removed each year since the completion of SPSM, consistent with standard operating procedures.
 
During the 2016/17 operating season, the South Pole Retrograde Initiative (SPRI) was developed to more efficiently remove solid wastes from the station using available airlift and traverse resources. During the 2018/19 season, 9% of the material included in the SPRI project was sorted for retrograde and reuse.  SPRI is currently being managed as a sustaining activity.  USAP plans to transport the waste material to McMurdo Station for subsequent retrograde from Antarctica and disposal per the conditions described in the CEE.

Impacts to Science

The CEE acknowledged that the new elevated station would allow increased flexibility in the number, type, and scope of science and education projects that could be performed at the South Pole. Several major scientific research projects including Project IceCube, the South Pole Telescope, and the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) were designed to utilize the new station resources and were constructed either during the final SPSM construction phase or shortly afterwards.
 
Following the completion of the new station, impacts to science primarily involve conflicting demands for station resources, such as electrical power and access to communication satellites as well as potential electromagnetic interferences (EMI).  South Pole stakeholders regularly review these and other potential issues and has noted that there have been no significant conflicts or impacts.
 
Unrelated to the functioning of the new station itself, available bandwidth for data transmission at the South Pole has been limited and continues to be the primary issue affecting science support at the station. Those limitations are mitigated as much as possible through prioritization among all ongoing research projects and through careful planning and scheduling of data transmission needs.  

Conclusions
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station modernization was initiated during the 2000/01 season and completed during the 2007/08 austral summer season. No significant deviations from the planned configuration occurred and no adverse impacts to the environment resulting from SPSM construction were realized. Resources at the new elevated station successfully support several major research projects. Following construction of the SPSM project and the other major research projects, station operating characteristics (i.e., fuel use, wastewater discharge) and other factors such as the number of LC-130 logistical support indicated station operations are within the sustaining operating conditions predicted in the CEE. Therefore, no corrective actions or modifications to current, sustaining station activities are recommended.
Some waste generated by SPSM activities remains at the South Pole awaiting removal. This waste material is secured accordingly to prevent release to the environment. The SPRI project to remove that waste is currently underway. 
The field review of SPSM is only one example of the feedback process identified by the Treaty Party resolutions of 1997 and 2016 that USAP uses to monitor impacts of on-going projects. USAP also routinely conducts field reviews of projects evaluated by ROERs and IEEs.
References
National Science Foundation (NSF). 2012. South Pole SuperDARN. Initial Environmental Evaluation.  SPST1301.IEE. October 13, 2012.
NSF. 2004a. Construction of the 10-Meter South Pole Telescope (SPT) at the Amundsen-Scott Station, Antarctica. Initial Environmental Evaluation. SPST0501.IEE. November 22, 2004.
NSF. 2004b. Project Ice Cube. Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation. SPST0501.CEE. November 30, 2004. 
NSF. 2004c. Development and Implementation of Surface Traverse Capabilities in Antarctica. SPST0502.CEE. August 30, 2004
NSF. 1998. Modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica. Final Environmental Impact Statement. April 1998.



