





C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn








C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn
Information Paper presented by Norway


Background
In WP 25 Argentina, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom proposes the designation of a new Historic Site and Monuments "C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn", a historic object associated with several important early Antarctic exploration expeditions. In this paper we provide a short historic backdrop to the man that it is named for and the original expedition that erected the cairn and pole in the first place.

Carl Anton Larsen
Carl Anton Larsen was a Norwegian whaler and explorer, born in Tjølling, Norway. He spent his youth as a fisherman/whaler outside the coast of Norway and into the Arctic Ocean. In 1891-92 and 1893-94 austral summers he led two expeditions to the Antarctic onboard the seal-hunter “Jason”. The primary goals of these expeditions were to find new hunting grounds for whales and seals. After returning from the Antarctic expeditions, Larsen spent a few years as the manager of a whaling station in the in the north of Norway. He returned to Antarctica in 1902, when he served as the captain of the polar vessel “Antarctic” which served as the transport and support vessel for Otto Nordenskiöld’s Antarctic expedition. C. A. Larsen and the crew survived a difficult winter on Paulet Island (cf. HSM 41 – which constitutes the remains of the hut they built for survival) after they were forced to abandon the “Antarctic” as she crushed by the ice and sank on their journey to pick up Nordenkiöld’s team on Snow Hill Island in 1903. C. A. Larsen and his crew, as well as Nordenskiöld’s expedition team, were rescued by the Argentinian vessel “Uruguay” and brought safely back to Buenos Aires. In Buenos Aires C.A. Larsen stared new whaling adventures, financed by Argentinian investors, and in this process amongst other established the shore based whaling station in Grytviken. Later on, in 1923 he also established the Norwegian whaling company A/S Rosshavet and initiated Norwegian whaling activities in the Ross Sea. He died while at sea in the Ross Sea region in 1924.  

The 1892-93 “Jason” Expedition
The Norwegian company A/S Oceana wanted to investigate reports by James Clark Ross of plentiful right whales in the Weddell Sea and sent out a reconnaissance expedition, choosing C.A. Larsen as leader of the venture. “Jason” left Norway on 3 September 1882, stopped by the South Orkney Islands on his way landed on Seymour Island off the still largely unexplored east coast of the Antarctic Peninsula. Here he raised the Norwegian flag, where we today find the remains of the proposed new HSM, the C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition Cairn.  During his visit on the island Larsen and his men found fossils of petrified wood, some of the first fossils ever discovered in Antarctica. These fossils became the source of considerable scientific interest, as they both provided clear evidence that Antarctica had not always been covered by ice, and demonstrated from the sedimentary rocks that the fossils were encased in that it was likely  that Antarctica was a continent rather than an archipelago of volcanic islands.  The expedition reached its furthest south at 64° 40’S, 56° 30’W, where they observed land to the west, likely part of the Antarctic Peninsula. The expedition did not catch any whales (although doing a bit of sealing), but observed them in abundance, and thus gave basis for further expeditions and exploration the coming years. 

