





Topic Summary: CEP Discussions on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System









Topic Summary: CEP Discussions on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
This paper presents a summary of CEP meeting documents and discussions on the topic of further developing the Antarctic protected area system, consistent with the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol and the Committee’s role under Article 12(g) of the Environmental Protocol to provide advice to the Parties on ‘the operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area system’. It presents several observations that, in Australia’s view, are worth recalling during the Committee’s ongoing consideration of this topic.
Background
A mechanism to formally apply additional internationally-agreed protection to particular locations within the Antarctic Treaty area has been available since the adoption of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora in 1964, which provided for the designation of sites of outstanding scientific interest as Specially Protected Areas (SPAs), to accord them ‘special protection … in order to preserve their unique natural ecological system’. The framework for the identification, designation and management of Antarctic protected areas continued to evolve over subsequent decades, with growing recognition that a special protection mechanism would also be beneficial for a wider range of scientific and environmental values, and was consolidated with the adoption in 1991 of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol, on Area Protection and Management.
Annex V established provisions for the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research (Article 3.1). It also outlined a commitment by Parties to identify areas with a range of specified values and characteristics, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, for inclusion in the series of ASPAs (Article 3.2). The Environmental Protocol also established a related role for the CEP to provide advice to the Parties on the ‘operation and further elaboration of the Antarctic Protected Area system’. 
With the intention of providing a useful reference for the joint SCAR/CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System, and the CEP’s further consideration of this topic, the this paper provides:
    • a timeline overview of CEP discussions on further developing the Antarctic protected area system (Appendix A); and
    • Australia’s observations of some noteworthy points arising from those discussions.
It is important to note that the CEP’s deliberations on the topic built on earlier discussions in the ATCM, which were in turn informed by constructive input from Observers and Experts, including for example the outcomes and recommendations of the 1992 SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas.
Observations regarding CEP discussions on further developing the Antarctic protected area system
In Australia’s view, the following points raised in CEP meeting papers and discussions are worth recalling in the CEP’s continuing work on further developing of the Antarctic protected area system.
    1) It is evident from the regularity of discussions and the volume of related meeting papers throughout the period from CEP I in 1998 to CEP XXI in 2018, that the Committee considers the further development of the Antarctic protected area system to be an important, though somewhat complex, topic. With the agreement at CEP XXI in 2018 to hold a joint SCAR/CEP workshop on further developing the protected area system, and related priorities identified in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan and Climate Change Response Work Program, it can be expected that the topic will remain prominent in the work of the CEP in future years.
    2) Throughout its discussions, the CEP has recognised that the further elaboration of the Antarctic protected area system should be considered in the context of the wide protections given to Antarctica by the Environmental Protocol and other annexes, and that areas not designated as ASPAs remain subject to those protections.
    3) Consideration of how proposed ASPAs may contribute to the protected area system as a whole has been built into the CEP’s procedures for considering proposed new areas and into guidance materials developed by the Committee for use by potential proponents. The CEP moved quickly to adopt, in 2000, guidance on implementing the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V. There have been calls to review the guidelines, and to consider rationalising the growing body of guidance materials on area protection.
    4) The establishment of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and its Protected Area Database (which built on the earlier Antarctic Protected Areas Information Archive developed by the United Kingdom) has provided a sound basis for the central management of information relevant to consideration of the current state, and further development, of the Antarctic protected area system.
    5) The CEP has recognised the benefit of biogeographic tools to provide a sound basis for informing Antarctic area protection at regional and continental scales, within a systematic environmental geographic framework. Several such tools and analyses have been developed by Members (including for example the Environmental Domains Analysis of Antarctica, Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions, Important Bird Areas).
    6) The CEP has clearly highlighted the importance of drawing on the best available science to inform the designation of ASPAs within a systematic environmental-geographic framework and, accordingly, the Committee has recognised the importance of cooperation with SCAR as an important and valued contributor to this work.
    7) The concepts of risk, resilience, representativeness and reference areas have regularly featured in CEP papers and discussions on further developing the Antarctic protected area system.
    8) Since the mid 2000’s, the Committee has regularly discussed the importance of a harmonised approach to marine protection across the Antarctic Treaty system and the relevance of considering the marine environment when implementing Article 3.2 of Annex V. The Committee has recognised that its efforts should complement rather than duplicate the ongoing work by CCAMLR to consider the designation of marine protected areas.
    9) The Committee has recognised the relevance of the application and further development of the Antarctic protected area system as an important means of addressing the implications of climate change for protection of the Antarctic environment, and also the need to consider the implications of climate change for values within protected areas.
    10) The value of undertaking ‘gap analyses’ of the protected area system has been raised on several occasions. Several meeting papers have presented broad analyses against the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V, as well as analyses of the representation of particular values (e.g. geological values, vegetation).
Appendix A. Timeline of CEP discussions on further development of the Antarctic protected area system
CEP I (1998)
ATCM XXII/WP 26 Report of the Antarctic Protected Area Workshop (Norway, United Kingdom) presented the report of the Antarctic Protected Areas Workshop held earlier in the year in Tromsø, Norway, following a decision taken at ATCM XXI (1997). The workshop recommendations included, among others:
    • that the ATCPs, the CEP, SCAR, and if appropriate CCAMLR, take urgent steps to identify possible new protected areas in the following categories: areas kept inviolate from human interference (Annex V, Article 3(2a)); representative examples of ecosystems (Annex V, Article 3(2b)).
    • that the CEP, in collaboration with SCAR and IUCN, should develop new systems for classifying protected areas in Antarctica making good use of existing knowledge and methods.
    • that the ATCPs, through the CEP, undertake a gap analysis based on the values for site protection identified in Article 3 of Annex V, in order to make recommendations for new protected areas.
ATCM XXII/WP 27 Developing the Protected Areas System in Antarctica (SCAR) suggested that the CEP work towards developing a coherent overall protected areas strategy for Antarctica by convening a second international scientific workshop prior to the next CEP meeting. The Committee acknowledged that Antarctic protected areas should be examined in the wider context of the protection given to Antarctica by the Environmental Protocol and Annexes I - IV, as well as the protection provided by Annex V. It noted that particular attention needed to be given to protecting areas where there are fauna, flora or other values at high risk of being damaged by human activities, and that there were also gaps in the system with some protected area categories as set out in Article 3(2) of Annex V being very poorly represented or not represented at all.
The Committee endorsed the convening of a second workshop to address Antarctic Protected Areas, with terms of reference including:
    • examine how the overall Antarctic protected areas framework envisioned in Article 3(2) of the Protocol Annex V could be developed; and
    • undertake a gap analysis based on the values for site protection identified in Article 3 of Annex V, in order to make recommendations for new protected areas.
ATCM XXII/IP2 Wilderness and Aesthetic Values in Antarctica (United Kingdom) discussed considerations for giving effect to the Article 3.2(g) of Annex V.
ATCM XXII/IP 51 Marine Protection in the Southern Ocean (IUCN) suggested that the Parties look at developing a representative network of marine protected areas, which could be a mixture of ASPAs and ASMAs.
CEP II (1999)
ATCM XXIII/WP36 Development of Guidelines for the Protected Area Designation Process (New Zealand) contained suggestions that built on the workshop report, including a conceptual framework for Antarctic protected areas.
ATCM XXIII/WP37 Report of the Second Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas (Peru) presented the report of the workshop held in Lima, prior to CEP II. The workshop recommendations included:
    • that the CEP adopts an elaborated framework for protected areas in Antarctica which draws on a conceptual schema outlined in the workshop report
    • that the CEP considers the need for further elaboration of an Antarctic conservation strategy
that in selecting new protected areas, a range of tools be used, including: environmental risk analysis (a useful systematic/integrative tool), complementarity analysis; and other criteria as listed in the workshop report.
The Committee agreed to establish an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG), led by New Zealand, to report back to CEP III on how to use and build on the outcomes and recommendations of the second Protected Areas Workshop in the implementation of Annex V of the Protocol, also taking into account the report and recommendations from the first Antarctic Protected Areas Workshop. The ICG terms of reference included to develop guidelines for:
    • implementation of the framework for protected areas set forth in Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol, drawing on the conceptual scheme in Recommendation 1 of Working Paper 37; and
    • ways to apply the concepts of environmental risk, quality and feasibility for identifying, selecting and proposing protected areas.
ATCM XXXIII/IP80 Towards additional protection of Antarctic Wilderness Areas (New Zealand) discussed the designation of special areas for wilderness protection in Antarctica, including possible criteria to evaluate proposals for establishing ASPAs for wilderness protection in accordance with Article 3.2(g) of Annex V.
CEP III (2000)
SATCM XII/WP11 Report on the Open Ended Intersessional Contact Group on Protected Areas Terms of Reference (a) - Development of Guidelines for Protected Areas Under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (New Zealand) reported on aspects of the work of the ICG established at CEP II. It presented proposed ‘Guidelines for Implementation of Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol – Antarctic Specially Protected Areas’, intended to assist the Parties, SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR and the CEP in the assessment and definition of ASPAs. Following revisions during the meeting, the Committee referred the Guidelines to the Special ATCM, which adopted Resolution 1 (2000), recommending that the Guidelines be used by those engaged in the development of proposals for specially protected areas in Antarctica.
SATCM XII/WP16 A systematic environmental-geographic framework for Protected Areas under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (New Zealand) noted that the phrase ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ was not defined in the Protocol and there was no such agreed framework. It further noted that a systematic approach to protected areas could help the CEP take a broader, more comprehensive and long-term perspective on protected areas in Antarctica including incorporation of aspects such as priority areas and representativeness. The Committee noted that this was a complex issue that needed further thought and welcomed New Zealand’s intention to continue its work with assistance from SCAR and others who may wish to contribute.
CEP IV (2001)
ATCM XXIV/WP12 Systematic Environmental-Geographic Framework for Protected Areas Under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (New Zealand) concerned development of a systematic environmental-geographic framework (SEGF) as outlined in Annex V, and which followed on from the work of the earlier ICG reported in SATCM XXII/WP11. It outlined several ways in which a SEGF would be used consistent with implementation of the Environmental Protocol, including enable the representativeness of proposed and existing protected areas to be assessed efficiently, transparently and repeatably, and to allow Parties and the CEP to assess overall needs for protected areas on a more systematic basis. The Committee agreed that this was a useful initiative and asked New Zealand to report back on progress to CEP V. It was recognised that SCAR would also need to continue to have input.
CEP V (2002)
ATCM XXV/WP13 Report back on a Systematic Environmental-Geographic Framework (SEGF) for Protected Areas under Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (New Zealand) presented a progress report on the development of a SEGF for protected areas. The Committee asked New Zealand to present further information to CEP VI. 
CEP VI (2003)
ATCM XXVI/WP20 Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica (SEPIA) The creation of a systematic environmental-geographic framework for Antarctica using Environmental Domains Analysis (New Zealand) noted that a SEGF could be developed using Environmental Domains Analysis (EDA), and that such a scientific method for classifying Antarctic areas with similar environmental characteristics would be a systematic way to assist the CEP in identification and protection of special areas. ATCM XXVI/IP1 Environmental Domains for the Ross Sea Region (New Zealand) presented information on a pilot approach to EDA for the Ross Sea region. The Committee noted the potential applicability of EDA for establishing a SEGF for Antarctica within which areas can be identified for special protection under Annex V, and that the feasibility of creating a SEGF for Antarctica using the EDA framework would depend on data availability and the ability to both access and extrapolate known datasets. The CEP asked New Zealand to continue with the development of a SEGF, and to present a progress report to CEP VII.
CEP VII (2004)
ATCM XXVII/IP024 Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica – First Progress Report (New Zealand) reported on progress with the creation of creation of a SEGF for the Ross Sea region using EDA.
CEP VIII (2005)
ATCM XXVIII/WP2 Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica: A draft Systematic Environmental- Geographic Framework for Antarctica created using Environmental Domains Analysis (New Zealand) and ATCM XXVIII/IP44 Environmental Domain Analysis for the Antarctic Continent (New Zealand) provided an update on New Zealand’s ongoing work to develop a SEGF. Computer analyses of seven continent-wide datasets had been used to define various ‘Environmental Domains’. Future work planned included examination of the representativeness of existing ASPAs in the light of the draft classification. The Committee looked forward with interest to an update from New Zealand at CEP IX on the further development of a SEGF, including a finer-scale classification for ice-free land environments (‘oases’). It requested that SCAR review the “proof of concept” classification layer, and requested national programs to contribute to the data layers used in the analysis where practical. SCAR indicated that it would be happy to review this work and may be able to provide other data being prepared in the SCAR system, such as improved geological information and remotely-sensed data.
ATCM XXVIII/WP11 A Review of the Antarctic protected Areas System (New Zealand) and ATCM XXVIII/IP 29 A Review of the Antarctic protected Areas System (New Zealand) presented a review of the status of the Antarctic protected areas system, primarily to support the preparation of an evaluation for the CEP’s state of the Antarctic environment reporting system. The Committee:
    • acknowledged that the SEGF presented in ATCM XXVIII/WP2 provided an excellent tool for ensuring a more systematic spread of protected areas; and
    • noted that it would be useful to review the Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol and consider at CEP IX when it would be appropriate to do so.
CEP IX (2006)
ATCM XXIX/WP4 Marine Protected Areas (MPAs): tools for protection and management (United Kingdom) highlighted the importance of recent CCAMLR discussions and recommendations on MPAs and implications for the CEP, including continuing work towards the development of a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ of protected, including marine areas.
ATCM XXIX/WP7 The Work of CCAMLR on Marine Protected Areas (CCAMLR) provided the report of the 2005 CCAMLR Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and outlined progress with recommendations subsequently agreed by CCAMLR-XXIV. It reported that CCAMLR had agreed there was a need to develop a strategic approach and harmonised regime to protect the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System. CCAMLR had identified a work plan for developing a system of marine protected areas, including the establishment of a steering committee, with representation from SC-CAMLR and the CEP, to coordinate work towards a workshop in 2007 to undertake a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, and inviting the CEP to initiate the work necessary to develop bio-regionalization of the coastal provinces, as an extension of its terrestrial bioregionalisation work, while SC-CAMLR undertakes initial work to delineate oceanic provinces.
ATCM XXIX/IP3 Rationale for the development of MPAs in Antarctica (United Kingdom) contained further background information on the objectives of MPAs, the types of areas that might be considered for protection, and the ways in which these objectives might be achieved using the tools available under the Annex V of the Environmental Protocol and CCAMLR.
ATCM XXIX/IP6 Approaches to marine bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (United Kingdom), provided information on the methodologies that might be used in a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, including examples of where this type of work had been undertaken elsewhere, and details on the types of scientific information that may be required.
ATCM XXXIX/IP104rev1 Notes on Bioregionalisation in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (Chile), provided a reminder that bioregionalisation, within the Antarctic domain should develop alongside with the ecosystem approach, primarily as conceived in Article II of the CAMLR Convention, but also in the context of the approach in the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems. 
The Committee agreed to:
    • continue its work towards the elaboration of a ‘systematic environmental-geographic framework’ and give further specific consideration to the inclusion of marine areas within such a framework;
    • endorse cooperation with CCAMLR on the protection of the marine environment, and particularly on the development of scientifically-based principles and criteria for MPAs;
    • consider how it might best contribute to the proposed work towards a bioregionalisation of the Antarctic marine environment, by initially focusing on work on the coastal areas.
ATCM XXIX/WP13 Non-native Species in the Antarctic. Report of a Workshop (New Zealand) reported on a workshop held in Christchurch to bring together relevant national and international experts to discuss conservation, management and research issues relating to the introduction of non-native species in the Antarctic.The workshop suggested that consideration should also be given to utilising protected area mechanisms to give appropriate (and even immediate) protection to high-risk sites. The Committee strongly supported key recommendations arising from the workshop, including that ‘to the extent possible, non-native species issues concerns should be built into existing procedures and practices; notably EIA procedures and the protected areas system’.
ATCM XXIX/WP32 Systematic Environmental Protection In Antarctica – refining and reviewing the “proof of concept” Environmental Domains of Antarctica classification for a systematic environmental geographic framework (New Zealand) provided an update on progress towards a SEGF under Annex V. The paper noted that the “proof of concept” classification of Antarctica into 20 Environments using EDA, as presented at CEP VIII, had been checked and refined using ice temperature data, information in management plans for ASPAs and ASMAs, and the ice-free digital data layer in SCAR’s Antarctic Digital Database. Analyses had shown that a few Environments were well represented in ASPAs or ASMAs but several ice-free and ice sheet environments that may face risks from human activities were not. The Committee encouraged New Zealand to bring final results to CEP X.
ATCM XXIX/WP 42 Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges. A summary report of the CEP Workshop (United Kingdom, Australia, France) and ATCM XXIX/IP113(rev.1) Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges. Report of the CEP Workshop, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9–10 June 2006 (United Kingdom, Australia, France) presented the outcomes of the workshop held prior to CEP IX. Headline goals identified at the workshop included  ‘Make full use of the provisions of the Madrid Protocol and enhance the protected area system in Antarctica’, and ‘Establish a representative network of marine and terrestrial protected areas’. Related actions the CEP could take included ‘do a gap analysis of the protected area system’ and ‘elaborate and expand the protected and managed area system and develop a network of effective sites within a systematic framework’. The Committee agreed that the workshop had been productive and agreed to establish an ICG to take forward the development of a five-year work plan.
CEP X (2007)
ATCM XXX/WP10 Intersessional CEP Consideration of Draft Management Plans (Australia) identified the desirable characteristics of an effective intersessional process for reviewing draft Management Plans and proposed Terms of Reference for a standing group that could operate intersessionally to provide advice to proponents and to the CEP. The Committee agreed to establish an informal group to trial such an intersessional process, with the Terms of Reference including to consider whether new or revised draft management plans ‘clearly state how the proposed Area complements the Antarctic protected areas system as a whole’.
ATCM XXX/WP12 Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica: Final progress report on Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic continent (New Zealand) provided a revised classification of Antarctic Environmental Domains at the continental scale and improved the ‘proof of concept’ presented at CEP VIII and CEP IX, better incorporating ice-free terrain. It noted that the addition of further data, including biotic and permafrost/soils databases at the continental scale would continue to improve the EDA. The current classification was expected to provide a scientifically sound basis for a systematic spatial classification of Antarctica into 21 Environments of quantifiable character. ATCM XXX/IP41 Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica: local and regional scale application of Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic continent (New Zealand) noted that a regional scale classification around the Larsemann Hills ice-free area showed that the system could also work at finer scales. The Committee commended New Zealand for this excellent work and for the progress made in providing a tool to meet the SEGF requirements of the Protocol. The Committee also welcomed SCAR’s proposal, following the earlier request from New Zealand to undertake an assessment of the EDA, to assess the potential fit of existing biological data into the EDA.
ATCM XXX/WP15 A Five-Year Work plan for the CEP: Report of the Intersessional Contact Group (New Zealand) reported the outcomes of the ICG led by the CEP Chair to develop a five-year work plan for the Committee, building on the discussions that had taken place at the workshop on ‘Antarctica’s Future Environmental Challenges’ held before CEP IX. The Committee agreed to endorse the five-year work plan presented in WP 15 on a provisional basis, including the medium priority issue ‘Overview of the protected area system / SEGF’ and a related action ‘Apply the domains analysis (SEGF) to the existing system – undertake a gap analysis’.
CEP XI (2008)
ATCM XXXI/WP27 Systematic Environmental Protection in Antarctica: Final report on Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic continent as a dynamic model for a systematic environmental geographic framework for Annex V of the Protocol (New Zealand) presented a classification of Antarctic Environments created using EDA, noting that 21 different Environments had been identified based on currently available climate, slope, land cover and geological data. The Committee strongly endorsed the EDA as a dynamic model for the identification of ASPAs within the SEGF referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V. The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 3 (2008), which recommended that the EDA be used consistently and in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty System as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within the systematic environmental-geographical framework referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol.
ATCM XXXI/WP29rev.1 A Five-Year Work plan for the CEP: Report on Intersessional Review (New Zealand) presented the results of intersessional discussions on the five-year work plan endorsed at CEP X on a provisional basis. Following minor modifications during the meeting the Committee adopted the five-year work plan, including a priority 3 issue ‘Overview of the protected areas system / SEGF’ and related action ‘Apply the domains analysis (SEGF) to the existing system – undertake a gap analysis.
ATCM XXXI/IP2 Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (Brussels, Belgium, August 2007) (United Kingdom and United States) reported on the outcomes of the workshop convened to provide a scientific basis for the identification of representative areas for protection in the Southern Ocean. It highlighted the relevance of the workshop outcomes to the CEP, including that the outcomes of the bioregionalisation analysis could be used as one of a range of tools to support decision-making on the selection of marine protected areas, which may include ASPAs and ASMAs, and that the process of systematic conservation planning was a useful framework to facilitate the selection and design of representative protected areas, and could be used further by the CEP in the design of protected areas on land as well as in marine areas.
ATCM XXXI/IP3 Proposed approach for the identification of important marine areas for conservation (United Kingdom) proposed an approach for the identification of important marine areas for conservation based on “Systematic Conservation Planning” methodology. The Committee agreed that further work on this topic was of key importance and Members were encouraged to continue working with CCAMLR to utilise the outcomes of the CCAMLR-CEP bioregionalisation workshop.
ATCM XXXI/IP57 Area Protection: Time for Action (ASOC) reviewed the progress made in delivering the objectives of Annex V. It noted that the rolling Annex review process offered an opportunity to both consider the effectiveness of Annex V to deliver best practice area protection for the Antarctic Treaty area, and to review the barriers to effective implementation of current requirements. It suggested that the CEP be tasked with advising the ATCM on which parts of Annex V were not yet fully represented with designated protected areas.
CEP XII (2009)
ATCM XXXII/WP8 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans – Report on Term of Reference #4: Improving Management Plans and the Process for their Intersessional Review reported on the SGMP’s review of the status of previous workshop recommendations relating to protected area matters (presented in Attachment A to WP8). Regarding recommendations relating to the further development of the Antarctic protected area system, the SGMP had noted:
    • that representation was still geographically biased;
    • that it was important to consider vulnerability as well as environmental-geographic representation, and to take a risk-based approach to site protection; and
    • identification of new “representative” areas can be informed by Resolution 1 (2000): Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol; and Resolution 3(2008) “Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic continent as a dynamic model for a systematic environmental geographic framework”.
ATCM XXXII/WP29 Towards a representative system of marine spatial protection for the South Orkney Islands (United Kingdom) and ATCM XXXII/IP11 Pilot study on identifying important marine areas for conservation around the South Orkney Islands (United Kingdom) provided details of a pilot study carried out to investigate the utility of a systematic conservation methodology in identifying important areas for conserving marine biodiversity. The Committee endorsed the methodology demonstrated by the United Kingdom as one practical method of selecting and designating marine protected areas. The Committee agreed to:
    • develop a strategy and work towards the establishment of effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty area within the next three years, through the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs under Annex V
    • cooperate as far as possible with CCAMLR and SCAR to ensure that such measures are implemented on a scientific basis, and with the aim of achieving harmonised protection for Antarctic marine biodiversity across the Antarctic Treaty System
    • Focus further work on the development of marine spatial protection and management within, but not limited to, those priority areas agreed by CCAMLR which fall within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
ATCM XXXII/WP31 Updated analysis of representation of Annex V categories and Environmental Domains in the system of Antarctic Specially Protected and Managed Areas (New Zealand) provided an updated analysis of the representation of the categories of ASPAs identified in Article 3.2 of Annex V and of Environmental Domains, with updated details of the total sizes of areas covered by ASPAs. It noted that inviolate reference areas and wilderness values were still poorly represented in ASPAs and ASMAs, protected areas were relatively well represented in most ice-free Environmental Domains, and the ice-free Environmental Domains R, T and U were the least represented. The Committee thanked New Zealand for the excellent paper.  
ATCM XXXII/WP34 Spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity (United Kingdom) provided information on the types of marine spatial protection and management that can be implemented in Antarctic waters. This included details on definition of terms, objectives of marine spatial protection and management, examples of measures currently adopted under CCAMLR and the Antarctic Treaty and a summary of principles agreed by the ATCPs and CCAMLR Members with regard to marine spatial protection and management. 
The CCAMLR Representative referred to CCAMLR’s bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, noting that the Scientific Committee and the Commission had approved SC-CAMLR’s identification of eleven priority areas for attention within the bioregionalisation. These areas had been identified based on a variety of indicators that highlighted areas of high heterogeneity within the Southern Ocean, predictive of high biodiversity.  The bioregionalisation graphic overlain with the eleven priority areas was made available to the Committee. The Committee agreed that the eleven areas were useful priority areas for ongoing attention, and further agreed to append the CCAMLR figure to its report as a means of lending CEP endorsement to the eleven priority areas and as a means of focussing future CEP work on the issue. The Committee urged Members to focus further work on the development of marine spatial protection and management within, but not limited to, those priority areas which fall within the Treaty area. 
ATCM XXXII/WP55 Report of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop (France, New Zealand, Russian Federation, United States) presented the report of the workshop held prior to CEP XII. On the subject of marine spatial protection and management, the report noted that the workshop had:
    • agreed on the importance of a systematic approach to marine spatial protection and management and noted that CEP and SC-CAMLR had agreed to taking a harmonised approach to the development of a representative system of marine protected areas
    • noted a representative system of marine protected areas would serve the purpose of conserving representative components of Antarctic marine biodiversity and could also be designed in such a way to
    • act as scientific reference areas, for example to help understand how to manage activities in the face of climate change impacts; and
    • provide areas to increase the resilience of the Antarctic marine ecosystem to climate change or other impacts.
    • agreed that the committees should consider representative areas, reference areas and resilience areas with respect to spatial protection and management in the marine environment
    • endorsed the development of mutual region-specific objectives, and further consideration of overlapping areas of interest for marine protection to facilitate increased cooperation
    • agreed that issues relating to spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity would generally be best led by SC-CAMLR, but that this did not preclude in any way the development by the CEP of ASPAs and ASMAs which have in whole or in part a marine component
    • recommended that the 11 priority areas agreed by SC-CAMLR should be the priority for future work towards a network of MPAs, that these priority areas should be presented to the CEP, that consideration be given to using these as potential priority areas under the existing framework, and that both committees develop a strategy to achieve these aims in the next three years.
The Committee welcomed the workshop report and endorsed the recommendations and stressed the importance of maintaining momentum on the issues identified by the workshop.
The Secretariat demonstrated the features of the new Antarctic Protected Area online database which had been developed during the intersessional period, replacing the Antarctic Protected Areas Information Archive developed by the United Kingdom. The Chair noted that the database would also contribute to the Committee’s ongoing work in the strategic development of a more holistic protected areas system.
CEP XIII (2010)
ATCM XXXIII/WP3 Biodiversity-based Evaluation of the Environmental Domains Analysis (SCAR) reported on SCAR’s assessment of the extent to which the outcome of the EDA undertaken by New Zealand corresponded with patterns found in spatially explicit biodiversity data for the region, based on data from the SCAR Biodiversity Database hosted by the Australian Antarctic Division. SCAR noted that the use of abiotic environmental variables as surrogate measures of diversity was a well-established approach used for other continental regions. It concluded that the EDA provided a useful and important measure of environmental variation across Antarctica that, in terms of the ice-free domains, can be considered essential as a first order assessment of likely systematic variation in biodiversity. SCAR suggested that for meaningful analysis at the finer spatial scales typically used in protected area designation, the EDA must be supplemented with biodiversity data, which not only reflect current conditions but, importantly, historical processes that cannot in many instances be captured by modern environmental data. The Committee welcomed the comprehensive and useful work by SCAR. Noting that more comprehensive terrestrial biodiversity information would increase the ability to undertake detailed and thorough analyses, the Committee agreed that Members should strongly encourage national scientific programmes to collect further biodiversity data and make such data available via the SCAR Biodiversity Database maintained by the Australian Antarctic Division. The Committee noted that such action was also encouraged by the ATME on Climate Change (Recommendation 20). The Committee also noted that the EDA was one tool to assist with further developing the protected areas system, but that it was important to draw effectively on all available tools. 
ATCM XXXIII/WP16 The Implications of Climate Change for the Antarctic Protected Areas System (United Kingdom) noted that climate change was likely to have significant implications for terrestrial, freshwater and marine ecosystems, and for ASPAs protecting these environments, in particular in areas where regional climate warming was established (for example, the Antarctic Peninsula). It reviewed how these effects might specifically impact on the values currently protected by ASPAs, and provided recommendations on the development and review of the protected area system. The Committee noted that the paper had also been submitted to the ATME on Climate Change, and that some of the proposals were reflected in the ATME recommendations, including Recommendations 24, 25 and 26. The Committee welcomed the United Kingdom’s initiative, and noted that the protected areas system was an important tool to manage the implications of climate change. The Committee also welcomed the United Kingdom’s offer to take forward work on classifying existing protected areas according to their vulnerability to climate change. It agreed to consider the issues raised in WP 16 in its forward planning through the five-year work plan.
ATCM XXXIII/WP50 Use of the Guidelines for the designation of Protected Areas (Argentina) proposed that a number of additional elements be included in Resolution 1 (2008) ‘Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for ASPAs, ASMAs or HSMs’, to allow for confirmation that Resolution 1 (2000) ‘Guidelines for Implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas’ were being implemented effectively. The Committee welcomed Argentina’s objective of promoting the use of the Guidelines appended to Resolution 1 (2000), and agreed in principle on the benefit of following a process when developing protected area proposals and pursuing a systematic approach to the protected areas system. The Chair noted that the Committee might wish to keep under consideration other options for promoting the use of the guidelines, and the possible need to review and update them as necessary.
ATCM XXXIII/WP 54 Enhancing the Antarctic Protected Areas Database to help assess and further develop the protected areas system (Australia) recalled that CEP XII had endorsed the SGMP’s suggestion to include additional information in the protected areas database, and proposed that the Committee consider expanding the database to also include the primary reason for designation, values being protected, an accurate indication of the size of the area and the environmental domain(s) represented. It also proposed that the Committee consider encouraging proponents of ASPAs and ASMAs to submit area boundaries in a suitable digital format. Collectively, these actions would assist the CEP to assess how existing or proposed protected areas represent the environmental domains and the suite of values identified by Annex V for protection in ASPAs.
ATCM XXXIII/WP63 Report from Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance (Norway, United Kingdom) presented the co-chairs’ report of Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change and Implications for Management and Governance of the Antarctic Region, held in Svolvær, Norway in April 2010. Of the 30 recommendations agreed at the ATME, 22 were identified as being of particular relevance to the CEP, including:
    • Recommendation 24: The ATME recommends that CEP review the means of applying protected and managed area management tools to ensure sufficient flexibility to account for climate change effects. Such a review should consider: 
    • the need to ensure that climate change effects are assessed during each five-yearly review of management plans, including for example, the need to establish protected and managed area boundaries that are climate change resilient; and
    • the potential to delist sites at which the original values to be protected have been lost or degraded.
    • Recommendation 25: The ATME recommends that the CEP consider a systematic approach to protected or managed areas to:
    • protect species, or habitats identified to be of particular risk to climate change consequences (cf. Recommendation 18);
    • accommodate areas that have potential to be environmental or climate refuges;
    • set aside areas for future climate change related research, including reference areas.
ATCM XXXIII/IP107 Bioregionalisation and Spatial Ecosystem Processes in the Ross Sea Region (New Zealand) outlined the outcomes of a Workshop on Bioregionalisation and Spatial Ecosystem Processes in the Ross Sea Region, held in Wellington, New Zealand in June 2009, to contribute to the identification and potential designation of marine protected areas. The workshop had produced a fine-scale benthic/demersal bioregionalisation of the Ross Sea region, a fine-scale pelagic bioregionalisation of the Ross Sea region, as well as an agreed list of spatially bounded ecosystem processes of particular importance in the regional ecosystem, and which may be amenable to protection using spatial management tools.
CEP XIV (2011)
ATCM XXXIV/WP32 Enhancing the Antarctic Protected Areas Database to help assess and further develop the protected areas system (Australia) followed on from WP 54 considered at CEP XIII and outlined proposals to expand the Antarctic Protected Areas Database The Committee agreed:
    • that the Antarctic Protected Areas Database should be expanded to include fields representing: (1) primary reason for designation; and (2) main Environmental Domain represented
    • to encourage proponents to make ASPA and ASMA boundaries available in a digital format suitable for use in a GIS where possible, and to provide this information to the Secretariat for central management and access via the Antarctic Protected Areas Database.
In order to allow the Secretariat to capture the relevant information for inclusion in the database, the Committee drafted modifications to the coversheet for Working Papers presenting ASPAs and ASMAs. The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 5 (2011), recommending use of the revised Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments.
ATCM XXXIV/WP43 Developing a Single Methodology for Classifying Antarctic Specially Protected Areas According to their Vulnerability to Climate Change (United Kingdom, Norway) presented first steps towards developing a simple and rapid assessment of vulnerability of 12 ASPAs to climate change. The assessment considered possible impacts in terms of two components: vulnerability of their key values and regional exposure to climate change. Following discussion the Chair noted the wide interest in this approach and suggested that, whilst it could already be seen as a useful tool for the management plans of the protected areas, with an increase in the number of parameters it would be even more useful. The Chair encouraged the United Kingdom, Norway and interested Members to continue the work.
CEP XV (2012)
ATCM XXXV/WP23rev.1 Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Australia, New Zealand and SCAR) presented the results of recent analyses of the relationships between the best available Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity data, the Environmental Domains adopted under Resolution 3 (2008), and other relevant spatial frameworks. The analyses identified 15 biologically distinct ice-free regions encompassing the Antarctic continent and offshore islands within the Antarctic Treaty area. Among other potential applications, it recommended that the Committee endorse the classification represented by the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) as a dynamic model for identifying ASPAs within a SEGF. The Committee endorsed the recommendations in WP23 rev.1 and, among other things:
    • agreed that the ACBRs should be used consistently and in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty system as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as ASPAs within the SEGF referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol
    • requested the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to make the spatial data layer representing the ACBRs available via its website
    • reiterated its agreement that Members should encourage the further collection and timely submission of spatially explicit biological data.
The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 6 (2012), recommending that the ACBRs be used in conjunction with the EDA and other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty system to support activities relevant to the interests of the Parties, including as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as ASPAs within the SEGF referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol.
ATCM XXXV/WP50 Concepts for Wilderness protection in Antarctica using tools in the Protocol (New Zealand, Netherlands) and ATCM XXXV/IP60 Further information about wilderness protection in Antarctica and use of tools in the Protocol (New Zealand, Netherlands) sought to progress the discussion on how areas of wilderness significance could be better protected, and proposed the development of practical guidance material to support the protection of wilderness values when applying the environmental impact assessment and area protection tools of Annex I and Annex V of the Protocol.
The Committee commended New Zealand and the Netherlands on their work, acknowledged that there had been gradual degradation of some aspects of Antarctic wilderness, and discussed the importance of inviolate areas in conservation planning. The Committee welcomed the offer of New Zealand and the Netherlands to bring further work to CEP XVI resulting from intersessional work to:
    a) develop guidance material to assist Parties to take account of wilderness values when undertaking environmental impact assessment of proposed activities and/or developing proposals for protected areas on the basis of their wilderness values; and
    b) explore possibilities for consideration of inviolate areas in conservation planning, and potential synergies with protection of wilderness areas in the development of proposals for protected areas in conjunction with SCAR.
ATCM XXXV/IP26 Analyses of the Antarctic Protected Areas System Using Spatial Information provided an update on Australia’s acquisition of a comprehensive dataset of spatial information representing the boundaries of all ASPAs and ASMAs, and informed the CEP of the availability of this dataset on the Secretariat’s website. Australia presented examples of how the dataset could assist in assessing and further developing the Antarctic protected areas system, and support other CEP activities. The Committee thanked Australia for acquiring the data set and making it freely available and noted the utility of the information for supporting a systematic approach to area protection and management. 
CEP XVI (2013)
    • n/a
CEP XVII (2014)
ATCM XXXVII/WP 33 Background and initial thought and questions: Need for and development of procedures concerning ASPA and ASMA designation (Norway) followed on from Norway’s suggestion at CEP XVI that the CEP should review the overall process of designating ASPAs and ASMAs. It encouraged the CEP to consider: (1) Would there be merit in having a process that would allow Members and the CEP to have a discussion about the merit of an area as an ASPA/ASMA before a management plan for an area not yet designated as a protected/managed area was prepared and submitted by the proponent(s)?; and (2) If such an approach was a useful way forward, would there be merit in having guidance as to instances where interim protection might be needed until a management plan had been submitted and approved due to immediate threats? The Committee welcomed Norway’s offer to continue informal intersessional discussions on the CEP Discussion Forum. 
ATCM XXXVII/WP 36 Monitoring vegetation cover in Antarctic Specially Protected Areas using satellite remote sensing: a pilot study (United Kingdom) presented information on the use of remote sensing techniques to provide baseline data on the extent of vegetation cover in 43 ASPAs protecting terrestrial vegetation. The CEP agreed to encourage members to Members consider the potential usefulness of this satellite sensing approach: 1) on-going monitoring within ASPAs as a complementary tool; 2) determining potential changes on Antarctic vegetation within ASPAs and more widely; 3) informing the further development of the Antarctic Protected Areas system. 
ATCM XXXVII/WP46 Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool (United Kingdom, Germany, Norway, Spain) and ATCM XXXVII/IP 94rev1 Antarctic trial of WWF’s Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience (RACER) Conservation Planning Tool – methodology and trial outcomes (United Kingdom), reported on a trial of the RACER methodology in the terrestrial Antarctica, as endorsed at CEP XV. The trial had focused on Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region (ACBR) 3 North-West Antarctic Peninsula, and early outcomes had indicated that the RACER concept and methodology have value in an Antarctic context for this relatively productive and diverse part of the terrestrial Antarctic Peninsula, with some limitations and challenges. The trial had identified a number of areas believed to be of conservation importance on the basis of their likely resilience to climate change. Some of these areas were located in existing ASPAs, others were not currently protected under Annex V.
The Committee supported the recommendations contained in WP 46, and:
    • based on the RACER trial outcomes, and given the rapid climatic change occurring in the Antarctic Peninsula, encouraged Parties to take into consideration resilience in the designation, management and review of protected areas
    • recognised RACER as one possible tool to determine key features important for conferring resilience (noting that it may be adapted for use in more productive and diverse parts of Antarctica), and noted that protecting areas which are resilient to climate change may ultimately assist in the longer-term protection of biodiversity.
    • encouraged on-going support for further collaboration among interested experts to investigate the applicability of the RACER methodology in Antarctica.
ATCM XXXVII/WP39 The concept of “outstanding values” in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol (Belgium, France) proposed the establishment of an ICG to discuss implementation of Article 3 of Annex V in respect “outstanding values” in the marine environment. The Committee agreed to establish an ICG to discuss “outstanding values” in the Antarctic marine environment, with the following terms of reference:
    1) Identifying key "outstanding values" within different contexts/scopes of the marine environment and analyse how they may be affected by activities under the competence of the CEP linking both terrestrial and marine environments;
    2) Identifying criteria by which marine areas with "outstanding values" would require protection through the ASPA instrument and, in appropriate, identifying activities that may have impacts on marine environment and associated risks to be managed/ mitigated through the range of tools available to the CEP, including the outstanding values;
    3) Understanding the work of CCAMLR on systematic conservation planning, in order to avoid duplication of efforts, complement it and maintain separate roles, while using the appropriate tools available to the CEP's work to implement Article 3 (2) of Annex V of the Protocol;
    4) Discussing options for the CEP within the existing framework and tools of the Treaty and the Protocol to include “outstanding values" of the marine environment, when establishing and/or reviewing ASPAs, in accordance with Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol; and
    5) Providing an initial report to CEP XVIII.
CEP XVIII (2015)
ATCM XXXVIII/WP20 The concept of “outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol, and referred to IP 10 The concept of “outstanding values"” in the Antarctic marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol (Belgium) presented a summary of the discussions of the ICG established by CEP XVII to consider the concept of outstanding values in the marine environment. ICG participants had reached general agreement that: presently no further work was required on definitions and criteria for protecting ‘outstanding values’ in the marine environment, because Annex V and the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental Protocol (Resolution 1 (2000)) provided sufficient guidance; they wished to proceed case by case and step by step, the greatest need for spatial protection being given by the combination, in a given area, of a value (in this case, an outstanding marine value) and a situation or activity that threatens that value. The ICG had recommended that the CEP consider outstanding values in the marine environment when proposing new ASPAs or revising existing ASPA management plans; and the CEP’s efforts to advance the provisions of Annex V should complement rather than duplicate the ongoing work by CCAMLR to consider the designation of MPAs. The Committee supported the key outcomes of the intersessional discussion and agreed that Belgium would continue to lead an ICG on these matters, with the following terms of reference:
    1) Discussing next steps in the implementation of Annex V, Art. 3 of the Protocol regarding the concept of "outstanding values" applied to the marine environment, including any actual or potential threats to that environment, with respect to activities covered by Art. 3 (4) of the Protocol;
    2) Identifying further mechanisms for the CEP, within the existing framework and tools of the Treaty and the Protocol, to consider “outstanding values" of the marine environment, when establishing and/or reviewing ASPAs, and ASMAs as appropriate;
    3) Understanding the work of CCAMLR on systematic conservation planning, in order to avoid duplication of efforts, complement it and maintain separate roles, while using the appropriate tools available to the CEP's work to implement Article 3 (2) of Annex 5 to the Protocol;
    4) Providing a final report to CEP XIX.
ATCM XXXVIII/WP29 A Suggested ASPA/ASMA Prior Assessment Process (Norway) presented draft guidelines for ‘A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs’. The Committee noted the benefits of a prior assessment process for proposed new ASMAs and ASPAs, including: engaging all Parties in the process of designating new sites, recognising that all ASPAs and ASMAs are internationally designated; aiding Members in preparing management plans by allowing for feedback and comments from other Members earlier in the process; and facilitating consideration of the further systematic development of the protected areas system in accordance with Article 3 of Annex V, and with consideration of climate change implications. Following some minor modifications during the meeting, the Committee adopted the Guidelines: A Prior Assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs, and agreed that the procedure for prior assessment of ASPAs or ASMAs should not apply to any areas that had already been proposed as an ASPA or an ASMA.
ATCM XXXVIII/WP35 The Antarctic Protected Area system: protection of outstanding geological features (United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, Spain) highlighted that few ASPAs had been designated to protect geological features. ATCM XXXVIII/IP22 Antarctic Specially Protected Areas protecting geological features: a review (United Kingdom) presented supplementary information. WP 35 recommended that Members and SCAR identify outstanding geological features and consider requirements for their protection, including ASPA designation, use of zoning within ASMAs and/or the inclusion of specific considerations for protection in other developed management tools such as the Site Guidelines for Visitors. The Committee acknowledged the importance of guaranteeing protection of these values and welcomed further discussions on the matter. 
ATCM XXXVIII/WP37 Report from ICG on Climate Change (United Kingdom, Norway) presented a report on the work of an ICG established at CEP XVI, and continued at CEP XVII, to develop a Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) for the CEP. The Committee endorsed the CCRWP, which identified actions including ‘Holistic review of existing Protected Areas network and the process for designation of such areas to ensure they take into account climate change impacts and consider how we might respond’ and ‘Initiate action with the aim to protect representative areas of each biogeographic region and areas likely to provide refuges to species and ecosystems at risk’. Related tasks included ‘Plan for intersessional workshop on a review of the protected areas system’ and ‘Provide a status report to the ATCM on the status of the Antarctic Protected Areas network’. The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 4 (2015), encouraging the CEP to begin implementing the CCRWP as a matter of priority.
ATCM XXXVIII/WP38 Application of the RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) Conservation Planning Tool to James Ross Island (United Kingdom, Czech Republic) and ATCM XXXVIII/IP34 Results of RACER Workshop Focused on James Ross Island (United Kingdom, Czech Republic) followed on from WP 46 to CEP XVII, and outlined further intersessional activity related to RACER, including the identification of key features on James Ross Island that were likely to persist under different climate scenarios. The Committee thanked the United Kingdom and Czech Republic for the report and endorsed further work led by the Czech Republic, with support from the United Kingdom and other interested Parties, to bring forward a proposal to CEP to designate initially Torrent Valley and a nearby area, Johnson Mesa and Monolith Lake catchment within a single multi-site ASPA based on resilience criteria. The Committee noted the advice from the United Kingdom and Czech Republic that this work to identify areas for protection on the basis of resilience was being undertaken within the provisions of Annex V to the Protocol and did not seek to add to those provisions. The Committee looked forward to receiving further details of the proposal to designate a multi-site ASPA on James Ross Island, noting also the usefulness of having had the opportunity to consider and provide comments at an early stage. 
ATCM XXXVIII/WP40 Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica and IP 27 Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica (United States, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and the United Kingdom) presented the report of a recently completed analysis of Important Bird Areas, based on the consistent application of global criteria for bird population assessment worldwide. 204 IBAs located in Antarctica had been identified using a standardised set of thresholds. The Committee recognised the value of the IBA report, which represented a substantial product and was of considerable relevance to its deliberations on the protection and management of Antarctica. The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 5 (2015) which, among other things, recommended that the CEP provide an update to the ATCM on the extent to which these IBAs are, or should be, represented within the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, in particular those areas that might qualify as “major colonies of breeding native birds”.
ATCM XXXVIII/IP109 Antarctic Tourism and Protected Areas (ASOC) emphasised the connection between area protection and tourism regulation and recommended that Members consider examining, from a regional perspective, the intersection of current tourism activities with protected and managed areas, as well as area protection and management needs. It further suggested that Members provide clear statements about tourism policies at their facilities and consider the spatial expansion of tourism in the process of developing a representative network of protected areas.
ATCXM XXXVIII/IP112 Expanding Antarctica’s Protected Areas System (ASOC) highlighted the importance of strengthening the protected areas system, given the exposure of the changing Antarctic environment to threats such as invasive species. It recommended that the Committee critically review the scope of ASPA coverage in Antarctica and initiate an integrated, region-wide planning process that enacted the obligations set out in Article 3 of Annex V. 
The Committee thanked ASOC for the papers, and noted that they contained a range of information and views that may be useful for the Committee’s further discussions on the systematic development of the protected areas system, including actions identified in the Climate Change Response Work Programme.
CEP XIX (2016)
ATCM XXXIX/WP5 Revision of the 'Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments (United Kingdom), recommended that the Committee acknowledge the benefit of the provision of additional information on how protected areas fit within existing systematic environmental-geographical framework tools. It further encouraged the Committee to recommend to the ATCM revisions to Template A: Cover sheet for a Working Paper on an ASPA or ASMA’ appended to Resolution 5 (2011) concerning the provision of data on Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions and Important Bird Areas within proposed protected areas. The Committee agreed that it was beneficial for ASPA proponents to provide information on how proposed protected areas fit within systematic environmental geographic framework tools and, following minor amendments to reflect that the concept of representativeness was not applicable to all protected areas, agreed to recommend that the ATCM revise the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments to include questions relating to ACBRs and IBAs. The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 5 (2016).
ATCM XXXIX/WP6 Templates to summarise the prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) for subsequent consideration by the CEP (United Kingdom, Norway) proposed that the CEP consider recommending the non-mandatory use of two short templates in order to help proponents of new ASPA and ASMA designations summarise their findings, consistent with the Guidelines: A prior assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs adopted at CEP XVIII. The Committee supported the intent of the proposal, which was to provide a practical and non-mandatory means of facilitating the provision of information consistent with the Guidelines, and not to delay the designation of new areas. Several Members expressed a desire to contribute to the further development of the templates, and the Committee welcomed the offer by the United Kingdom and Norway to consult with interested Members during the intersessional period, and to present an updated proposal to CEP XX. 
ATCM XXXIX/IP80 A Systematic Approach to Designating ASPAs and ASMAs (ASOC) provided preliminary suggestions on how to expand the protected areas system under the Environmental Protocol in order to comply with the requirements of Annex V, Articles 3 and 4. It recommended that Parties consider strategically using ASPAs and ASMAs to regulate current and potential future tourism. ASOC pointed out the clear need for designation of a systematic planning process based on best practices in conservation management. The Committee thanked ASOC for the paper, which addressed an issue identified as a high priority in its Five-Year Work Plan, and also welcomed SCAR’s offer to report back to a future CEP meeting on its related research activities.
CEP XX (2017)
ATCM XL/WP21 ASPA/ASMA prior assessment process (United Kingdom, Norway) recommended use of the attached non-mandatory template where the proponent(s) decide it would be helpful to engage the Committee in a prior assessment discussion, in accordance with the Guidelines: A Prior Assessment process for the designation of ASPAs and ASMAs adopted at CEP XVIII. The Committee emphasised that the purpose of the template was to provide a practical and non-mandatory means of facilitating provision of information consistent with the prior assessment guidelines and not to delay or impede proposals to designate new areas, nor to imply prior approval of a new area designation. The Committee advised the ATCM that it had updated the Guidelines to include a non-mandatory template.
ATCM XL/WP29 Proposed update to the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Australia, New Zealand, SCAR) and ATCM XL/IP15 Antarctic biogeography revisited: updating the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Australia, New Zealand, SCAR) summarised a recent revision of the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs) adopted under Resolution 6 (2012). The revision reflected updates in underlying spatial layers, including the most current representation of Antarctica’s ice-free areas, together with the results of new analyses justifying the inclusion of an additional (16th) biologically distinct area in the Prince Charles Mountains region. The Committee recalled its endorsement at CEP XV of the ACBRs as an important framework for its discussions relating to spatial values and environmental protection in Antarctica, agreed on the importance of continuing to update the framework, and agreed to endorse the revised ACBRs. The ATCM subsequently adopted Resolution 3 (2017) recommending that the revised ACBRs (‘Version 2’) be used in conjunction with the EDA and other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty system to support activities relevant to the interests of the Parties, including as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as ASPAs within the SEGF referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 3 of Annex V.
ATCM XL/WP 37 Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Important Bird Areas (United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and Spain) reported that two recent analyses of IBAs had examined the extent to which representative and potentially vulnerable bird colonies were currently represented within the ASPA Network. Those analyses were presented in ATCM XL/IP16 Representation of Important Bird Areas in the network series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (United Kingdom, New Zealand and Norway) and ATCM XL/IP 17 High resolution mapping of human footprint across Antarctica and its implications for the strategic conservation of bird life (submitted by the United Kingdom and Spain). The co-authors of WP 37 highlighted the importance of protecting bird colonies across a range of Antarctic bird species, and that a more consistent approach needed to be taken to protect all native Antarctic bird species. The co-sponsors also clarified that it should not be assumed that all IBAs should receive ASPA designation nor that bird colonies which are not IBAs should not be considered for ASPA designation. The Committee agreed to undertake intersessional work to develop criteria for assessing the suitability of bird colonies for ASPA designation, including to identify what constitutes ‘major colonies of breeding birds’ as set out in Article 3.2(c) of Annex V, and to recommend to the Committee a list of IBAs that meet those criteria, and welcomed the offer of the United Kingdom to lead discussions during the intersessional period. The Committee noted that points raised by Members in the discussion during the meeting could be considered further during the intersessional work, including: the importance of also considering relevant information other than presented in IP 16 and IP 17, including peer-reviewed, ground-truthed studies and ongoing research such as that referred to by several Members; current protection and management mechanisms at sites that are not designated as ASPAs; and the relevance of the mechanisms available in Annex II, which play an important role in the protection of Antarctic bird colonies.
ATCM XL/IP84 Climate change impacts on ice-free areas (Australia) summarised research presented in a forthcoming scientific paper in Nature by Lee et al. (In Press), which quantifies the potential impacts of climate change on Antarctic ice-free areas. It noted that the research is likely to be of particular value for the Committee’s ongoing work to further develop the Antarctic protected areas system.
ATCM XL/IP153 Considerations for the systematic expansion of the protected areas network (ASOC) noted that the system of ASPAs was still inadequate to protect the values listed in Annex V to the Protocol and suggesting that the ATCM should initiate a systematic conservation planning process to identify and designate new ASPAs. It recommended that the Committee: continue to populate the list of relevant available metadata to improve the classification of Antarctic Environments created using Environmental Domains Analysis and its application to protected area systematic development; initiate a five to ten year systematic conservation planning process aiming to establish a network of protected areas in the Antarctic Treaty Area in accordance with Annex V, Articles 3 (1) and (2); and, complement this process with the use of other area-based protection instruments, including ASMAs and those available under other instruments of the Antarctic Treaty system (such as CCAMLR MPAs). The Committee agreed that the expansion of the protected areas network was an important issue that it was committed to examine in the future.
CEP XXI (2018)
ATCM XLI/WP16 Proposal for a joint SCAR/CEP workshop on further developing the Antarctic protected area system (Australia, Argentina, Belgium, Chile, China, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Russian Federation, SCAR, the United Kingdom, and the United States, proposed that a joint SCAR/CEP workshop on further developing the Antarctic protected area system be convened to address actions in the Five-year Work Plan and the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP). The Committee strongly supported the proposal and agreed the workshop terms of reference:
    • Review the current status of the Antarctic protected area system. 
    • Identify information and resources relevant to designating ASPAs within a systematic environmental-geographic framework. 
    • Identify actions that could be taken to support the further development of the Antarctic protected area system. 
    • Prepare a report for consideration by the CEP. 
The Committee agreed that the steering committee established to finalise and communicate the arrangements for the workshop, to be held in Prague prior to CEP XXII, could give further consideration to related issues raised by Members during the meeting including: the possible designation of Important Bird Areas (IBAs) as ASPAs; taking tourism growth into consideration in the expansion of the protected area system; processes for review and delisting of areas; and the relevance of considering risk in assessing the potential for new ASPAs. 

