





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP








Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer 
SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP


Introduction

This report focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR as identified in the first joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop:
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
The Thirty-seventh Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 22-26 October, 2018. The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website https://www.ccamlr.org/en/system/files/e-sc-37%20prelim%20v2.1.pdf.  A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXXIV is provided in Appendix 1. Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are available at https://www.ccamlr.org/en/publications/fishery-reports
The Chair of the Scientific Committee, Dr M. Belchier (UK) reflected on the Scientific Committee’s work in the 2017/18 intersessional period and noted that seven subsidiary meetings were held over a period of eight weeks during the year. These had involved over 240 scientists and to which 222 papers had been tabled, this was in addition to the 56 papers considered by the SC itself.  In addition to the regular meetings of SG-ASAM, WG-SAM, WG-EMM and WG-FSA, two workshops were held during the intersessional period. The Workshop for the Development of a Dissostichus mawsoni Population Hypothesis for Area 48 (WS-DmPH-18) was held in Berlin, Germany from  19 to 21 February 2018 whilst  the Workshop on Spatial Management (WS-SM-18), was held in Cambridge, UK, from  2 to 6 July 2018. Lastly an Independent Stock Assessment Review for Toothfish, was held from the 18 to 22 June 2018 in Norwich, UK.
The newly established Scientific Committee Bureau (SCB) comprising the Chair and Vice Chairs of the Scientific Committee and the conveners of the working groups played an instrumental role in the planning and coordination of the intersessional work of the Scientific Committee. 
Dr Belchier, on behalf of the Scientific Committee, thanked the conveners of the intersessional groups and Germany, Chile and the UK for hosting meetings in 2018. He also thanked participants for developing the Scientific Committee’s work in 2017/18 and Members for supporting these activities.

SC-CAMLR Capacity Building  
The Scientific Committee agreed that the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarships Scheme continued to be a very successful mechanism for developing capacity in CCAMLR, both in the working groups and in the Scientific Committee, and agreed to hold an additional call for scholarship applications with a deadline for applications by March 2019 so that any potential recipient may have suitable time to organise for attendance at the mid-year working group meetings.

The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 

Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
The Scientifc Committee considered the outcomes and recommendations of the ICED–CCAMLR Projections Workshop held in Hobart from 5-7 April 2018. This workshop brought together a range of ecologists, physical and ecological modellers and fisheries scientists to examine questions posed by WG-EMM to consider the potential impacts of climate change on Antarctic krill in Area 48 to address the questions of direct relevance to CCAMLR. 
The key outcomes of the workshop included that:
    • Area 48 is a region of high natural variability and that current Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) models indicate that signals of change will not be distinguishable from model variability until after ~2050. ) 
    • the position of the Polar Front is highly constrained and is not expected to change by 2100. 
    • under a high emissions scenario, the warming and loss of sea-ice is expected to result in a reduction in the abundance and biomass of krill in northern areas of the Scotia Sea but an increase in abundance to the south around the Antarctic Peninsula and Weddell Sea. However, the resilience and adaptive capacity of krill to withstand such changes is poorly determined 
The Scientific Committee highlighted the importance of the interdisciplinary approach provided by the participation of both biological and physical scientists and looks forward to future collaboration with ICED and other such organisations incorporating the implications of climate change in its management advice.

Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
The Scientific Committee considered a range of issues pertaining to biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected areas agenda item.  The CEP remains the lead body on the issue of non-native species 

Antarctic species requiring special protection
The Scientific Committee did not consider any issues related to individual species requiring special protection.   

Spatial marine management and protected areas 
The Scientific Committee considered advice arising from the workshop dedicated to spatial management, the WS-SM-18, which was held in Cambridge, UK, from 2 to 6 July 2018.
During the Scientific Committee meeting  there was considerable discussion on the development of MPAs within the Planning Domains of the Convention area including further development of spatial planning of MPAs in Domain 1 (Western Antarctic Peninsula–South Scotia Arc) undertaken by Argentina and Chile, and Domains 3 and 4 (Weddell Sea) carried out by Germany.
The Scientific Committee also considered a proposal for an expert group on ‘pelagic spatial planning of the sub-Antarctic areas of Planning Domains 4, 5 and 6’. The Scientific Committee welcomed the progression of work in this region and agreed that an e-group could be used to facilitate the further development of scientific activities with regard to pelagic spatial planning in the sub-Antarctic areas of the Atlantic and Indian Ocean of Planning Domains 4, 5 and 6.
The Scientific Committee recalled Resolution 31/XXVII regarding the use of best available science and also that the development of a representative network of MPAs was a priority for the Scientific Committee.
The Scientific Committee welcomed a revised proposal for the Weddell Sea MPA (WSMPA) which provided technical detail on further analyses undertaken in response to recommendations from WG-EMM-17 and SC-CAMLR-XXXVI.
Most Members agreed that the proposal complied with CM91-04, and reconfirmed their view that the proposal was based on the best available science and that this proposal would make an important contribution to the development of a representative network of MPAs in the Convention Area. 
The Delegations of Argentina and Chile presented a proposal on the establishment of a protected area in Planning Domain 1 (D1MPA). The Scientific Committee noted with appreciation the great amount of collaborative work undertaken by the proponents, taking into account the views of other Members and observers, particularly via the D1MPA Expert Group e-group. In particular, it reflected that much of this work has been led and undertaken by two recipients of CCAMLR scholarships, highlighting the significant value of this program to the work of the Scientific Committee.
The Scientific Committee agreed that the scientific basis for the proposal is well developed however, two members raised a number of outstanding and substantive issues that they felt required further consideration.
The scientific committee discussed general considerations of research and monitoring plans (RMPs) for MPAs and agreed that they are an important component of all MPAs. The Scientific Committee encouraged Members to continue to communicate on this issue in the intersessional period, including to submit additional papers to the appropriate working group and/or the Scientific Committee.
The Scientific Committee considered a framework for the development of a draft RMP for the SOISS MPA, which aims to harmonise the SOISS MPA RMP with the requirements of CM 91-04 before a review of the SOISS MPA scheduled for 2019. The Scientific Committee recommended that a summary of research and monitoring activities be developed in time for the next review of the SOISS MPA in 2019. It recommended that the framework be expanded to include provision of baseline data on the SOISS MPA.
The Scientific Committee clarified that baseline data shall, in the context of RMPs, be considered to be all data used to justify designation of an MPA or that describe the state of the Antarctic marine ecosystem at the time an MPA enters into force.
The Scientific Committee considered baseline data on seven indicator species in the Ross Sea region. These data were submitted for inclusion in the RSRMPA RMP, as endorsed by the Scientific Committee at its meeting in 2017. The baseline data provide benchmarks from which to assess change and evaluate the performance of the RSRMPA. These data have been compiled into sets of files that have been submitted to and posted on the CCAMLR data portal.
The Scientific Committee welcomed the baseline data presented in SC-CAMLR-XXXVII/11 and noted that:
(i) provision of these data both highlighted the flexible nature of the RSRMPA RMP and was an expected outcome of the RMP
(ii) the baselines and associated indicators will increase understanding of the Antarctic marine ecosystem and facilitate assessment of changes in the system.

The Scientific Committee received reports of ongoing or planned research and monitoring activities that will contribute to the RSRMPA RMP. The Scientific Committee noted that Members are making substantial efforts to address specific objective (i) of the RSRMPA (‘to conserve natural ecological structure, dynamics and function throughout the Ross Sea region at all levels of biological organisation, by protecting habitats that are important to native mammals, birds, fishes and invertebrates’; CM 91-05), but less effort seems to be being spent addressing other objectives. In this regard, it was further noted that populating the project list for the RSRMPA RMP would help the Scientific Committee conduct a more complete gap analysis to assess whether research and monitoring efforts in the Ross Sea region are relevant to the specific objectives of the RSRMPA
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
The Scientific Committee noted that there had been considerable discussion of ecosystem monitoring and observation during WG-EMM (Annex8 Para4.1-4.70)
The Scientific Committee welcomed progress on the use of fixed cameras to provide ecosystem monitoring data and noted that such progress was a result of multi-Member collaborative research supported by the CEMP Fund.
The Scientific Committee discussed the recommendation of WG-EMM to consider a review of the ecosystem monitoring requirement of CCAMLR noting that such a review is important and that a staged-approach to a review would be helpful.
The Scientific Committee recommended the development of a management procedure for krill that identifies ecosystem monitoring data requirements prior to a review of CEMP. In doing so, CEMP could then be reviewed and revised to deliver on such data requirements.

Future Meetings 
The next regular meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 21 to 25 October 2019. 

