





Colombia-Turkey Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica








Colombia-Turkey Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Colombia and Turkey 
Summary

The following document presents the collaboration and synergies formed between the Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center – ITU PolReC and the Colombian Antarctic Program – PAC, for the study of the White Continent on the context of the Third Turkish Scientific Expedition (TAE-III) to Antarctica and the Fifth Colombia Scientific Expedition. 

Colombia-Turkey Scientific Collaboration

The Colombian expedition was named “V Expedición Científica de Colombia a la Antártica, Almirante Campos”. The Colombian Navy, the Colombian Ocean Commission (CCO) and the Colombian Maritime Directorate (DIMAR), transported one Ecuadorian researcher, one Turkish scientist and nine Colombian scientists, among others, to develop their Antarctic projects. Additionally, military personnel from Brazil and Peru were invited by Colombia to carry out activities in their specific professions. Furthermore, ten Colombian military researchers from DIMAR carried activities on physical, chemical and marine oceanography studies and other activities related to the Colombian Base in Antarctica. During the V. Colombian Expedition, there was an important national television channel, which transmitted short videos with relevant information in regards to the logistic, scientific and operational activities. 

During the expedition, Turkey, along with other countries, such as Bulgaria, Spain, Uruguay, Ecuador, and Peru received logistic and scientific support from Colombia and its National Antarctic Program.

Within the component of hydrography and oceanography studies, 54 oceanographic stations and 17 physical profiles were made, both aboard the Colombian vessel and from zodiac boats. Moreover, 640 biochemical samples, 184 plankton samples, 28 sediment samples, and 162 microbiological samples were collected in seven different sampling areas in the Antarctic Peninsula. Considering these activities, Senior Research Scientist Fatih Karakaya, from TUBITAK (Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey), conducted the project titled “Bioprospecting with new scientific approaches being undertaken on Antarctic organisms”. 

The first part of the project included collecting DNA-extractable and organism samples around King George Island and Gerlache Strait, according to the route of the vessel ARC “20 de Julio”. Bioprospecting was accomplished aboard the vessel for marine samples. The preliminary results show the capability to bring both living organisms and eDNA samples from Antarctic Region. 

Aboard the vessel, Senior Research Scientist Fatih Karakaya also collaborated with other researchers from Colombia and Ecuador, throughout the sampling of plankton, krill, and benthic specimens, measuring marine values ad CTD wave-height, water transparency or turbidity via Secchi Disc. Also, meteorological values and supplying coordinates and bearings for fieldwork; along with other activities. 

We would like to thank Captain Alex Fernando Ferrero Ronquillo, who at the time was the head of the Colombian Ocean Commission, and his Antarctic team: Frigate Lieutenant Lina Maria Olano Venegas, and advisors Diego Fernando Mojica M, Nicolás Villegas Vallejo. Additionally, we would like to thank Corvette Captain Julio Monroy from DIMAR, scientific coordinator of the expedition. Captain Fernando Diaz, head of the Colombian vessel ARC “20 de Julio” and Frigate Captain Adelmo Dam, Second Captain of the vessel. Finally, we would like to also thank all related National Antarctic Program representatives, Ministry of Industry and Technology of Turkey, Alfredo Fuentes Merino, sub-director of INACH (Instituto Antártico Chileno) and all the people from Colombian Naval and Air Forces and Chilean authorities.

