





Air traffic flight information arrangements for activities in the Australian Flight Information Region








Air traffic flight information arrangements for activities in the Australian Flight Information Region
Information paper submitted by Australia
Summary
This paper briefly outlines Australia’s air traffic flight information responsibilities for activities in the Australian Flight Information Region (FIR) that includes Antarctic airspace, and for which Australia has responsibility under the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation1. The paper notes that some aviation activity occurs in the Antarctic region that is subject to International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) arrangements including compliance with air traffic services, but that is not managed as an Antarctic activity. 
Australia considers that it is relevant for ATCM discussions of aviation issues to consider how ICAO arrangements for air traffic management apply in the Antarctic context, the activities that occur under those arrangements, and potential interactions with aviation activities that are managed primarily under Antarctic-specific arrangements. 
Antarctic airspace classification in the Australian Flight Information Region
Under the Chicago Convention, Australia is one of five nations with responsibility for a FIR that includes airspace over the Antarctic Treaty area. Australia’s FIR lies between 163 degrees East and 75 degrees East. Under the rules adopted by ICAO, pursuant to the Chicago Convention, Australia has the authority to regulate the provision of air traffic services in this FIR. In Australia, the responsible authority is the Civil Aviation Safety Authority. 
The upper airspace in the Antarctic part of the Australian FIR between 24500 and 60000 feet, to a latitude of 80 degrees South, has been classified by Australia as Class A consistent with Annex 11 of the Chicago Convention. Under that Annex, Australian air traffic authorities are obliged to provide air traffic services, including Air Traffic Control clearance, and flight separation, to flights passing through Class A airspace. The airspace between the surface and 24 499 feet is classified as Class G (uncontrolled) airspace, in which Australia currently provides no air traffic services. 
Activities for which air traffic services are provided
Aviation activities in the Class A airspace in Australia’s FIR, and which are subject to air traffic services provided by Australia consistent with ICAO arrangements, routinely include:
    • commercial flights between Australia and South Africa;
    • intercontinental flights with an Antarctic destination; and
    • Antarctic sightseeing overflights. 
Other Antarctic activities that interact with that airspace, and therefore would be subject to the requirements of Class A airspace, may include Antarctic intra-continental flights, research survey flights, balloon launches, UAV activities, and research rocket launches, among others. The operators of any such activities need to ensure compliance with the requirements of Class A airspace.
En-route flights and information exchange
Commercial flights between continents (for example between Australia and South Africa) pass through airspace in the Antarctic region. These flights do not have Antarctica as a destination or purpose, and are not managed as Antarctic activities, but remain subject to ICAO arrangements. Operational information on these activities is not generally shared through COMNAP or ATCM mechanisms such as the electronic information exchange system. 


