





Malaysia’s activities and achievements in Antarctic research and diplomacy








Malaysia’s activities and achievements in Antarctic research and diplomacy
Introduction
Malaysia is extremely honoured to be part of the 42ndAntarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in Prague, Czech Republic. This meeting marks the eighth time which Malaysia makes its presence at this prestigious meeting, since being a member of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) in 2011. Malaysia is also pleased to share progress of activities and achievements in Antarctic research and diplomacy.
Progress
    1) To- date, the Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation, which was established in July 2012 has disbursed and awarded:
    i) 20 Research Grants to Malaysian scientists
    ii) 12 Fellowships to young Malaysian scientists
    iii) 8 Antarctic Berth Supports to Malaysian scientists
This is in line with the Foundation’s objective to promote scientific research programmes in the Polar regions; and to provide and manage funding for research grants, post graduates studies and fellowship in scientific research in the Polar regions among Malaysian scientists.

    2) Other than providing research grants, fellowship and berth support, the Foundation continues to undertake awareness programmes to promote the importance of the Antarctic among school children and Malaysian public in general. The programmes included Antarctica exhibitions, sharing sessions with polar scientists, and contests.
    3) Malaysia also participated in the Annual General Meeting (AGM) and Special Meeting of AFOPS (Asian Forum on Polar Sciences) which was held in Xiamen, China from 11th - 12th October, 2018. The meeting deliberated on several items including expedition and operational plan, research highlights, cooperation with other international organizations and AFOPS, cooperative projects and research collaboration. Through AFOPS, a  Malaysian scientist benefited from Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI)Antarctic Science Fellowship Program in 2019 and he is expected to undertake field work at KOPRI research station in 2019/2020 summer season.
    4) During the 2018/2019 summer season, two (2) Malaysian scientists carried out field works in Antarctic as part of their research activities. They can be grouped into 2 namely:
    i) Field research at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica; 
    ii) Field research at the China facilities in Antarctica

Field research at the Chilean facilities in Antarctica
A scientist from Malaysia once again visited and carried out field work at the Bernardo O’Higgins Station in Antarctica. Hervisit this time was a continuation of the field work from the previous summer season and also was made possible under the collaboration with Universidad de Magallanes, Chile and Centro de Investigación y Monitoreo Medio Ambiental Antártico (CIMAA). Malaysia would like to thank Chile for the opportunity given to this scientist to work at Chilean facilities in Antarctica. The collaborative project that our scientist works on is:


Scientist
Research Title
Date
Station

Assoc. Prof. Dr. Siti Aqlima Ahmad
Development of Bioreactor for Ex-Situ Bioremediation of Diesel Polluted Soil in Bernardo O’Higgins Station, Antarctica
5 Jan – 18 Feb 2019
Bernardo O’Higgins


Field research at the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAAA) facilities in Antarctica
One of Malaysian researcher visited and carried out field work at Great Wall station in Antarctica. His visit was made possible through the collaboration between Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAAA). During this field work, he conducted measurement of meteorological conditions, surface ozone and other trace gases. Malaysia would like to thank CAAA for the opportunity given to this scientist to work at their facilities in Antarctica. The collaborative project with CAAA that our scientist works on is:

Scientist
Research Title
Date
Station

Assoc. Prof. Dr. Justin Sentian
Modelling Approach in Simulating Stratosphere-Troposphere Exchange (STE) under Climate Change Scenarios: Occurrence and Characterization of Tropopause and Tropospheric Ozone Chemistry
14 Dec 2018 – 25 Jan 2019
Great Wall

Malaysia has the pleasure and honour to inform that we are organising Eighth Malaysian International Seminar on Antarctica (MISA8) on 18-20 June 2019. MISA is a biennial event to gather scientists from different countries to share findings and experiences in polar research and also provide platform to strengthen existing and forge new collaborations. MISA also provides opportunities for local scientists and students who are interested in pursuing their career in polar sciences especially global sciences. 3 plenary speakers from Australia, Japan and New Zealand, were invited to deliver a paper at MISA 8. In conjunction with MISA8, there will be two SCAR supported workshops namely on:
    i) Tropic Antarctic Teleconnections (TATE) Workshop
    ii) State of the Antarctic Ecosystem (AntECO) Workshop
Since Malaysia through Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation (SMARF) has been accepted as Observer of Council of Managers of National Antarctic Program (COMNAP) in 2017, Malaysia has been invited and expected to attend the XXXI COMNAP AGM from 28 – 31 July 2019 in Plovdiv, Bulgaria.It is also worth mentioning that Sultan Mizan Antarctic Research Foundation and British Antarctic Survey (BAS) renewed the MOU on scientific co-operation for another five years from 2019-2024. 2 Malaysian scientists are expected to undertake field works at Signy Research Station at the coming summer season of 2019/2020 under this MOU. In the MOU, SMARF and BAS are committed to develop a closer working relationship in order to achieve the following aims:-
    i) Cooperate in the study of the Antarctic environments and their variability by coordinating and sharing resources and data.
    ii) Coordinate and integrate mutual intellectual activities to enable more efficient operations, better utilization of resources, and enhanced scientific and societal impact.
    iii) Explore opportunities for cooperation and collaboration in Antarctic logistics.
Malaysia is developing the National Polar Roadmap and is in the final stage of drafting national legislation in the form of an Antarctica Bill to implement our obligations under the 1959 Treaty and the 1998 Madrid Protocol. This Bill is currently undergoing the legal scrubbing process and will subsequently be tabled in the Parliament. 
Conclusion
Malaysia looks forward to actively engage in the Antarctic Treaty development process.

