





Advances in the revision of the Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112, Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands

English version provided by the author








Advances in the revision of the Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112, Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands
Information paper presented by Chile
Summary
The development of the revision of the Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112, Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island, South Shetland Islands, is reported to date, with the proposal to present a revised management plan at the next meeting of the CEP.
Review of the current Management Plan 
Coppermine Peninsula (62º24'S; 59º30'W) is located on the northwest coast of Robert Island, South Shetland Islands, facing the English Strait and the Drake Passage. In 2012, the ATCM approved the Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 112, mainly due its relevant terrestrial ecosystem, with the presence of important colonies of Antarctic flora and fauna, which are of special interest for scientific research.
With the actual environmental pressure that climate change is exerting mainly in the northern sector of the Antarctic Peninsula region, plus the increase in international interest to develop research in the English Strait area, it is necessary to review the measures proposed in the management plan, complying with the provisions of Article 6, paragraph 3, of Annex V of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection.
To date, progress has been made in the compilation of information by Chilean scientific projects that have been developing activities in the area during the last five years. However, it is necessary to continue with the compilation of information that may have been generated by the researchers from Ecuador, Brazil and Turkey, programs that have been reported the development of activities in the area, as well as to carry out an on-site survey of the state of values of the zone.
Next steps
With the start of the review of the management plan, to the extent of having the appropriate logistical means, the next steps proposed by Chile are the following:
    • To continue the review of the information generated by national scientists, as well as that generated by researchers from other National Antarctic Programs, who have been developing activities in the area at least in the last five years.
    • To carry out a field visit to the ASPA, during the following Antarctic season, to compare the status of environmental values under protection, and identify others not previously considered, as well as to gather more information about the site.
    • To prepare a revised Management Plan, updating the maps.
    • To present the corresponding working paper, ideally for consideration of CEP XXIII, once the review is concluded.
Chile invites Parties that had developed activities in the zone to participate in this review, in order to consider, to the greatest extent possible, the most relevant aspects that allow the appropriate protection of the site.

