





Reconstruction works of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station









Reconstruction works of the Comandante Ferraz 
Antarctic Station


This Information Paper presents the current state of the reconstruction of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF).

Background
Open on February 6th , 1984, Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF), located on the Keller Peninsula, King George Island, allowed Brazil to maintain a support base for the development of scientific research (Photo 1). From 1986 on it began to be supplied uninterruptedly until 2012, when a fire destroyed its main building. The provisional installation of Emergency Antarctic Modules (MAE) in 2013 allowed the continuation of scientific research with logistical support and maintenance of the facilities under the responsibility of the Base Group of the Brazilian Navy (MB) all year long. 

Picture 1: old EACF

Still in 2013, in Brazil, the Secretariat of the Interministerial Commission for the Resources of the Sea (SECIRM) with the technical support of the Specialized Directorates of the Navy started the procedures concerning the project for the EACF reconstruction. After the completion of the executive project, an international bidding process was launched with the purpose of hiring a company for the execution of the reconstruction work. On August 31st, 2015, the contract was signed with the Chinese state-owned company “China Electronics Import and Export Corporation” (CEIEC), winner of the bid. Work related to the reconstruction began that same year.

Technical Characteristics
The main building of the Station consists of three blocks (Photo 2):
1. The East Block: intended for research, social life in Station and EACF services. It has 14 laboratories, cafeterias, kitchen, health area, drying room and workshops;
2. The West Block: will house 32 cabins, library, gymnasium and video room/auditorium (at the upper level), and storage rooms and water tanks for consumption and for fire fighting (at the lower level); and
3. The Technical Block: where is the garage and the station's equipment and machinery room, which contains generators, electric panels, boilers, water and sewage treatment plant and incinerator, among other systems.

The project also provides for the use of renewable sources of energy (photovoltaic and wind). The aim is to achieve, through cogeneration and management systems (Smart Grid), maximum efficiency with minimum environmental impact.



Picture 2: EACF 3D image with the identification of the Blocks.

The construction work was planned to carried out in four different and consecutive phases, two of which consisting of manufacturing and pre-assembly in China and the last two being the assembly in Antarctica.

The first phase consisted of the manufacture of the pieces that make up the foundations of the main building. 

Completed in March 2017 the next phase (2nd) was the excavation, preparation and levelling of the plot, installation of the base plate, assembly of the concrete parts and backfill, required for the installation of the precast concrete parts of the foundations.

The third phase took place in Shanghai and consisted of the fabrication and pre-assembly of the pillars, structures and containers that make up the Blocks and the Isolated Modules. This phase was completed in November 2017, after the disassembly, cataloguing and shipment to Antarctica of various items.

The fourth phase was carried out in two stages:
- The first one occurred from December 25th, 2017 to March 31st, 2018, when the partial assembly of the Block structure and the isolated units was carried out.
- The second stage began on October 8th, 2018 with the return of the Magnolia Merchant Ship, chartered by CEIEC, to EACF, when the assembly of main building and the other Isolated Modules (telecommunications, Meteorology/Ozone, VLF, washing of sediments, diving material, waste room) was completed.

Throughout the construction period, in addition to the specific construction activities, the Basic Environmental Plan (PBA) was also carried out, which contains the guidelines and specifications of the mitigation measures, as well as the environmental programs that served to monitor possible environmental impacts - such as monitoring the quality of the air, water and sediments, effluents, of birds and solid waste management programs, among others.

Testing, training and commissioning of the various systems of the new EACF are scheduled to take place in the 2019/2020 summer.

The opening of the EACF is expected to occur in January 2020. 

Picture 3: the construction site of the EACF – April 201
