





Evaluation of Antarctic educational activities








Evaluation of Antarctic educational activities

Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Germany and the United Kingdom 
Summary
Portugal, Germany and the United Kingdom present a report on how to evaluate Antarctic educational activities related to biodiversity. The potential benefit of such evaluation should be taken into consideration when conducting educational activities in the Antarctic, in order to maximize its impact. 
Background
In ATCM XXXVII WP009, Brasilia, Bulgaria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Portugal, and the United Kingdom, recognised a need for better public and educational outreach activities. Subsequently, the ATCM endorsed the organization of a workshop held prior to ATCM XXXVIII (Paragraph 323, report ATCM XXXVIII) that involved thirty-seven parties, observers and experts (ATCM XXXVIII BP26).  The establishment of an Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach included the coordination of an online ATCM discussion forum that has been gathering a considerable amount of information on education and outreach activities by Parties (ATCM XXXIV WP24).   Despite many Parties using the Antarctic as a perfect vehicle to transfer scientific concepts through educational activities, it is unfortunate that evaluations of the impact of these activities are scarce. A review was carried out (1) to address how to best evaluate educational activities related to biodiversity while providing a general review of the importance of the Antarctic educationally, (2) give examples of major advances, and (3) discuss how different organizations and programmes have been acknowledging the role of Antarctic education and outreach in Antarctic affairs. 	

Conclusions
The role of education in Antarctic (and polar) education was boosted during the International Polar Year, 2007– 2008. Three of the most important challenges to be addressed in the future have been identified:
    • Assess the needs of Antarctic (and polar) educators (e.g. using the links through organizations such as Polar Educators International (PEI), Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) or Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Capacity Building, Education and Training advisory group (SCAR CBET)).
    • Strengthen the network of information sharing of educational materials (e.g. in a validated, multi-lingual and easily accessible online mode).
    • Develop robust evaluation of the educational activities. 

Such evaluation includes improving methodological knowledge within Antarctic (and polar) education institutions and using technology-enhanced methods of evaluation (e.g. pre-visit and post-visit surveys).  Recent improvements in Internet technologies may provide a major source of ideas and the ability to effortlessly spread polar information relevant to biodiversity education.

Reference
Xavier JC, Fugmann G, Beck I, Huffman L and Jensen E (2016). Education on Biodiversity in the Polar Regions. In: P. Castro, U. M. Azeiteiro, P. Bacelar-Nicolau, W. L. Filho and A. M. Azul, editors. Biodiversity and education for sustainable development. Springer International Publishing, Switzerland. pp. 43-56 DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32318-3_4 
(to obtain its pdf, contact José Xavier: jccx@cantab.net).




	
