





Initiation of renovation of the Henryk Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station on King George Island, South Shetland Islands








Initiation of renovation of the Henryk Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station on King George Island, South Shetland Islands

Summary
Arctowski Station was built in 1977 and since that has been operated year-round by Poland. Main building of the Station was renovated in 1998. Nowadays, immediate vicinity of the sea (< 2m), together with the sea level rising, jeopardize its construction. Therefore, the main building together with most of other research and accommodation facilities which have been used for more than 40 years, are in need of repair and reconstruction. 
Renovation work has been planned and proposed to enhance the research support capacity for Polish and international research collaboration, as well as to reduce human impact on the Antarctic environment, reduce energy demand and improve the safety of logistic operations.
All works will be carried out within the area of the currently operated station. It is not planned to extend the work outside the currently transformed area. The Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) document for the proposed activities will be submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for approval.
Introduction
The Polish Antarctic Station “Arctowski” was established by Poland in 1977 as a base for scientific research and associated logistic operations of the Polish National Antarctic Program, and has been operated continuously on a year-round basis since its founding. It is located on a gravel beach berm 500 meters east of Point Thomas on the western shore of Admiralty Bay on King George Island at 620 15’ S, 580 28’ W, in ice-free area of >4.2 km2. This ice-free area is restricted by Ezcurra Inlet and the central part of the Admiralty Bay in the north and east, and by glaciers of Warszawa Icefield System in the west and south. The Station is constructed of numerous small buildings as a precaution against fire accidents. Main building (living quarters), laboratories, warehouses, fuel tanks, access road, electrical installations and a water-sewage system are located on the area of ca 0.28 km2 in the shore belt up to 5 m a.s.l. Marine laboratory building and parts of the main building were renovated in 1998. The main transportation route within Arctowski Station leads from Point Thomas (where fuel tanks are located) to the station compound ca 500 m to the southeast, and then a further ca 100 m more to the lighthouse situated on prominent rocks at Shag Point. The road is an unimproved compaction of existing loose rock of beach berm. Polish National Antarctic Program operates also two field camps:  at Paradise Cove (within ASPA No. 128) and Cape Lion’s Rump (50 m outside the border of ASPA No. 151).


Fig  2 Polish Antarctic Station - main building 			Fig  3 Polish Antarctic Station - main building

Arctowski Station is located within Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 1 Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands. Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands is located ca 700 m to the east of Arctowski Station. An area with rich cover of mosses and vascular plants (Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica) is situated between Arctowski Station and boundary of ASPA No. 128. Elephant Seals (Mirounga leonina), Fur Seals (Arctocephalus gazella), Weddell Seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) as well as three penguin species (Chinstrap Penguin Pygoscelis antarcticus, Adélie Penguin P. adeliae and Gentoo Penguin P. papua) and other bird species such as South polar skua Catharacta maccormicki, Brown skua Stercorarius antarcticus, Dominican gull Larus dominicanus are often observed near or even in the area of the Station. 
The Station has been functioning for over 40 years under harsh Antarctic conditions. In recent years, coastline in the Station vicinity has been changed due to erosion of the coast. Therefore, the main building is approximately 1m from the high-water coastline, what threaten its construction. This fact and the desire to reduce human footprint in this pristine environment necessitated the need both to modernize and relocate main building of the Station, together with some parts of infrastructure, and improve its logistical operations.
The time plan for proposed investment
The plan of renovation of Henryk Arctowski Station was introduced to and considered by the relevant committee in the Ministry of Science and Higher Education, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Environment. Ministries endorsed the activity to be proceeded by an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) as impacts are expected to be minor or transitory. The document will be submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for approval of the planned renovation.
The proposed activities will proceed for four Antarctic seasons, 2019/2020, 2020/2021, 2021/2022 and 2022/2023. The first year of the investment includes conceptual work. Environmental Impact Assessment (Initial Environmental Evaluation) is already in progress. In the summer season 2020-2021, construction works are planned at the station and the construction of the building on the continent will be prepared. In the summer season 2021-2022, transportation and finalization of the building shell in H. Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station is planned. In the summer season 2022-2023, finishing and demolition works will be carried out and materials will be removed after demolition.










Plan of modernization
    1. New main building will be erected, and part of the existing station infrastructure will be replaced. The new building will house laboratories, warehouses, as well as a residential and social areas. Currently, the station can handle up to 50 people in the summer and up to 15 people in the winter. The new building will be able to handle up to 45 people throughout the year.
    2. The renovation of storage halls, including anti-absorption floor insulation and corrosion resistant facades will be made.
    3. Erecting a sewage treatment plant that supports the whole station with protection against bacterial introduction into the environment is planned. 
    4. Reconstruction of the water acquisition system including renovation of water reservoir embankment reinforcement, performance of culverts, replacement of water and filtering installations will be performed. 
    5. Energy-efficient generators will be installed and synchronized with solar power. Solar panels will be installed on renovated storage halls.
    6. Refurbishment of the fuel storage system will include tank cleaning, anti-corrosion protection, replacement of valves and a pumping system. Anti-spill system will be applied to protect expansion tanks.
    7. The boat slip system in the unloading area and the boat hall are planned to be build.
Possible environmental impacts and mitigation measures
Based on the Polish research in the area, including biological, meteorological, hydrological, geochemical and geological observations for over last 40 years, the environmental impact assessment for the proposed activity has been undertaken. The environmental impact of major factors, such as air pollutants, fuel and oil spill, sewage, wastes and noise due to the planned activities, was estimated. Based on that, necessary mitigation measures of reducing the possible impact on environment will be undertaken. In result, environmental impact of planned investment is predicted to be minor or transitory. 
Due to the unique localization of the Arctowski Station and close vicinity of ASPA No 128 (Western Shore of Admiralty Bay), all works will be carried out within the area of the currently operated station. It is not planned to extend the work outside the currently transformed area. 
Work protocol of all planned activities will be established in order to their environmental impact. The protocol will include: reduction of discharge of air pollutants and noise from construction vehicle engines; reduction of waste water production, and its proper treat and discharged according to water quality standards of sewage treatment (Polish Antarctic Waste Management Manual); proper disposal, store and removal of solid waste.
Proposed rebuilding activities are expected to generate non-hazardous solid waste, and some hazardous waste such as batteries, waste oil or solvents. All produced waste will be disposed, stored and removed from the Antarctica, according to Polish Antarctic Waste Management Manual. 
Dedicated environmental monitoring is prepared and will be undertaken throughout the renovation activity period in accordance with guidelines of SCAR and COMNAP. On-going ecological and hydrological monitoring in the area (conducted respectively for 40 and 4 years), will continue, and any environmental impacts from the renovation activities will be noted and minimalize on an as-needed basis.
Conclusion
Proposed renovation works will enhance research support capacity for Polish and international scientific community and acquire safer and environmentally sounder operation of the infrastructure. Minor or transitory impacts on the Antarctic environment is predicted for each planned activity.  The infrastructure’s impact will be further reduced after finishing the investment, as modern and ecological solutions are planned to be introduced. Over long term, benefits for scientists and Antarctic environment will outweigh the direct and indirect impacts during the investment. 

