





Progress with development of a methodology to assess the relative sensitivity of sites to visits by tourists










Progress with development of a methodology to assess the relative sensitivity of sites to visits by tourists
Information paper submitted by Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States, in conjunction with IAATO
Summary
This paper provides an update on work to develop a methodology to assess the relative sensitivity of sites to visits by tourists. The paper describes revisions to a version of the methodology presented to CEP XIX to reflect feedback provided by Members and Observers. The paper also provides initial thoughts on how the CEP might use assessments of relative site sensitivity, alongside other information, in considering visitor site management questions and priorities. The authors plan to trial the application of the methodology and report outcomes and recommendations to CEP XXIII.
Background
The CEP’s report on Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic: Environmental Aspects and Impacts (ATCM XXXV/WP22, ATCM XXXV/IP33) recommended that a method of assessing the sensitivity of sites to tourist visitation be developed, to inform analyses of relative sensitivity and to assess appropriate management needs. ATCM XXXV (2012) requested the CEP to advance this recommendation as a matter of priority. This is reflected in the CEP 5-year work plan, which identifies addressing the recommendation as a Priority 1 task. A group of members has worked to address this recommendation, reporting at subsequent CEP meetings, including in ATCM XXXVII/WP17, ATCM XXXVII/IP12 and ATCM XXXVIII/IP103.
At CEP XIX in 2016, the meeting discussed ATCM XXXIX/WP16 ‘A methodology to assess the sensitivity of sites used by visitors: prioritising future management attention’ (New Zealand, Norway, Australia, and the United States). The paper reported on work to develop a simple, readily-applied method for assessing the relative sensitivity of sites to visits by tourists, with the objective of assisting the CEP to identify those sites that may benefit from further management attention. In summary, that version of the methodology involved using available information to identify key values/features present at a site; applying expert judgement to consider whether there is an appreciable risk that the identified values/features might be affected by ‘normal’ tourism activity (with a definition of ‘normal’ activity provided); and, using the results to provide an assessment of each site’s sensitivity to disturbance from tourism activity.
Progress with development of the methodology
During CEP XIX, Members made suggestions for matters to consider in the further development of the methodology. In ATCMXL/IP83, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States, with IAATO, reported on consultations and suggestions received from other Members and Observers. 
These comments, and others provided following consultation in the 2018/19 intersessional period with interested CEP members and observers, were taken into account in further developing the methodology.
The current version of the methodology is presented at Attachment A. It retains the core of the original approach, and seeks to provide a simple and user-friendly approach to assessing the relative sensitivity of visitor sites to ‘traditional’ tourism, to inform the CEP’s work on the environmental aspects of tourism management. 
The updated methodology facilitates a simple approach to assessing risks to the values present at the site, using a 3 point scale for rating the combined likelihood/consequence of disturbance to each of the site values. This replaces the binary ‘appreciable risk / no appreciable risk’ approach previously proposed. It is suggested that the highest risk to any of the values present be used as a simple indicator for the site. That is, if the risk to any one of the site values was rated ‘3’, then that site would be rated ‘3’, for the purposes of prioritisation for CEP attention. 
The methodology accommodates consideration of sites with characteristics which may vary over time of season, and includes (in the list of values that might be present) categories for presence of a species at sensitive life cycle stages ensuring the ‘most sensitive’ state for that value is assessed.
In addition to the site characteristics and values, there are activity-related factors that will have a bearing on the nature and scale of any environmental impacts (e.g. the types of activities undertaken, frequency of visitation, and overall visitor numbers). These factors are not incorporated into the methodology, but would be taken into account by the CEP in its consideration of management requirements for sites, as outlined in the following section.  
The updated methodology also includes:
    • a preface with ‘Guidance for using the methodology’
    • a table for recording additional site and assessment information (other than ‘values’)
    • a column to record whether any ATCM site-specific management measures are in place to address any identified risks to the values present; and, 
    • a column for providing detail and explanations of ratings.
CEP consideration of assessments
In developing and revising the methodology, the authors have considered how the resultant information could contribute to the CEP’s consideration of management of visitor sites.  Figure 1 illustrates how relative sensitivity assessments could be considered by the CEP alongside other relevant information, including information on site use, existing site management arrangements, and the broader context of the site. 

In addition to the information tabulated in the methodology tables, which would be available to the CEP to support its considerations, it is suggested that the highest risk to any of the values present be used as a simple indicator for the site. That is, if the risk to any one of the site values was rated ‘3’, then that site would be rated ‘3’, for the purposes of prioritisation for CEP attention. 

Information arising from the application of the methodology (e.g. ratings for individual values, information on existing management measures) would also be available to support the CEP’s consideration. The methodology would also serve to identify where gaps in site knowledge exist.
Next steps
The authors would welcome further feedback on the methodology and the suggestions above and in Figure 1 on how the methodology could support CEP consideration of visitor site management. 
We would welcome the involvement of other interested Members and Observers in advancing this work. Our intention is to trial the application of the methodology, consider refinements as necessary, and report outcomes and recommendations to CEP XXIII.
Figure 1: Indicative flow chart for how the CEP might consider site sensitivity and future site work
Attachment A
Methodology for assessing the sensitivity of sites1used by visitor


Guidance for using the methodology

Where possible, site sensitivity assessments should be prepared by, or in consultation with, people who are familiar with the site (e.g. National Antarctic Program personnel or scientists, tourism expedition staff). 

Table 1

    1. Fill out the ‘Site Information’ details as far as possible. This information will provide useful background and context for the site sensitivity assessment in the next step.

Table 2

    2. Fill out column 1, indicating whether each of the values listed occur at the site.

    3. For each value, fill out column 2 by considering the likelihood of disturbance and level of disturbance from ‘traditional tourism’2. This assessment should consider the site information in Table 1 - that is, given the characteristics of the site, how likely is it that a value present at the site will be disturbed by ‘traditional tourism’, and what level of disturbance would result? 

        ◦ For example, could the size and/or layout of the site result in visitors approaching wildlife, and causing a behavioural response? Do routes from one part of the site to another require walking close to vegetation? 

The assessed likelihood and level of disturbance for each value should be combined using the matrix below and the result entered into the column (i.e. 1, 2, 3 or ‘unknown’). 

        ◦ The assessment should consider the management requirements that are generally applicable to tourist visits in any location, but should not take into account site-specific requirements (these are considered in the next step).








    4. For each value, fill out column 3 by considering whether there are ATCM-approved site-specific visit requirements in place that address risks to this value (such as site guidelines or area management plans). 

        ◦ For example, there may be Site Guidelines with provisions that address the risks to that value (e.g. a closed area, or guidance on avoiding concentrations of wildlife).

    5. In column 4 provide a brief description of the value in the context of the site, factors contributing to the likelihood and level of disturbance, and the rationale for choosing the rating. 

Table 1: Site information



Details
Site name and location


Assessors



Person(s) conducting the site assessment (with position and organisation)


People consulted about the site assessment (with position and organisation)

What sources of site information were used to inform the assessment?



Direct site observation (including whether this assessment was conducted at that time, or if not, when the site was visited)


Site guidelines


National Antarctic program records about the site


Oceanites compendium of Antarctic visitor sites / other Oceanites site information


IAATO site information


Non-government visits or information (eg. tourism expedition staff, Oceanites researchers)


Biodiversity information (SCAR biodiversity database, Birdlife International report on Important Bird Areas in Antarctica)


Electronic Information Exchange System


CEP tourism study


Management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) or Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)


Peer reviewed literature


Other (describe)

Site management arrangements



ATCM Site guidelines


IAATO site guidelines


ASPA or ASMA management plan


Arrangements for Station visits

Site layout and spatial information



Size of the site and description of the site’s natural or operational boundaries, if any (eg. glaciers, steep terrain, concentrations of wildlife acting as boundaries, unconfined)


Are maps available? (attach)


Description of site features and topography / characteristics  - presence of glaciers, ice or snow banks, steep terrain, water bodies, receding glaciers


Locations of nesting areas, concentrations of wildlife 


Location / distribution of plant communities


Visitor access (eg. whether boat landing sites are limited in number, whether landing sites are close to or separated from site values, helicopter or other access)


Movement around the site – eg. whether there is ample space for visitors to remain separate from environmental or physical features, whether movement is constrained, whether there are obvious or regularly-used routes, are there main areas of visitation, are there any dangerous areas)

Proximity to other features 



Proximity to any nearby or adjacent ASPA


Whether the site is within an ASMA


Proximity to any Important Bird Areas

Temporal variation
Description of the degree to which characteristics of the site vary over time of season (eg. extent of snow covering or exposing vegetation, changes in space available for visitor movement, presence or absence of wildlife)



Table 2: Site values / features


Site values / features
1

Does this value occur at this site at any time?

(Yes /No /unknown)
2

Risk rating in the absence of ATCM site-specific management measures

 (1, 2, 3, or unknown)

3

Are risks to this value addressed in ATCM site-specific management measures 
(eg. site guidelines)?
4

Brief description of value and explanation of rating (eg. species present, presence of colonies, uncertainty about that value, factors contributing to choosing the rating)
Historic  Values






Historic features / artefacts




Scientific Values






Current scientific research (e.g. known research projects / scientific equipment / cameras / markers / monitoring site)




Environmental Values





Biodiversity






Seals (true seals)





Fur seals





Seals at a sensitive stage of life cycle (e.g. breeding / moulting)





Flying seabirds





Flying birds at a sensitive stage of life cycle (e.g. incubation / brooding)





Penguins





Penguins at a sensitive stage of life cycle (e.g. breeding / moulting)





Plant communities and associated invertebrate fauna





Significant plant communities (i.e. more notable than the ‘standard’ presence of vegetation).




Geodiversity






Fragile terrain (e.g. soft sediments, geothermal areas, stream beds, scree slopes, peats, terraces)





Fragile geomorphic or geological features (e.g. ventifacts)





 Fossils




Other environmental sensitivities recognised by the CEP






Southern giant petrels (Resolution 5 (2009))





Type locality or the only known habitat for any species





Important or unusual assemblage of species (e.g. important bird areas)





Location and site characteristics leading to increased likelihood of non-native species establishment (e.g. geothermal area, within a region of substantial climate warming, available fresh water / soil)





Fresh water systems (lakes, ponds, streams)




Highest risk rating from column 2







