





Environmental Monitoring and Management Plan for Contaminated Areas at the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF)









Environmental Monitoring and Management Plan for Contaminated Areas at the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF)

Summary
Reconstruction works of the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF) will be finished and EACF will be open in January 2020. The Ministry of the Environment (MMA) and partners will then resume soil decontamination activities around the station. The contamination diagnosis and the implementation of the Contaminated Area Management Plan will be carried out. That will indicate the best techniques for treatment and remediation of each item considered to have an impact on the environment.

Background
The Brazilian base in the Antarctic continent suffered a major fire in February 2012. At least 70% of the structure was destroyed, causing soil contamination with organic and inorganic pollutants. At that time, Brazil was developing about 20 scientific research projects in the area, including atmospheric observation, environmental monitoring of whales and algae and climate monitoring.

Responsible for the environmental affairs of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR), Ministry of the Environment of Brazil has been coordinating the actions of environmental monitoring, prevention and response to environmental emergencies at the EACF surroundings in partnership with the General Office for Environmental Emergencies (CGEMA) of Brazil’s Environmental Institute (IBAMA), with the Oceanographic Institute of the University of São Paulo (IO-USP), the Environmental Company of the State of São Paulo (Cetesb), and the Federal University of São João Del-Rei (UFSJ). In addition to the preventive actions that are adopted, research and delimitation of possibly contaminated areas is carried out, as well as the adoption of strategies and procedures for its decontamination.

To carry out an environmental assessment in the area of ​​direct influence of the EACF through chemical and biological indicators, in compliance with the monitoring provided for in the Madrid Protocol, the IO-USP team initiated a monitoring program in 2012: (a) to monitor the contributions of organic and inorganic pollutants in the Admiralty Bay; (b) to evaluate the possible impacts caused on biota by pollutant inputs using microbiological indicators; and (c) provide data for the time series of the pollutants, contributing to the establishment of the dynamic baseline, representing the range of natural variability of the environment.

In addition to the monitoring activities carried out by the IO-USP team, the Cetesb’s Contaminated Areas research sector started in 2013, following the fire at the EACF, the preliminary assessment and detailed investigation of the station area. This work continued in the Antarctic summers since then, concomitantly with the construction of the new station, with preliminary indications of the contaminated areas.

Also samples of superficial and subsurface soil were collected in the area in question and the volatile organic compounds, present in fuels, were evaluated. Over the years soil samples were collected and the results indicated a change in quality. The main contamination source area (site of the old station generator) and the main affected areas were set.

With the need to decontaminate the area previously indicated in the Cetesb survey, in 2014 the bioremediation process of the area was initiated in a project developed by the UFSJ team in support of MMA. The main objectives were to treat the soil of the EACF environment contaminated with diesel oil to reduce the content of hydrocarbons and to carry out contaminated soil treatment experiments in loco to set procedures for the immediate removal and treatment of soil that for any reason will be contaminated by oil spills in the future.

However, with the dynamics of the reconstruction of the Brazilian Antarctic station, decontamination activities were suspended in summer 2017/2018. In spite of that the monitoring continued to be carried out even with the reconstruction works still progress.

Measures to be adopted
Following the opening of the EACF in January 2020 the conditions of soil contamination in the vicinity of the station will be the subject of a new study starting in next Antarctic summer (October 2019-March 2020) with a new diagnosis of the contamination and the implementation of the Contaminated Areas Management Plan and the use of the best techniques for treatment/remediation of each parameter considered to have an impact on the environment.

Conclusion
The Brazilian Antarctic Program, with the support of the abovementioned partner institutions, has been complying with the guidelines established by the Madrid Protocol regarding the continuous environmental monitoring and implementation of the necessary remediation measures in the EACF surroundings. 
