





Evaluating the efficacy of viewing distance guideline in minimizing visitor disturbance to penguins: A camera trap approach 


English version provided by the author






Evaluating the efficacy of viewing distance guideline in minimizing visitor disturbance to penguins: A camera trap approach 
Background and rationale
As stated in XLI ATCM WP22 A Practical Approach to Antarctic Tourism Management, it is broadly recognized among Parties that Antarctic tourism has been generally very well managed with minimal impacts and that has been positively contributing to the conservation of Antarctica. Considering the significant increase and diversification of tourism activities over the last decades, Parties have been emphasizing about the importance of actively support the development of research and monitoring efforts that could contribute to the adoption of timely and appropriate tourism management measures (Bauer et al., 2003, Lamers et al., 2012, CEP, 2012, Powell et al., 2008, Liggett et al., 2017).
Particularly for highly visited sites, one of the major concerns is that tourism increase and activities diversification could potentially cause some type of wildlife disturbance. (Lynch et al., 2010, Lamers et al., 2012, CPA, 2012, Coetzee et al. 2016). This has raised questions regarding the potential interactions of tourists and wildlife, the behavioral, physiological and population responses associated to these interactions and the effectiveness of management measures such as minimum approach viewing distance guidelines (IUCN, 1991, CPA 2012, Coetzee et al., 2016).
In Antarctica, past research has been developed to understand the implications of human disturbance to wildlife (Coetzee and Chown 2016, Van Polanen et al., 2007, Heaslip et al., 2008, Lamers et al., 2012) as well as studies regarding tourists effects over penguins’ populations and behavior (Martin et al., 2004, Viblanc et al., 2012, Barbosa et al., 2013, Rümmler et al., 2018). In terrestrial visitor sites, minimum approach viewing distance guidelines have been a common measure to maintain a buffer between breeding seabirds and human activity (Holmes et al., 2005). Different experiments to test its efficacy had been developed in areas of low and high human activity through the use of video recordings and specific research conditions (Holmes et al., 2007, Holmes et al., 2006, Holmes et al., 2005, Burger et al., 2007, Lee et al., 2017). 
However, Coetzee et al., (2016) recommend that pedestrian approach guidelines in the Antarctic region be revisited while emphasizing that among species, it remains unclear to what extent different forms of disturbance translate into negative population responses. The authors emphasize that management guidelines for different sites and species need to be developed on a case-by-case basis, ideally in conjunction with carefully designed experiments. Corresponding, Burger et al., (2007) recommend the establishment of complementary management measures such as temporal and spatial restrictions as well as the size of the tourist's group, suggesting that management guidelines could be site-specific.
The camera trap method is a standard monitoring tool for wildlife researchers, being more commonly applied for wildlife long-term ecological monitoring, census and assessing behavioral wildlife responses (Harmsen et al., 2017, Meck et al., 2014, 2016, Trolliet, 2014). In Antarctica, Black et al., (2016) studied the aggregation behavior in Gentoo penguins, using time-lapse cameras to examine the adaptive benefit of aggregations to chicks.  More recently, Black et al., (2018), used time-lapse images of Adélie penguins to reveals differential winter strategies and breeding site occupation. Nevertheless, camera traps have been less commonly applied for visitors’ monitoring or for analyzing visitor-wildlife interactions (Miller et al., 2017). While pedestrian distance experiments have been developed under specific conditions and sites no one have been performed by the use of camera traps at a highly visited site.
Research purpose and study site
The purpose of this research is to improve understanding of how human presence could influence penguins’ behavior at early phases of the summer at a highly visited site in the Antarctic Peninsula through a camera trap approach. The objectives of the study will be to 1) analyze the relationship of viewing distances and behavior reactions of Chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarctica) and Gentoo (Pygoscelis papua) penguins, 2) proposed a feasible and replicable research method for estimating the effect of different viewing distances on penguins. 
The study area for this research will be Aitcho Island, located 3 miles away from the Ecuadorian Station “Pedro Vicente Maldonado”. The studied section of the island corresponds to the southeast and northeast beaches, where both penguin species have confirmed breeding areas.
The research is going to be conducted during the early stage of the 2019-2020 summer season considering that chicks are more sensitive during early stages (Coetzee et al., Burger et al., 2007, Holmes et al., 2006). Otherwise, interactions could not be appropriately assessed due to the high mobility and curiosity of chicks.
The experiment consists of 3 different treatments (three different viewing distances) to be tested by researchers on nests of both penguin species breeding on the island. Nests for treatments will be randomly selected among those that meet the criteria selection for intended purposes. Short- distance cameras will be installed during the experiments and long-distance cameras will be set temporary in the field during the research period to function as controls. 
The results of this research are expected to contribute with timely insights regarding the viewing distance management measures and with a feasible and replicable research method for estimating the effect of different viewing distances on penguins. 

