





Turkey-Korea Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica










Turkey-Korea Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Turkey
Summary
On the context of the Third Turkish Antarctic Expedition; collaboration with the Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) is reported.
Turkey – Korea Scientific Collaboration
Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI), hosted many researchers including foreign visitor scientists during the station’s 32nd expedition. Within the context of international cooperation opportunities supported by Ministry of Industry and Technology of Turkey, coordinated by Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Polar Research Center (PolReC) and offered by KOPRI, researchers Dr. Mustafa Şenkaya, Dr. Alper Gürbüz and Yağmur Güneş from Niğde Ömer Halisdemir University, Karadeniz Technical University and Istanbul Technical University, respectively, conducted their projects in the 2018/2019 Antarctic summer season. 

Dr. Şenkaya’s project is named as ”Spatial and Temporal Geophysical Anatomy of Permafrosts” and collaborated with Dr. Joohan Lee and Kim Kwansoo from KOPRI. Dr. Senkaya stayed at the King Sejong Station between 18 December 2018 – 17 January 2019. In this period, Dr. Şenkaya and his teammates acquired seismic (refraction, surface wave, and microtremor) and GPR data from the target area. As a result of this study, the group submitted two scientific presentations for ISAES 2019 which includes the very first results. 

Dr. Gürbüz’s visit aimed to collect sediment and soil/permafrost deposit samples from the Barton Peninsula of King George Island for his project entitled as “Sedimentological, geochemical and magnetic susceptibility properties of permafrost and soil deposits in the King George Island (West Antarctica): Paleoenvironmental implications”. He collected core samples in the field between 15 February 2019 and 12 March 2019.

Ms. Güneş worked as a field scientist for the project ‘A New Approach to the Origin of Evaporate Formations in Antarctica: Implication of Mars’ which is led by Prof. Dr. Nurgül Balcı. She collected rock, sediment, water and lichen samples to reveal detailed geochemical properties of the area mainly focused on lakes and meltwaters. She stayed at the station from December 3, 2018, to January 17, 2019

Turkish researchers’ field work was successfully conducted and completed. Therefore, we would like to thank the KOPRI and the Korean authorities for their support and kind hospitality. We hope to maintain the scientific collaborations started under this program and continue to contribute Antarctic earth sciences.


