





Footprint in Antarctica








Footprint in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
This paper summarises recent Australian research (Brooks et al., 2019), which used satellite imagery and GIS mapping techniques to examine the area of the Antarctic continent that is covered by buildings, and the area of ice-free ground that is physically disturbed. The researchers calculated a total building footprint of >390,000 m2, with an additional disturbance footprint of >5,200,000 m2 on ice-free ground. These high resolution measurements of the spatial extent of Antarctic infrastructure and ground disturbance are relevant to the work of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) to understand, minimise and monitor the impacts of human activities on the Antarctic environment, and can contribute to developing an agreed understanding of the term footprint.
Introduction
The CEP has regularly considered the subject of footprint in Antarctica. At CEP XIII (2011) Australia submitted Information Paper 48 Topic Summary: Footprint, which presented a summary of CEP meeting reports and meeting papers that referred to the term ‘footprint’, and highlighted key points from earlier discussions. A related item remained on the meeting agenda until CEP XVII (2014) and in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan until CEP XVIII (2015), and the topic has continued to be raised in discussions at CEP meetings.
As a contribution to the CEP’s ongoing work to understand, minimise and monitor the impacts of human activities on the Antarctic environment, and to the Committee’s discussions on developing an agreed understanding of the term footprint, this paper summarises the findings of Australian-led research, recently published in the journal Nature Sustainability titled ‘Our footprint on Antarctica competes with nature for rare ice-free land’ (Brooks et al., 2019).
Research findings
Noting that the construction and operation of research stations are the most obvious human activities on the Antarctic continent, and that the data on the spatial extent of associated impacts were limited, Australian researchers used satellite imagery and GIS mapping techniques to undertake a continent-wide assessment of:
    • building footprint (the area covered by buildings)1; and
    • disturbance footprint (the area of detectable substrate disturbance in ice-free areas caused by compaction, clearing, earthworks and other landscape modification)
The methods and results are described in detail in Brooks et al. (2019). Regarding building footprint, the researchers mapped 158 locations, including 5,342 individual polygons, and found that:
    • total building footprint was >0.393 km2 (see Figure 1)
    • 81% of all buildings were on ice-free land
    • 76% of all buildings were situated in ice-free areas located within 5 km of the coast
Regarding disturbance footprint, the researchers found that the total area disturbed was 5.242 km2 (Figure 2).
This research delivers the most comprehensive assessment of the spatial extent of buildings, and physical disturbance to ice-free areas to date, and provides a sound scientific basis for the CEP’s discussions on the environmental management of human activities on the Antarctic continent. 
References
Brooks, S. T., Jabour, J., van den Hoff, J. & Bergstrom, D. M. 2019. Our footprint on Antarctica competes with nature for rare ice-free land. Nature Sustainability, doi:10.1038/s41893-019-0237-y.
    • 
    • 

Fig. 1 Distribution of building footprint in Antarctica. (a) The distribution and density of building footprint represented within 50x50km2 cells. These cells may include multiple stations. (b) Shows the density of building footprint within the Antarctic Peninsula. (c) Example of detail applied showing buildings and disturbance footprint mapped within Australia’s Davis Station, (Credit: Nature Sustainability).

Figure 2. Physical disturbance footprint presented in 50x50km2 cells, (Credit: Nature Sustainability)

