





Quantifying and understanding the impacts of plastic pollution in the Southern Ocean








Quantifying and understanding the impacts of plastic pollution in the Southern Ocean
An Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Peru
Summary
The level, extent and environmental impacts of plastic pollution within the Southern Ocean are poorly understood, but are an issue for concern.  Parties are encouraged to support scientific research efforts on plastics in the Southern Ocean, with a view to supporting evidence-based decision making by the Committee.
Introduction
The Antarctic research community has been aware of the issue of plastic pollution in the Southern Ocean for some time. There have already been attempts to report on the problem, with CCAMLR beach surveys documenting plastics litter for many years and published reports detailing ingestion of plastics by a range of birds from petrels to penguins. Entanglement of seals in plastic fishing debris has been observed. Plastics have also been found in bird nests and high levels of floating plastic debris have been found in the stomach contents of albatross.  Nevertheless, the Southern Ocean seems to have been much less polluted than many of the World’s other oceans and may be protected by the Polar Front, potentially making it a useful baseline area for monitoring trends in plastic pollution. 

More recently, there has been a global recognition that macroplastic debris is only one component of the total problem. Documentation of the breakdown of macroplastics, as well as observations of microplastics (fragments of less than 5 mm) in many environments, has produced an increase in global interest. Microplastics concentrations in the Southern Ocean have been recorded five orders of magnitude higher than predicted, although the source of the plastic is not well understood (see Attachment A). Nevertheless, Antarctica may not be as isolated as previously thought as recent studies have shown that rafting kelp can cross oceanic barriers to reach the continent, and plastic debris from more northerly latitudes may make this journey too. With recent research reporting on ingestion of microplastics by fish and marine invertebrates there is the likelihood that human food supplies have been contaminated for some time by microplastics. This could potentially include fish and krill from the Southern Ocean, but the scale of the threat or the medical effects, if any, on humans are not well understood. We also lack understanding of the impacts of ecologically meaningful concentrations of microplastics on keystone species, such as krill, or whether biomagnification through food webs is occurring. Research studying the plastics found in the surface waters, beaches and the seafloor in Antarctica highlights the need for a better approach to understand this problem in order that strategies to mitigate the impacts on Antarctic ecosystems might be developed.

For more information on current knowledge on microplastics in the Southern Ocean see Attachment A or the Antarctic Environments Portal summary (available at: https://www.environments.aq/emerging-issues/microplastics-in-the-southern-ocean/) 
Research needs
Few peer-reviewed scientific publications exist that quantify plastics in Antarctic waters. Further research is required to facilitate evidence-based decision making by the Committee concerning plastic pollution prevention.  

Research objectives may include:
    • quantification of microplastics generated from macroplastic degradation or transferred into the Southern Ocean across the Polar Front; 
    • improving knowledge of plastic distribution in the Southern Ocean through monitoring activities that generate comparable data; and
    • a greater understanding of the impact of plastic upon species across the food chain and in different marine habitats.

In response to these gaps in knowledge, SCAR has established its cross-disciplinary Action Group ‘Plastic in Polar Environments’ (Plastics-AG) to examine the presence, origin and biological effects of macro-, micro- and nanoplastics; quantify the scale of the problem; develop standard procedures for plastic sampling and monitoring and propose solutions for minimising the environmental risk and impacts on Polar ecosystems.
Conclusion
The level, extent and environmental impacts of plastic pollution within the Southern Ocean are poorly understood, but are an issue for concern.  Parties are encouraged to support scientific research efforts on plastics in the Southern Ocean, with a view to supporting evidence-based decision making by the Committee on this issue.

