





Initiation of the revision process of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area Admiralty Bay 
(ASMA No. 1)









Initiation of the revision process of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area Admiralty Bay (ASMA No. 1)
Joint Information Paper Submitted by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and the USA

Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the ASMA 1 Management Group has initiated a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area Admiralty Bay (ASMA No. 1). The objective of this IP is to propose a working plan for the review of ASMA No. 1 Management Plan in agreement with ASMA 1 Management Group members.
Background
Admiralty Bay is an area of outstanding environmental, historical, scientific, and aesthetic values (birds’ and mammals’ breeding colonies, varied geological features, terrestrial plant communities, diverse marine ecosystems, relics from the era of sealers and whalers, and other historic mementos), a magnificent glaciated mountainous landscape, home to long-term research and monitoring programs.
Admiralty Bay has become a site of increasingly diverse human activities (stations, refuges, field camps, ships, helicopters and remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), as well as a growing number of scientists, scientific and monitoring programs, scientific installations/equipment in the field and tourism activities).
Thorough planning and coordination of existing and future activities has helped in avoiding or reducing the risk of mutual interference and minimize environmental impacts, thus providing an effective mechanism for the conservation of the valuable features that characterize the area.
Admiralty Bay was adopted as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 1) on a voluntary basis at ATCM XXIX in 2006 (Measure 2). The Management Plan for the Area was jointly prepared by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and the USA, and its last revision was adopted in Measure 14 (2014) at ATCM XXXVII. The Area includes ASPA 128 (Western Shore of Admiralty Bay). A revised ASMA 1 Management Plan was adopted in Measure 14 (2014).
ASMA 1 Parties
The ASMA 1 Management Group is comprised of representatives of the 5 Parties that have research programs in the Area: Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and the USA. Poland and Brazil operate all-year round stations (Henryk Arctowski Station at Thomas Point and Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station at Keller Peninsula, respectively). Peru operates a summer station (Machu Picchu at Crepin Point) and the United States operates a summer field camp (Copacabana at Llano Point). Ecuador has the refuge Republica del Ecuador at Hennequin Point. There are several small removable and permanent installations elsewhere.
The Area includes one ASPA (ASPA Nº 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay – former SSSI Nº 8) and one Historic Monument (N° 51: a grave) at Arctowski Station.
Revision process
The ASMA 1 Management Group met on the margins of ATCM XLI – CEP XXI and decided to initiate the Management Plan’s revision in 2019, as well as to prepare a joint Information Paper for the XXII CEP Meeting initiating the revision and providing a short summary of the planned review process. The ASMA 1 Coordination will be taken over by Brazil and a discussion forum for the Management Group has been created on the Secretariat website. The Parties have agreed that the revision of the ASMA 1 MP will be a long-term process starting in 2019. 
The working plan will be discussed by the Management Group members during meetings on the margin of ATCM XLII - CEP XXII. 
Main tasks of the revision include:
    • the general review of the contents of the current Management Plan and their comparison with applicable Antarctic Treaty regulations; 
    • review of status of ASPA 128, HSM 51 and other areas under special protection;
    • identification of issues/problems that need to be addressed in the new MP 
        ◦ e.g. outdated zonation system, lack of guidance on RPAS use within ASMA 1;
    • identification of formal problems 
        ◦ e.g. need to achieve consistency with new Measures and Guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans - Resolution 1/2017;
    • contacting researchers, station operators and other stakeholders (IAATO, CCAMLR, ASOC) to obtain scientific/technical/other information, advice or opinion 
        ◦ e.g. information on plans to build new infrastructure, advice on how to minimize risks associated with non-native species or views on unique scientific value that needs additional protection
        ◦ consultation on practicable coordination on their contingency plans for oil spills and other possible accidents/hazards;
    • collating/evaluating/summarizing obtained information related to special values (aesthetic, environmental, scientific, historic, educational and touristic values), updating bibliographic material, reviewing lists of species and status of populations of fauna and flora;
    • preparing a new Management Plan, Codes of Conduct  and Maps;
    • preparing progress report(s) for CEP Meeting(s) (joint IPs), submitting new MP to CCAMLR (to seek advice on those aspects of MP relevant to living marine resources - ATCM Decision 9/2005) and submitting a joint WP to CEP.



