





ASOC update on Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean 2018-2019








ASOC update on Marine Protected Areas in the Southern Ocean 2018-2019
Information Paper submitted by ASOC1
Summary
In this document, ASOC provides an update on MPAs discussions that took place at the CCAMLR XXXVII meeting in October 2018. These discussions are directly and indirectly relevant to the work of the ATCM/CEP, which has an overlapping but not identical membership to CCAMLR. ASOC encourages all ATCPs who are also CCAMLR Members to support efforts, both at the technical and diplomatic level, towards reaching consensus on a wide network of CCAMLR MPAs in the Southern Ocean. In addition, ASOC recommends the ATCM/CEP to expand the network of terrestrial and marine ASPAs and ASMAs in Antarctica, building on ongoing SCAR/CEP work on expanding the network of protected areas in Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions; and to continue discussions about the harmonisation of ASPAs, ASMAs and CCAMLR MPAs.
Introduction
The establishment of a representative system of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)2 has been one of the most significant issues discussed in the Antarctic Treaty System context in recent years. The CCAMLR MPA process is significant in terms of the ambition to secure large-scale marine protection in the Southern Ocean, something that has not yet occurred on the continent itself. 
ASOC has provided overviews of this process to previous ATCMs.3 In this document, ASOC provides an update on MPA discussions since ATCM XLI, and in particular on the CCAMLR XXXVI meeting in October 2018. 
The ATCM/CEP have discussed spatial marine protection in a number of instances,4 including at the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR meeting in 2009, which focused on areas of common interest and mechanisms for cooperation.5 A second joint CEP/SC-CCAMLR meeting took place in 2016 and was aimed at identifying the effects of climate change that most likely are having an impact on the conservation of the Antarctic. The workshop also discussed the existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR.6 In addition, in recent years some CCAMLR Members have held formal and informal discussions on MPAs in the margins of the ATCM and CEP. 
Background 
The CAMLR Convention, which entered into force in 1982, was established with the primary objective of conserving Antarctic marine life. This was in response to the concern over increasing commercial interest in Antarctic krill - a keystone component of the Antarctic ecosystem - and a history of over-exploitation of several other marine species in the Southern Ocean.7
The Convention's primary objective is the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources (Art. II (1)). For the purposes of the Convention, conservation "...includes rational use..." (Art. II (2)). However, "...any harvesting and associated activities..." in the Convention Area must be conducted in accordance with three principles of conservation that outline the ecosystem and precautionary approaches (Art. II(3)). This includes minimising ecosystem changes that cannot be potentially reversed within two the three decades. 
Regardless of different interpretations about the concept of “rational use”, Art. II(3) makes clear that “…any harvesting and associated activities” must meet strict conservation criteria. 
In 2009, CCAMLR set itself the target of establishing a representative system of MPAs within the Convention Area by 2012. Concurrently, CCAMLR adopted the South Orkney Islands Southern Shelf MPA (Conservation Measure 91-03, 2009), the first high seas MPA worldwide. CCAMLR agreed a General Framework for the Establishment of CCAMLR MPAs through Conservation Measure 91-04. As part of a systematic conservation planning strategy, in 2011 the Convention Area was divided into nine "planning domains."
Since 2011, CCAMLR held discussions to create MPAs in the Ross Sea and in East Antarctica. Discussions resulted in significant changes to the original proposals to satisfy concerns from some CCAMLR Members about MPA size, duration, review period, and their interest to maintain access to actual or potential fishing areas. 
After several years of negotiations, CCAMLR XXXV achieved consensus on the adoption of the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (Conservation Measure 91-05), which includes an area of over 1.55 million square kilometres. The MPA entered into force on 1 December 2017 and is currently the largest MPA in the world. 
Several other MPA proposals are at various stages of the CCAMLR discussion process and were discussed during CCAMLR XXXVII.
MPA discussions at CCAMLR XXXVII
CCAMLR held its XXXVII Meeting in Hobart (Australia), between 22 October – 2 November 2018. CCAMLR and its Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) discussed proposals for MPAs in East Antarctica (Domain 7), the Weddell Sea region (Domain 3 and parts of 4), and Domain 1 (NW Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea). 
Each of these proposals is at a different stage with respect to its design regarding issues such as location, boundaries, zoning, management, and research and management plans. Also, each is at different stages of the formal process of adoption, which include consideration of their scientific merits by SC-CAMLR, CCAMLR’s Drafting Committee, and CCAMLR’s Plenary. 
In addition, CCAMLR discussed aspects of a research and monitoring plan for the Ross Sea region MPA.
East Antarctica MPA proposal
A proposal for an East Antarctica Representative System of Marine Protected Areas (EARSMPA) put forward by Australia, the EU and France has been discussed formally since 2012. In the intervening years, it has lost nearly 50% of its originally proposed surface area. Nonetheless the proposed MPA adds extra protection for nearly a million square kilometres of ocean and provides a vital sanctuary for key feeding and breeding areas as well as critical species habitats.
The MPA revision submitted to CCAMLR in 2017, renamed the East Antarctica MPA (EAMPA), consists of three sub-areas, each with somewhat different conservation objectives. With respect to earlier versions it adds extra protection to inner shelf depressions contained in relatively shallow areas (<550m) in the continental platform where fishing is already prohibited under CCAMLR regulations. It designates one of its three sub-areas as a krill no-take zone, aside from other provisions allowing a multiple-use approach and research fishing. 
Although the revised proposal did not achieve consensus in 2017, there was an extraordinary demonstration of support of the proposal with about 20 delegations – including fishing and non-fishing Members – speaking in favour of its adoption. This proposal was resubmitted to the Commission in 2018, however two Members objected to discussing it further that year.8 
ASOC supports the revisions made to the EAMPA proposal since 2017 as they are more precautionary, and offer stronger protections to safeguard populations of Antarctic krill and the predator species that depend on them for survival. ASOC urges CCAMLR to designate this proposal in 2019.
Weddell Sea MPA proposal
The Weddell Sea MPA (proposed by the EU and led by Germany) was presented to SC–CAMLR XXXVII for the third time since 2016. The proposal covers most of the key areas needing protection in Domain 3 and part of Domain 4 and includes a General Protection Zone, a Fisheries Research Zone, and a Special Protection Zone. 
In 2018, most Members considered that this proposal was based on the best available science,9 however two Members raised the need for more information.10 One of these Members further stated that the Western part covered by the Weddell Sea MPA proposal did not need to be considered because of extensive sea ice cover.11 Another Member suggested to split the proposal in two along the prime meridian (the boundary between Domains 3 and 4), so that the area west of the prime meridian could be progressed to the Commission in 2018 while the area east of the meridian would be dropped from the proposal and more data collection and analysis be undertaken to assess the proposal’s merits over the next three to four years.12 Thus, both the western and eastern parts of the Weddell Sea MPA proposal were dismissed by some Members for one reason or other, at least for the time being. Nonetheless, work on this proposal continues.
ASOC supports the WSMPA proposal submitted to CCAMLR XXXVII, and opposes any reduction in the precautionary nature of the proposed General Protection Zone, including opening additional areas or omitting them from the proposal.
Domain 1 MPA proposal (NW Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea)
Argentina and Chile are developing an MPA proposal for Domain 1 (NW Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea) in collaboration with scientists from those and several other Member countries. This region is significant not only for its outstanding environmental and other intrinsic values, but also for being the region of Antarctica with most anthropogenic activity including research, fishing, and tourism. The Antarctic Peninsula area is also affected by the impact of climate change, experiencing significant warming as well as showing evidence of ocean acidification. 
In 2017 these countries presented to SC-CAMLR a preliminary draft scenario for an MPA proposal. During the 2018 SC-CAMLR meeting a draft MPA proposal for this area was submitted. More than 17 Members supported it,13 but two Members objected to different aspects of the proposal.14
ASOC supports large scale marine protection in this region that include no-take buffer zones in coastal areas critical to penguins and other predators. ASOC also supports the establishment of large no-take areas in the southern regions believed to be critical for krill spawning, among other key ecosystem processes. ASOC and its members continue to support ongoing efforts for developing ecosystem-based management measures for the krill fishery, but oppose any efforts to delay the development and designation of the MPA in favour of pursuing new fisheries management measures.

Ross Sea MPA
The Ross Sea MPA was adopted at CCAMLR’s previous meeting in 2016 through Conservation Measure 91-05 (2016) and entered into force on 1 December 2017, some weeks after CCAMLR XXXVI. 
The new MPA in the Ross Sea limits, or entirely prohibits, certain activities in order to meet specific conservation, habitat protection, ecosystem monitoring and fisheries management objectives. Seventy-two percent of the MPA is a "no-take" general protection zone that forbids all commercial fishing, while other sections act as scientific reference areas for research allowing scientific exploratory extraction of fish and krill. As a result of the MPA, fishing will shift to the north and east away from key predators and to areas with less sea ice.
In 2018, CCAMLR discussed the Ross Sea region Research and Monitoring Plan but it did not meet the required approval by the Commission.15 This discussion followed on a discussion that had taken place at the XLI ATCM in 2018 concerning the harmonisation of CCAMLR MPAs with ASPAs and ASMAs as designated by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.16 There was an animated debate on the development of Research and Monitoring plans for MPAs.17 However, there was some progress with respect to research and monitoring for the South Orkney Islands Southern Shelf MPA, which will be reviewed next year.18
ASOC supports the Ross Sea MPA research and monitoring plan, and looks forward to the successful implementation of the world’s largest protected area.
Future developments
Despite the inconclusive discussions in 2018, progress continues in the development of MPAs in the CAMLR Convention Area. As noted above, there are already three advanced MPA proposals that will be discussed again by CCAMLR, as well as various Research and Monitoring plans. 
Area protection under ATCM and CCAMLR MPAs
As the network of MPAs expands under CCAMLR, the connectivity between different activities, and types and scales of protected areas under ATCM will become apparent. In turn, this requires better harmonisation between management regimes applicable to those activities or areas, so that management plans and research and monitoring plans are compatible and act in synergy. ASOC participated in informal discussions on this topic that were coordinated by New Zealand and thanks all participants from their contributions.
ASOC contends that harmonization work could start with the Ross Sea MPA and adjacent ASPAs and ASMAs protecting marine values. This work should continue with other MPA proposals as they are developed.
Antarctic tourism and MPAs
Antarctica tour operators are one of the main users of the waters around Antarctica and have a significant stake in keeping the Antarctic environment and ecosystems pristine in order to protect the natural values that make the Antarctic experience unique. In this regard tourism could be regarded as a form of rational use. 
The CCAMLR MPA process has generated interest among some Antarctica tour operators. One tour operator has already issued a formal statement supporting current and future MPAs in Antarctica19 To ASOC’s knowledge this has not been replicated by other tour operators. In 2018, IAATO attended CCAMLR as an observer. IAATO has also made a statement on how the organization plans to support MPAs at its 2019 annual meeting in Cape Town. This is particularly important as the tourism sector is expected to grow significantly in the next few years, further increasing the pressure of this industry on the marine environment.
ASOC appreciates that the tourism industry has taken an interest in the CCAMLR MPA process, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula area where shipborne tourism concentrates, and hopes that it will contribute actively to promote the high standard of marine protection that is essential for the tourism business.
Closing remarks and recommendations
ASOC strongly supports the designation of MPAs in East Antarctica, the Weddell Sea region, and Domain 1 (NW Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea) by CCAMLR and completing outstanding formalities concerning a Research and Monitoring plan for the Ross Sea MPA and look forwards to these proposals being discussed again in October 2019.

In this context, ASOC
    • Encourages all ATCPs who are also CCAMLR Members to support efforts, both at the technical and diplomatic level, towards reaching consensus on a wide network of CCAMLR MPAs in the Southern Ocean. 
    • Recommends the ATCM/CEP to expand the network of terrestrial and marine ASPAs and ASMAs in Antarctica, building on ongoing SCAR/CEP work on expanding the network of protected areas in Biogeographic Conservation Regions; and
    • Recommends the ATCM/CEP to continue discussions on the harmonisation of ASPAs, ASMAs and CCAMLR MPAs.

