





Marine non-native species in the Antarctic Treaty area








Marine non-native species in the Antarctic Treaty area

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom presents recent knowledge regarding the introduction pathways/vectors, risk, known status and potential impacts of marine non-native species in the Antarctic Treaty area.  
Background 
Antarctic terrestrial environments are increasingly at risk from non-native species, within the context of increased human activities and climate change scenarios, but little is known about the risks that introduced non-native species present to the marine environment.  The potential risks of marine non-native species were highlighted at the CEP Non-native Species Workshop in Christchurch in 2006 (see ATCM XXIX WP 13) and Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty area were agreed through Resolution 3 (2006).  However, since that time most of the work of the Committee has focussed on management of terrestrial non-native species introductions.  Nevertheless, the CEP has repeatedly recognised the importance of receiving up-to-date scientific knowledge to evaluate the threat to Antarctic marine ecosystems from marine non-native species introduction, for example:
    • The Non-native Species Manual Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’ identified the need to improve understanding of risks and pathways for marine introduction. 
    • The CEP Five Year Plan identified the need for an assessment of the risk of marine non-native species introductions; and 
    • The Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) identified, as a high priority (Priority 1.8), the need to undertake a risk assessment to identify marine habitats at risk of invasion and pathways for introduction.
The aim of this Information Paper is to provide an update on recent knowledge of marine non-native species within the Antarctic Treaty area, based predominantly on a recent academic paper: McCarthy A., Peck L. S., Hughes K. A., Aldridge D. (2019). Antarctica: the final frontier for marine biological invasions. Global Change Biology https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/gcb.14600 (see: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/gcb.14600 Attachment A).
Factors influencing marine introductions
Non‐native marine species (NNMS) will interact with other human impacts affecting Antarctic ecosystems, such as climate change (warming, ocean acidification) and pollution. The impacts of NNMS on biodiversity and ecosystem services in the Antarctic region are uncertain but could be profound and long-lasting. The likelihood of a non‐native species being transported to a new environment is influenced by a complex range of natural and human factors that affect different stages of the invasion process. Key factors relating to the introduction of non-native marine species to the Antarctic region are outlined in Figure 1.



Figure 1. Factors influencing the risk of non‐native marine species (NNMS) becoming invasive in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean throughout the five main stages of invasion process. Factors can be anthropogenic or related to a species’ physiology, biodiversity or the abiotic environment. 

Current knowledge of NNMS in Antarctica
Evidence of non-native marine species in the Antarctic region is limited. Four NNMS from very different taxonomic groups have been reported free-living in Antarctic waters that were likely introduced through human activities. They are the great spider crab, brown bryozoan/common bugula, vase tunicate (sea squirt), and the pinkmouth hydroid. Yet, no established populations have been confirmed. In addition, one species of green algae known as grass kelp or gutweed has established populations and might have been introduced by either human activities or natural dispersal. Six species that have been found living on (biofouling) the hulls of Antarctic‐going vessels, also have both high latitude distributions and are considered invasive in part of their range. They include bryozoans, ascidians (sea squirts), the pinkmouth hydroid and the Mediterranean mussel.

Pathways to Antarctica – ship movements and vectors
Quantitative research on the vectors and pathways that transport NNMS and hot-spots of invasion in Antarctica is scarce. Nonetheless, current estimates suggest there may be 180 vessels and 500+ voyages in Antarctic waters each year across tourism, fishing and research, representing a 5 to 10-fold increase since the 1960s. Different types of activity appear to vary temporally and spatially, representing a different kind of introduction risk. The Antarctic Peninsula may be particularly at risk as it receives most ship-based traffic and is showing rapid climate change (Figure 2). Due to a combination of vessel activity and recent international agreements, e.g. International Maritime Organisation’s Polar Code (2016) and Ballast Water Convention (2004, in force September 2017), biofouling on ships is likely to be a greater concern than ballast water and other vectors. Increasing plastic pollution may become a more significant vector in the future.


Figure 2. Map of Antarctica and Southern Ocean showing key features: Antarctic year‐round stations, sea‐ice extent in summer and winter, gateway ports, Antarctic Treaty area, Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), areas of coastline within the Antarctic region with high, medium or low annual ship traffic, and main shipping zones connecting gateway ports to Antarctica. 

Climate change and future marine introductions
Non-native species introductions into Antarctic marine ecosystems have, to date, been limited by ocean currents and ice that form physical barriers and harsh conditions that provide physiological barriers. Climate change and human activity are lowering the barriers for terrestrial invasive species in Antarctica and this is likely to be true for marine species, too. Climate change is warming oceans and increasing the amount of ice-free coastal habitat, which will likely improve the survival of introduced NNMS. Antarctic species will show diverse responses to changes and uncertainty surrounds the impacts that NNMS will have on Antarctic communities.
 
Conclusions
The risk posed by non-native marine species in Antarctica, though increasing, still remains largely unquantified. Support of research that quantifies the uptake of species into invasion pathways and their transport to locations within Antarctica would help inform further policy decision-making. Improved monitoring for NNMS would also enhance our understanding of the rate of introductions, which in turn will inform environmental management of the risk through use of marine biosecurity measures. Co-ordinated action on response plans and monitoring for NNMS would benefit from continued interaction between ATCM, CEP, COMNAP, CCAMLR, IAATO and Parties.

