





Modernisation of Antarctic Stations: Survey results









Modernisation of Antarctic Stations: Survey results

Summary
Seventy-three percent (73%) of the COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs are currently planning or in the process of modernisation of their station or stations. A further seventeen percent (17%) indicated they may be in the process of modernisation of their station or stations at some point in the near future.  Only twenty-two percent (22%) are considering modernisation for the main reason of climate change. The most common reasons given for modernisation can be summarised as need to replace old buildings, to meet science requirements or to improve environmental performance.
Background
The ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (Annex of ATCM Decision 3 (2018)), lists as item 11 priority “Modernisation of Antarctic stations in context of climate change” and states that for ATCM XLII (2019) “WG2 to discuss exchange of information and COMNAP advice”. In response to this request, COMNAP carried out a survey of all thirty COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs in regards to modernisation of their Antarctic stations.  This paper presents the survey questions, results and summary to assist discussions. 
Survey
COMNAP surveyed its thirty Member National Antarctic Programs using an on-line system from 21 December 2018 to 10 January 2019. All thirty responses are included in the summary of responses and the results. The survey consisted of three questions:

Question 1
“Is your National Antarctic Program planning or in the process of any Antarctic Station modernisation of any of your Stations from now or to up to the next 10 years?” 
[Multi-choice from A1, A2 or A3]:
	A1 Yes
	A2 No [if this was chosen, survey ended]
	A3 Maybe, but no definite plans at this time

If A1 or A3 was chosen, then proceeding with the survey:
Question 2 
“Is the main reason for undertaking or considering the modernisation "climate change" and its impacts to your Stations?” 
[Multi-choice from A1 or A2]:
	A1 Yes [if this was chosen, survey ended]
	A2 No 

If A2 was chosen, then proceeding with the survey:
Question 3 
“What is the main reason for undertaking or considering the modernisation of your Station?” [Free text box]


Results: Question 1
Twenty-two (22) of the thirty (30) responses answered “yes” to Q1.  
Meaning that 73% of National Antarctic Programs are currently planning or in the process of modernisation of their station or stations. 
An additional five (5) National Antarctic Programs answered “maybe, but no definite plans at this time”, meaning that a further 17% of National Antarctic Programs think they may be in the process of modernisation of their station or stations at some point in the near future. 
Three (3) of the thirty (30) responded with a “no” to Q1, meaning 10% of the COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs are not modernising at this time and have definite plans at this time to modernise. 
Results: Question 2  
Of the twenty-seven (27) “Yes” and “Maybe” responses, when asked in question 2 “Is the main reason for undertaking or considering the modernisation "climate change" and its impacts to your Stations?”, six (6) of the twenty-seven (27) responded “yes” to Q2.  Meaning that 22% of National Antarctic Programs are considering modernisation for the main reason of climate change. 
Twenty (20) of the twenty-seven (27) responded “no” to Q2. Meaning that 73% did not consider climate change to be the main reason for their current or planned  modernisation. 
One (1) of the twenty-seven (27) of the respondents did not answer Question 2.
Results: Question 3
Of the twenty (20) that responded “no” to question 2, two (2) respondents did not provide the main reason their National Antarctic Program was currently modernising or were planning modernisation. Of the eighteen (18) free text responses, the main reasons for modernisation were can be summarised as:
6%, Reduce operational costs
6%, Regular maintenance
6%, Related to climate change but required to meet research needs
11%, Old building(s), need to improve environmental performance
17%, Old building(s), need to increase efficiency, improve environmental performance
22%, Required to meet research needs
33%, Old building(s)
Conclusions
A significant majority of all the of the COMNAP Member National Antarctic Programs are in the process of, or are considering for the near future, modernisation projects related to their Antarctic stations and related facilities. The most cited reasons for the need to modernise is the age of the building, the infrastructure is not meeting research/science needs, and it is not efficient in terms of energy requirements and environmental impacts.

