





Summary of the 30 years of Finnish-Argentine collaboration in Antarctic climate research









Summary of the 30 years of Finnish-Argentine collaboration in Antarctic climate research 
Information Paper submitted by Finland and Argentina

This information paper analyzes the 30-year history of the joint Finnish-Argentine Antarctic climate research. It depicts an example of a long-term international research collaboration based on the bilateral agreements. Continuous monitoring of the environmental change has been the main pillar in this long-term commitment. Yet, another key for success has been the ability to renew and respond to the emerging climate challenges. During the past 30 years, Finnish and Argentine scientists have worked together to understand the Antarctic ozone depletion and the changes reflected in the surface ultraviolet (UV) radiation. They have studied the atmospheric composition driven by the global change and studied the Antarctic connection with the rest of the world. The research has extended from the process level to the global context and been shared with the international research communities. Here are summarized the main outcomes from these studies. The research described in this paper is by no means a complete description of the Finnish or the Argentine climate studies in Antarctica, but rather, it shows some jointly managed measurement programmes with a strong emphasis in experimental climate science.

The challenge of the Antarctic ozone hole
The historical 30-year collaboration started with an ozone sounding programme established only shortly after the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole. The Argentinean Meteorological Service (Servicio Meteorológico Nacional, SMN) started columnar ozone measurements in year 1987 in the Marambio station using a Dobson instrument and the Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI) joined this effort by providing an ozone sounding system for ozone vertical distribution studies. The first ozone sonde was launched in the early 1988. This programme is still active today providing one of the longest continuous vertical ozone data series from Antarctica. The sounding system at Marambio station was recently upgraded. The data are sent to the World Ozone and UV Data Centre (WOUDC) and are used in several international publications for model and satellite validations as well as in ozone chemistry studies (e.g. Karhu et al., 2003; Roscoe et al., 2005).

Measurements of UV, visible and photosynthetically active radiation
Depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer leads to an increasing level of surface UV radiation. This, in turn, affects the living organisms causing damages to human, plant and animal cells and reproduction. Towards the end of the 90s, an idea emerged of the Finnish-Spanish-Argentinean collaboration to further monitor and understand this connection in Antarctica. In 1999,  UV and total column ozone measurements were started at three southern locations: Ushuaia, Marambio station and Belgrano II station, as a collaboration between AEMET (Spanish Agencia Estatal de Meteorología), FMI (Finnish Meteorological Institute), DNA-IAA (Dirección Nacional del Antártico, Instituto Antártico Argentino), and CADIC (Centro Austral de Investigaciones Científicas/Argentina) (Lakkala et al., 2005; Redondas et al., 2008; Lakkala et al., 2018).The data of this Antarctic NILU-UV network contributed until 2013 to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) monthly ozone bulletins. The UV data is available in the FMI’s database http://litdb.fmi.fi/nilu-uv.php. Since 2013, FMI and SMN have continued the UV monitoring in the Marambio station by setting up new UV measurements and UV albedo measurements. In 2017 the measurement system was upgraded to cover also total ozone, visible and photosynthetically active radiation. Near real time plots are available at http://fmiarc.fmi.fi/sub_sites/GUVant/.

Climate forcing by atmospheric gases and aerosol particles
The atmospheric gas molecules and the minuscule omnipresent particles, so called aerosols, both interact with the solar and terrestrial radiation, affecting the earth energy balance. The rapidly increasing human made emissions of these atmospheric constituents, in the last decades, have changed this complex balance leading to climate change. Even if far from the human emissions, Antarctica interacts with the rest of the world via oceanic currents and the atmospheric circulation. New measurement programmes were initiated to understand these interactions and to monitor the concentration levels of the major climate forcers, i.e. greenhouse gases and aerosols.

Solar photometric measurements of aerosol particles over the Marambio station started in 2005 as a collaboration between FMI and SMN (Tomasi et al., 2007). They contribute to the global GAW-PFR AOD (Aerosol Optical Depth) network. Atmospheric composition measurements were further upgraded in early 2013 to cover all the major climate forcing agents: aerosols, clouds, and greenhouse gases. At present, various properties of aerosol particles: number, optical properties, mass and chemistry, as well as the concentration of the greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, methane, carbon monoxide and water vapor, are measured with a high-resolution automated instrumentation all year round. The results from these measurements highlight the proximity of the Southern Ocean, as a source of strongly light-reflecting marine aerosol (Asmi et al., 2018), as well as a sink of the CO2 that is visible in the data (e.g. Informe del estado del ambiente, 2017). In addition, cloud coverage, height and type are automatically monitored with a ceilometer (Near real time plots available at: http://public.lidar.fmi.fi/processing/realtime/archive/marambio/cl51/). While the changing climate and atmospheric composition can also lead to changes in the snow surface reflectance, the surface albedo is measured and analyzed for any observed changes (Meinander et al., 2016).

Antarctic radiation and ions
The proximity of the magnetic pole also calls for studies of electromagnetic and particle radiation as well as ionization processes in the atmosphere. Since 2013, gamma dose rate in Antarctica has continuously been measured. In the end of 2018, the Institute for Atmospheric and Earth System Research (INAR) together with SMN and FMI, installed a Neutral cluster and Air Ion Spectrometer (NAIS) that can monitor the charged tiny clusters that are born as a result of this cosmic radiation. In addition, particle samples for the analysis of the continental tracer, lead-210 are collected (Paatero et al., 2007). These measurements have shown that Marambio is rarely affected by the atmospheric circulation from other continents (e.g. Asmi et al., 2018).

Campaigns for atmospheric processes studies
The objective of the above described long-term observations has been to respond to the great global challenges and to provide quality-controlled data for climate monitoring and international research. These observations are complemented with specifically targeted campaigns in order to reach the process-level understanding that is needed in global modelling. Examples of such campaigns have been for example participation in the Antarctic ozone balloon experiment (Roscoe et al., 2005) and the summer 2017/2018 new particle formation (NPF) campaign, organized in collaboration between SMN, INAR and FMI, to study the formation of secondary aerosols in the Antarctic Peninsula. 

The future directions
The information gathered on the state of the atmosphere and on the climate connections of the Antarctic Peninsula with the measurements highly concentrated in the Marambio station have inspired numerous scientific studies. The list of the studies cited here is not complete, but serves as a source of additional information and contact point. In addition, the research has been presented in several high level international conferences such as conferences organized by Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), European Geophysical Union (EGU), American Geophysical Union (AGU), World Climate Research Programme (WCRP-SPARC), International Polar Year (IPY), International Radiation Commission (IRC) etc. In addition, the research results are regularly presented in various smaller national and international conferences and meetings. The measurements continue contributing to several international networks and providing high-quality data to scientific use via the WMO databases and other organizations. Special focus in future will be on multi-disciplinary scientific studies, for which the various observations described in this document provide an excellent opportunity.




References
Asmi, E., Neitola, K., Teinilä, K., Rodriguez, E., Virkkula, A., Backman, J., Bloss, M., Jokela, J., Lihavainen, H., de Leeuw, G., Paateri, J., Aaltonen, V., Mei, M., Gambarte, G., Copes, G., Albertini, M., Fogwill, G.P., Ferrara, J., Barlasina, M.E., and Sanzhez, R.: Primary sources control the variability of aerosol optical properties in the Antarctic Peninsula, Tellus B: Chemical and Physical Meteorology, 70:1, 1-16, 2018, doi: 10.1080/16000889.2017.1414571 
Karhu, J. A., P. Taalas, J. Damski, J. Kaurola, M. Ginzburg, C. A. Villanueva, E. Piacentini, and M. Garcia, Vertical distribution of ozone at Marambio, Antarctic Peninsula, during 1987–1999, J. Geophys. Res., Vol. 108, No. D17, 4545, 2003, doi: 10.1029/2003JD001435.
Lakkala K., A. Redondas, O. Meinander, C. Torres, T. Koskela, E.Cuevas, P. Taalas, A. Dahlback, G. Deferrari, K. Edvardsen and H. Ochoa, 2005. Quality Assurance of the solar UV network in the Antarctic. J. Geophys. Res., 110, D15101, 2005, doi:10.1029/2005JD005584.
Lakkala, K., Redondas, A., Meinander, O., Thölix, L., Hamari, B., Almansa, A. F., Carreno, V., García, R. D., Torres, C., Deferrari, G., Ochoa, H., Bernhard, G., Sanchez, R., and de Leeuw, G.: UV measurements at Marambio and Ushuaia during 2000–2010, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 18, 16019-16031, 2018, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-18-16019-2018.
Meinander, O., Aarva, A., Poikonen, A., Kontu, A., Suokanerva, H., Asmi, E., Neitola, K., Rodriguez, E., Sanchez, R., Mei, M., de Leeuw, G., and Kyrö, E.: Bipolar long-term high temporal resolution broadband measurement system for incoming and outgoing solar UV radiation, and snow UV albedo, at Sodankylä (67°N) and Marambio (64°S), Geosci. Instrum. Method. Data Syst. Discuss., 2016, https://doi.org/10.5194/gi-2015-31
Paatero J., Buyukay M., Aaltonen V., Garcia M.J., SanchézR., Hatakka J., Virkkula A. & Teinilä K. 2007. Airbornelead-210 at research stations Aboa and Marambio, Antarctic. In A.S. Paschoa et al. (eds.):  Book of abstracts of the 8th International Symposium on the Natural Radiation Environment (NRE-VIII), Búzios, Rio de Janeiro, 7–12 October2007. Pp. 65. Rio de Janeiro: Natural Radiation Environment Associations
Redondas, A., Torres, C., Meinander, O., Lakkala, K., García, R., Cuevas, E., Ochoa, H., Deferrari, G., and Díaz, S.: Antarctic network of lamp-calibrated multichannel radiometers for continuous ozone and uv radiation data, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 8, 3383-3404, 2008, https://doi.org/10.5194/acpd-8-3383-2008. 
Roscoe, H.K., S.R. Colwell, J.D. Shanklin, J.A. Karhu, P. Taalas, M. Gil, M. Yela, S. Rodriguez, C. Rafanelli, H. Cazeneuve, C.A. Villanueva, M. Ginsburg, S.B. Diaz, R.L. de Zafra, G. Muscari, G. Redaelli, R. Dragani, Measurements from ground and balloons during APE-GAIA –A polar ozone library, J. Advances in Space Research, Vol 36, Issue 5, Pages 835-845, 2015, doi:10.1016/j.asr.2005.03.016.
Tomasi, C., Vitale, V., Lupi, A., Di Carmine, C., Campanelli, M., Herber, A., Treffeisen, R., Stone, R. S., Andrews, E., Sharma, S., Radionov, V., von Hoyningen-Huene, W., Stebel, K., Hansen, G. H., Myhre, C. L., Wehrli, C., Aaltonen, V., Lihavainen, H., Virkkula, A., Hillamo, R., Ström, J., Toledano, C., Cachorro, V. E., Ortiz, P., de Frutos, A. M., Blindheim, S., Frioud, M., Gausa, M., Zielinski, T., Petelski, T., and Yamanouchi, T., 2007. Aerosols in Polar Regions: An historical overview on the basis of optical depth and in in-situ observations. J. Geophys. Res., 112, D16205, 2007, doi:10.1029/2007JD008432.

Informe del estado del ambiente 2017, La Secretaría de Ambiente y Desarrollo Sustentable de la Nación, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/ambiente.

Acknowledgements
Many scientists, politicians, technicians, logistics, funding agencies, and specialists of various fields have supported these joint efforts – and are all greatly acknowledged. In particular, we want to highlight the importance of the Antarctic logistic support from both countries: the Finnish Antarctic Research Programme (FINNARP) and the Argentina Air Force (Fuerza Aérea).

