





XXXVII Brazilian Antarctic Operation








XXXVII Brazilian Antarctic Operation

Summary
This Information Paper presents the activities carried out by Brazil for the country’s XXXVII Antarctic Operation.

Introduction
The XXXIII Antarctic Operation (OPERANTAR XXXIII) began in October 2018 when two Brazilian Antarctic ships - the Polar Ship "Almirante Maximiano" and the Oceanographic Support Ship "Ary Rongel" – departed from Rio de Janeiro for the Antarctic Continent to return in April 2019. 

Science
OPERANTAR XXXVII supported 23 scientific projects involving about 230 people, including researchers from different areas of knowledge. The projects were selected by the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation and Communication (MCTIC) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) and the teams were distributed on both Antarctic ships, in the Emergency Antarctic Module and in camping areas. Studies on biodiversity and Antarctic ecosystems, on the consequences of climate change in the region, as well as on oceanography, glaciology, biology, anthropology, meteorology and geology must be highlighted.
 
Research activities were also carried out in other Antarctic stations in cooperation with the Antarctic Programs of other Contracting Parties (such as Argentina, Chile, Poland and Spain), while the Brazilian Antarctic Program also provided field support to other countries' activities (such as Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Germany, Poland, Portugal and Russia). 


Brazilian ships in Admiralty Bay during OPERANTAR XXXVII (picture: Ana Carolina Feijão)

Logistics
OPERANTAR XXXVII provided support for the reconstruction of the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF), detailed in another Information Paper (IP). Furthermore, 10 flights were also conducted by the Brazilian Air Force, transporting researchers, base personnel, cargo and provisions both from the Brazilian Antarctic program as from other national programs.

Pre-Antarctic training
During the preparation of the OPERANTAR XXXVII, a Pre-Antarctic Training was carried out involving 210 participants, including researchers, collaborators and military personnel. The training aims at providing basic knowledge for the safe conduction of activities in the Antarctic environment, evaluating the adaptability and physical capability of the participants, as well as selecting the staff members of the Base Group for the Brazilian Antarctic Station. The Pre-Antarctic training is offered to all ATS members.

Communications
In March 2019, the Joint Parliamentary Front that supports the Brazilian Antarctic Program in Congress visited the EACF. The PROANTAR Parliamentary Front helps guaranteeing financial resources to the Program and, in their periodical visits, observe how the budget is invested. During their visit, politicians were presented to a new communication system, provided by the telecommunications company Oi, which guarantees high-speed data communication, enabling access to high-speed internet (40 Mbps), television and other services by 4G mobile phone.
