





Developments in the process for adoption of a Marine Protected Area in the west Antarctic Peninsula and south Scotia Arc (D1MPA)


English version provided by the authors






Developments in the process for adoption of a Marine Protected Area in the west Antarctic Peninsula and south Scotia Arc (D1MPA)
Information Paper submitted by Argentina and Chile

Abstract
This paper briefly describes the progress made during 2017 and 2018 regarding the planning process towards the establishment of a Marine Protected Area in Domain 1 (west of Antarctic Peninsula and south of the Scotia Arc, D1MPA), as an update to the Information Paper 64 of ATCM 41. In summary, in 2017 Argentina and Chile submitted to CCAMLR a preliminary proposal for a D1MPA and proposed the creation of a D1MPA Expert Group (EG). During 2018, and after one year of consultations within the EG, in intersessional meetings and working closely with CCAMLR Members, a Conservation Measure was put forward to CCAMLR to designate the D1MPA, contemplating both the protection of the region´s most outstanding natural values and the rational use of marine living resources. 
Brief overview on Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in Antarctica
Since 2012, Argentina and Chile have been working together towards the establishment of a Marine Protected Area in Domain 1 (west of Antarctic Peninsula and south of the Scotia Arc, -D1MPA-), with the contribution of several other Members, after the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) committed to the establishment of a representative system of MPAs in the Convention Area. The aims of this representative system are to conserve marine biodiversity, contribute to sustaining ecosystem structure and function, including in areas outside MPAs, maintain the ability to adapt in the face of climate change, and reduce the potential invasion by alien species, as a result of human activity. A healthy marine ecosystem contributes to preserve not only biodiversity but also biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem services including food security. Inherent to the system is the coexistence of multiple interests that need to be understood and contemplated in the design of MPAs, while both committing and facing additional challenges to find consensus.
The Domain 1 (west Antarctic Peninsula and south of Scotia Arc) 
Climate change is one of the main factors affecting the Antarctic marine ecosystem, exerting pressure on the environment that will impact its productivity, the distribution of species and the ecosystem processes, causing changes that are currently most noticeable in the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP, ATCM XXXIX IP 65). 
The WAP is prone to constant environmental changes, including the extension and duration of sea ice, the collapse of ice shelves, ocean acidification and changes in the wind systems. Particularly, from North to South, the WAP shows a strong latitudinal climate gradient, both in temperature and in sea ice formations, characterized by a short ice season and more marine conditions in the North, while the South shows continental conditions and a larger ice season.
Given the growing environmental variability in the area, in addition to the increasing fishing operation capacities, interest in extractive activities is on the rise. There is a pressing need to incorporate climate change to fisheries management particularly in the WAP, in order to contribute to the understanding and the development of the effects from the different causes, thus helping to reduce any disruption to marine ecosystems and food supplies. In addition, the need to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica has also been recognized by the CEP Climate Change Response Work Program (ATCM XXXIX, Appendix 2).
The Domain 1 MPA (D1MPA)
Throughout 2017, Argentina and Chile worked together and submitted a preliminary proposal for a D1MPA to that year’s CCAMLR annual meeting. This consisted of the identification of Priority Areas for Conservation (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, figure 3; PACs) and a preliminary model of MPA (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, figure 4), which was developed considering both the protection of the region´s most outstanding natural values and the rational use of marine living resources. 
PACs were identified based on an ecosystem approach and using systematic conservation planning tools, and they contribute to the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem by protecting:
    a) a representative portion of benthic and pelagic marine environments;
    b) large scale benthic and pelagic processes, that contribute to preserve predictable high sources of productivity;
    c) important areas for zooplankton life cycles, including Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) nurseries;
    d) important areas for fish life cycles with emphasis on species that have been commercially overfished;
    e) distribution of marine mammals and birds during critical stages of their life-history;
    f) vulnerable or rare benthic habitats.

The CCAMLR Scientific Committee and Commission highlighted the work undertaken by Argentina and Chile and recognized that the proposal was developed in an inclusive and transparent manner with comprehensive and adequate scientific justification. They also recognized that the PACs were appropriate and justified by data and that in the context of climate change it is important to have PACs along the latitudinal gradient, thus integrating the different environmental gradients (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, paragraphs 5.26 and 5.27).
During that same year, and taking into account the difficulties and challenges associated to Domain 1, considering it is the Antarctic sector with the most significant human presence and activities, a D1MPA Expert Group (EG) was also created (SC-CAMLR-XXXVI Report, paragraph 5.34). Its aims have been to enable communication and coordination concerning the debates between CCAMLR Members, Observers and Experts; to identify a clear working flux, including considerations about the krill fisheries management, climate change, fishing activities, research plan and monitoring of the eventual D1MPA; and to enhance synergies among key actors. Keeping the open and transparent approach that has characterized this process since its beginnings, the EG is aimed at enriching discussions and does not imply any form of approval or acceptance of any aspect of the D1MPA and all CCAMLR members were encouraged to participate.
At the 2018 CCAMLR meeting and as a result of discussions held through the EG, the comments received during the inter-sessional meetings and working closely with CCAMLR Members, Argentina and Chile put forward a proposal on a Conservation Measure establishing the D1MPA. It incorporated scientific reference areas for climate change and new zones to address the effects of the krill fishery on the marine ecosystem, while achieving its conservation objectives. The Scientific Committee and Commission recognized the amount of collaborative work undertaken transparently and comprehensively taking into account the views of other Members (CCAMLR 37, paragraph 6.44). Such collaborative work is still on-going via the EG and  as a priority item of work identified by the Scientific Committee for its 2019 meetings in relation to the management of krill. 
Additionally, during January 2019, an Argentina-Chile binational expedition to the Antarctic Peninsula on board the Chilean Navy ship OPV 83 “Marinero Fuentealba” took place, in collaboration with National Geographic “Pristine Seas”, aimed to develop a wide-audience documentary in support of the D1MPA process, which is planned to be released later this year. This project was undertaken in coordination with the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) and the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) , and has the committed support of Presidents Piñera and Macri. 
Also, in late March 2019, an informal workshop between scientists from Argentina, Chile and Norway took place in the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) in Punta Arenas, and contributed to explore potential ways to harmonize the different strategies for the management of krill.  
Accordingly, Argentina and Chile inform the CEP about the progress made from 2017 to date towards the designation of an MPA in Domain1, insofar as the CEP may deem developments of interest in relation to its own system of protected areas. Both proponents also encourage more Members to follow debates regarding the D1MPA, including an active participation in the Expert Group.
