





In situ experiments and sampling of supraglacial environments in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica









In situ experiments and sampling of supraglacial environments in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica

Abstract
In situ primary and bacterial production experiments were carried out in selected supraglacial environments like cryoconite hole and meltwater samples in Larsemann Hills during 2018-19 Antarctic season as part of XXXVIII Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (ISEA). Approximately seventeen hundred samples were retrieved from in situ primary and bacterial production experiments. Samples for total and dissolved organic carbon, total nitrogen, ions, microbial diversity, morphology and metagenomic studies were collected and preserved for further laboratory analyses. The study area falls, outside the ASMA boundary however environmental protocol followed during these experiments to leave minimum footprint. 
Introduction
Supraglacial systems like snowpacks and cryoconite holes in coastal have huge significant in terms of nutrient availability, albedo changes, melt rates as well as the health of the coastal Antarctic ice sheet. A detailed field based sampling and in situ experiments were conducted during the 2018-19 field season with objectives: a) quantify the rates of primary production and bacterial production in supraglacial environments, b) understand the spatial and temporal changes in microbial and chemical characteristics of meltwater over a melt period, and c) understand the dynamics of cryoconite hole ecosystem over the summer melt period. 

Figure 1 : Map showing the transect of meltwater channel selected for sampling and in situ experiments in the Grovnes, Larsemann Hills. Samples collected along the transect include glacial melwater (MT), cryoconite hole (CT), debris (DT) and fjord water (FT). Box in the map shows the cryoconite hole sampling region in Grovnes peninsula, Larsemann Hills.
Field Work carried out
To address the objectives, sampling and in situ experiments in supraglacial environments were undertaken during the summer season of XXXVIII Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (November, 2018 - January, 2019) in Grovnes, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica.
Cryoconite holes
    1. The cryoconite hole sites at South Grovnes region, Larsemann Hills covers an area of approximately 1.3 km2 (Figure 1). Strategic sampling from fifty six cryoconite holes from this region was carried out during the summer melt season. Diameter of cryoconite holes sampled varied from 5 to 70 cm, while depth varied from 5 to 50 cm. Cryoconite holes sampled included open as well as closed holes. Samples for total and dissolved organic carbon, total nitrogen, carboxylate ions, major inorganic ions, bacterial count, microbial morphology were collected from each cryoconite hole and preserved for further analysis. Samples for pigment and metagenomic studies were processed and preserved for further laboratory analysis.
    2. In situ experiments were carried out in selected twenty seven cryoconite holes to measure the rates of primary and bacterial production. Nine hundred and fifty samples retrieved from in situ incubations (primary and bacterial production experiments) were processed in the laboratory at Bharati station.
    3. Sampling from twenty cryoconite holes was carried out for metabolome and metagenomic studies.
Meltwater
    1. Spatial and temporal sampling of meltwater was carried out along a transect of approximately 1.1 km in South Grovnes region (Figure 1 and 2). Temporal sampling included 4 sampling days expanded over a period of 40 days in summer melt season. Samples collected along the 1.1 km meltwater channel comprised glacial meltwater, cryoconite holes, debris, surface snow and fjord water. Samples for total and dissolved organic carbon, total nitrogen, carboxylate ions, inorganic ions, bacterial count, microbial morphology were collected and preserved. Samples for pigment and metagenomic studies were processed and preserved for further laboratory analysis.

Figure 2: Images showing meltwater channel formed during the melt season at South Grovnes.

    2. Glacial meltwater samples were collected from Fisher island and Broknes peninsula. Samples for total and dissolved organic carbon, total nitrogen, carboxylate ions, inorganic ions, bacterial count, microbial morphology were collected and preserved.
    3. In situ experiments were carried out in the collected samples to measure the rates of primary and bacterial production. Eight hundred samples retrieved from in situ incubations (primary and bacterial production experiments) were processed in the laboratory at Bharati station.
Retrieved samples were stored at -20 °C. Samples were transported in frozen conditions to National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research, Goa in -20 °C conditions for further analysis. 
Environmental impact 
The project involved less than minor environmental impact as minimum footprint was accounted and only trained personnel were permitted to undertake the in situ experiments.

