





Two Hundred Year Anniversary of the discovery of the Antarctic Continent 2020









Two Hundred Year Anniversary of the discovery of the Antarctic Continent 2020




Summary

Estonia is planning events to commemorate the passing of two hundred-years since the first recorded sighting of the Antarctic continent. To this end, Estonia seeks the co-operation of all interested parties to use this historic anniversary for promoting the importance of Antarctica to a broader audience. Estonia seeks to put special emphasis on the importance of international scientific cooperation and addressing issues related to the environment and climate in polar regions as well as for promoting the use of digital solutions. Estonia will make a special effort to engage younger audiences in the process. 


Background

    1. At The beginning of the year 1820, the Antarctic Continent was first sighted within days of each other by a Russian South Polar Expedition (on sloops “Vostok” and “Mirny”) under the leadership of Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, British sailors (on brig Williams) with Edward Bransfield as commander and also by an American Nathaniel Palmer (on the sailing ship Hero).
    2. The idea and plan of the first Russian South Polar Expedition was created by the Minister of the Navy of Imperial Russia, Marquis de Traversay (of French descent). The leader of this expedition was Estonian-born, Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen (of Baltic-German descent). A number of Russian navy officers who participated in the expedition were also trained in the British Navy.
    3. Those realities demonstrate that already in those days, great scientific discovers were made possible above all through the co-operation of nations. Today, this spirit is successfully upheld through the framework of the Antarctic Treaty.
    4. It is also in this spirit that Estonia has reached out to relevant authorities and institutions in Chile, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and USA and seeks co-operation with all other interested parties with the aim to commemorate the historic expeditions and cooperation that led to the discovery of the sixth continent.


Activities

    5. The Estonian Maritime Museum in co-operation with the Office of the President of Estonia and Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Estonia is organizing an expedition retracing the route of Estonian admiral F. G. Bellingshausen’s voyage from Kronstadt (Russia) to Antarctica 200 years ago.
    6. The voyage will call at more than 30 ports in Europe, the coast of Africa and America where themed events will be organized. 
    7. It will culminate in January 2020, when the 200th anniversary of the discovery of the frozen continent will be commemorated worldwide. At this point, a number of activities will take place to mark the anniversary, for example the presentation of the commemorative Euro coin issued by the Bank of Estonia, visits to several polar stations etc. 
    8. The objectives of the voyage are: 
        ◦ Showing that Estonia actively joins with the rest of the world in commemorating and celebrating this important date in the history of scientific discovery and exploration.
        ◦ Demonstrating that great scientific discoveries were and still are made successful above all through international cooperation.
        ◦ Emphasizing that addressing climate change, often most visible in polar areas, is one of our most important challenges and responsibilities.
        ◦ Addressing, teaching, and engaging wider audiences (with a specific focus on the youth) through various events and extensive media coverage, on the topics of natural sciences, history, environmental protection, as well as international scientific exchanges and cooperation.
    9. The voyage will be undertaken on a 25-meter long steel motor yacht Admiral Bellingshausen, with a 12-member international crew (composed of professional seamen and prominent figures from sciences, arts, media and politics).
    10. To cover the expedition, a 10-episode TV-documentary will be produced where the lead characters will be young cadets from the Estonian Maritime Academy. They will be joining the expedition during its various phases. 
    11. The President of Estonia, H. E. Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid will most likely join the expedition in January 2020 once it has reached Antarctic waters. 
    12. The President’s office will literally be moved to Antarctica for a period of time. With this, among other issues, Estonia wants to draw attention to its e-governance system that is based on advanced digital and communications services and promote its use globally.



