





Cooperation between Romania and Australia in Antarctica









Cooperation between Romania and Australia in Antarctica
in the context of celebrating 50 years of bilateral diplomatic relations and 
150 years since the birth of the Romanian scientist Emil Racovita, 
the biologist of the Belgian Antarctic Expedition (1897-1899) and  
the founder of biospeleology in the world (1920)
Information Paper submitted by Romania
Summary 
Romania reports on the cooperation between Romania and Australia highlighted in a documentary-scientific and artistic exhibition organized at the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs with the support of the National Commission for Antarctic Research (NCAR) of the Romanian Academy. The exhibition was inaugurated on 8 October 2018, in the presence of a delegation of the Australian Federal Parliament also including the Ambassador of the Commonwealth of Australia to Romania to mark 50 years of bilateral diplomatic relations and 150 years since the birth of the Romanian scientist Emil Racovita, the biologist of the Belgian Antarctic Expedition (1897-1899) and the founder of biospeleology in the world (1920). 
The Cooperation Agreement between Romania and Australia in Antarctica at the Law-Racovita Station (2005-2015) highlighted in the Emil Racovita Year 2018 
The Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs organized, with support from the National Commission for Antarctic Research of the Romanian Academy, on the occasion of the visit to Bucharest on October 8, 2018 of an official delegation of the Australian Federal Parliament, lead by Mr. Ian Macdonald (Australian Senate Member) also including Ms. Kate Logan (Ambassador of the Commonwealth of Australia to Romania) an exhibition on the cooperation between Romania and Australia in Antarctica to mark 50 years of Romania-Australia bilateral diplomatic relations (1968-2018), also celebrating 150 years since the birth of Emil RACOVIŢĂ (1868-1947), the biologist of the Belgian Antarctic Expedition “Belgica” (1897-1899), in honor of which the Australian Law Base in  Antarctica was renamed Law-Racovita on June 15, 2005, respectively Law-Racovita-Negoita on 09.12.2011. The exhibition also highlighted the contributions of the explorers Phillip Garth LAW (1912-2010) in Australia and Teodor Gheorghe NEGOIŢĂ (1946-2011) in Romania to ensuring national commitment to Antarctica and the development of Antarctic sciences. 
The exhibition included two sections: documentary-scientific and artistic, respectively: 
The first section included posters dedicated to the personality of the scientist Emil Racovita and the bilateral Antarctic cooperation (2005-2015) developed on the basis of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Australian Antarctic Division and the Romanian Antarctic Foundation for the joint use of the Law Base in the Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica, signed by Dr. Tony Press and Dr. Teodor Negoita. These posters highlighted the outstanding results of this MoU for Romania: developing a management plan along with Australia, China, Russia and India for ASMA no. 6 Larsemann Hills, four Romanian Antarctic Excellence Research Projects conducted by: the Institute of Astronomy (PROTEL), the Romanian Polar Research Institute (BIODIVERSITY and BIOREMED), the Institute of Virology (EXTREM BIO_MED), three international polar research symposia Bucharest 2006, 2007 and 2008, admission of Romania as Associate Member to SCAR - July 14, 2008, European projects through the contribution of the Romanian Polar Research Institute: FP7 - ERICON-AB and INTER-HEMISPHERE monitored by the European Science Foundation. 
The documentary-scientific section of the exhibition also included pictures from the Law-Racovita station area, ATCM-CEP documents, scientific papers, books, magazines, maps, a silver commemorative coin dedicated to Emil Racovita issued on 6 August 2018 by the National Bank of Romania, and the collection of stamps issued by the Romanian Post at the centennial of the “Belgica” Expedition.
The artistic section included three paintings dedicated to the cooperation between Romania and Australia at the Law-Racovita Station in Larsemann Hills, Prydz Bay, East Antarctica, by the Romanian painter Mariana Ioaniţescu (artist and biologist), the winner of the Romanian national contest on polar themes, painting section. (https://acad.ro/comisiiAR/Comisia-CNCA/comisii_CNCA_even2018.htm). Comment of the author on the messages embedded in the painting “Friendship and Collaboration Between Australia and Romania” is available at http://galeria15.ro/galleries/mariana-ioanitescu-galleries/antarctica/.
The Australian delegation appreciated the way the documentary-scientific and artistic sections were combined, as well as the participation in this event of the two winners of the Romanian national contest on polar themes, Literature and Art section, Homage to Emil Racovita, (gymnasium pupils accompanied by their teacher).  
The exhibition was presented by the biologist of the first Romanian National Antarctic Research Expedition (RONARE) at Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica (Dr. Florica Toparceanu - NCAR and the Romanian Institute of Virology of the Romanian Academy) and by the painting author. An exhibition flyer designed by the Education & Outreach team of the NCAR has been made available to the audience, as it is attached to this IP. 
Romanian representatives expressed their willingness to resume bilateral scientific cooperation at the Law Base in the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, based on common interest scientific themes. 
http://www.mae.ro/node/47103
Romania, as reported in some IPs, continued to cooperate with Australia in Antarctic matters, in intersessional ATCM/CEP activities. In Galati, Romania, the new Australian Nuyina icebreaker is being built by the Dutch operated Shipyards Damen and it has been successfully launched on wet in 2018. http://canberra.mae.ro/en/node/1356

