





Finnish Antarctic Research Station Aboa celebrates its 30th Anniversary








Finnish Antarctic Research Station Aboa 
celebrates its 30th Anniversary

Information Paper submitted by Finland




Background

The Finnish research station Aboa was established on February 4, 1989 on the Basen Nunatak in Dronning Maud Land, five years after Finland acceded to the Antarctic Treaty. Aboa is a seasonal summer-only research station, which runs automatic observations throughout the year. 

In the past 30 years, the Finnish Antarctic Research Program, FINNARP, has organized 27 expeditions to Aboa.  During these years Finnish scientists have gathered significant sample series and long-term observation series from Aboa and the vicinity of the station.  Aboa also supports the research activities of other Parties of the Antarctic treaty. 

Antarctic research

The authority responsible for the Finnish Antarctic research is the Ministry of Education and Culture. The Academy of Finland, an agency of the Ministry of Education and Culture, is the main financier of the Finnish Antarctic research projects. Since 1998 the Academy of Finland has organized regular calls for Antarctic research. Presently the call for applications is issued every fourth year. The most recent application round was organized in 2016, when a total of 1,97 million euros was granted to research projects. Higher education institutes and research institutes also promote Antarctic research with their own funding. There are additionally many other national and international sources of funding that can be utilized in Antarctic research. 

FINNARP

The FINNARP operations office is responsible for the logistics and maintenance of Aboa. FINNARP operates in connection with the Finnish Meteorological Institute under the Ministry of Transport and Communications. FINNARP's main responsibilities are to carry out the Finnish Antarctic research activities in accordance with the Finnish Antarctic Strategy, to maintain Aboa, arrange field research and supervise that both national and international law and obligations are complied with. In addition, FINNARP manages travelling expenses, transportation and health care of Antarctic expeditioners to Aboa and other destinations.

The fieldwork in the Antarctic is usually carried out at Aboa and from there to other areas in the western Dronning Maud Land. In addition, FINNARP arranges working facilities in the research stations or vessels of other countries.

Aboa station

Aboa is located on Basen Nunatak at Vestfjella mountains (73⁰03’S, 13⁰25’W), Dronning Maud Land. The station is built on snow-free basalt and regolith about 130 km south of the edge of sea ice and 480 m above the sea level. The Swedish research station Wasa is located on the same nunatak, 200 meters from Aboa. Together the stations form the Nordenskiöld Base Camp. Aboa and Wasa are both independent stations but they are built close to each other for safety reasons. The nearest other stations are German Neumayer III and South African Sanae IV on an ice shelf at a distance of about 360 kilometers. 

Aboa was designed and built by the Laboratory of Structural Engineering at the Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT), and funded by the Finnish Ministry of Trade and Industry (now part of the Finnish Ministry of Employment and the Economy). Aboa was originally built and equipped to be occupied all year round, however, the station has been in use during Antarctic summers only. At that time of the year the 
conditions are most suitable for research activity, air temperature being approximately from 0 to minus 20 °C. 

In 1988-89 the station consisted of a main building (120m2) with 10 beds, generator building, four storage containers and a vehicle storage hall. In the early 2000s, the size of the Finnish expeditions to Aboa had steadily grown and there was a need to renovate the station.  Aboa was enlarged and renovated during the austral summer 2002-2003. Two new accommodation and working space modules were installed, as well as a new shower facility, laundry and a proper Finnish sauna. In the following year, the power system was enhanced with a solar and wind energy system to allow more consistent year-round measurements and to lessen consumption of fossil fuels during an active summer season.  

During the austral summer 2014-2015 FINNARP started burning combustible waste in an incinerator, authorized by the Finnish Centre for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment. With a comprehensive waste management plan the amount of waste in Aboa has been reduced remarkably.  During austral summers of 2015-16 and 2016-17 an old helicopter shelter and an old tent hall were refurbished and recovered. Now the renewed shelters are used as science workshop, storage and vehicle shelter. In 2016-17 additional research/accommodation modules and a new waste management container were added to the infrastructure of the station. 

Today the research station comprises a main building (about 250 m2), four separate research and accommodation modules, medical surgery module, generator building, two arch shelters, food and spare parts storeroom, incinerator and waste container, gravity laboratory and climate research container with year-round synoptic weather station. Aboa can comfortably accommodate expeditions of up to 15-21 people. 

The station has been subject to one inspection carried out in accordance with Article VII (3) of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The inspection was carried out on 28 January 1994 by a Swedish inspection team.

Automatic monitoring

At Aboa, there are measuring instruments that enable continuous data collection, also throughout the Antarctic winter when the station is unoccupied. Aboa has a solar panel and battery system installed to produce and store energy. 

Automatic weather station (AWS) is operating all year round and measures weather observations hourly. Observation information is sent every three hours through ARGOS satellite transmittance system via World Meteorological Organization (WMO) to any user.  In addition, other automated year-round measuring instruments have been deployed outside Aboa, such as an automated weather station near the coast and an automatic weather station 10 km from Aboa. There is also a GPS equipment for geodetic purposes and an automatic seismometer at the station. 

Expeditions

The first FINNARP expedition to Aboa took place during the Antarctic summer of 1989-90. In 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 Finland, Norway and Sweden shared logistics such as sea transport to Antarctica.
In the 1990s FINNARP expeditions travelled to Aboa by ship from Cape Town. The cargo was unloaded at Rampen, which is an ice edge on the shore of Dronning Maud Land. From Rampen the expedition travelled by all-terrain tracked vehicles or helicopters to Aboa. 

There was a strong emphasis during the 1990s on marine research, which was conducted during all expeditions, either on board Finnish R/V Aranda (89-90 and 95-96), on board a hired logistic vessel, or by participating on international cruises. In addition, there were campaigns carried out in cooperation with other countries at their stations or on board ships, most notably the ozone program carried out at the Argentinian Marambio station, which commenced in 1988.

From the 2000s onwards, logistical support has mainly been provided by aircraft; expeditions arrive at and leave from Aboa by air. Intercontinental flights to Antarctica have been carried out in the framework of the Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN). Larger shipments of goods are freighted through the German station Neumayer III, which is possible to reach by ship. From Neumayer III goods are driven to Aboa by land. The station uses all-terrain tracked vehicles, off-road vehicles, a tractor and snowmobiles for maintenance duties and for moving about in the area.

International cooperation 

In recent years, international co-operation and operational efficiency have been successfully promoted in logistics. International co-operation takes place directly with the national Antarctic programs and research institutes and in the framework of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and DROMLAN system. Cooperation with research stations and vessels belonging to other countries has increased. In the 2018-2019 season, Finnish Antarctic research was carried out at German Neumayer III, Italian-French Dome Concordia and New Zealand’s Scott Base stations, and on the South African S/A Agulhas II research vessel. In addition, research cooperation continued at the Argentinian Marambio station. 

Finland’s research station Aboa’s activities support the research of other Parties of the Antarctic Treaty. International cooperation is a key element in supporting Aboa as a research platform. On the practical level, the most important partners are German Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) and Swedish Polar Research Secretariat (SPRS).  Indicators of international cooperation include high-quality international collaborative publications, researcher exchange, international funding and the use of data in international research and monitoring. Finnish researchers participate in the working groups of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). Bipolar research also requires close cooperation with the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). Through this interaction, international actors become more widely known in Finland. Moreover, the media coverage on Antarctic research has increased, and expeditions to the Antarctic, in particular, are actively covered in the Finnish media.

Towards zero-emission operations

It is a challenging task to carry out research activities in Antarctica. Human impact must be mitigated as much as possible.  FINNARP has started the implementation of a plan towards zero-emission operations in order to reduce the carbon footprint of Aboa station. The work to improve the energy efficiency of the station has already begun, and in the future, solar energy will play an increasingly important role in the energy production of the station. 

During the first phase of the project, which is currently ongoing, the station is being studied and monitored. Waste management, purchasing and packing, usage of water, heating and energy consumption and other daily activities are under observation and reassessed to find best practices for more efficient operations and to lessen environmental impacts. After careful consideration, these fundamental principles will be taken into account when selecting the most efficient energy systems and practices to manage the station. 

Throughout the whole process the needs of future science and Antarctic research strategy of Finland are the fundamental and guiding elements. 

