





WMO Annual Report 2018-2019








WMO Annual Report 2018-2019
An Information Paper submitted by WMO

The World Meteorological Organization1 (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations and includes 193 Member States and Territories. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. 
WMO has framed its Polar and High Mountain activities as part of the new WMO Strategic Plan 2020-2023 along the following priorities: (i) integration of surface and space observations, (ii) polar prediction and services, including climate services, (iii) the Global Cryosphere Watch pre-operational phase, (iv) high mountain activities, (v) transition from research to operation and services, and (vi) resources and partnership.

The Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW)2 is foundational to WMO’s polar initiatives and its observing component is one of the four components of the WMO Integrated Global Observing System. Currently, the surface observing network of GCW includes 22 stations in the Antarctic region, and each of them observes at least one cryosphere variable (snow, ice sheet, sea ice). Recognizing the increased availability of sea ice products and the need for guidance on their strengths and applications, GCW has initiated the coordination of a sea ice thickness and snow on ice intercomparison, which will be conducted with significant international engagement, for both poles, over the next 3-4 years.The Guide for Best Practices for cryosphere observations, under development by GCW includes references to observations in the Antarctic region. A chapter on snow observations has been published by WMO as part of the Volume on Measurement of Cryosphere Variables of the WMO Guide for Instruments and Methods of Observation. Significant engagements with the operational and scientific communities are taking place to achieve increased standardization and common practices regarding terminology and semantics on data and metadata.

 
Steps are being taken to integrate the WMO/SCAR Antarctic Observing Network (AntON), which has been focusing on traditional weather and climate observing stations, into the new Regional Basic Observing Network (RBON), which will be more multi-disciplinary and include new types of observing stations (e.g. aircraft-based observations, marine observing stations, surface-based remote sensing observing systems). 

The Year of Polar Prediction (YOPP) is an initiative of WMO’s World Weather Research Programme, covering the period 2017 – 2019, which has aimed to improve environmental prediction capabilities by coordinating periods of intensive observing, modelling, prediction, verification, and user-engagement and education activities. A special Observing Period was held in Antarctica from 16 Nov 2018 to 15 Feb 2019. The YOPP is now entering its consolidation phase, which is crucial to synthesize research efforts and to determine measures of the long-term success of YOPP, as well as to provide recommendations (see associated IP 94).
 
WMO is developing the concept of an Antarctic Polar Regional Climate Centre (PRCC) Network. Focus has been on the development of the Arctic PRCC Network but the intention is still to hold a scoping workshop in order to ensure the products are co-designed with partner organisations. Both the ATCM and CEP (as well as others such as SCAR and COMNAP) will be invited to send representatives to this workshop to ensure that the needs of the CEP and Treaty are taken into account when designing such an Antarctic PRCC.

Through its co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme2, WMO carries out a number of research activities (often in partnership with SCAR and others) of relevance to Treaty Parties. For example, on Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level3, the Southern Ocean and Sea Ice4 (including support of the International Programme for Antarctic Buoys – see associated IP 93), Polar Climate Predictability5 and modelling on a variety of scales (e.g. WCRP coordinates the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project used by the IPCC)6. WCRP has drafted its new Strategic Plan 2019-20287 and is developing an associated Implementation Plan8, in which the climate of the polar regions are a key aspect.

Each year WMO produces a high-level “Statement on the State of the Global Climate”9. The 2018 Statement includes sections on “Warming trends in the Southern Ocean” and “Antarctic ice sheet mass balance”. These statements are presented at the Conference of Parties (COP) meetings and other fora and are available in English, Spanish, Russian, French, Chinese and Arabic. Hard copies will be made available or can be downloaded from https://library.wmo.int/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=20799.

SCAR and WMO have also launched a WMO-SCAR Fellowship Program for early career scientists. Those supported will be expected to undertake research, on a topic that is relevant to the programme priority areas of WMO, at major international laboratories, field facilities, and/or institutes in or operated by SCAR member countries with the goal to expose them to recent advances in research and to develop long-term scientific links and partnerships (see associated IP 49).

WMO continues to look forward to a positive, mutually beneficial engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate observations, services and research. For further queries please contact Mike Sparrow (msparrow@wmo.int) or Etienne Charpentier (echarpentier@wmo.int).


