





Outcomes of the 2017 UN Conference on Oceans and a look forward to the 2020 conference in Lisbon, Portugal








Outcomes of the 2017 UN Conference on Oceans and a look forward to the 2020 Conference in Lisbon, Portugal

Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Sweden and WMO

Summary

The Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) is an important player in the advancement of scientific knowledge of the Ocean and the conservation of its natural resources. The breadth and quality of its work has the potential to contribute positively to the implementation of SDG14 (Life Under Water) of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In 2017, the United Nations held their first Oceans Conference in New York, with positive outcomes for the future of Ocean conservation and its sustainable use. In 2020, Portugal will be co-hosting – alongside Kenya – the second UN Oceans Conference in support of the implementation of SDG14 and the ATS has the capacity and expertise to be one of the key contributors to the success of the event.   	

Background

The Antarctic Treaty has jurisdiction south of 60ºS and has been considered one of the most successful treaties of all time, recognizing that Antarctica should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes, minimizing human impact and promoting international scientific cooperation (Antarctic conference, 1959). Various actions have been taking place, with Parties agreeing on measures for the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora (1964), a conservation convention for Antarctic Seals (1972), a convention on the conservation of Antarctic living resources (CAMLR, 1982) and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991). In 2016, during ATCM XXXIX in Chile, Parties re-affirmed their commitment to this Protocol through the “Declaration on the Twenty Fifth Anniversary of the signing of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty”. 

	The Antarctic Treaty has an important role in sharing and promoting Antarctic research  with the World community, in accordance with Art. III of the Antarctic Treaty, such as climate related Antarctic research (E.g. via the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the World Climate Research Programme/World Meteorological Organization (e.g. ATCM XXXIX IP012, ATCM XL IPs115, 118, 119) and/or United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC; E.g. ATCM XL IP161; ATCM XXXVII IP39; ATCM XXXVIII IP114)) and Antarctic biodiversity (E.g. via SCAR (E.g. ATCM XXXIX IP38; ATCM XL WP13). In terms of Southern Ocean conservation, the role of CAMLR and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources on regulating fisheries and the establishment of a representative system of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs), has attracted much attention. 

The United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Developments and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals, the SDGs (2015), aim to address global challenges facing humankind, including issues that overlap with some of the Articles of the Antarctic Treaty (Ex. Art. I, II and III), such as climate change (SDG13), ocean pollution (SDG6 and SDG14) and gender equality (SDG5).  The aim of this Information Paper is to share information about the United Nations Conference in support of SDG14, a 5-day conference that took place in New York in 2017, and provide preliminary information relevant to Antarctic Treaty Parties about the second UN Ocean Conference, which will take place in Lisbon, Portugal, from 2 to 6 June 2020.



The 2017 UN Oceans Conference

Convened under the mandate of UNGA Res. 70/226, of February 2016 (further developed by UNGA Res. 70/303, of September of the same year), the High-level United Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development (informally, The Ocean Conference) was held at United Nations Headquarters in New York from 5 to 9 June 2017, coinciding with World Oceans Day. The Governments of Fiji and Sweden co-hosted the Conference. 

The Conference was the first of its kind because of its focus on solutions, aiming to identify ways and means to support the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14, building on existing successful partnerships and stimulating innovative and concrete new partnerships to advance its implementation. The event brought together 193 UN Member States and involved the United Nations system, other intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions, non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions, the scientific community, the private sector, philanthropic organizations and other actors. 

During the meeting, participants shared their experiences gained at the national, regional and international levels with regards to implementation of Goal 14, contributing to the follow-up and review process of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, by providing input to the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, including on opportunities to strengthen progress in the future.

The Conference adopted, by consensus, a concise and intergovernmentally-agreed declaration entitled "Our Ocean, Our Future: Call for Action", a report containing the co-chairs' summaries of the seven partnership dialogues, as well as a list of more than 1300 voluntary commitments for the implementation of Goal 14, that now registers up to 1541 commitments (and counting). A registry of these commitments can be found online, at the website of the Conference.1

To consider the themes for the partnership dialogues and elements for a "Call for Action", the President of the General Assembly convened a two-day preparatory meeting earlier that year (in February), at UN Headquarters in New York, chaired by two co-facilitators, H.E. Mr. Álvaro Mendonça e Moura, Permanent Representative of Portugal to the UN, and H.E. Mr. Burhan Gafoor, Permanent Representative of Singapore to the UN.  

The Call for Action
Recognizing that the wellbeing of present and future generations is inextricably linked to the health and productivity of the ocean, countries collectively agreed “to act decisively and urgently, convinced that our collective action will make a meaningful difference to our people, to our planet and to our prosperity.”2 

In the Call for Action, countries expressed alarm by the adverse impacts of climate change on the ocean, including the rise in ocean temperatures, ocean and coastal acidification, deoxygenation, sea-level rise, the decrease in polar ice coverage, coastal erosion and extreme weather events. Also, they stressed the importance of enhancing understanding of the health and role of our ocean and the stressors on its ecosystems, the need to further increase marine scientific research to inform and support decision-making, and to promote knowledge hubs and networks to enhance the sharing of scientific data, best practices and know-how. To this end, countries called on all stakeholders to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development by dedicating greater resources to marine scientific research.

States managed to agree to implement long-term and robust strategies to reduce the use of plastics and microplastics, such as plastic bags and single use plastics. Countries also agreed to develop and implement effective adaptation and mitigation measures that address ocean and coastal acidification, sea-level rise and increase in ocean temperatures, and to target the other harmful impacts of climate change on the ocean. The Call for Action recognizes the importance of the Paris Agreement on climate change.

The Call for Action also included measures to protect coastal and blue carbon ecosystems, such as mangroves, tidal marshes, seagrass and coral reefs, and wider interconnected ecosystems, as well as enhancing sustainable fisheries management, including to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield. Countries were called upon to decisively prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies, which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, and eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.

The 2020 UN Oceans Conference

Organized by Portugal and Kenya, the next UN Ocean Conference will take place in Lisbon, between the 2nd and the 6th of June 2020, following UNGA Res. A/73/292, of 9 May2019. The Conference, whose proposed theme is “Scaling up Ocean Action based on science and innovation for the implementation of Goal 14: stocktaking, partnerships and solutions”, will seek to build on the outcomes of the first Conference and, at the same time, explore synergies and build on the work of other processes, as well as feed into upcoming initiatives such as the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development (2021-2030).

Apart from the plenary meetings, the Conference will be holding eight interactive dialogues which will address themes related to the different targets under Goal 14, thus exploring the key role and potential that partnerships between different actors have in order to bring about the solutions supporting the full implementation of Goal 14 and other Ocean-related SDGs. As in 2017, the aim will be to adopt a political declaration to provide a substantial contribution to the international debate on Oceans, this time focused on the theme of the Conference. 

Because of its focus on ocean science and innovation, the 2020 Oceans Conference will be a unique event that will enable us to continue raising global awareness to Oceans issues, establish new partnerships and solutions and create opportunities to strengthen progress in the implementation of SDG14 and the conservation of our Ocean.

As a contribution to the preparations for the Ocean Conference 2020 and the Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development, WMO, as part of its eighteenth World Meteorological Congress (Geneva, 3-14 June 2019), has organized an “Ocean Dialogue” on ocean information to deliver weather, marine and climate services for a resilient and sustainable blue economy. The Congress adopted draft resolution 7.3(1)/2 – United Nations Ocean Conference 2020, which emphasizes the priority of ocean science, based on sustained observation and information sharing, for delivering enhanced services to strengthen the resilience of societies to the socioeconomic consequences of extreme weather, climate, water and other environmental events, and underpin their sustainable development.



Conclusions

It is a well-established notion that more effort will be necessary if we are to reverse the current cycle of decline in which the Ocean and marine resources are currently in. A close analysis of the activities of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), in conjunction with the objectives and outcomes of the UN Oceans Conferences, highlights a singular role for the ATS in the context of the implementation of SDG14 as a whole and, particularly, for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean region.

Indeed, it is safe to say that the work of CCAMLR is of extreme importance for the conservation of the region’s living resources and contributes actively to the achievement of Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda. Other Antarctic scientific bodies such as the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) have important roles in the implementation of Goal 14 (namely on Targets 14.2, 14.3, 14.5 and 14.A). SCAR is charged with initiating, developing and coordinating high quality international scientific research in the Antarctic region (including the Southern Ocean), by providing objective and independent scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, as well as other organizations such as the UNFCCC and the IPCC, on issues of science and conservation affecting the management of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and on the role of the Antarctic region in the Earth system.

The UN Ocean Conference in 2020 will be an opportunity to get the World one step closer to the realization of our commitments under the 2030 Agenda and that is why we are looking forward to welcoming representatives of all States, at the highest possible levels, as well as all the interested stakeholders (private sector, academia and civil society) including a breadth of ocean-relevant international organizations, especially the Antarctic Treaty system and SCAR. 

