





Eradication of a non-native grass 
Poa annua L. from Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands – update 2018/2019









Eradication of a non-native grass Poa annua L. from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands – update 2018/2019
Information Paper submitted by Poland
Summary
Results of research study on the eradication of non-native species Poa annua from ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay and from Arctowski station are presented. Follow-up activities from the 2018/2019 Antarctic season are reported.
Background
The non-native grass Poa annua L. was accidentally introduced at the Polish Antarctic Arctowski Station during 1980s. Its presence was initially recorded in the austral summer of 1985/86, first in sites disturbed by human activities, later on the deglaciated moraines of the Ecology Glacier, inside ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, about 1.5 km from the Station. 
In accordance with Annex II of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, as well as the CEP non-native species manual, and the Management Plan of ASPA No 128, measures to eradicate P. annua from the Area were taken. Progress was reported to ATCM XXXVIII/CEP XVIII (IP78), ATCM XXXIX/CEP XIX (IP60) and ATCM XL/CEP XX (IP47).
Research study on P. annua eradication
Eradication program was preceded by detailed investigation of the biology of P. annua  in accordance to guidelines regarding the eradication/control of alien species (Galera et al. 2016). The distribution, morphology, ecology, genetics, physiology, expansion history and potential sources of introduction of the species were determined. Authors concluded that the species is expanding from the anthropogenic sites to native communities, and presents a potential threat to native flora. Spatial and temporal dynamics of P. annua spread is deemed sufficient to declare this species invasive at the scale of Point Thomas Oasis. At the same time it was not exceptionally intense in comparison with other alien plant invasions worldwide, which make the control/eradication effort a realistic goal.
Point Thomas Oasis and ice-free areas of ASPA No 128 were surveyed, and the each found P. annua tussock was mapped. Thereafter, non-native plants were gradually removed, beginning with those found in the Area as well as those closest to  moss carpet formations. The removal was conducted carefully by hand, in such a manner so as not disturb native plant species. It was estimated that negative impact of the eradication program on native flora was negligible.
Earlier research indicated that the structure of the soil seed bank is highly associated with the location of tussocks. Therefore additional topsoil (0-10 cm) removal from underneath the tussocks should efficiently restrict population recover from the soil seed bank. Authors also noted that the biology of the species (i.e., autogamy, seed persistence, small seed size, minimal requirements for germination, short life cycle, small plant size) may still hamper effective total eradication.
Authors estimated that it was the biggest non-native plant eradication conducted so far in Antarctica.
Follow-up activities taken in 2018/2019 season
In the summer season 2018/2019 (January - April 2019), vicinity of the Henryk Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station was thoroughly checked for the presence of tussocks and seedlings of this invasive species. 
Eradication was carried out in accordance with the methods used in the multi-year research program “The causes, course and consequences of the expansion of Poa annua L. in Western Antarctica, a multi-aspect population study” which was carried out in 2014 – 2017 (Galera et al 2016). The removal was conducted by hand by a thoroughly trained scientist with the experience of working with invasive species, carefully not to disturb native plant species. Process was carried out honestly and in great detail. In this season app 180 tussocks were removed from the Point Thomas Oasis. Each tussock was dug up with the roots and surrounding soil. Part of the collected material was described, protected and transported to Poland for further studies, while the rest of the material was burned in the incinerator on the Station. All tussock collection sites were described according to accepted standards and marked on the map. Grass was taken from around 85 sites, all in the vicinity of the Station. No tussock was found in the ASPA No 128 Western Shore of Admiralty Bay. Each site was photographed, and GPS location was noted. 
The action, both around Arctowski Station, and in ASPA No 128 will be continued during the next Antarctic seasons.
References
Galera H., Wódkiewicz M., Czyż E., Łapiński S., Kowalska M.E., Pasik M., Rajner M., Bylina P., Chwedorzewska K.J. 2017. First step to eradication of Poa annua L. from Point Thomas Oasis (King George Island, South Shetlands, Antarctica). Polar Biology, 40, 939–945

