





Antarctic Publications by Turkish Scientists 








Antarctic Publications by Turkish Scientists 
Summary
This information note has been prepared to share the number of scientific papers published or contributed/co-authored by Turkish scientists related to Antarctica. This paper also includes education and outreach (E&O) activities conducted under polar social sciences umbrella. 
Details about Scientific Articles

The scientific publications on the Antarctic which were published by Turkish scientists during their doctoral studies and/or academic careers, either abroad or in Turkey, between 1977 and 2019 has been archived. These publications were collected in three categories which are especially compatible with SCAR categories. These are physical sciences, earth sciences and life sciences. The study included articles of Prof. Dr. Umran Inan and Prof. Dr. Serap Tilav who studied Antarctic in the United States of America for many years. Because of their unique Antarctic studies/work, the names of these two scientists were given to two different places in Antarctica as Inan Peak and Tilav Cirque by the USGS. Although not all the journals included, the most important ones are listed below:

Journal of Geophysical Research, Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, Geophysical Research Letter, Polar Biology, Nature, Annals of Glaciology, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography,  Physical Review D, Journal of Marine Research, The Cryosphere Discussion (TCD), Journal of Glaciology, Quaternary Research, Quaternary Science Reviews, Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, Astrophysical Journal, European Physical Journal, Remote Sensing and so on. 

Figure 1 shows the numbers and categories of publications published until now. It is very clear that since the announcement of the National Polar Science Program in 2017, the number of projects and scientific publications have gained momentum. It is proud to see that the physical sciences publications are quite high compared to other categories. Besides, as it is seen that the numbers in other categories are less, indicates that the scientists in these fields should be supported primarily in the scientific term. For this reason, while the scientists working in physical sciences will be supported, it is aimed, the other categories, to be encouraged by the National Polar Science Program. In particular, there were 39 scientific projects from different universities and institutions supported during Turkish Antarctic Expedition II (2017-2018 season) and Turkish Antarctic Expedition III (2018-2019 season). 22 of them were under the roof of life sciences and 17 of them were under earth sciences. The general overview of the numbers can be found in Figure 2. In addition to these categories, incentives will be increased to include the social sciences category into the system in the forthcoming days. In this sense, between 2016-2019, three books were printed with international cooperation in the Arctic and Antarctic social sciences. On the other hand, the National Polar Science Program is carrying out a very successful education and outreach program in the field of social sciences. Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center’s (ITU PolReC) carries out trainings intended to raise public awareness about global climate change, polar regions and the Turkish Polar Science Programs. Additionally, it engages in national and international courses, seminars, conferences, congresses and suchlike activities which include solution suggestions and explains scientific and technical findings as results of practices and studies. APECS Turkey has a big E&O program which is executed by Turkish Students Polar Research Team (PolSTeam). During the one-year period, APECS Turkey and PolSTeam members usually visit primary, middle and high schools to make age orientated presentations about global climate change and Polar Regions. Figure 3 shows the number of students has been reached since 2015. 



Figure 1. Number of scientific publications between 1997-2019 by Turkish scientists co-authored with international scientists


Figure 2. Number of scientific projects funded between 2017-2019 during Turkish Antarctic Expeditions


Figure 3. Number of students reached directly by PolReC, PolSTeam and APECS Turkey

