





Progress update in the construction of the gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica 








Progress update in the construction of the gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica 

Information Paper submitted by Italy 


    1. Summary
Italy is realizing the construction of a gravel runway to increase the reliability of its National Antarctic Programme (PNRA) transportation system, allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and a more reliable multi-year programming. The construction site “Boulder Clay” is located in the Northern Foothills, about 6 km south of the Italian Antarctic Research Station Mario Zucchelli (MZS). The site is an ice-free area located on a very gentle slope with south-eastern exposure.
Italy produced several documents while the concept of building this new infrastructure was developing (IP 41- ATCM XXXV, IP80 – ATCM XXXVI, IP57 – ATCM XXXVII, WP30 – ATCM XXXVIII). During ATCM XXXIX, Italy presented the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica.  In ATCM XL, the Final CEE was presented. 
This Information Paper is presented to inform about the ongoing activities. A total length of 1350 m has been realized and 70% of the apron. The runway has a double slope of 1% from the centre of the runway to allow an easier evacuation of water from melted snow. The final levelling of the surface was done up to 1100 x 30 m to allow Basler landing.
The support provided by USAP was fundamental concerning the provision of missing spare parts and technical advice on the machinery.
    2. List of installations to be performed
The gravel runway project, as outlined in the Final CEE, includes the following facilities to be constructed mainly using the material available in the nearby area.
    • a gravel embankment of  2,200 m long and 60 m width
    • an apron (130x134 m)
    • an helipad (30x30 m) 
    • a service area (70x22 m) 
    • a small taxiway (70 m long, 25 m width) to connect the runway with the apron. 
    • access road from MZS 
The embankment is constructed of poorly graded open aggregate to ensure a high air permeability. The first sub base layer is composed of crushed rock and gravel put in place as it is, the final surface layer will be refined using meshed material from course to fine gravel. 
Once the runway terminated, a reception structure (MZS terminal) will also be constructed.
    3. Technical works performed

A first set of tests were performed in the years 2016-2017, to assess the productivity and the working conditions. Two full field seasons of work were realised in 2017-2018 and 2018-2019.
In comparison to what initially expected, the substrate resulted to be easily workable only a reduced amount of time. The available working period is annually around 10 December to around 10 February.
Annually works start with snow clearing, the preparation of the refuelling station and of the maintenance area. A transportable power generation group of 6,0 kW is installed on site. One living module and one module containing vacuum toilets and lavabo with black water accumulation are placed on site at the beginning of the season. Once full, black water reservoir is transported to MZS and black water is put in the sewage treatment plant.

3.1	Access to the construction site, quarries estimation and material excavation
Access to construction site was provided prolonging the already existing road that connects MZS to Enigma Lake runway. To enable an easier access to the planned quarries, a light embankment was realized to connect the road with the quarries. Drainage pipes were placed under the embankment. The road was optimized to reduce the length.
Georadar measurements were performed in the quarries to evaluate their potential. The first 60 cm of soil can be easily dig in the same season (Fig.1).

Fig 1. Ripping operations at the quarry site

3.2 	Organization of the work
The following phases are performed: 
•	Ripping of the soil in the quarries area, eventual screening (Fig.2)
•	Accumulation of excavated material along the quarry road 
•	Transfer to construction site with dumpers
•	Download and positioning
•	Compaction with steamroller
The organization of the working team composed of 20 dedicated personnel initially was in 3 shifts but was reduced to 2 shifts to enable a higher production in the most favourable hours of the day. In effect, after 02:00 AM the production rate was considerably lower.
Personnel from ENEA, Italian Air Force, Italian Fire Department and specialized private machine operators, has been hired for this work. MZS personnel for fuel supply activities, operation room and cuisine supported also the work. 
Differential GPS measurements allowed to follow the exact positioning of reference sticks and to elaborate in a more accurate manner the technical properties of the runway (gradient and volume calculation).

Fig 2. Screened material stacks
Drone surveys were used to produce a 3D model of the surface allowing rapid evaluation of planarity of the surface and an evaluation of the volume of material to move. Figure 3 presents the modelling of the apron.
   
Fig 3. Apron realization: study of volume of material to be moved. The green colour is the expected height of the apron.



3.3	Production and fuel consumption
The total excavated material, up to now, has been 217840 m3 (roads, apron and runway). Once compacted the material has 25% lower volume. 
The total fuel consumption, up to now, was 235445 L, the daily consumption was around 1,7 ÷  2 m3 using 2 excavators in the quarries, 1 excavator on the runway construction front , 4 dumpers for material  transportation a steamroller and a grader. 
The actual length of the runway is 1350 m. 70% of the apron was realised together with the double slope of 1% from the centre of the runway to allow an easier evacuation of water from melted snow (Fig 4.). The levelling of the surface was done up to 1100 m. The first 700 m of the runway have a slope of 1%, between 700 and 800 m the slope is 0%, and from 800 forwards it is -0,8%.


Fig 4. Overview of the runway site

3.4 	Main encountered problems 
The main encountered problems are summarized below:
    • Blowing snow and snow accumulation reduced visibility and slowed down the operations. In 2018-2019 a lot of very windy days were recorded
    • Great erosion of mechanical parts, buckets and caterpillars occurred because of the high abrasiveness of the excavated material (manly granite), frequent failure of crossbows and cut tyres. The latter problem was reduced with a better preparation of the roads 
    • Melting of permafrost in the hottest periods with the occasional formation of water in the quarries area. The excavated material could not be placed on site immediately but some days of drying up were required before installation, when its water content was excessive
    • Melting of transported snow in the runway area and resulting occasional accumulation of water at the foot of the embankment. A 3D topographic survey was performed to identify the zones of possible water accumulation and explore the drainage solutions. A ditch was realized with two accumulation pits that can be manually drained when necessary using installed submerged pumps and water hoses
The support provided by USAP was fundamental concerning the provision of missing spare parts and technical advice.

3.5 	First landing of a Basler
On 7 February the VKB Basler landed successfully for the first time on the runway of 1100 m long and 30 m wide (Fig. 5).

Fig 5. Basler VKB successfully landing at Boulder Clay
    4. Environmental monitoring
In the Final CEE the conclusion was that proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station would likely have a “more than a minor or transitory” impact on the environment. 
An Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMOP) has been proposed by ENEA and CNR in order to evaluate the impacts of the proposed infrastructure. The mainly interested environmental compartments are permafrost, fauna, vegetation and air quality. Some installations are under way and data of last season are currently being analysed.
Unfortunately, in his activities, a young researcher highlighted rocks using paint, without authorization. This unfortunate episode has been investigated and remediation will be conducted in the next season.

4.1 Air quality 
Air quality is monitored at 5 sampling points as shown in Figure 6, where the proposed runway is indicated in red. Sampling point P5 can be considered as an indicator of what happens at the further position with respect to the construction activities, therefore indicating in a very conservative way, possible impacts on the air quality closer to the targets. Sampling point P2, in the quarries area, is the only one provided with electrical power produced by a generator and hosts a high volume sampler. 

  
Fig 6: air quality monitoring point P2 and passive devices installed by the quarries
The monitored parameters are reported in table 1.  
Parameter
Sampling method
Frequency
n. of samples
SO2

Passive sampler (Radiello)	15 days	11
15 days
11

microsensor
Average of 1 day exposure
15
NO2
Passive sampler (Radiello)	15 days	11
15 days
11

microsensor
Average of 1 day exposure
15
CO

Passive sampler (Radiello)
15 days
11

microsensor
Average of 1 day exposure
15
Organic contaminants
Passive sampler PUF
45 d
10
VOC
Passive sampler (Radiello)
15 d
15
PM10
OPC
Average of 1 h exposure
15
PAHs (PM10)
High Volume sampler
3 d
39
Metals (PM10)
High Volume sampler
3 d
39
Results indicate that gaseous contaminants (SO2, NO2, CO) did not show any increased level compared with measures effected in November, before the beginning of the working period.
Atmospheric particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5) has been sampled during the working period with a portable optical particle counter at the 5 sampling sites during the working period. The values show that no particulate contamination seems to reach sampling point P5. Measures where highly dependent, as expected, from the wind conditions. 
Analyses of PM10 composition concerning heavy metals in PM10 are well below the threshold values of the Italian legislation (D.L.155/2010), which are 28 times higher for Nickel, 2 orders of magnitude for Arsenic and 3 orders of magnitude for Cadmium and Lead (Figure 7).
 

Fig. 7 Heavy Metal concentration in the PM10 fraction reported to the volume of filtered air. Blue corresponds to Campo Icaro location before field works,  a site considered the baseline site for MZS monitoring, being far from anthropogenic pollution. The Orange color is referred to Boulder Clay sampling point P2 , the grey to data from MZS. The detection limit are: 0.5pg/m3 Cd, 200 pg/m3 Ni, 9,5 pg/m3 for Pb and 1,5 pg/m3. Where no data are present the concentration is below the detection limit.
Analyses of PM10 composition concerning PAHs and organic contaminants are under progress in Italy.

4.2 Monitoring of flora
Before the start of construction, a detailed vegetation survey has been carried out both on the runway as well as in the quarries area.  The occurrence of single vegetation species of mosses and lichens, vegetation communities’ distribution and coverage has been mapped. Twelve different vegetation communities were identified along the runway path, involving both moss dominated as well as lichen dominated ecosystems, characterized by different ecological requirements. 
To preserve as much as possible the original biodiversity of the site, researchers performed transplantation actions of vegetation patches collected from the runway path and re-located outside from the runway, in safe locations in the surrounding area, providing suitable conditions, favouring the persistence of the transplanted patches. The safe areas suitable and proposed for the transplant operations were located on the upward side of the runway, downwind. The transplantation actions were performed with the removal and transplant of 29 vegetation patches. The survey of the first 17 patches transplanted in 2016/17 allowed stating the full success of the transplant. Six biomonitoring sites for mosses and lichens were also identified. 

4.3 Monitoring of fauna
Habitat quality is likely to induce effects on physiology, behavior and distribution of wildlife. The stretch of coast between MZS and Adélie Cove hosts three different seabird species (Stercorarius maccormicki, Oceanites oceanicus and Pygoscelis adeliae) in the breeding season (mid October - late February). 
During 2017-2019, in collaboration with the PNRA PenguinERA research project, the following activities were performed:
    • GPS survey of skuas and Wilson’s storm petrel nests from MZS to Adélie Cove
    • a preliminary GPS survey of the upper limit, and north to south extension of the Adélie penguin colony, 
    • evaluation of breeding success in a subset of 50 Adèlie penguin nests 
    • remote data collection by installing a Time Lapse Camera at Adélie Cove in a control area T
Aerial survey was also conducted and Figure 8 presents the obtained Giga photo. The analysis of images  and data will allow gaining data on phenology and on penguin behaviour during the breeding season. Up to know no apparent change of behaviour was recorded as a result of construction works.



Fig. 8 Giga photo pf the Adelie Penguin colony at Adélie Cove

4.4 Monitoring microorganisms
Microbial diversity was studied in brine samples collected aseptically near the ice blisters of two adjacent lakes at Boulder Clay  (project PNRA13/AZ1.05) before the start of the runway construction, as baseline. All brines shared bacterial members mostly affiliated with the same taxonomic groups, even if differences were encountered in their relative abundances within both the total and metabolically active bacterial and archaeal communities, including methanogens. Sampling and microbial analyses of the brines for monitoring purpose, also in relation to the biodegradation capabilities on contaminants, are forecasted for the next expedition (2019/20).

4.4 Moraine deformation
Since the beginning of activities, the moraine of Boulder Clay was subject to geodetic measurement in collaboration with the personnel from the geodetic observatory of MZS. 12 points are measured annually. 
To detect and characterize potential deformation processes affecting the area of interest, an investigation was performed by using archive Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) satellite images collected by the satellites of COSMO-SkyMed constellation, managed by the Italian Space Agency (ASI).  Non major displacement has been observed. 

4.5 Permafrost  

Regarding permafrost monitoring in the examined areas two main activities were done:
    • Restoring and partially saving the pre-existing Grid for monitoring of the active permafrost layer.
    • Active layer monitoring along the runway.
The old CALM grid, which was affected by construction works for about a half,  has been updated transferring 2 of shallow boreholes with 4 thermistors for each borehole at the depth of  2, 20, 30, 50 cm. This new part of the grid will become an interesting site in order to understand the impact of the infrastructure on the surrounding environment.
A new grid not far from the previous one (less than 200 m inland) has been selected and partially set up. 20 new shallow boreholes equipped with  thermistors were installed as well as almost all the 121 marks on the ground. Surface characteristics are still mapped and analysed. To monitor the snow cover, snow cams will be installed next season.
A monitoring system was designed and 6 locations along the first 600 hundred meters of runway  were selected too. The planned locations were established with one site within the runway and one on a inland side of the runway. All the shallow boreholes were equipped with thermistors to monitor the maximum depth of permafrost table.
The  ground characteristics (ice content, type, grain size and thermal properties)  of the shallow boreholes  will be finalized in the next years.




