





A brief review of the activities of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica
 in 2006-2018


English version provided by the author





A brief review of the activities of the Republic of Belarus 
in Antarctica in 2006-2018
As part of its consideration of the issues of paragraph 19 of the Agenda XLI ATCM (Other matters), the Republic of Belarus deems necessary to introduce the international Antarctic community an overview of the activities of the Republic of Belarus in 2006-2018 in Antarctica and inform the participating countries of the Antarctic Treaty on the conceptual information of paragraph 2, section 2 of the "National legislation on regulation of activities in Antarctica" and section 6 "Final clauses" of the present document.
1. General information
The Republic of Belarus officially joined the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 in July 19, 2006, and on April 10, 2008 joined the Protocol of protection of the environment to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991.
With a view to practical implementation of the activities of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica, Presidential Decree No. 1211 from 25.09.2007 established a state institution "National Center of Polar Research", which is entrusted with the organization of the activities of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica.
For the implementation of the research plans of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica, State target program “Monitoring of the Earth's polar regions and maintenance of the Arctic and Antarctic expeditions for 2007-2010 and for the period up to 2015” was developed and approved by the Presidential Decree No. 1104 dated 31.08.2006. Next State target program “Monitoring of the Earth's polar regions and maintenance of Belarusian Arctic and Antarctic expeditions in 2011-2015" was developed based on the experience gained by Belarusian explorers during their work in the Antarctic expeditions and approved by Presidential Decree No. 587 dated 10.05.2011. Currently, there operates Sub-Program No.3 of State target program "Knowledge-intensive technologies and engineering" in 2016-2020, approved by the Decree of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus No. 327 dated 21.04.2016 (further – Sub-Program No. 3). Scientific management of the Sub-Program No. 3 is assigned to the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus.
Financing of scientific and logistic activities in Antarctica is carried out at the expense of the state budget funds allocated for this purpose in the framework of implementation of Sub-Program No. 3. Distribution of the state budget funds for the activities in Antarctica is as follows: 40% for the transportation and logistics costs, 33.3% for the creation of the infrastructure of the Belarusian Antarctic station, 20% for scientific support, 4.7% for administrative activities, and 2% for international interaction.
To ensure the activity of the Republic of Belarus in Antarctica, 13 government and non-governmental institutions are attracted: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Labor and Social Protection, Ministry of Secondary and Higher Education, Court of Justice, Ministry of  Emergency Situations, the National Academy of  Sciences of  Belarus, the State Committee on Science and Technologies, Belarusian State University, government agency “National Center of Polar Research”, government agency “Republican Center for Hydrometeorology, Contamination Control and Environmental Monitoring”, Belarusian Geographic Society, Foundation for the Support of Extreme Expeditions “Polus”.
2. National legislation regulating activities in the Antarctic
From 2006 to 2018, 15 regulatory legal acts were adopted in the Republic of Belarus in relation to the Antarctic. Of these, 2 regulatory legal acts were adopted in relation to the activities of the Republic of Belarus in the Antarctic Treaty system, 5 in relation to the activities of Belarusian Antarctic expeditions, 5 in relation to the scientific activities of the Republic of Belarus in the Antarctic, and 3 bilateral international agreements of the Republic of Belarus on cooperation in the Antarctic. In total, in the Republic of Belarus for the period from 2006 to 2018 with regard to the Antarctic, the following was adopted: 1 Republican Law, 2 Decrees of the President of the Republic of Belarus, 5 Decrees of the Government of the Republic of Belarus, 4 Decrees of Ministries, 3 bilateral international agreements.
Currently, in the process of approval there are the Decree of the Government of the Republic of Belarus “On the procedure for reviewing and issuing permits for the activities of legal entities and individual entrepreneurs in the Antarctic Treaty area” and “On the approval of Measure 16” “Amendments to Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty "Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora”. In addition, the Decree of the Government of the Republic of Belarus “On Approval of Measure 1 of the “Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Liability resulting from environmental emergencies” is in the consultation phase of the Ministries and Departments of the Republic of Belarus.
3. Formation of the infrastructure of the Belarusian Antarctic Scientific Station
In 2015, the Republic of Belarus with the logistic and transport support of the Russian Antarctic Expedition, began construction of a scientific Antarctic station located on Enderby Land, at coordinates S67°39.5’, E46°09.2’.
The construction of the facilities of the Belarusian Antarctic Station is carried out in strict accordance with the Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation submitted by the Republic of Belarus at ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia (Bulgaria) under IP 39 Construction and Operation of the Belarusian Antarctic Station on mountain Vechernyaya, Enderby Land - Final Comprehensive Assessment environment. Currently, the infrastructure of the research station “Mountain Evening/ Vechernyaya” is being built. Further plans provide for the possibility of its transfer to the mode of year-round work with scientific and technical personnel in the amount of 12 people.
4. Scientific activities in the Antarctic
Regular scientific expeditions of the Republic of Belarus to the Antarctic began in 2006 and are held annually in the summer season. From 2006 to 2019, 11 Belarusian seasonal Antarctic expeditions were organized and conducted, in which 52 Belarusian specialists took part. 
As part of the implementation of the scientific tasks of Sub-Program 3, during the expeditions with the use of instrumentation systems and techniques developed in the Republic of Belarus and abroad, research programs are being carried out with the participation of research institutes and universities of the Republic of Belarus in the following areas:
- studies of the parameters of atmospheric aerosol and the reflection spectra of the underlying surface;
- carrying out synchronous ground-based measurements and observations of agreed parameters and natural objects in the periods of remote sensing of the area of activity of the BEA by Russian and Belarusian space satellites;
- studies of the state of the ozonosphere and components of the radiation balance;
- production of standard meteorological observations and climate research;
- measurements of variations of the Earth’s magnetic field;
- studies of living marine, freshwater and terrestrial biological objects, as well as microbiological studies;
- conducting environmental and microbiological monitoring of key environmental parameters in the area of work of the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition;
- medical research and registration of the functional indicators of the expedition staff, as well as indicators of physical activity.
During the period from 2006 to 2018, scientists and specialists of the Republic of Belarus published 145 papers and articles on the problems of the Antarctic. Of these, 28 in peer-reviewed scientific journals and 97 in English. Since 2014, the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus with an interval of two years, has been organizing international scientific conferences on the problems of the Antarctic. Since 2014, three conferences have been held. In the last of them, in 2018, 86 specialists and scientists from Belarus, Great Britain, New Zealand, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Russian Federation, the Turkish Republic, and Ukraine took part.
To promote their own and international scientific research programs, the development of scientific and logistical cooperation, the Republic of Belarus and interested Belarusian organizations have 12 international and bilateral Agreements and Agreements on cooperation in the Antarctic with Governments, national programs and organizations of other Antarctic Treaty countries from Finland, France, New Zealand, the Russian Federation, Turkey, Ukraine.
The Agreement on cooperation in the Antarctic with Bulgaria is under negotiation. Its signing is planned in Plovdiv during the AGM COMNAP.
In addition, Belarusian organizations are partners in 7 joint and international projects on the study of the Antarctic environment with colleagues and organizations from Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Norway, and the Russian Federation.
5. Participation in the work of public organizations of the Antarctic Treaty
Since 2006, the Republic of Belarus has been a Contracting Party to the Antarctic Treaty.
Since 2008, the Republic of Belarus has been a permanent member of the Committee for the Protection of the Environment of the Antarctic.
Since 2015, the Republic of Belarus has been a permanent member of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs.
The Republic of Belarus since 2018 has been an associate member of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR). In the near plans of our country there is a membership in SCAR.
From 2006 to 2018, the Republic of Belarus took part in the work of nine Consultative Meetings on the Antarctic Treaty and the Committee for Environmental Protection, where our country presented 17 information documents on various issues of activity in the Antarctic.
From 2007 to 2018, representatives of the Republic of Belarus took part in the work of eight meetings of the Council of Governors of National Antarctic Programs, at which our country presented 8 working documents and 5 presentations.
From 2007 to 2018 participated in the work of three parliamentary sessions of the Scientific Committee for the Study of the Antarctic in which our country presented 2 reports, 3 messages and 2 presentations.
6. Final provisions
The Republic of Belarus fully supports all the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty of December 1, 1959, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of October 4, 1991, and the Recommendations and Measures of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings that entered into force, and expresses its readiness, as before, to follow such basic principles of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991 as support for the peaceful coexistence of Antarctica, development of international cooperation, freedom of research and environmental protection in Antarctica.
Based on the above, we believe that the current activities of our State in the Antarctic can meet the necessary criteria for the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, which are set out in Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and Decision 2 of the Fortieth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Beijing, China Guidelines for the Provision of the Status of a Consultative Party, and express our intention to submit in the near future an application for approval by the Republic of Belarus of the status of a Consultative Party to the Treaty on Antarctica with the aim of active participation in the development of the Antarctic Treaty system and strengthening international cooperation.

