





Initial Responses to Comments on the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station Area Activities









Initial Responses to Comments on the Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station Area Activities
An information paper submitted by the United States

Background

A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was prepared by the National Science Foundation (NSF) for the modernization of McMurdo Station while continuing the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) science and operational activities at the station, field sites, and facilities that the station supports. The draft CEE was prepared in accordance with applicable provisions of Annex I, Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991) and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (2016).

Notification of the availability of the CEE was circulated by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to all Parties via Circular 5 (February 19, 2019) and to the CEP via CEP Circular 5 (March 4, 2019). The draft CEE was made available on the CEP Workspace on the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: https://www.ats.aq/e/cep_workspace/cep_draftcee.htm and on the National Science Foundation’s Office of Polar Programs: https://www.nsf.gov/geo/opp/antarct/treaty/modernization_cee.jsp
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report), an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) was established, convened by the Republic of Korea, to review the draft CEE.  ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP discussion forum, which also provided the Non-Technical Summary (NTS) translated into the official Treaty languages  
The United States appreciates the efforts of ICG participants who provided valuable comments on the CEE and, in particular, thanks the Republic of Korea for convening the ICG and providing an excellent summary of the responses (ATCM XLII WP15 Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group established to consider the draft CEE for the “Continuation and Modernization of McMurdo Station Area Activities”). We plan to revise the CEE and address the comments received from the ICG, from discussion during the CEP meeting, and from the general public in the Final CEE. 
With regard to the conclusions of the ICG, we note that the participants considered that the draft CEE generally and broadly conforms to the formal requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol. We also note that some participants recommended reconsidering the scope of the proposed activity and expressed the view that additional information would be required on a number of aspects for the Final CEE to fully conform to the requirements of Article 3 of the Protocol. Recommendations to provide additional information or clarification in several areas of the CEE, both in the text and in the figures and tables, were made. The ICG concluded that the draft CEE broadly supports the conclusion that the impacts of some activities within the project will have a “more than minor or transitory impact”, and that this level of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is appropriate for this project. 

Initial Responses to the comments from ICG participants

Purpose and Scope of the CEE

The United States recognizes that this CEE is unlike any CEE to date. The scope of the CEE is broad, and the period of work is 15-20 years. We believe that our approach, although novel, fully conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of the Protocol. Because ICG participants noted that further explanation of the scope of the CEE would be beneficial, we have expanded our statement of the purpose and scope of the CEE as detailed below.

The purpose of the proposed activity is to ensure that USAP resources at McMurdo Station continue to serve as a viable and flexible platform to support evolving scientific research efficiently and effectively. The proposed activity consists of two interrelated and interdependent parts: the modernization of McMurdo Station through the McMurdo Master Plan and the continuation of science and associated operational activities in areas supported from the McMurdo Station area hub. 

The McMurdo Master Plan consists of a phased set of projects that would be conducted over a period of 15- 20 years. The McMurdo Master Plan replaces or substantially upgrades assets at McMurdo Station that are nearing or have exceeded their life expectancy. Proposed modernization activities would provide facilities and equipment that meet energy efficiency standards, logistical requirements, and environmental stewardship goals. A subset of the McMurdo Master Plan is the Antarctic Infrastructure Modernization for Science (AIMS) project. Site preparation and initial demolition work is planned to begin in the 2019-2020 season. The AIMS project construction phase is planned to continue through 2025-2026. Other McMurdo Master Plan projects following AIMS (implemented primarily from 2026 through 2033) have been identified but are not yet fully developed nor funded and thus are not at a stage for detailed environmental analysis.

Science and operational activities supported from the McMurdo Station area hub have been conducted since the construction of the station in 1955. Research sites supported from the McMurdo Station area hub include locations on Ross Island, in McMurdo Sound, on the Ross Ice Shelf, in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, and at deep field sites on the polar plateau and in West Antarctica. 
The USAP considers the McMurdo Station modernization (both AIMS projects and other Master Plan projects that are in the conceptual planning phase) and science activities supported from the McMurdo Station area hub are interlinked to the degree where a holistic approach is required to fully understand potential environmental impacts. The USAP has a track record of assessing its activities, including operations, logistics, construction/demolition, and science projects, in an integrated manner. CEE-level assessments that covered program-wide activities were conducted in 1980 and 1991, prior to the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Since that time, several CEEs and numerous IEEs assessed individual projects in the areas of both operations/logistics and science. 
This CEE continues the integrated assessment approach with regard to McMurdo Station and activities supported from the McMurdo Station area hub. The CEE incorporates by reference prior EIAs that are appropriate for the assessment of activities to be conducted over the next 15-20 years. The CEE provides an assessment of activities for which there is currently a sufficient level of detail. The USAP commits to further EIAs, as appropriate, for activities listed or planned that are not known in sufficient detail to assess at this time, have not been previously assessed, or which are to be conducted in sensitive areas. Additionally, the USAP is committed to an EIA feedback process as described in 2016 Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica. Examples of the USAP feedback process are discussed in ATCM XXXVIII IP42 EIA Field Reviews of Science, Operations and Camps; ATCM XL IP8 Field Project Reviews: Fulfilling the environmental impact assessment (EIA) monitoring obligations; ATCM XLII IP77 The Environmental Impact Assessment Feedback Process: Review of Project IceCube (2004 CEE) and ATCM XLII IP76 The Environmental Impact Assessment Feedback Process: Review of Modernization of the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica (1998 CEE).
Overall comments on supporting material
ICG participants recommended improvements to the figures and tables in order to more fully understand the scope, timeline, and footprint of the activities; locations of new construction and demolition of extant buildings, laydown areas, and fines collection areas; and locations of ecological resources (fauna and flora), ASPAs, and HSMs within the area. To address these comments, four new figures were prepared, and the current figures were substantially improved. Several tables in Chapter 3 (Proposed activity and alternatives), Chapter 5 (Identification and Prediction of Impacts), Chapter 6 (Mitigation Measures), and Appendix Table C-1 were amended. The list of references was also updated as recommended by several participants.
Alternatives 
Some participants noted that several alternatives considered but not carried forward were not described in detail. These alternatives, which considered the function, location, size, design, configuration of specific buildings, were severely constrained by existing site conditions at McMurdo Station. These alternatives were identified early in the process as non-viable due to higher cost, lower efficiency gain, and impact to construction schedule. Given the heavily disturbed nature of the McMurdo Station footprint, these alternatives in building design and location were considered to have essentially the same environmental impact as Alternative A and thus were not further developed.
Description of the initial environment. 
Several commenters recommended specific improvements to the description of the initial environment, particularly as related to the footprint of McMurdo Station. The improved figures provide clarity with regard to location of the new and to-be-demolished buildings. Results of prior environmental monitoring which show the disturbed nature of McMurdo Station’s footprint have been incorporated into the CEE. The areas of fines collection, which are within the McMurdo Station footprint, are also included in the new figures. There were questions raised about the location of ecological resources within the potentially impacted area, in order to allow for an understanding of potential impacts to fauna and flora. This information, along with the location of ASPAs and HSMs, is incorporated into the new figures. The text of the CEE will be amended accordingly.
Impact Assessment Methods
ICG participants suggested that expansion of the impact assessment methods would be appropriate. The methods and data used have been more fully described to provide a more complete understanding of how USAP implemented the 2016 Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica related to impact assessment methodology description. The Final CEE will include a discussion of applying extent, duration, intensity, and probability to predicting the impact level. In addition, a short overview has been added that summarizes data sources and application of the extensive experience USAP has in understanding the impacts of those proposed activities that are similar to prior construction and demolition on operation activities.
Impacts
ICG participants noted that additional detail on impacts and clearer linkage between the text and summary tables (Tables 5-2 and 5-3) would enhance the CEE. In addition, ICG participants recommended that additional impacts should be identified and that additional EIA documents may need to be prepared as project plans and designs mature. 
The Final CEE will provide additional detail on sources and types of impacts, resources potentially affected, and scale of impacts. A Gantt chart of the construction schedule of each of the seven AIMS construction projects has been provided for inclusion in the Final CEE.  This schedule compiles more detail of the basic construction steps that supports the existing text. Chapter 5 (Identification and Prediction of Impacts) will be expanded to include more detail on waste management during demolition and construction plus figures showing fines harvest locations. The revised impact chapter will include a broader discussion on the potential impacts to wildlife, vegetation, and marine resources from dust, noise, and vibrations. The Final CEE will separate potential impacts at McMurdo Station from potential impacts at supported locations (e.g. field camps, Black Island Transmission Facility, Marble Point, traverse operations). The discussion of indirect impacts (e.g., to marine resources) and cumulative impacts is being expanded. In addition, as previously discussed in this paper, USAP commits to further EIAs, as appropriate, for activities listed or planned that are not known in sufficient detail at this time, have not been previously assessed, or which are to be conducted in sensitive areas.
Mitigation 
The ICG participants noted that the CEE suggests appropriate methods of mitigation aimed to reduce or to avoid the impacts of the proposed activity in general. However, they suggested that more specific detail of mitigations should be included in the Final CEE. In addition, participants noted that additional detail would allow an assessment of the likely effectiveness of the planned arrangements, consistent with the approach recommended in the 2016 Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica. 
The Final CEE will include additional information throughout the Chapter 5 (Identification and Prediction of Impacts) and Chapter 6 (Mitigation Measures) related to specific mitigations. Examples of additional information provided includes specific mitigations for dust suppression, reduction of impacts from explosives use, handling of waste to minimize/prevent release to the environment, testing and management of material containing asbestos and lead-based paint, and prevention of transfer of non-native species among sites on the continent. Figures have been improved to facilitate an understanding of the location of activities, particularly construction and demolition, and the location of sensitive receptors (e.g., wildlife, vegetation, and HSMs), maps and figures).
Monitoring currently on-going by USAP would continue during construction and post-construction of the McMurdo Modernization projects.  In the Final CEE, Chapter 7 (Environmental Monitoring) will be expanded to explicitly identify the types of measurements that would be made to monitor specific resources.

Summary

In summary, the United States appreciates the efforts of ICG participants who provided valuable comments on the CEE and in particular, thanks the Republic of Korea for convening the ICG and providing an excellent summary of the responses. We are in the process of revising the CEE based on comments received to date and will address the comments received from the ICG, from discussion during the CEP meeting, and from the general public in the Final CEE. We look forward to circulating the Final CEE in due time.
For further comments or information, please contact Dr. Polly A. Penhale, Senior Advisor, Environment
National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs, 2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, Virginia 22314. E-mail: CEE.comments@nsf.gov

