





Bathymetric Survey Activities of the Turkish Navy Office of Navigation, Hydrography and Oceanography in the Antarctic Region


IHO Seminar






Bathymetric Survey Activities of the Turkish Navy Office of Navigation, Hydrography and Oceanography in the Antarctic Region
Summary

Hydrography and oceanography have been a concern for The Turkish Navy since back in the 15th century. Piri Reis, the well-known Turkish admiral and mariner, compiled his work known as Kitab-ı Bahriye in 1531. His map dated 1513 is the oldest map which shows the closest point to the Antarctic region.

Turkish Navy Office of Navigation, Hydrography and Oceanography (TN-ONHO) established in 1909 is the official department that organises national oceanographic researches and produces nautical charts. TN-ONHO is a member of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) and UNESCO Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission(IOC).
Activities

According to IHO reports, there are limitations of hydrographic knowledge in Antarctica and it is known that those unsurveyed waters pose serious risks for maritime incidents. The other point should be added is that the areas where charted in Antarctica contain old and low- resolution soundings. 

All the things mentioned above encouraged Turkey to put efforts to strengthen shiping safety, reducing the risks for scientific researches. That is why TN-ONHO is joined Turkish Antarctic Expedition-III (2019) and surveyed in the approaching waters of Horseshoe Island (Lystad Bay) in order to improve hydrographic mapping, human safety and logistic support.

It is the first time Multibeam Echo Sounder (400KHz) is used in that bay for hydrographic survey. By the help of that equipment comprehensive and reliable data are obtained. The surveyed area is shown in Figure 1. After the data process, 1/7500 scaled nautical chart has been produced.

Doing survey in Antartica is pretty hard, expensive, problematic due to unpredictable sea conditions, lack of comprehensive depth information and bad weather situations. Eventhough surveying is hard in white continent, Turkey will keep working in Antartica in order to contribute navigation and human safety by doing reliable hydrographic and oceanographic surveys. 

Figure-1:Horseshoe Island (Lystad Bay) Surveyed Area

