





Results of PEI International Workshop on Education and Outreach April 2017, Rovereto, Italy








Results of PEI International Workshop on Education and Outreach April 2017, Rovereto, (Trento) Italy
                                            Submitted by Italy, Portugal, India and Germany 
Summary
	The intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings advises Parties to share information on Education and Outreach activities. This information paper aims to provide the results of the International workshop on education and outreach of Polar Educators International (PEI) association, held in April 2017 that gathered a total of 76 participants from 12 different countries.

Background
After recognizing the need for better public and educational outreach activities regarding Antarctica during ATCM XXXVII in Brasilia, an ICG on Education and outreach was established during ATCM XXXVIII in Sofia, which has provided reports on their activities in the following years, in Santiago (ATCM XXXIX WP24) and in Beijing (ATCM XL WP24). Parties were advised to continue to use and promote the forum on Education and Outreach to share information on Education and Outreach activities and events with each other (in 2016-2017, ATCM XL final report paragrah 182). A wide range of consultative and non-consultative Parties, and observer organizations, have also been submitting papers to the ATCM and CEP about their education and outreach activities (e.g. at ATCM XL: WP15 (COMNAP and SCAR), IP19 and IP28 (Venezuela), IP24 (Portugal and other parties), IP 60 (Colombia), IP67 (Japan), IP90 (Turkey), IP96, BP9 and BP10 (Chile), IP 99 (Argentina), IP129 (Ecuador), IP124 (Peru), IP136 (COMNAP), IP148 (ASOC and IAATO), IP171 (Romania), BP13 (Belarus), BP20 (SCAR)). 
The mission and objectives of Polar Educators International (PEI) (see ATCM XXXVII IP2), aimed to expand and promote a network of polar education and research to a global community (http://www.polareducator.org/). By fostering dialogue and collaboration between educators and researchers, PEI also aims to highlight and share the global relevance of the polar regions with the broader community. With the endorsement of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the International Arctic Science Council (IASC), PEI already has partners involved in Antarctic Treaty countries with interests in further educational and outreach activities, along with the Arctic Research Consortium of the United States (ARCUS) and the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS). Under such context, PEI has organized regular workshops on polar education to follow its mission. In this paper, it is aimed to provide the general results of the PEI workshop in Rovereto (Italy) in 2017.

Conclusions
	A total of 76 participants from 12 different countries (Australia, Brazil, France, Germany, Iceland, India, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, UK, USA) participated in the PEI International workshop held in Rovereto, Trento (Italy) between the 11th and 14th April 2017. The workshop, that was broadcasted live online, aimed to: 1 – provide updated polar research results from keynote polar research speakers relevant to polar education and outreach (e.g. 25th anniversary of the Madrid protocol, the history of international scientific cooperation in the polar regions, the Ross Sea region Marine Protected area, Robotic applications in polar regions), 2- engage participants into sharing their experiences, through snap oral and poster presentations on sharing educational experiences (e.g. educational research projects, hands-on activities in the classroom, educational activities with researchers) and 3- promote networking between participants around the world.
The workshop was supported by a set of partners representing a wide spectrum of institutions local, national as well as international. Amongst these we would mention the italian National Research Council (CNR) and the National Antarctic program (PNRA) and other local institutions dealing with professional teachers development (IPRASE) and informal science education (Museo Civico di Rovereto). During the workshop it has been done a students exchange program between Italy and Germany that was part of a EU funded project. 
Surveys conducted before and after the workshop indicate that this workshop provided a unique professional opportunity for all participants. The wide array and type of activities and subjects involved, together with the inclusive and active style of the workshop strongly encouraged deep discussions on several of the presented topics as well as triggering commitment for further studies and collaborative polar projects.


