





Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: Time for a Fresh Approach

Discussion document for the International Workshop 
on Antarctic Tourism, Rotterdam, 3-5 April 2019









Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: 
Time for a Fresh Approach

Discussion document for the International Workshop on Antarctic Tourism
Rotterdam, 3-5 April 2019


Information Paper submitted by the Netherlands and New Zealand 

Summary

From 3-5 April 2019, the Netherlands hosted an informal workshop in cooperation with the United Kingdom, France, USA New Zealand and IAATO. The workshop, held in Rotterdam, was attended by representatives of 17 Treaty Parties, as well as by external experts and observer organisations ASOC, IAATO and SCAR. The main aim of the workshop was to discuss the current and future challenges and opportunities facing the management of Antarctic tourism and to develop proposals for a fresh way forward to be discussed at CEP XXII and ATCM XLII. To provide background-information for the participants of the workshop and to stimulate the discussions on strategic as well as pragmatic approaches, the Netherlands and New Zealand prepared a discussion document, which is presented in this Information Paper. The document starts with a brief overview of Antarctic tourism facts and figures, an introduction to the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and an overview of the fundamental values and principles of the Antarctic Treaty System. Next, the three main workshop themes are discussed: the growth of tourism numbers, the increase in diversity of tourism activities and the strengthening of compliance with current regulations. Special attention is paid to instruments and management tools that have been discussed in the past to prevent re-inventing the wheel and to re-examine these ideas in a contemporary setting. Each of these sections end with conclusions and questions for the workshop to consider.

A co-chairs’ report of the workshop has been submitted to ATCM XLII as Information Paper 11, submitted by The Netherlands and the United Kingdom. A summary of this report and the key recommendations arising from the workshop for discussion by the CEP and the ATCM have been included in Working Paper 19, also submitted by The Netherlands and the United Kingdom.



Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: 
Time for a Fresh Approach
Discussion document for the International Workshop on Antarctic Tourism
Rotterdam, 3-5 April 2019

Document prepared with equal contributions from Kees Bastmeijer and Neil Gilbert,
with additional advice from Stuart Doubleday, Guillaume Cottarel, Arthur Eijs,
Polly Penhale, Damon Stanwell-Smith, Amanda Lynnes and Lisa Kelley.


    1. Introduction
 
        1.1. Background

The Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have discussed the issue of tourism since the 1960s. The adoption of the Madrid Protocol - the provisions of which also apply to Antarctic tourist activities – constituted a major step in regulating Antarctic tourism, however, the substantial increase of tourism since the adoption of the Protocol has raised concerns. The ATCM has regularly reaffirmed their responsibility for managing Antarctic tourism in line with the objectives, principles and values of the Antarctic Treaty System1 and has annually discussed trends in Antarctic tourism and related concerns. Concerns expressed by Parties relate, for instance, to increasing pressures on the environment due to the growth of visitor numbers, the difficulty of considering cumulative impacts on wilderness and other values, challenges relating to the increasing diversity of activities, supervision and compliance issues, difficulties relating to monitoring, the capacity of search and rescue resources and possible burdens of SAR on science programs, lack of sufficient communication and cooperation among competent authorities, etc. 
Two additional Measures (2004 and 2009) and several resolutions were adopted, including General Principles of Antarctic Tourism in 2009. The ATCM as well as individual Consultative Parties have also cooperated with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) since IAATO’s establishment in 1991 (see §2.2). The ATCM has invested in strengthening cooperation among competent authorities, for which also an ATCM forum for informal consultation has been established. Nonetheless, the ATCM has struggled with reaching consensus on various issues. Since the adoption of the Protocol the Parties have considered numerous management measures, including spatial planning approaches (opening or closure of areas), accreditation schemes, prohibitions of certain types of activities (e.g., permanent facilities for tourism), Port State controls, observer systems, but no agreement could be reached on the need or desirability of such measures or the ways such ideas should take shape. Parties as well as authors of academic contributions have noted that to date, regulation of Antarctic tourism via the Antarctic Treaty System has been largely reactive and that a more proactive, strategic vision for Antarctic tourism development and regulation is warranted.
To support preparations of the discussions in the CEP XXII and at the ATCM in Prague (July 2019), The Netherlands offered to host an informal workshop in cooperation with the United Kingdom and IAATO. Main aim of the workshop is to discuss the current and future challenges and opportunities facing the management of Antarctic tourism and to develop proposals for a fresh way forward in the CEP and ATCM debates. Since CEP XXI, representatives of France, USA and New Zealand have joined the initiators in the preparations of the workshop. The workshop will take place in Rotterdam, from 3-5 April 2019 and focuses on three main themes:

    • The growth of tourism numbers;
    • The increase of diversity of tourism activities and
    • The strengthening of compliance with current regulations. 

The aim of this document is to provide background-information to the participants of the workshop and to stimulate the discussions on strategic as well as pragmatic approaches. Special attention is paid to instruments and management tools that have been discussed in the past to prevent re-inventing the wheel and to re-examine these ideas in the new time and setting, however, there is also space for discussing new approaches.  

        1.2. Structure of this document

The next section provides, as an introduction, a brief overview of Antarctic tourism facts and figures and introduces the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) (Section 2). Next, before focussing on the three main workshop themes, an overview is given of the fundamental values and principles of the Antarctic Treaty System (Section 3).2 A good understanding of these values and principles constitutes an important foundation of Antarctic policy making, for instance in relation to tourism activities. The following sections discuss the three main workshop themes: growth, diversity and compliance (Sections 4, 5 and 6). Each of these sections has a similar structure: 

    • Introduction: Fact and figures
    • ATCM discussions (summary)
    • Possible future scenario’s
    • Consistency with Antarctic values and tensions with adopted principles
    • Management measures
        ◦ Management measures currently in use
        ◦ Available measures but currently not in use
        ◦ Instruments discussed but never adopted
    • Conclusions

The main findings of these discussions are summarised in an executive summary (separate document). Two appendixes provide important background material: the relevant ATCM Resolutions and Measures (app.1) and a list of key CEP and ATCM papers (app.2). Both lists are based on the database of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and electronic access to a document is possible by clicking on the icon in the right column.


    2. The Current State of Antarctic Tourism and IAATO

        2.1.  Facts and figures: a brief overview

Tourism activities in Antarctica have evolved since they first began in the late 1950s.  The numbers of tourists and tour operators have increased as has the number and geographic spread of sites being visited.  The range of activities being undertaken have also diversified. This subsection provides a ‘snapshot’ of the current state of Antarctic Tourism. The facts and figures are mainly based on the documentation of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), which provides an annual overview of Antarctic tourism.  The most recent overview was provided at the 41st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).3 
	In the 2017/18 austral summer season, 44 marine-based IAATO-operators ran 344 cruises utilising 50 ships or yachts. The number of tourists making landing was 42,576. Within this category, Air-Cruise operations in the Peninsula regions brought 3,408 tourists to the Antarctic and four land-based operators utilised a range of aircraft (for inter- and intra-continental transport) and a range of over-snow vehicles to support 580 visitors in a range of activities. The number of cruise-only tourists (not making landings) was 9,131 and no IAATO-related overflights took place. The total number of tourists visiting the Antarctic with IAATO member companies in the 2017-18 season was 51,707. The estimates for 2018-19 is 55,733.4 
The majority of tourism (in terms of overall visitor numbers) remains of the ‘traditional’ ship-based form with visitors being transported to a number of different coastal locations where shore-based activities are undertaken for a short period of time before returning to the ship. A more recent development has been the offering of fly-cruise packages whereby visitors fly to the South Shetland Islands from South America and join a cruise ship before returning to South America by air. This category has grown substantially over the last years. Furthermore, four IAATO members support land-based tourism.

As will be discussed in more detail in Section 5, activities undertaken by visitors have become more diverse and include camping, climbing, kayaking, small boat cruising, swimming, station visits, scuba diving, helicopter flights, emperor penguin colony visits, marathons and many other types of activities.5 Activities such as paragliding, heli-skiing and base jumping are not necessarily routine activities, but have occurred in the Antarctic as well.6

        2.2. IAATO and Self-Regulation

Foundation and membership
IAATO was founded in 1991 by seven companies that had been operating in Antarctica for several years. The first season since its foundation (1991-92) “approximately 6,400 tourists visited Antarctica, traveling aboard ten different expedition ships operated by six operators plus the land-based activities of the one land operator.”7 Currently, IAATO has 115 Members comprised of 48 Operators, 64 associates (agencies and companies that book onto IAATO member programmes or companies) and 3 Provisional Operators. 

Objectives and main values
IAATO’s aims include advocacy for and promotion of “safe and environmentally responsible operations” of tourism in Antarctica.8 IAATO represents its members in CEP and ATCM discussions and other fora and has formulated ambitions aims regarding the protection of Antarctica. “IAATO's focus on conservation, management and education promotes a greater worldwide understanding and protection of the Antarctic with the goal of leaving it as pristine and majestic for future generations as it is today.”9 To this end, IAATO aims to ensure that tourism in Antarctica “will have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.”10 
In its activities and operations, IAATO has the intention to connect closely to the relevant international governance systems, for instance by emphasizing that Antarctic tourism must take place “within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty System […] along with MARPOL, SOLAS and similar international and national laws and agreements.”11 However, IAATO also stresses that state governments take their joint and individual responsibility in relation to effectively regulating activities that fall under their jurisdiction: IAATO-members “are subscribed to the belief that the ultimate protection and conservation of Antarctica will largely depend upon sound policy to which all Treaty nations adhere.”12

Bylaws, operational procedures and guidelines
To implement these aims, IAATO has adopted a rich collection of bylaws, operational procedures and guidelines. Bylaws and operational procedures include “regulations and restrictions on numbers of people ashore, minimum staff-to-passenger ratios, […] requirements for pre- and post-visit activity reporting, passenger, crew and staff briefings, previous Antarctic experience for expedition staff, ship's command and Bridge officers; contingency planning; emergency medical evacuation plans; and more.”13 In addition to the General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic, adopted by the ATCM 2011 (Resolution 3) (a revision of the guidelines adopted with Recommendation XVIII-1(1994)), IAATO has also adopted various more specific guidelines, such as a rich selection of site specific guidelines and guidelines on non-native species,14 decontamination,15 and wildlife watching.16

        2.3 Positive aspects of Antarctic tourism

Before focussing attention to the three themes and related concerns, it should be noted that it has often been stressed that Antarctic tourism may also have positive effects, relevant to the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System. One of the major argument is that Antarctic tourism creates ‘Antarctic ambassadors’. For instance, one of IAATO’s objectives is “[t]o create a corps of ambassadors for the continued protection of Antarctica by offering the opportunity to experience the continent first hand.”17 This potential of tourism has also been acknowledged by Parties and according to the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism this educational effect should be a guiding principle in the planning and conduct of tourism in the Antarctic: “All tourism organisations should be encouraged to provide a focus on the enrichment and education of visitors about the Antarctic environment and its protection.”18 What ‘ambassadorship’ exactly means and whether tourists traveling to the Antarctic indeed turn into ambassadors for the protection of the Antarctic is the subject of discussion in the literature. Some studies support this argument, while other studies have other outcomes and stress for instance that “pro-environmental intensions” only hold for a few months and that tourists that have travelled to the Antarctic appears not to be willing to change their own behaviour (e.g., regarding traveling).19









    3. Managing Antarctic Tourism and the ATS: Fundamental Values and Principles

        3.1. Safeguarding peace, cooperation on the basis of freedom of scientific research and comprehensive environmental protection

The foundational values of the Antarctic Treaty are the safeguarding of peaceful purposes and the freedom of and cooperation in scientific research.20 Environmental protection receives limited attention in the text of the Antarctic Treaty itself,21 however, the topic has become the subject of much debate and law making within the ATS since its very early start. With the adoption of the various agreements (conventions and Measures) and non-binding instruments (recommendations and decisions) and in particular the Madrid Protocol, environmental protection has become the third pillar of the ATS. In respect of all three pillars, the Consultative Parties have expressed their conviction that safeguarding these pillars is “in the interest of all mankind”:

“Recognizing that it is in the interest of all mankind that Antarctica shall continue for ever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international discord;”22 

“Convinced that the establishment of a firm foundation for the continuation and development of such cooperation on the basis of freedom of scientific investigation in Antarctica as applied during the International Geophysical Year accords with the interests of science and the progress of all mankind;” 23  

“Convinced that the development of a comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is in the interest of mankind as a whole.”24

        3.2. The designation of Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science

As noted above, environmental protection receives limited attention in the text of the Antarctic Treaty itself,25 however, the topic of nature conservation was intensively debated during the first years after the adoption of the Treaty.26 To stimulate the Consultative Parties to develop a “common policy on the conservation of nature in Antarctica”,27 SCAR published the “Suggested Form of Measures to Promote Conservation of Nature in the Antarctic” in 1961.28 This document proposed several general principles and recommendations and the first recommendation states: “All areas of land and fresh water, including fast ice and ice shelves, and all coastal waters south of lat. 60° S. should be recognized internationally as a nature reserve.” 29 SCAR’s work constituted an important foundation for the debates during the first three ATCMs, which resulted in the adoption of the Agreed Measure for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (the Agreed Measures) in 1964. The above-mentioned SCAR recommendation may be recognised in the preamble of this instrument: “Hereby consider the Treaty Area as a Special Conservation Area […].” 
The discussions on a mineral resource regime (CRAMRA) during the 1980s stimulated again discussions on the protection status of Antarctica. Environmental NGOs advocated the designation of Antarctica as World Park.30 While also recalling the 1964 designation of the Treaty Area as a Special Conservation Area in ATCM Recommendation XV-1 (Paris, 1989) and the Preamble of the Protocol,31 Article 2 of the Protocol states:

“The Parties commit themselves to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and hereby designate Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science.”

The ATCM has recalled this ambition of comprehensive protection and designation of Antarctica on various occasions. For instance, the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism (2009, see below) includes the commitment of the Consultative Parties to the “comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment”32 and in the Santiago Declaration on the 25th Anniversary of the signing of the Protocol they pledged “to further strengthen their efforts to preserve and protect the Antarctic terrestrial and marine environments, bearing in mind the designation of Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science.” 33

        3.3. Antarctic values

While most treaties of the Antarctic Treaty System (including the Antarctic Treaty) do not include the word ‘values’ itself, the concept of ‘values’ can be found in many texts agreed by the ATCM. For instance, in Recommendation ATCM XV-1 of 1989 the Consultative Parties agreed to develop a comprehensive protection system “aimed at ensuring that human activity does not have adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment or its dependent or associated ecosystems or compromise the scientific, aesthetic or wilderness values of Antarctica.”34 This aim has not only been reflected in Article 2 of the Protocol (see above), but also in Article 3(1):

“The protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.”

Recognition of these values constitutes also the basis for the instrument of the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas “to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research” (Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol). In addition to these values, Annex V also contain the instrument of designation of Historic Sites and Monuments (HSM) for the protection of historic values.
The values have also been reflected in various additional adopted measures. For instance, with Resolution 2 (1996) on educational and cultural activities, the Consultative Parties recognised “that the unique character of Antarctica itself represents an inspiration for protecting its values,” and underlined the contribution of educational opportunities, literature, art and music in the promotion “of understanding and appreciation of the values of Antarctica, in particular its scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values.”35 The Decisions on the development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM also stress these values as part of the basis of ATCM’s work: “Reaffirming the values, objectives and principles contained in the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection.”36 Another example is the Non-native Species Manual on actions to “protect Antarctic biodiversity and intrinsic values by preventing the unintended introduction to the Antarctic region of species not native to that region.”37 

        3.4. Managing Antarctic tourism and the ATS: The Protocol, ATCM discussions and adopted Recommendations, Measures and Resolutions

Early 1990s: a separate Protocol annex on tourism?
The fundamental values and principles discussed above are reflected in the many ATCM discussions on tourism as well as in adopted Recommendations, Measures and Resolutions. In the first ATCM recommendation on tourism, adopted in 1966, the Consultative Parties recognized that tourism could create tensions with the fundamental principles and values of the Antarctic Treaty System: “Recognizing that the effects of tourist activities may prejudice the conduct of scientific research, conservation of fauna and flora and the operation of Antarctic stations.”38 Similarly, Recommendation ATCM VI-7 (Tokyo, 1970) acknowledged that tourists and other visitors not sponsored by Consultative Parties “can have lasting and harmful effects on scientific programmes, on the Antarctic environment, particularly in Specially Protected Areas, and on historic monuments.”39 Over the years, these more general statements were worked out in more specific guidelines for tourist operators and visitors. For instance, the first set of ‘Guidance for visitors to the Antarctic’ was adopted as attachment to Recommendation X-8 (Washington, 1979). 
During the negotiations of the Protocol (1990-1991), tourism and related concerns also received specific consideration,40 however, according to Richardson, “the scarceness of negotiating time precluded specific examination of the complex issues of tourism”,41 and the Consultative Parties agreed42 to study the topic at the XVIth ATCM (1991). One of the proposals at this ATCM was the adoption of a sixth Annex to the Protocol on tourism and non-governmental expeditions,43 however, no agreement could be reached on the need of such an Annex. Consequently, the ATCM adopted Recommendation XVI-13, that recommended to the governments to convene an informal meeting to discuss Antarctic tourism, including the proposal of a separate Annex. This meeting took place prior to the XVIIth ATCM (9 and 10 November 1992). While tourism in the Antarctic was seriously debated, no consensus among the Consultative Parties could be reached on the desirability of any legally binding measure in addition to the Protocol. The main result of the debates at the beginning of the 1990s was the adoption of Recommendation XVIII-1 in 1994, through which the ATCM agreed on guidelines on environmental and organisational matters for visitation in Antarctica.44 

The Protocol and Antarctic tourism
The Protocol applies to all tourist and other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. One of the consequences is that the above provisions on values and principles constitute the basis for the management of Antarctic tourism. For instance, as for all other Antarctic activities covered by the Treaty and the Protocol, “[t]he protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and the intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, in particular research essential to understanding the global environment, shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct” of tourist activities in the Antarctic. 
Based on Article 8 and Annex I to the Protocol, a prior environmental impact assessment (EIA) must be prepared for tourist activities. Each proposal for an activity must be subjected to a preliminary assessment (PA), an initial environmental evaluation (IEE) or a comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE), depending on the possible impacts of the proposal. Practice under domestic implementation systems shows that current tourist activities are being assessed at the PA- and IEE-level. No tourism-related or non-governmental activity has yet been assessed at the level of a CEE.45
Tourist activities must also respect the provisions of the Annexes to the Protocol. For instance, based on Annex II, the taking or harmful interference with flora and fauna must be avoided and precautionary measures must be taken to prevent the introduction of non-native species and diseases. Tourist expeditions should also respect the waste management provisions of Annex III (on land) and Annex IV (at sea). Also of relevance are the provisions of Annex V. Tourist activities must ensure that designated Historic Sites and Monuments are not damaged and must comply with the regulations concerning designated Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). Tourism activities are explicitly allowed in five ASPAs that also include an Historic Site or Monument (ASPA no. 155, 157, 158, 159 and 162) under the condition that a permit for entering the ASPA has been issued by a Party to the Protocol in accordance with the internationally agreed ASPA management plan. Tourist activities in ASMAs may be conducted in accordance with the code of conduct for the area.

ATCM discussions: a brief inventory of topics discussed 
Tourism has been discussed at many ATCMs since 1966 and all ATCMs since the adoption of the Protocol. For comprehensive and more systematic discussions on these ATCM debates, we refer to other papers and publications.46 Final Reports of the ATCMs and reports and summaries of ATMEs show that a comprehensive and broad variety of issues have been discussed by the Parties. Some issues were discussed only during one or two ATCMs, but many issues continued to come back on the table. Over more than 25 years, issues that have been discussed include:
    • advance notification and post-visit reporting for tourist activities, 
    • concerns relating to cumulative impacts, 
    • port-state control in relation to tourism,
    • concerns relating to the visitation of new sites, 
    • education and training, 
    • the components, functioning and importance of the self-regulation by IAATO,
    • tourism activities from non-contracting states and/or non-IAATO-members,
    • growth in tourist/visitor numbers, 
    • concerns relating to passenger landings from ships carrying more than 500 passengers, 
    • challenges concerning environmental impact assessment for tourist activities, 
    • the desirability of adopting a separate annex on tourism (revisited), 
    • the possible added value of the establishment of an accreditation scheme,
    • the development and adoption of site specific guidelines, 
    • the desirability of the establishment of ‘Areas of Special Tourist Interest’,
    • the educational value of tourism, 
    • the relationship between tourism and science, 
    • risks of certain forms of tourism and/or cumulative impacts of tourism for wilderness values, 
    • issues relating to monitoring of effects of tourism in Antarctica, 
    • the desirability of the establishment of an international observation scheme to strengthen supervision of tourist activities, 
    • concerns related to tourism through third state-operations,
    • risks of introduction and spread of diseases and non-native species by tourists and other visitors,
    • concerns in relation to diversification of tourism (e.g., adventure tourism, possible future initiatives to build permanent facilities for tourism, marathons, etc.), 
    • property rights issues, 
    • the improvement of cooperation among competent authorities in relation to tourism and other non-governmental activities, 
    • the desirability of adopting a strategic approach or strategic vision in relation to Antarctic tourism management. 

Many of these topics have been the subject of intense debates in the ATCM. The limited number of products to emerge from many years of debate suggests that the concerns that have been voiced by the Parties on numerous occasions have not been matched by a desire to find solutions.

Adopted Recommendations, Measures and Resolutions
A list of all Recommendations (until 1995), Measures and Resolutions (1995 – present) is provided in appendix 1. This overview shows that in the period 1966 – 1995, 10 recommendations were adopted which referred to Antarctic tourism (9 substantial recommendations and 1 relating to the organisation of an intersessional meeting). Since 1995,47 3 Decisions, 30 Resolutions and 2 Measures have been adopted, which refer to tourism. While adopted 10 and 15 years ago, neither of the two Measures (intended to be legally binding on the Parties) have entered into force. 
From the perspective of fundamental values and principles, several Resolutions are of particular relevance. For instance, with Resolution 5 (2007) the Consultative Parties recalled “the Environmental Principles contained in Article 3 of the Protocol,” desired “to limit the potential impacts of tourism activities, including cumulative impacts, upon the Antarctic environment,” and recommended “that the Parties discourage any tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems.” In Measure 15 (2009) they expressed their consciousness “of their responsibilities to ensure that tourism is conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible manner consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty.” At the same ATCM, the Consultative Parties also adopted ‘General Principles of Antarctic Tourism’ (Resolution 7(2009)). In view of the high relevance of these principles as a basis for the policy debate, the text of this resolution is included in the text box below:










    4. Managing Tourism Growth

        4.1. Introduction: Facts and figures
 
The concept of growth of Antarctic tourism has several dimensions. This subsection discusses:
    • Growth in ship-based tourism (including number of vessels, departures), land-based activities and fly-sail operations, and the resulting total tourism numbers; 
    • Growth of the length of the Antarctic tourism seasons
    • Increase of the number of visited sites and the number of landing passengers at sites.
All three dimensions will briefly be discussed below. Another dimension of growth, the growth of diversity of activities, will be discussed in the next section. 
	The facts and figures are based on data collected by IAATO. Consequently, the discussed numbers and trends relate to tourists travelling to Antarctica with IAATO-members and are therefore not necessarily complete.

Growth in ship-based tourism (including number of vessels, departures), land-based activities and fly-sail operations, and the resulting total tourism numbers 
Antarctic tourism is as old as the Antarctic Treaty System but for almost three decades numbers of tourists visiting the Antarctic did not exceed the number of 1000 persons per season. Particularly since the end of the 1980s, numbers of tourists visiting the Antarctic has grown substantially. Each Antarctic season numbers increased with a temporary decrease from 2008 to 2011 due to globally economic crisis, paralleled by other influential factors, such as the IMO ban on the use of heavy fuel oil in 2011.
As shown in table 1, the majority of tourism (in terms of overall visitor numbers) remains ‘traditional’ ship-based tourism with visitors being transported to a number of different coastal locations, where shore-based activities are undertaken for a short period of time before returning to the ship. Figure 1 shows the trend in passenger landings since the 1992/93 season as well as the trend in the number of passengers undertaking cruises with no landings over the same period.

Figure 1. Trend in passenger landings and cruise-only passengers since the 1992/93 season.
Figure 2 summarises the trend in the number of operators, the number of ships and yachts being used, and the number of voyages being undertaken since 1992/93.


Figure 2. Trend in the number of (vessel-based) tour operators, the number of ships and yachts and the number of voyages since the 1992/93 season.

In parallel to growing ship-based tourism, also land-based tourism and other non-governmental activities, facilitated by air access to Antarctica, has continued to grow since these activities started to be conducted on a commercial basis in the late 1980s. As shown in figure 3, the drop of numbers during the economic crisis was - compared to ship-based tourism - less substantial and limited to one or two seasons. Today, four IAATO-member companies develop land-based tourism or other non-governmental activities (see §5.1 below). 
	The increase of these activities has been particularly substantive during the last seasons. The increase of numbers in 2017-18 was 28% (from 452 in 2016-17 to 580 in 2017-2018) season and estimates for the 2018-19 season indicate a further growth of 31% (estimate of 721 in 2018-19). 




Figure 3. Land-based tourism. Source: IAATO

Similar to land-based tourism, fly-sail-operations also have substantially increased. Also the contribution of this category in relation to the total number of tourists visiting the Antarctic has increased. Currently, 17 to 18% of the tourists visiting the Antarctic participate in fly-sail operations.
The growth in these different categories of Antarctic tourism has resulted in a total number of tourists of 51,707 tourists in the 2017-18 season, a 17% increased since the previous season. Table 1 below shows that – based on IAATO’s estimates for the 2018-19 season – the number of vessels, the number of voyages and the total number of tourists visiting Antarctica will further increase. The expected growth of the total number of tourists is almost 8%, after a 17% increase in the 2016-17 season. Table 1 below shows the numbers for the 2017-18 season and the estimates for the 2018-19 season.







Types of Tourism
Number of Vessels
17/18 and 18/19
Number of Departures
Total Number of Passengers 
IAATO Traditional Seaborne Tourism Peninsula
30 / 33
252/258
38,109 / 40,544
IAATO Seaborne Tourism Ross Sea/Continental
2/1
4/2
189 / 96
IAATO Sailing Vessels/Yacht Tourism Peninsula
17/12
45/31
290 / 244
IAATO Air-Cruise Peninsula
7/13
41/64
3,408 / 4,188
Over-flights
0 / 0
0 / 0
0 / 0
IAATO Large Ships/Cruise-Only Peninsula
3/2
6/5
9,131 / 9,900
IAATO Deep-Field Tourism
4/5
n/a/72
580 / 761
Totals
56 / 66
348 / 432
51,707 /  55,733

Table 1: Overview of tourist numbers, visiting the Antarctic with IAATO members. Collation of tables from doc. ATCM XLI / IP71, IAATO, 2018 and category ‘over-flights’ added. 


Growth of the length of the Antarctic tourism seasons
Bender et al. have calculated that “[a]s the years have passed, the duration of the Antarctic Peninsula tourism season (defined as the number of days between the first Peninsula landing and the last) has grown in accordance with the increase in passenger landings.”48 They explain:
 
“The longest season (175 days from first landing to last) was in 2008/09 and was 68 days longer than the shortest season (107 days) in 1995/96. Part of this increase in the length of the season stemmed from the use of the icebreaker Kapitan Khlebnikov and the discovery of the Snow Hill Island emperor penguin colony (a landing site that usually requires an icebreaker), which permitted emperor penguin focused trips in early October before the traditional Antarctic summer visitation season starts in November.”49

IAATO data show that since the 2007-08 season, the seasons have been shorter. The last two seasons, landings were made during a period of 151 days per season.50 Bender et al. confirm this but note that the season length has grown compared to 20 years ago: “While the current absence of icebreakers from the Antarctic fleet has eliminated the earliest of these itineraries in the last several years, the tourism season is still beginning earlier (late October) and ending later (late March/early April) than was the case 20 years ago.”51 Their figure 6 shows that in the period 1995-2000, seasons had on average less than 125 landing days. 
	This topic has received limited attention during tourism discussions in the ATCM, but may have relevance from a management perspective. For instance, the fact that landings are made very early or late in the season may raise different questions regarding potential risks for biodiversity or Search and Rescue-issues.


Figure 4. Season length and total number of IAATO Operators landings made per day at all sites within the Antarctic 2017-18 season. Sources: IAATO ATCM XXXVI/ IP72, ATCM XLI / IP72 

Increase of the number of visited sites and the number of landing passengers at sites
IAATO reports annually on the use of passenger landing sites on the Antarctic Peninsula, in the Ross Sea region and in East Antarctica. The number of landing sites used each season depends on various factors, such as the type of vessels used, the total number of voyages of such vessels and tourist numbers as well as ice conditions in the Antarctic. In the 2016/17 season the number of landing sites used had decreased from 125 to 11152 while in the 2017/18 season the number of landing sites had increased to 166.53 Over the years the number of sites that have been visited by tourists has increased to almost 250 sites of which IAATO received data on visitation.54 
	These numbers of visited sites must be related to the location of these sites and the numbers of landing passengers per site. The available data make clear that passenger landings and marine traffic are highly concentrated at a few regions in Antarctica and mainly at the Antarctic Peninsula.


Figure 5. Location of tourist sites. Source: CEP-tourism study 2012; map produced by Heather Lynch.

During the 2017-18 season the geographical spread of tourist sites was comparable and most landings were concentrated at a few specific locations along the Antarctic Peninsula’s southwest coast. IAATO’s report on the 2017-18 season explains: 

“The top five sites (Goudier Island, Cuverville Island, Neko Harbour, Halfmoon Island and Whalers Bay) accounted for 25% of all passengers landed and 27% of landings made during the season. The top twenty most visited sites accounted for circa 68% of the landings, with the top 25 landing sites accounting for circa 75% of the landings.”55 

This concentration and percentages appear to have been relatively constant. In view of the increase of the total number of tourists making landings, this means that the total number of visits to these top 25 sites has been increasing as well. The number of landings and the number of landed passengers for the top 20 most visited sites for the 2017/18 season are shown in Table 2. As shown in the table, the most visited site in the 2017/18 season (Neko Harbour) received just under 25,000 passenger landings.


Table 2. Top twenty most visited sites during the 2017-18 season (including yachts). Source: IAATO ATCM XLI / IP72

        4.2. ATCM discussions

The topic of tourism growth has been a constant component of the tourism debate in the ATCMs. Already through Recommendation XVI-13 (1991) Consultative Parties have expressed their concerns “about the possible effect of increased tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica.” Concerns have also been expressed during many ATCMs. For instance, the Final Report of ATCM 2006 states (§151): “Many delegations noted with concern the growing number of large tourist ships operating in Antarctica.” Similar concerns have been expressed in respect of other types of tourism, as well as the increasing geographical spread of tourist activities. Concerns relating to these developments, expressed during ATCMs, include concerns relating to: 
    • cumulative impacts for the Antarctic environment;
    • loss of pristine areas and related scientific and wilderness values;
    • potential interference with scientific research; 
    • potential disruption to national programmes if search and rescue is required, and 
    • human safety and search and rescue issues.
    • increasing challenges in assessing and authorising activities. 








        4.3. Possible future scenario’s

The future developments in Antarctic tourism will depend on many different factors. Mainly based on Liggett et al.,56 the following factors may be identified, although this list is not meant to be exhaustive:
    • the availability of vessels that are fit for tourism activities and comply with relevant international regulations or trends in the use of ships, e.g., a shift from smaller to larger vessels;57
    • the availability and price of fuel;
    • the absence or availability of infrastructure (e.g., landing sites, runways, accommodation);
    • the interactions between tourism and scientific programs (access to facilities/accommodation, tensions due to disturbance of science, etc.);
    • the prices of Antarctic traveling and the disposable income of people that will determine whether people can effort an Antarctic travel experience;
    • information on Antarctica and the options to travel to Antarctica, e.g., through the media, t.v. programs, marketing by tour operators, etc.
    • positive and negative experiences of tourists in Antarctica (e.g., overcrowding in certain parts of the Antarctic Peninsula);
    • the decrease of certain Antarctic values that are determining for the demand of Antarctic tourism (e.g., loss of wilderness and related opportunities to experience solitude, loss of wildlife);
    • applicable international governmental regulations as well as self-regulation;
    • changing value sets among Consultative Parties;
    • environmental and other consequences by climate change (e.g., logistic implications (access to areas), changing perceptions of Antarctic values (and consequently, the interest of people to travel to the Antarctic), the abundance and distribution of Antarctic wildlife;
    • accidents or incidents in relation to Antarctic tourism (e.g., governmental responses to make regulations stricter, negative effects on the demand for Antarctic traveling);
    • coverage of membership by IAATO;
    • protests from environmental NGOs, the general public, or others (e.g. states outside the ATS), criticizing the intensity, diversity, geographical spread, or other characteristics of Antarctica tourism;
    • the demand, availability and pricing of travel products elsewhere, e.g., in the Arctic.

Such and other factors and particularly the various mixes of and interactions between these factors will determine how Antarctic tourism may develop over the next decades. It is not the purpose of this report to conduct scenario-studies but the expectation of experts is that Antarctic tourism will continue to growth. For instance, in a publication of 2016, Bender et al. state: “The global economic recovery already underway, and the development of a new and potentially large market coming from China, suggest that continued growth in Antarctic tourism is highly likely.”58
	The number of visited sites (currently almost 25059) may also increase. For instance, the geographical reach of vessels may increase due to climate change or the use of new types of ships (e.g. icebreakers). At some point in time, the high numbers of landings and tourists at the most visited sites may also constitute a stimulus to visit other sides and possibly new sites.

        4.4. Consistency with Antarctic values and tensions with adopted principles

The type of impacts in the Antarctic due to human visitation and other activities may be diverse, depending on the mode of transport, types of activities, number of visitors, characteristics of the visited site, etc. Many (possible) impacts on the Antarctic environment are not typical for Antarctic tourism but relate to human activities, regardless of the purpose of these activities. Generally speaking, the impacts of scientific programs may at certain locations be substantially higher than the impacts caused by tourism in Antarctica, but the growth of tourism with its different dimensions may contribute to an increasing human footprint in Antarctica. Impacts of tourism that have been noted in the literature include:60

    • The introduction of non-native species of plants and animals;61
    • Disturbance of wildlife;62
    • Increased energy costs for species, for instance, penguins by pausing during commuting due to encounters with tourists;63
    • Trampling of vegetation and changes of soil properties (e.g., penetration resistance, bulk density, production of visible micro-relief changes) resulting from pedestrian traffic during tourism landings;64
    • Increasing risks for the marine environment due to vessel incidents;65
    • Cumulative impacts, for instance those mentioned above, for locations where scientific research, logistic activities, tourism and other non-governmental activities are conducted in the same ice-free area of Antarctica;66
    • Loss of wilderness (areas without human footprint) in Antarctica due to a slow but continuing increase of sites that are being visited and the increase of land-based tourism and related use of infrastructure;67
    • Emissions from vessels, air crafts and other motorised means of transportation, including greenhouse gas emissions.68

Some of these impacts may further increase due to a further growth of Antarctic tourism.  Other factors, such as climate change, may increase risks of impacts (e.g., the introduction of non-native species). For instance, Chown et al. show that there is a strong overlap between the areas where flora is likely to experience warmer temperatures and the sites most visited by tourists, which is likely to increase the risk of introduction of non-native species that may become invasive.
	The above identified impacts clearly create tensions with the principles and values discussed in Section 3. Discussion may arise on the question whether full proof of impacts and inconsistency should be required or awaited. This may particularly be problematic as the discussed literature also emphasises that comprehensive ecological monitoring in the Antarctic is lacking. This may explain why at ATCM discussions the importance of the precautionary principle has been regularly emphasized.69


Figure 5. “Predicted increase in degree days for vascular plants between 2007–2008 and 2100, overlaid with science and tourist visitor activity in 2007–2008”; source: Chown et al., Science, 2012. 


        4.5. Management measures

            4.5.1. Management measures currently in use

 Management measures that aim to directly address growth of tourism at a continent - or regional level, for instance by establishing a cap on visitor numbers for the Antarctic or regions of the Antarctic, have not been adopted and in fact never seriously considered by the ATCM. However, several measures have been taken to prevent or limit negative impacts due to over-visitation at the level of individual sites.
	One of these measures relate to the concern of over-visitation by landings from large vessels.70 While in 2007 the CEP had “recommended that more consistent and dedicated monitoring of tourism be undertaken to ensure that data and information are available to support such decision making”,71 the ATCM decided to take a precautionary approach by adopting Resolution 4 (2007) that recommend governments to prevent ships carrying more than 500 passengers from making landings in Antarctica.72 Two years later this measure was codified in Measure 15 (2009). Furthermore, for vessels carrying 500 or fewer passengers, the Measure requires the Parties to require their operators:
    i. “to coordinate with each other with the objective that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time;
    ii. to restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to 100 or fewer, unless a lower number is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures and to maintain a 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio, unless a more restrictive ratio is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM measures.”73

Apart from these measures to limit the pressure and effects at landing sites, the ATCM has also adopted measures that aim to exclude tourism and other non-governmental activities from certain extra vulnerable and/or valuable areas. This approach was already adopted for the Specially Protected Areas, established under the 1964 Agreed Measures. That tourists could not receive permission to enter such areas was again reiterated in the 1979 ‘Statement of accepted principles and the relevant provisions of the Antarctic Treaty’, attached to Recommendation X-8 (1979): “visitors must not enter Specially Protected Areas and must respect designated historic monuments”.74 A similar approach of excluding tourists from vulnerable areas may be recognised in Recommendation VI-11 (1970). This recommendation recognized “the special scientific interest of new islands formed by geological processes in the Antarctic” and recommended to the governments that “they should use their best endeavors to prevent tourists from landing on such islands.”75 
In Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), designated under Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol, tourism is in principle also not allowed, although the management plans of five ASPAs, which areas also include an Historic Site or Monument, explicitly allow governments to issue permits for tourist visitation (ASPA no. 155, 157, 158, 159 and 162). 
Apart from excluding certain areas for tourist activities, areas may also be ‘zoned’ when using the instrument of designating an area as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA). For instance, as was noted at the ATCM in 2006: “Some delegations noted that the ASMAs for Deception Island and the Dry Valleys each have tourist zones included in their management plans.”76
	The ATCM has also used the instrument of Site Specific Guidelines for visitor sites to limit or prevent negative impacts by visitation. This instrument was first suggested at the 26th ATCM (2003) with the first guidelines for four sites adopted in 2005 (Resolution 5 (2005)). Currently, 42 sites (continent-wide) have site specific guidelines in place (see Resolution 1 (2018)), 38 of which are on the Antarctic Peninsula. Of the top twenty most visited sites in the 2017/18 season, 17 are covered by site specific guidelines (Figure 3). The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) regularly reviews the site guidelines based on the advice of Member countries and IAATO.  The CEP advises the ATCM on updates that are required to existing site guidelines and on the adoption of new site guidelines. IAATO reports annually on its use of these sites including the number of occasions when maximum visitation numbers are reached (Table 3).


Table 3. Site use at sites covered by site guidelines during the 2017-18 season.

            4.5.2. Available measures but currently not in use

Under this category, we may note that certain available instruments could be used more often or with a broader scope than in the current practice. For instance, the above mentioned ASPA instrument could be used more often to protect areas against negative effects from visitation if for these areas the requirements of Annex V are fulfilled. ASPA designation may also be considered for larger areas as currently, the size of ASPAs is relatively small. 
Taking the precautionary approach, ASPA designation could also be considered for relatively pristine areas that have never been visited before, for instance on the basis of their outstanding wilderness values. Parties have expressed special concern over the expansion of tourism into the Antarctic interior and questioned how to regulate pristine areas, given that interior areas are less likely to have been exposed to human impacts77. However, in previous discussions, some Parties were of the view that areas should not be made ‘off-limits’ without environmental justification. 
This approach of excluding tourism in certain areas could also be relevant for areas that have never been visited before but become accessible as a result of a warming climate, changes in the type of vessels used (e.g., icebreakers) and the growth of air transportation (e.g., helicopter use, fly-sail operations). Designating such areas as ASPAs would constitute an approach that is in the spirit of Recommendation 26 of the ATME on Climate Change: “The ATME recommends, recognising the responsibilities of and need to coordinate with CCAMLR, that the CEP consider, and advise the ATCM accordingly, as to means by which automatic interim protection might be afforded to newly exposed areas, such as marine areas exposed through ice-shelf collapse.”

            4.5.3. Instruments discussed but never adopted

An approach contrary to the above discussed exclusion of tourism in certain designated areas is the concentration of tourism in certain areas that represent the Antarctic values that tourist want to experience. The designation of such ‘Areas of Special Tourist Interest’ (ASTI) was first suggested at ATCM VII (1972)78, and has been further considered at several ATCMs since79, though none have been established. During the negotiations of the Protocol, this instrument received attention as well: 

“It also considered the possibility of establishing duly monitored special tourist interest areas, in order to determine the impact of human presence on the environment and its feasibility as a management scheme.”80

However, the ASTI did not receive explicit regulation in the Protocol or its annexes. As previous spatial management instruments (e.g., SSSIs and SPAs, regulated in the Agreed Measures of 1964) have been integrated in the new instruments of Annex V, ASTIs may be considered to be integrated in the instrument of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMA) of Annex V to the Protocol. The idea to use ASMAs in this manner has been proposed by France in 2006, but no consensus could be reached.81 Approaches of concentrating tourist activities in certain designated or listed areas have also been discussed in the literature.82
An approach which may be situated between ‘open access’ and an ASTI approach might be to restrict tourist activities to sites that have site guidelines in place. This approach has also been proposed though not reached consensus support83.
For ensuring a good fit between the number of visitors and the carrying capacity of the Antarctic ecosystem, access to Antarctica could also be subjected to a cap-and-trade-system, as has been proposed in the literature.84 In the literature as well as at ATCMs, also other economic instruments have been discussed, including a tourism tax and/or payment for ecosystem-services approaches.85
An additional tourism annex to the Protocol has been discussed in the context of ‘increasing complexity of tourist activities86, and on several other occasions87. Some Parties see an additional annex as a means for collating and codifying a suite of tourism controls, whereas other Parties have argued against an annex that addresses just one specific activity in Antarctica when the existing provisions of the Protocol already apply to Antarctic tourism88.


        4.6. Conclusions and questions for the workshop

Concerns in relation to the growth of tourism in Antarctica have been expressed at many ATCMs. Management measures that have been taken mainly focus on limiting negative effects at site-level. This has been done by Site Specific Guidelines and by excluding tourism from certain areas (ASPAs), although such areas are relatively very small in size. Other concerns, for instance those related to cumulative impacts at a regional or continent level, the spread of tourism to areas that are still relatively pristine, etc. have not been addressed. However, the decades-long debates have resulted in a rich set of ideas and approaches, which may be worthwhile to be revisited.

Questions for the workshop to consider:
        ◦ What are the priority concerns in relation to the growth of tourism in the Antarctic and why? 
        ◦ How does the current size and intensity of Antarctic tourism relate to the principles and values of the Treaty, the Protocol, the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism and other relevant resolutions (Resolution 5 (2007); Resolution 9 (2012))?
        ◦ Would further growth create inconsistencies with these principles and values?
        ◦ Are controls needed to constrain further growth of Antarctic tourism or to manage growth?  If so, why, and what should those controls be? For instance:
            ▪ Should – in addition to existing instruments such as Site Specific Guidelines - more strategic regulatory instruments be considered, such as the concentration of tourism to certain areas, the prevention of tourist activities from entering certain areas, maximizing numbers of visitors per Antarctic regions/per seasons/per site, etc.? 
            ▪ Should the ATCM further regulate the expansion of tourist activities into the Antarctic interior? 
            ▪ Should further geographical expansion of tourism beyond the currently used locations be prohibited unless (through an EIA or similar approach) it can be demonstrated that any impacts will be no more than minor or transitory?
            ▪ Should pristine areas be closed for any type of human visitation in the future, including all tourism activities, e.g., to preserve these areas as reference areas for future scientific research or because of the intrinsic (aesthetic or wilderness) values of these sites?
            ▪ Are any of the potential controls that have been proposed in the past, but not implemented, worth reconsidering?
            ▪ What could we learn from other places in the world?


    5. Managing the Increasing Diversity of Tourism Activities

        5.1 Introduction: Facts and figures

Over time Antarctic tourism and non-governmental expeditions have evolved so as to encompass an increasing diversity of undertakings. The term ‘diversity’ as it has been used in the context of discussions on Antarctic tourism has not been defined by the ATCM but is taken here to encompass the variety of forms of travel to Antarctica, as well as the variety of activities and experiences that are undertaken by tourists and non-governmental expeditions in Antarctica. 
IAATO appears to have first recorded a “visible trend towards the diversification of activities” from tourist vessels in 200289. Antarctic tourism operators now offer an array of activities including for example: marathon running, SCUBA diving and kayaking. 
In the late 1980s new opportunities to access Antarctica by air were opened up with the establishment of Adventure Network International (ANI, now Antarctic Logistics & Expeditions (ALE)) which has continued to offer and support a range of land-based activities such as mountain climbing, visits to Emperor penguin colonies, sky diving and visits to the geographic south pole90. Three additional IAATO member organisations now offer land-based activities via air links to Antarctica91.
ATCM XXXVI (2013) specifically addressed the issues of diversification in tourism activities on the basis of a report of an intersessional contact group (ICG) that was established to “identify examples of activities that contribute to a diversification of tourism in Antarctica, and exchange information on experiences and challenges with applying domestic law in respect of such activities”92. The ICG collated and summarised an array of activities that contributed to a diversification of tourism activities over the previous 10 years. For all activities, evidence was given that these activities have taken / were taking place in the Antarctic. While not exhaustive (e.g., activities such as direct flights and mega yachts (usually with helicopters) could be added), the ICG report summarised activities into five categories:

I. Modes of transportation to Antarctica 

    • Tourist expeditions with yachts;
    • Tourist expeditions with small and mid-sized vessels (capacity not exceeding 500 passengers), making landings in Antarctica;
    • Cruise only activities;
    • Air over-flights;
    • Fly-sail operations.

II. Expeditions with the primary purpose of accomplishing a certain (often challenging) route in Antarctica:

    • Land-based trekking expeditions on foot, using skis and/or kites;
    • Expeditions with motorized vehicles;
    • Cycling and biking expeditions;
    • Air-born expeditions (primary aim: routes in Antarctica with helicopters or air planes).

III. Specific categories of activities, often a sports activity (individual activity or group competition):

    • Ocean related sports: 
        ◦ Kayaking;
        ◦ Long distance swimming;
        ◦ Scuba diving;
        ◦ Surfing.
    • Marathons and other athletic sports.
    • Mountain-related sports and other extreme sports:
        ◦ Mountain climbing;
        ◦ Base jumping/skydiving; 
        ◦ Downhill skiing and snowboarding; 
        ◦ Heli-skiing;
        ◦ Skydiving and paragliding.
    • Activities during landings (in addition to ‘conventional’ activities such as short distance hiking, photography, etc.):
        ◦ Snowshoeing;
        ◦ Sledding;
        ◦ Shopping for souvenirs, sending postcards, stamping passports, etc., at research stations and Port Lockroy;
        ◦ Swimming (Deception Island);
        ◦ Overnight camping – one/few nights.

IV. Overnight accommodation for tourism on land in Antarctica

    • Camps and Semi-permanent facilities (overnight, temporary, seasonal or multi-season);
    • Permanent facilities, non-governmentally operated (year-round or multi-season) with a primary tourism purpose;
    • Permanent facilities, governmentally operated (year-round or multi-season) with a primary tourism purpose.


V. Other non-governmental activities (a better header would have been: Public Outreach and Educational activities not supported by National Programs):

    • Film and photography projects;
    • Educational activities (e.g., programs that link students to research in Antarctica);
    • Art projects (e.g., establishing sculptures);
    • Other activities, e.g., religious activities.


5.2. ATCM discussions

The broad concept of increasing ‘diversity’ in or ‘diversification’ of Antarctic tourism has been noted as a ‘concern’ in discussions at several ATCMs. For example, the list of topics to be discussed at the 1992 informal meeting, which was attached to Recommendation XVI-13 (Bonn, 1991), included already the topic of permanent infrastructure for tourists. The term ‘diversity’ appears to have been first used during discussions at ATCM XXIV (2001) when the meeting “noted that there is an increase in the diversity of tourism activities, which may present new management challenges93.  Increasing ‘diversity’ in or ‘diversification’ of tourism and non-governmental activities have been recorded in ATCM reports on many occasions since then94.
During this time the potential implications of increasing tourism diversity that have been raised by Parties overlap substantially with concerns relating to the growth of tourism and have included: 
    • the potential impacts and particularly cumulative impacts on the Antarctic environment, including on wilderness values; 
    • potential interference with scientific research; 
    • potential disruption to national programmes if search and rescue is required, and 
    • increasing challenges in assessing and authorising activities95.

Over several years the ATCM has focussed on discussing a selection of activities which may fall under the concept of diversification.  Such activities have included: 
    • marathon running and large-scale sporting activities; 
    • high risk or adventure tourism activities; 
    • yachting; 
    • land-based tourism and infrastructure; 
    • camping ashore, and 
    • air-cruise tourism.


Marathon running and large-scale sporting activities
The issue of marathon running and other large-scale sporting events in Antarctica was first raised at ATCM XXXII (2009)96 with concerns noted over potential disruptions to research programmes, environmental impacts and the safety of marathon participants.   An ICG was established to look at the issue of ‘large scale sporting and marathon running events’. Discussions at ATCM XXXIII revealed mixed views among Parties on whether specific controls for such activities were required or whether existing provisions, including environmental impact assessments and exchange of information were sufficient97.  Although the issue was referred to a further ICG in 2010 it was not considered again until ATCM XXXVII (2014)98, though with no outcome.

High risk / adventure tourism
References to ‘high risk’ or ‘adventure’ tourism appear to have been first made at ATCM XIX (1996)99.  Concerns over the practical management of ‘adventure tourism’ were further raised by Parties and IAATO at ATCM XXIV (2001)100.  At ATCM XXV the terms ‘adventure’ tourism and ‘high-risk’ tourism were used interchangeably in the context of Parties concerns over health and safety and insurance cover for such activities101.  The term ‘extreme tourism’ has also been used102.
Some characteristics ascribed to adventure tourism during ATCM discussions were its high risk and the autonomy of the participants.  The implications of adventure tourism have been considered to be the safety and possible rescue by national operators and environmental impact.  ATCM XXVI noted the difficulty in distinguishing between adventure tourism and tourism in general, and the need for clear definitions has been called for, though a number of Parties have suggested that there is no need to distinguish between such types of tourism103.  
In relation to high risk, adventure as well as sporting activities (such as marathons) the ATCM has noted that Competent Authorities may lack information on the risks involved and that organisers may also underestimate the risks requiring more extensive communication with applicants104.  The ATCM has also noted the challenges for Competent Authorities involved in defining and being able to assess what may or may not be “sufficient experience” and “sufficient medical requirements” as set out in Measure 4 (2004) with respect to certain activities105.

Yachting activities
Yachting activity in and of itself as well as activities conducted from yachts in Antarctica have been the regular focus of ATCM discussions.  The issue appears to have first been raised at ATCM XXII (1998) when the UK provided an overview of yacht visits to Antarctica over the period 1970 to 1998106.  Parties have on several occasions noted the difficulties in obtaining data on yachting activity in Antarctica107.  
The 2004 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on tourism (ATME) noted the challenges posed by yacht expeditions that often travelled to Antarctica without notifying national authorities.
Yachting activity was of particular note at ATCM XXXIII (2010) when it was reported that individuals from two yachts had forcibly entered and inflicted some damage to Wordie House (HSM No. 62)108.  The Wordie House incident prompted Parties at ATCM XXXIII to review port state control options109 and to improve information exchange on yachts110.
Subsequently, the ATCM has developed and adopted yacht-specific guidelines111 which, in conjunction with other outreach campaigns appear to have had a positive impact and a decrease in the number of unauthorised yachts112.
Nonetheless, a number of specific case studies involving unauthorised yachting activity have been considered by the ATCM in recent years113, and ATCM XXXIX unanimously rejected unauthorised yacht activities in Antarctica114.
 
Land-based tourism, permanent facilities and other infrastructures
As noted above, land-based tourism and non-governmental activities (facilitated by air access to Antarctica) have been conducted on a commercial basis since the late 1980s. Policy and regulatory aspects of land-based tourism were first discussed during the 2004 ATME when concerns were raised over the political and legal implications of land-based tourist developments in particular private or commercial permanent facilities115.  
In discussions at ATCMs Parties have noted a number of concerns related to land-based tourism infrastructure including: environmental impact; impacts on Antarctica’s wilderness values and inconsistency with Antarctica's designation as a "natural reserve devoted to peace and science"; possible jurisdictional issues; the potential assertion of private property rights, and the possible assertion of ‘rights to use’ through regular permitting116.
The matter of infrastructure ashore has been discussed at several ATCMs with Parties divided over the need for additional regulation.117  Some Parties consider existing controls under the Protocol, in particular the EIA provisions of Annex I to be sufficient whereas others have called for new binding regulations to prohibit permanent land-based infrastructure to support tourism activities118. Further discussion on the issue at ATCM XXX resulted in the adoption of Resolution 5 (2007) which recommended that Parties “discourage any tourism activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems”. Further controls including a moratorium on permanent land-based tourist infrastructure were proposed at ATCM XXXII (2008) but did not achieve consensus support119, with some Parties expressing the view that this was their interpretation of Resolution 5 (2007).
A checklist to assist with the assessment of land-based activities was adopted at ATCM XXXV (Resolution 9 (2012)). ATCM XXVII (2004) noted that IAATO’s by-laws include the principle that their planned activities will have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment and that construction of any infrastructure would require submission of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation120.

Camping ashore
Camping ashore during otherwise vessel-based tourism was first raised at ATCM XXXV (2012)121 and IAATO confirmed at the time that there had been an increase in short overnight visits by its operators122.  Parties have expressed differing views on the acceptability of camping and noted concerns related to the suitability of selected campsites and the potential environmental implications, as well as waste management and adequacy of supervision.  Proposals to amend site-specific guidelines or develop separate camping guidelines have been discussed123 though not implemented.
The matter was returned to at ATCM XXXVII (2014) when the variability among Competent Authorities to address the issue was noted124, but it has not been specifically considered by the ATCM since then.

Fly-cruise tourism
In 2013 IAATO reported a doubling of air-cruise visits noting an increase in ‘time constrained’ passengers that preferred a faster route to Antarctica125 (though the number of visitors in that season was only a small percentage of overall visitor numbers).
Parties have noted that this form of tourism may involve multiple Competent Authorities for various segments of the expedition opening up the potential for unexpected gaps in the permitting process126.  Concerns have also been expressed over the potential for this form of tourism to lead to an exponential increase in Antarctic tourism with an increase in supporting infrastructure and the bunkering of vessels in Antarctic waters127, though IAATO have indicated that none of its operators have a desire to implement such a practice128.
Some Parties and IAATO have also noted that this form of tourism is a more risky business model that is heavily influenced by weather conditions for intercontinental flights129.

At ATCM XXXVIII (2015) a Special Working Group on Competent Authorities Issues further elaborated on the issues encountered by Competent Authorities in the context of the diversification of tourism and non-governmental activities130.  These issues included:

    • the lack of guidelines or information on activities that specific NCAs had not dealt with before, such as kite-skiing, snorkelling, and leisure fishing;
    • how to address individuals in National Antarctic Programmes engaging in leisure activities; 
    • potentially risky adventure activities masked under an application as a scientific activity; 
    • the lack of a harmonised position across Treaty Parties, especially in relation to potentially risky activities for the environment and the safety of the environment;
    • the existence of different types of activities that added to the diversity of behaviour and interaction with the environment; 
    • the difficulty in regulating and anticipating the types of interactions with the environment in relation to new activities; 
    • the need for comprehensive descriptions of activities; 
    • the need to consider cumulative impact when assessing the range of activities proposed;
    • the challenge in preventing unauthorised expeditions taking place;
    • the diversification of proponents of activities.

At recent meetings IAATO has recorded the full range of activities now being undertaken or supported by its members in Antarctica131.

5.3. Possible future scenarios

A review of the past few decades of Antarctic tourism suggests that the growth in numbers and increasing diversification of activities are likely to continue if not inevitable132.
Away from Antarctica, the diversification of tourism products (such as activities, transport modes and accommodation types) is a natural part of tourism development and reflects increasing levels of specialisation and competition among tour operators as well as a shift towards experiential travel133,134,135.  Diversification is often advocated as a strategy to make regions focused on a single economic activity, or a single mass tourism product, more sustainable, that is less vulnerable to external shocks and fairer in terms of distribution of costs and benefits136.
Some have speculated that as Antarctic tourism continues to grow and develop, and with increasing competition, operators will specialise and focus on niche markets (such as small groups, high-quality information, luxury or adventure) which in turn will increase the diversity of tourism products and operations available on the market137.
Antarctic tourism stakeholders have noted that technological advancements and more benign climate conditions may reduce the scale of natural barriers to Antarctica and lead to further intensification and diversification of Antarctic tourism.  A detailed study of stakeholder perspectives revealed that a wide cross section of Antarctic tourism stakeholders anticipated further diversification including development of land-based infrastructure, additional activities being offered, increasing ship traffic, and increasing use of larger vessels, which may present increasing complexity for regulators138. The addition of touristic icebreakers, equipped with helicopters, could also give access to new remote sites, which remained inaccessible so far due to ice conditions.
Such increasing operator diversification may also place pressure on industry self-regulation as an increasing array of operators with differing perspectives and interests makes agreement on management controls increasingly more challenging139.

5.4. Consistency with Antarctic values and adopted principles

During many years of debate, Parties have on several occasions questioned whether certain activities should be allowed or be considered acceptable in Antarctica, and whether criteria are required so as to deny certain activities140.
Parties have expressed differing views as to what activities may or may not be consistent with Antarctic values. Some Parties have proposed that certain forms of ‘adventure tourism’ (albeit undefined) should be discouraged and have drawn a distinction between ‘responsible’ and ‘irresponsible’ tourism141, though without further elaboration. 
It has been suggested that there is a need for strategic discussions in order to determine what kinds of tourist activities are acceptable to the ATCM142, and whether activities are acceptable under the principles of the Antarctic Treaty System as well as the General Principles concerning tourism adopted under Resolution 7 (2009)143. 
Some Parties have stated that the findings of environmental impact assessments should be the determining factor as to whether an activity should proceed in Antarctica and not its purpose, whereas others have held the view that the purpose of the activity is relevant to the application of the Protocol144. 
Other Parties find it hard to see what kind of activities would be considered unacceptable under the requirements of the Protocol and Measure 4 (2004) i.e. provided that activities are assessed as having no more than a minor or transitory environmental impact145, that appropriate contingency plans and insurance cover are in place, it is challenging to see how they can be refused146.
Consideration has been given to whether and if so, how authorisations might be denied on the basis of inconsistencies with the principles set out in Article 3(1) of the Protocol and it has been noted that further definition of values protected under the Protocol such as wilderness values, as well as guidance on the role of these values in assessing Antarctic activities would aid Competent Authorities in their permitting / authorisation role, particularly in view of the diversification of Antarctic activities147.
Resolution 9 (2012) sets out a series of questions for national Competent Authorities to consider in the context of assessing proposals for non-governmental land-based activities, including whether the proposed activities are consistent with the environmental principles set out in Article 3 of the Protocol; though no additional guidance has been developed to assist this assessment and it is left to individual Competent Authorities to decide how they wish to utilise and apply the questions.
At recent ATCMs Parties have discussed means for declining proposed activities and some Parties have provided examples where they have done so148. However, it has been noted on several occasions that authorisations are seldom refused149. 
Other Parties have noted the importance of dialogue and engagement with proponents or applications which can assist in modifications to a proposed activity or mutual agreement not to proceed150. 
Some Parties have stressed the importance of only focussing on activities that provide educational enrichment and respect for the environment151.

5.5. Management measures

5.5.1. Management measures currently in use

Some Parties have noted that the EIA provisions of the Protocol are the primary means for determining whether any tourism or non-governmental activity should be allowed to proceed152. However, variability across domestic laws implementing the Protocol has been highlighted as a concern, which could lead to ‘forum shopping’ between Competent Authorities153.
ATCMs have considered the need to focus on the risks posed by an activity (in respect of both safety and environmental impact) rather than on the nature or type of activity per se154.  Taking a risk-based approach to assessing activities was particularly discussed at ATCM XXXVII when the Meeting adopted Resolution 6 (2014), which recommended that Parties encourage operators to utilise risk assessment processes in planning their activities which can then be assessed during the authorisation process.  It is however, not clear to what extent this is being implemented among Competent Authorities nor to what standard.
Whilst all current Recommendations, Measures and Resolutions that have been adopted are generally applicable to all forms of Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities, there are currently no ATCM measures that explicitly address matters of diversity or controls on diversification; though some Parties have suggested that Resolution 5 (2007) which recommends that Parties discourage activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment, assists in restricting the development of land-based infrastructure.
Some ATCM measures have focussed on certain types of activity, for example on yachting155, and on the assessment of land-based expeditionary activities156.
The development of site-specific guidelines (the current crop of which are held under Resolution 1 (2018)) has proven to be a useful mechanism for managing visitation to a range of sites with differing characteristics and sensitivities. This instrument has been discussed in Section 4, but may also be relevant for providing more specific guidance on the forms of activities that should be allowed at the relevant sites. 

5.5.2. Available measures but currently not in use

It has been suggested on several occasions that the ASMA management tool could be more widely used, with zones carefully selected to recognise sustainable management and safety as well as limiting passenger numbers157.  Parties have also noted the potential utility of ASMAs for managing tourism in the Antarctic interior where there are a range of scientific and other activities158. ASOC has also frequently called for increased use of ASPAs and ASMAs as a means for controlling the distribution and diversity of Antarctic tourism159.
Suggestions have been made at recent meetings to modify site-specific guidelines so as to provide site-specific controls on coastal camping activities160, but this has to date not been taken forward.
The importance of monitoring for impacts including cumulative impacts has been raised by Parties on several occasions161. In responding to the CEP’s Tourism Study ATCM XXXV requested the CEP as a matter of priority to consider how to target monitoring efforts so as to inform environment management and develop a pilot monitoring study to assess the effectiveness of site guidelines.  The CEP has yet to attend to this request although some Parties have collaborated in undertaking on-site reviews of selected visitor sites162.

5.5.3. Instruments discussed but never adopted

The instruments discussed in §4.5.3, such as the designation of ‘Areas of Special Tourist Interest’ (ASTI), the exclusion of tourism in pristine areas, the restricting of tourist activities to sites that have site guidelines in place, are of particular relevance to the discussion of tourism growth, but may also be relevant for the diversification of tourism. For instance, in developing a spatial management approach, diversification may receive attention by excluding certain forms of tourist activities.
As noted above a prohibition or moratorium on land-based infrastructure has been proposed but has not received consensus support163.  Some Parties have argued that Resolution 5 (2007) is sufficient and IAATO has indicated that it has no interest in establishing permanent land-based facilities164.
Additional guidance material to assist national Competent Authorities in their review of proposals or applications, including on the acceptability (or not) of certain activities has been suggested in several ATCMs165. ATCM XXXVIII expressed the intent to consider developing guidance to assist Competent Authorities with reviewing ‘higher risk activities’, though the idea has not been progressed to date166.
Parties have also noted that there are no examples in the domestic laws of Parties where certain categories or types of tourism are prohibited167.

        5.6.  Conclusions and questions for the workshop

As noted above, the diversification of tourism products is part of the development pathway of tourism in destinations across the world168. In numerous settings the diversification of tourism activities, and the resulting varying interests of visitors, tour operators and other stakeholders has demonstrated the need for and importance of visitor management169.
Diversification in Antarctic tourism should not be an unexpected phenomenon therefore, though it continues to be a concern for the Antarctic Treaty Parties.  Even at the most recent ATCM, Parties stated that the trend of increasing tourist numbers and diversification of tourism activities warranted their attention170.
To date no management measures adopted by the ATCM have explicitly addressed the issue of diversification e.g. by attempting to restrict or prohibit certain types of activity, though yachting guidelines adopted in 2012 appear to have assisted in improving awareness of compliance obligations among the yachting community.
Some authors have noted that to date, regulation via the Antarctic Treaty System has been largely reactive and that a more proactive, strategic vision for Antarctic tourism development and regulation is warranted171,172.

Questions for the workshop to consider:
    • Does increasing diversification in tourism activities matter?  If so, why? In other words, should Antarctica be open for all types of activity, or are there some activities that should be prohibited?  If so, on what basis?
    • Are all current types of activity consistent with the principles of the Treaty, the Protocol and the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism?  If not, why not?
    • Are there any activities that are currently not being undertaken but may be initiated in the future and that would be considered unacceptable or inconsistent with the principles of the Treaty, the Protocol and the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism, and which could be prohibited in advance?
    • Should further diversification of tourism beyond the current range of activities be prohibited unless (through an EIA or similar approach) it can be demonstrated that impacts will be no more than minor or transitory?
    • Resolution 5 (2007) recommends that Parties discourage activities which may substantially contribute to the long-term degradation of the Antarctic environment, Resolution 7 (2009) contains General Principles of Antarctic Tourism and Resolution 9 (2012) sets out a series of questions for national Competent Authorities to consider in the context of assessing proposals for non-governmental land-based activities, including whether the proposed activities are consistent with the environmental principles set out in Article 3 of the Protocol. Would it be worthwhile to try to work these resolutions out in more detail to provide more clarity to competent authorities on their meaning in relation to diversification of activities in Antarctica?
    • What could we learn from other places in the world?


6.  Strengthening Compliance

6.1. Introduction

Antarctic tourism is subject to regulation through relevant domestic laws of Contracting Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol, IAATO (though its Bylaws, guidelines and operating procedures) and - for vessels- domestic legislation implementing the corpus of existing international maritime law.173
IAATO has summarized the range of regulatory controls that apply to private sector operators in Antarctica (as well as to all human activity in the region)174 as well as the industry’s own controls applied through IAATO, so as to emphasise the array of requirements that operators are required to comply with.
Nonetheless, challenges remain with the current regulatory arrangements for Antarctic tourism. Certain challenges relate to gaps in the regulatory system,175 while others relate to concerns in respect of the effective implementation and enforcement of existing regulations. These latter challenges have also been discussed at several ATCMs; particularly so at a Special Working Group of competent authorities held during the XXXVIIIth ATCM (2015)176.  Several issues were identified during those discussions including:

    • the question of multiple authorisations for a particular expedition;
    • the quality of communication mechanisms between NCAs;
    • limitations of the electronic information exchange system (EIES) with regard to relevant information regarding Competent Authorities, expedition details, authorisations, information regarding permits or authorisations denied, and the updating of the NCA contact list;
    • the need to face the issue of forum shopping (between NCAs) and 3rd-party flagged vessels;
    • the difficulty of accessing lists of denied permits or authorisation and understanding the reasons for their denial;
    • the desirability for NCAs to provide information to Parties with Antarctic search and rescue coordination responsibilities of activities planned to take place in their area;
    • the problems related to the enforcement of domestic legislation;
    • the lack of progress in the ratification of Annex VI of the Environmental Protocol;
    • station visits that involve multiple NCAs;
    • authorisations particularly related to adventure sport tourism activities;
    • complications arising from expeditions that contain a mix of non-governmental and governmental visitors.

The Special Working Group of competent authorities also discussed a range of issues encountered by NCAs when assessing the increasing diversification of tourism activities, including:

    • the lack of guidelines or information on activities that specific NCAs had not dealt with before, such as kite skiing, snorkelling, and leisure fishing;
    • how to address individuals in National Antarctic Programmes engaging in leisure activities;
    • potentially risky adventure activities masked under an application as a scientific activity;
    • the lack of a harmonised position across Treaty Parties, especially in relation to potentially risky activities for the environment and the safety of the environment;
    • the existence of different types of activities that added to the diversity of behaviour and interaction with the environment;
    • the difficulty in regulating and anticipating the types of interactions with the environment in relation to new activities;
    • the need for comprehensive descriptions of activities;
    • the need to consider cumulative impact when assessing the range of activities proposed;
    • the challenge in preventing unauthorised expeditions taking place;
    • the diversification of proponents of activities.

Parties have noted several examples of non-compliant activities among private sector visitors to Antarctica (and almost exclusively non-IAATO members), including:

    • unauthorised entry into Antarctica, particularly by yachts177,178,179,180;
    • activities undertaken in Antarctica that were not included in pre-departure applications, such as diving or climbing activities181;
    • disturbance events such as entry into wildlife colonies182;
    • unpermitted entry into ASPAs183;
    • damages caused to a HSM184; 
    • carriage and introduction to Antarctica of a non-indigenous bird185.

Enforcement

Among the 40 Parties to the Environmental Protocol, there are very few examples of cases being bought with respect to potential infringements of national implementing legislation; in respect of any activity in Antarctica not only tourism and non-governmental activities.
Parties have discussed some of the difficulties in prosecuting unauthorised activities undertaken by their nationals which have included186:

    • dealing with individuals with multiple passports;
    • limits of the jurisdictional scope of application of national legislation (e.g., only applying to activities organised within the territory of the relevant country);
    • different levels of involvement between those initiating an activity and those involved in undertaking it;
    • challenges in identifying the responsible entity in the case of small expeditions, such as yachts, one-off activities and adventure tourism.

Some Parties have reported on enforcement action that they have taken with respect to tourism and non-governmental activities (see for example case studies 1 and 2 below) though such examples are very few. 

Case study 1 – Unauthorised voyages of Esprit d’Equipe187

In January 2010 French authorities were alerted to the presence in Antarctica of the yacht Esprit d’Equipe, following damage caused to HSM No62 (Wordie House) by a French national and crew member of the yacht, which was moored off the site. 
The skipper of the Esprit d’Equipe had not submitted a preliminary environmental impact assessment, either with the competent French authority (TAAF - French Southern and Antarctic Lands) or with any other national authority. Consequently, his trip to Antarctica was unauthorised, thereby infringing Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Madrid Protocol and the relevant French law (French Environmental Code, Articles L. 712-1). 
An administrative sanction was issued to the skipper of the Esprit d’Equipe by the French NCA (head of TAAF), prohibiting him from gaining any access to Antarctica for a period of five years (2010-2015). However, in early 2011, the French authorities were alerted to the repeat presence of the Esprit d’Equipe in Antarctica. This resulted in a new administrative sanction being launched by the TAAF: a prohibition to undertake an activity in Antarctica from 2015 to 2020. 
The TAAF inquiries culminated in the two matters being brought to the Court (i.e. the carrying out of a repeat offence of an unauthorised activity in Antarctica and wilful damage caused to HSM No62). On 6 February 2014 the Court found the skipper of the Esprit d’Equipe guilty of having undertaken an activity in Antarctica without any prior authorisation being obtained from a competent national authority and fined 10,000 Euros.
However, the Court reserved its judgment on the question of the repeat offence, given the lack of clear and tangible evidence. Consideration of the case of damage caused to HSM No62 was still underway at the time of the report to the ATCM (2014). The second administrative sanction (the prohibition to undertake an activity in Antarctic from 2015 to 2020) was withdrawn in 2016 when it became clear that the skipper had not been active in Antarctica since 2011 and that the fine of 10,000 Euros had been paid.

Case study 2 – Unauthorised voyage of SV Infinity188

A 36-metre German-flagged yacht SV Infinity departed Auckland, New Zealand in January 2014, skippered by a German national and with 16 people from Canada, France, United States, Italy, United Kingdom, Germany, Australia and Sweden on board.
The expedition proceeded to Antarctica without any authorisation from any Antarctic Treaty Party. No environmental impact assessment was submitted prior to departure. 
During the voyage the German skipper and several other crew members made an unpermitted visit to ASPA 159, at Cape Adare.
New Zealand officials determined that both the failure to undertake the necessary environmental impact assessment and the unpermitted entry into ASPA 159 were prima facie in breach of New Zealand’s Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994. However, officials concluded that it was not feasible to pursue a prosecution, due to the fact that the individuals were not in New Zealand. Extradition was not considered to be a viable or appropriate option. 
In early 2015 New Zealand obtained evidence that Borchgrevink’s Hut (part of HSM 22) had been broken into, with damage to the door and disturbance of the historical items inside, including the placement among those items of an empty bottle of sparkling wine purchased in New Zealand. In addition, a page had been torn from the visitors’ book in the Hut. 
While there is circumstantial reason to suspect that the damage and disturbance may have been caused by the crew members of the SV Infinity, given the lack of other known visits to Cape Adare at the relevant time, New Zealand officials concluded that there was insufficient evidence to pursue this aspect further.
German national law does not provide applicable penalty regulations, if the voyage was not organised in Germany and did not proceed from German territory. Therefore, the German competent authority (Umweltbundesamt – UBA) could not pursue a proceeding concerning the unauthorised voyage of the SV Infinity to Antarctica itself. 
UBA initiated legal proceedings against the German skipper in respect of his unpermitted entry into ASPA 159. Under the German Act implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection (Umweltschutzprotokoll-Ausführungsgesetz) it is an administrative offence to enter an ASPA without a permit. The proceedings were still ongoing when the report was presented to the ATCM (2015).
German authorities also concluded that they could not take further action in respect of the damage to Borchgrevink’s Hut and disturbance of historical items, due to the lack of evidence linking it to the crew of the SV Infinity. 





6.2. Possible future scenarios

Historically the ATCPs have demonstrated limited appetite for implementing additional regulatory measures with respect to Antarctic tourism and non-governmental activities, over and above those that are provided by the Environmental Protocol. Accordingly, ‘business-as-usual’ Antarctic tourism (i.e. steady growth and continuing diversification189) is likely to continue to rely heavily on the good will and cooperation of the industry itself rather than on any new compliance requirements established by the Antarctic Treaty Parties190.
A key risk in this strategy is that it relies heavily on the ongoing perceived benefits of IAATO membership among operators, which some have speculated may be challenged by larger and influential operators in the future191. The risks of operators undertaking activities outside of IAATO membership has been acknowledged by the ATCM in past discussions192.
Authors have speculated that future challenges to the current regulatory approach may also arise from events such as a major tourism-related disaster that includes the loss of life; a significant shift towards more land-based operations involving flying visitors in to an increasing number of airstrips around Antarctica193 and involving the establishment of land-based infrastructure194, or a growing number of private ‘one-off’ expeditions that challenge political, legal, moral and economic boundaries195.
Inconsistencies between national implementing legislation have been recorded196, including by IAATO197, with concerns raised over the potential for operators increasingly to pursue ‘forum shopping’ between jurisdictions198.
The potential for increasing numbers of operators, expeditions and vessels from third-Party states has also been raised during ATCM discussions in the past199,200.


6.3. Management measures

6.3.1. Management measures currently in use

As noted elsewhere in this document, the Protocol provides for the regulation of all activities in Antarctica including tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities, which shall be undertaken in a manner consistent with the principles set out in Article 3 of the Protocol201. The Protocol also specifically refers to tourism with regard to application of its environmental impact assessment202 and emergency response203 provisions.
The majority of (though not all) Parties to the Protocol have implemented the provisions of the Protocol in their domestic legal systems. In the majority of cases NCAs assess the potential environmental (and sometimes safety) implications of the proposed activities through the submission of an application form and / or an environmental impact assessment. If accepted a notification of approval for the proposed activity is issued in some form (e.g. a permit or similar) that may include additional specific controls imposed by the relevant NCA, that the organiser must comply with.
In addition to the provisions of the Protocol, the Parties have over time adopted a suite of additional measures specifically targeted at managing Antarctic tourism (see Appendix 1). The vast majority of these have been hortatory with only two being legally binding: Measure 4 (2004) (on insurance and contingency planning) and Measure 15 (2009) (on landing of persons from passenger vessels) – though, as noted above, neither of these have yet entered into force204.
The Parties have recognised the importance of improved communication between NCAs so as to assist enforcement205 and to that end have made changes to the information exchange requirements regarding non-governmental expeditions (managed through the on-line Electronic Information Exchange System - EIES) so as to facilitate sharing of information on activities that are approved and denied by NCAs206.
To further improve communication between NCAs, an informal exchange forum for NCAs was proposed at ATCM XXXVIII.207 At the next ATCM the consultative Parties agreed “to create a sub-forum on the Secretariat website, where Competent Authorities could exchange information on authorisations, permits and other relevant information on tourism matters.”208 This agreement was implemented by the Secretariat as a tool, entitled ‘Communication among National Competent Authorities’, that may be accessed through the ATCM Forum (home page of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat). Since its establishment in 2016, the forum has been used for the communication among NCA regarding six different issues or questions.
Inspections of Antarctic tourism activities may be conducted by authorities under domestic legal systems as well as through the ATS inspection system under Article VII of the Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol. The ATS inspection system has limitations regarding the inspection of vessels: Article 14(3) of the Protocol refers to Article VII(3) of the Antarctic Treaty, which provision makes clear that all ships and aircraft are open to inspect “at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica.” The UK proposed at ATCM XXXVIII to agree “that Antarctic Treaty inspections of yachts, pursuant to Article VII(3) of the Antarctic Treaty, may be carried out when yachts are positioned at sites in Antarctica where a landing would be possible, whether or not discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel is occurring or planned at that point.”209 Consensus on this proposal could not be reached. Apart from the legal aspects, it should be noted that in practice, inspections of tourism vessels and other tourism facilities is a relatively rare phenomenon (see below).
As noted elsewhere in this document the development of site-specific guidelines (the current crop of which are held under Resolution 1 (2018) and which have been fully embraced and implemented through IAATO) has proven to be a useful mechanism for managing visitation to a number of regularly visited sites.
It is also noted that the Parties have acknowledged the important role that IAATO has played in tourism management since its establishment in 1991 and that they have agreed on the merits of maintaining a strong and credible industry association to ensure the implementation of consistently high standards amongst IAATO member companies210.

6.3.2. Available measures but currently not in use

As noted above, the inspections under the Treaty and the Protocol with attention for Antarctic tourism vessels or facilities are relatively rare. According to the inspection database, only 6 inspections have inspected tourist vessels since the adoption of the Protocol and the semi-permanent camp sites have never been inspected.211 The ICG on “inspections in Antarctica under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol” (2016-17) has recommended the ATCM to consider the proposal to “encourage Consultative Parties to include tourism facilities in inspections and to consider whether the development of a specific Tourism/NGO Inspection Checklist would be desirable.”212 The first part of this recommendation was embraced: “The Meeting encouraged Parties to consider tourism facilities in their inspections, but added that it was not necessary to have a specific Tourism/ NGO Inspection Checklist at this time.”213
The Parties have also given consideration to port state and departure state controls on a number of occasions214, though with limited progress. The ATCM has adopted a Resolution on ‘The Enhancement of Port State Control for Passenger Vessels Bound for the Antarctic Treaty Area’; an hortatory recommendation for ATCPs to proactively apply, through their national maritime authorities, the existing regime of Port State control to passenger vessels bound for the Antarctic Treaty area215. However, it has been noted that the text is very open and leaves room to accommodate concerns expressed by Treaty Parties in previous ATCMs216.

6.3.3. Instruments discussed but never adopted

Over time the Parties have considered an array of additional regulatory options for tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica, including as noted above, an additional tourism annex to the Protocol217, as well as an ASOC proposal for the development of a new Antarctic Treaty instrument (e.g. a convention on Antarctic tourism)218. Collating all relevant existing regulations and new regulations into one legal instrument may increase the visibility of the applicable regulations and thereby the awareness of governments and tour operators regarding such regulations. It may also help to strengthen the interconnections between the single existing instruments. Such possible advantages may strengthen compliance.

The Parties have considered the development of an international observer scheme for cruise vessels to support compliance assessment219. Establishing such a system was a recommendation of the 2004 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME)220 and although it has been raised on a number of occasions since221, the idea has not been developed further.
The proposal for the establishment of an accreditation scheme222, as a means for ensuring consistent standards of operation was also recommended by the 2004 ATME, though in subsequent discussions Parties were unable to agree on the need for such a scheme or whether it should be voluntary of compulsory223. IAATO made attempts to develop its own accreditation and audit scheme224, which also proved challenging, but IAATO have an established observer scheme in place which is set out in its bylaws225.
At ATCM XL the concept of a ‘black list’ for yachts that travel to Antarctica without authorisation was proposed (similar to CCAMLR’s “blacklist” of IUU fishing vessels). The proposal did not receive consensus support, though some Parties indicated that they would consult further on the idea226.
The ATCM has also identified a series of additional procedural measures that need to be developed to aid compliance including: 

    • a contact lists for NCAs and the five relevant RCCs; 
    • more comprehensive guidance to support the assessment of certain types of activity; 
    • the development of principles for communication between NCAs; 
    • a forum to exchange information between NCAs; 
    • further development of the EIES to enhance its usefulness for NCAs; 
    • further understanding and guidance on Measure 4 (2004); 
    • processes for informing other NCAs on non-permitted or authorised activities, both in terms of the formal decline of permits / authorisation and on those operators who had been engaged with and discouraged from activity; and
    • increasing outreach to new proponents of Antarctic activities227.


6.4. Conclusions and questions for the workshop

Tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica are regulated through a number of mechanisms including the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty and maritime law, implemented through domestic legislation, and via IAATO though its bylaws, guidelines and operating procedures.
The ATCM has over several years identified a number of aspects of compliance and enforcement including:
    • The complexity of some expeditions that involve more than one National Competent Authority (NCA) to assess and/or approve various aspects of the proposed expedition;
    • Activities and expeditions that take place that are unauthorised by any NCA (either deliberately or in ignorance); 
    • Unauthorised expeditions and activities that are undertaken by nationals or vessels of 3rd Party states;
    • The limited ability of NCAs to disallow certain activities from taking place;
    • Inconsistencies among NCAs in their approach to assessing and authorising proposed activities and expeditions;
    • Challenges in enforcing the requirements of domestic legislation.
    • it remains almost impossible to monitor to what extent the regulation framework is actually respected by the operators, due to the quasi absence of controls in the field. The identification of unauthorized activities is challenging as well. 

Enforcement of national implementing legislation remains a challenge for several reasons and successful prosecutions, which potentially act as a deterrent to others, are few.
As has been noted throughout this document, there remains a heavy reliance on IAATO to set and enforce standards so as to ensure consistency across all Antarctic operators.  The Parties have acknowledged the importance of a strong and effective industry body though there are risks in a strategy that relies heavily on industry self-regulation Furthermore, the Chairman’s Report from Tromso ATME, underlines that “establishing the regulatory basis for the industry was the primary responsibility of the State Parties.228”
The Parties have over time considered a range of additional measures to strengthen the regulatory regime though most of these have not been taken forward.  The two additional regulatory controls that heave been adopted (Measures 4 (2004) and 15 (2009)) are still not in force.
Attempts to improve coordination and cooperation among NCAs have been moderately successful in recent years with some benefits arising from changes to the EIES.
There is a strong case to be made for enhancing the level of cooperation between IAATO, the ATCM and NCAs, so as to ensure that existing controls are consistently enforced, and that practical responses to identified gaps in the regulatory regime are identified and implemented. 

Questions for the workshop to consider
        ◦ Of the primary compliance challenges that have been identified by the ATCM, what are the priorities that need to be addressed and how should they be addressed?
        ◦ Is there a need to enhance the level of cooperation between the ATCPs for the purposes of strengthening compliance? If so, how might that be achieved? For instance, should one or more of the following approaches be considered?:
            ▪ The establishment of an international pool of observers
            ▪ An international observation scheme
            ▪ A certain harmonisation of compliance approaches or enhanced guidance for NCAs to assist them in their assessment and enforcement roles?
        ◦ Is there a need to enhance the level of cooperation between IAATO and the ATCPs for the purposes of consistency of assessment and strengthening compliance?  If so, how might that be achieved?
        ◦ What could be done in order to allow NCAs to better monitor the actual implementation, in the field, of the activities they authorize, and better identify the unauthorized activities?



Appendix 1: Relevant ATCM Recommendations, Resolutions and Measures

Appendix 2: List of Key CEP and ATCM papers (e.g., ATME chairperson summaries, CEP Tourism Study 2012, Reports of Intersessional Contact Groups, most recent IAATO reports).

Appendix 1:
 
ATCM Recommendations (until 1995) and Decisions, Resolutions and Measures (1995 - present) relating to Antarctic tourism (based on the Antarctic Treaty Database)



RECOMMENDATIONS

ATCM / CEP
Year
No.
Subject
 
Current
ATCM IV Santiago
1966
27
Regulation of Antarctic Tourism


ATCM VI Tokyo
1970
7
Regulation of Antarctic Tourism


ATCM VI Tokyo
1970
11
Special protection for new islands


ATCM VII Wellington
1972
4
Effects of tourist activity


ATCM VIII Oslo
1975
9
Statement of Accepted Practices in Tourism


ATCM X Washington
1979
8
Tourist Regulation


ATCM XI Buenos Aires
1981
3
Mount Erebus declared a tomb


ATCM XIII Brussels
1985
3
Timetable for the exchange of information


ATCM XVI Bonn
1991
13
Intersessional meeting on tourism


ATCM XVIII Kyoto
1994
1
Guidelines for tourism




DECISIONS

ATCM / CEP
Year
No.
Subject
 
Current
ATCM XXVI - CEP VI Madrid
2003
D5
Expert Meeting on tourism


ATCM XXXII - CEP XII Baltimore
2009
D7
Meeting of Experts on Ship-borne Tourism


ATCM XXXVI - CEP XVI Brussels
2013
D6
Information Exchange on Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities




RESOLUTIONS

ATCM / CEP
Year
No.
Subject
 
Current
ATCM XIX Seoul
1995
R3
Tourist reporting


ATCM XX Utrecht
1996
R2
Educational and cultural activities


ATCM XXI Christchurch
1997
R3
Tourism reporting form


ATCM XXVII - CEP VII Capetown
2004
R3
Tourism and non-Governmental activities


ATCM XXVII - CEP VII Capetown
2004
R4
Tourist Guidelines


ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII Stockholm
2005
R5
Site Guidelines for Visitors


ATCM XXVIII - CEP VIII Stockholm
2005
R6
Post Visit Site Report Form


ATCM XXIX - CEP IX Edinburgh
2006
R2
Site Guidelines for Visitors


ATCM XXX - CEP X New Delhi
2007
R1
Site Guidelines for Visitors


ATCM XXX - CEP X New Delhi
2007
R4
Ship-based Tourism


ATCM XXX - CEP X New Delhi
2007
R5
Long-term effects of tourism


ATCM XXXI - CEP XI Kyiv
2008
R2
Site Guidelines for Visitors


ATCM XXXI - CEP XI Kyiv
2008
R6
Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres and Search and Rescue in the Antarctic Treaty Area


ATCM XXXII - CEP XII Baltimore
2009
R4
Site Guidelines for Visitors


ATCM XXXII - CEP XII Baltimore
2009
R7
General Principles of Antarctic Tourism


ATCM XXXIII - CEP XIII Punta del Este
2010
R1
Site Guidelines for visitors


ATCM XXXIII - CEP XIII Punta del Este
2010
R6
Improving the co-ordination of maritime search and rescue in the Antarctic Treaty area


ATCM XXXIV - CEP XIV Buenos Aires
2011
R3
General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic


ATCM XXXIV - CEP XIV Buenos Aires
2011
R4
Site Guidelines for visitors


ATCM XXXV - CEP XV Hobart
2012
R4
Site Guidelines for visitors


ATCM XXXV - CEP XV Hobart
2012
R5
Barrientos Island – Aitcho Islands visitor Site Guidelines


ATCM XXXV - CEP XV Hobart
2012
R9
The Assessment of Land-Based Expeditionary Activities


ATCM XXXV - CEP XV Hobart
2012
R10
Yachting Guidelines


ATCM XXXVI - CEP XVI Brussels
2013
R3
Site Guidelines for visitors


ATCM XXXVII - CEP XVII Brasilia
2014
R4
Site Guidelines for visitors


ATCM XXXVII - CEP XVII Brasilia
2014
R6
Toward a Risk-based Assessment of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities


ATCM XXXVII - CEP XVII Brasilia
2014
R7
Entering into force of Measure 4 (2004)


ATCM XXXIX - CEP XIX Santiago
2016
R2
Site Guidelines for visitors


ATCM XL - CEP XX Beijing
2017
R6
Guidelines on Contingency Planning, Insurance and Other Matters for Tourist and Other Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area


ATCM XLI - CEP XXI Buenos Aires
2018
R1
Site Guidelines for visitors




MEASURES

ATCM / CEP
Year
No.
Subject
 
Current
ATCM XXVII - CEP VII Capetown
2004
M4
Tourism and Non-Governmental activities

 but not in force
ATCM XXXII - CEP XII Baltimore
2009
M15
Landing of Persons from Passenger vessels


but not in force


Note Appendix 1:
The above listed ‘recommendations’ are ‘measures’ under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. As these measures were recommended to the governments of the Consultative Parties, they were called ‘Recommendations’ until 1995. Based on Article IX, paragraph 4, recommendations require approval of all Parties that had a consultative status when the recommendation was adopted. In 1995, “to increase the efficiency and clarity of the decision-making process within the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings”, a distinction was made between Decisions, Measures and Resolutions (Decision 1 (1995); see Final Report, ATCM 1995, §69).  According to this decision, a Measure is a “text which contains provisions intended to be legally binding once it has been approved by all the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties,” which has to be approved “in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty”. A Decision is a decision taken at an ATCM “on an internal organizational matter”, which “will be operative at adoption or at such other time as may be specified”. A Resolution is a “hortatory text” adopted at an ATCM and is not meant to become legally binding. (In view of this arrangement the Rules of Procedure were amended (Decision 2 (1995); see Final Report, ATCM 1995, §70)). Formally only Measures are measures under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. 

Appendix 2: List of Key CEP and ATCM papers (e.g., ATME chairperson summaries, CEP Tourism Study 2012, Reports of Intersessional Contact Groups, most recent IAATO reports)

ATCM XXVII
CEP VII
WP004
Chairman’s Report from Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica
Norway
X
ATCM XXVII
CEP VII
WP041
Report of the XXVI ATCM intersessional contact group on the development of a database on tourism and non-governmental activities
Australia
X
ATCM XXVIII
CEP VIII
WP018
Report of the intersessional contact group on accreditation scheme for Antarctic tour operators
United Kingdom
X
ATCM XXIX
CEP IX
WP001
Report of the CEP Intersessional Contact Group on Site Guidelines for Visitors to Antarctica
United Kingdom
X
ATCM XXXI
CEP XI
WP036
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters
Norway
X
ATCM XXXI
CEP XI
IP019
Chairman’s Report from the Miami Meeting (March 17-19, 2008) on Antarctic Tourism
IAATO
X
ATCM XXXII
CEP XII
WP043
Report of the continued Intersessional Contact Group on Issues Concerning Passenger Ships Operating in Antarctic Waters
Norway
X
ATCM XXXIII
CEP XIII
WP001
Chairs Report - Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area
New Zealand
X
ATCM XXXIII
CEP XIII
WP065
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Marathons and other large – scale Sporting Activities in Antarctica
Chile
X
ATCM XXXIV
CEP XIV
WP045
Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on revision of environmental elements of Recommendation XVIII-1
Australia
X
ATCM XXXV
CEP XV
WP022
Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica
New Zealand
X
ATCM XXXV
CEP XV
IP033
Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica
New Zealand
X
ATCM XXXV
CEP XV
WP027 rev.1
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group ‘Outstanding Questions’ on Antarctic Tourism 
Netherlands
X
ATCM XXXV
CEP XV
WP043
Final Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Supervision of Antarctic Tourism 
Argentina
X
ATCM XXXVI
CEP XVI
WP033
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Information Exchange and the Environmental Aspects and Impacts of Tourism
New Zealand
X
ATCM XXXVI
CEP XVI
WP047
Report of the Informal Contact Group on the Increasing Diversity of Tourism and other Non-Governmental Activities in Antarctica
Netherlands
X
ATCM XXXVII
CEP XVII
SP009
ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan: Summary of the ATCM discussions and decisions on land-based and adventure tourism
ATS
X
ATCM XXXVII
CEP XVII
WP004
Report on the informal discussion on tourism and the risk of introducing non-native organisms
Germany
X
ATCM XXXVIII
CEP XVIII
IP104 rev.1
Towards a Comprehensive, Proactive and Effective Antarctic Tourism Policy: Turning Recommendations into Action
India
X
ATCM XXXIX
CEP XIX
SP009
Review of ATCM discussions relating to Antarctic Tourism 2008-2015
ATS
X
ATCM XXXIX
CEP XIX
WP028
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group ‘Developing a Strategic Approach to Environmentally Managed Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities’
New Zealand
India
X
ATCM XL
CEP XX
SP009
Update on the current state of recommendations of the 2012 CEP Tourism Study
ATS
X
ATCM XLI
CEP XXI
IP055
Data Collection and Reporting on Yachting Activity in Antarctica in 2017-18
United Kingdom
Argentina
Chile
IAATO
X
ATCM XLI
CEP XXI
IP070
Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators 2017-18
IAATO
X
ATCM XLI
CEP XXI
IP071
IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism: 2017-18 Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2018-19 Season
IAATO
X
ATCM XLI
CEP XXI
IP072
Report on IAATO Operator Use of Antarctic Peninsula Landing Sites and ATCM Visitor Site Guidelines, 2017-18 Season
IAATO
X


