





Anthropogenic transfer of terrestrial species within Antarctica: assessing the risks








Anthropogenic transfer of terrestrial species within Antarctica: assessing the risks

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Spain
Summary
The United Kingdom and Spain presents recent knowledge regarding the pathways and risks of transfer of non-native species between Antarctic biogeographic regions.  
Background 
Antarctic terrestrial environments are increasingly at risk from non-native species, but less attention has been focussed on the risk of species transfer between the biologically distinct regions of the Antarctic region (however, see ATCM XXXIII WP14 and ATCM XXXII WP23).  
The CEP has repeatedly recognised the importance of receiving up-to-date scientific knowledge to evaluate the risks associated with inter-regional transfer of species, for example:
    • the Non-native Species Manual Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’ identified the need to reduce the distribution of native Antarctic species between distinct biogeographic regions within the continent including by identifying (i) regions of highest risk of introduction and (ii) activities, vectors and pathways that present a high risk to different biogeographical regions;
    • the Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) identified, as a high priority, the need to improve understanding of risks associated with relocation of native terrestrial species; and
    • the CEP Five Year Work Plan, under the priority 1 issue of the ‘Introduction of non-native species’, identified the action to ‘Give additional attention to the risks posed by intra-Antarctic transfer of propagules’.
The aim of this Information Paper is to provide the Committee with an update on recent research investigating pathways and risk of species transfer within Antarctica associated with human activities, based predominantly on a recent academic paper by UK and Spanish researchers (see Attachment A). 
The Protocol
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty focusses largely on the introduction of non-native species into the Treaty area.  However, with regard to the movement of native species between different regions of the continent, the Protocol states that activities in the Antarctic Treaty area ‘shall be planned and conducted so as to avoid detrimental changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of species or populations of species of fauna and flora’ (Article 3(2b)) and that permitted activities shall be limited to ensure ‘the diversity of species, as well as the habitats essential to their existence, and the balance of the ecological systems existing within the Antarctic Treaty area are maintained’ (Article 3(3c)).  Therefore, Parties have an obligation to consider the transfer of species within Antarctica in the planning of their activities and respond appropriately to maintain ecological balance in visited areas.
Antarctic terrestrial biogeography
Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity is simple compared with many other parts of the world, but varies considerably over differing spatial scales. The species distribution patterns present today are predominantly the result of natural distribution and successful colonisation events that have occurred over a range of timescales.  Consequently, the distribution of terrestrial biodiversity within Antarctica is complex, with 16 distinct biogeographic regions (Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions; ACBRs) currently recognised within the Antarctic continent, Peninsula and Scotia Arc archipelagos of the Antarctic Treaty area. Much of this diversity is endemic not only to Antarctica as a whole, but to specific regions within it. Further complexity is added by inclusion of the biodiversity found on the islands located in the Southern Ocean north of the Treaty area. 
Species transfer within Antarctica
Several natural dispersal mechanisms may be used by different terrestrial biological groups, including wind, birds, marine mammals, water and marine debris. However, high levels of endemism characterise many of the main terrestrial biological groups within Antarctica, suggesting that successful colonisation events following natural dispersal are rare. In contrast, scientific, logistic and tourism activities may inadvertently move organisms over potentially long distances within Antarctica, far beyond natural dispersal ranges. Such translocation can disrupt natural species distribution patterns and biogeography through:
    1. movement of spatially restricted indigenous species to other areas of Antarctica;
    2. movement of distinct populations of more generally distributed species from one area of Antarctica to another, leading to genetic homogenisation and loss of assumed local patterns of adaptation; and
    3. further dispersal of introduced non-native species from one area of Antarctica to another. 

Species can be moved between regions in association with people and cargo, by ship, aircraft and overland travel. Scientific projects may have a wide geographical perspective and in many cases will visit, by different transportation means, multiple ice-free ground locations within the same season, which may represent an intra-Antarctic species transfer risk.  Several of the sub-Antarctic islands and/or different Antarctic locations are visited, often sequentially and at a variety of frequencies, as part of standard shipping and air itineraries. Furthermore, such visitation patterns may be more commonly undertaken by those operators with infrastructure in multiple locations. Preliminary estimates suggest that movement of cargo and personnel by ship between stations located in different biogeographic regions is likely to present one of the greatest risks (see Table 1).  Operational practices, routes and transport mechanisms vary greatly between National Antarctic Programmes and tourist industry companies operating in Antarctica; however, in general, the risks of species transfer is likely to increase as the operation footprint expands across ice-free ground in multiple ACBRs.
Establishment
To establish, a transferred species is likely to require environmental conditions at its new location that are similar or more optimal than those found at the site where it originated.  The availability of liquid water has been recognised as the primary driver for biodiversity in the Antarctic and is closely linked with surface air temperature. Average summer temperatures experienced across different Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions may vary considerably.  However, most ACBRs include ice-free ground on the coast, and it is typically these locations that are selected for the establishment of research stations as (i) access is often easier and (ii) they generally experience less severe climatic conditions than inland sites.  Notably, research has found that mean summer temperatures at coastal research stations across the ACBRs are often very similar. Consequently, species transferred between coastal stations in different ACBRs may experience similar environmental condition, making the establishment of the introduced species more likely and thereby potentially disrupting the balance of the ecological systems existing within the Antarctic Treaty area.
Conclusions
Reducing the risk of inter-regional transfer of species is a priority issue for the CEP, and information has already been provided through SCAR Codes of Conduct, (e.g. Resolutions 3 (2016) and 5 (2018)) and the CEP Non-native Species Manual.  However, further research is needed to increase our understanding of species distribution and biodiversity across a range of spatial scales, in both the terrestrial and marine environments, and an emphasis should be placed upon the development of monitoring programmes and practical means to reduce species transfer between Antarctic regions and sharing of this knowledge amongst operators.
Supporting reference
Hughes, K. A., Convey, P., Pertierra, L. R., Vega, G. C., Aragón, P., and Olalla-Tárraga, M. A. (2019).  Human-mediated dispersal of terrestrial species between Antarctic biogeographic regions: A preliminary risk assessment.  Journal of Environmental Management 232: 73-89.
Table 1.  Risk assessment for movement of propagules between Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions by different anthropogenic transportation mechanisms. Scores are given in the range 1–5. Overall risk is calculated as the product of the scores shown in columns 2 to 5. The colours correspond to allocated scores, i.e. green = 1, yellow = 2, light orange = 3, dark orange = 4, red = 5.


1  Estimate largely based upon the physical size of potential vector and nature of activities undertaken with Antarctica; 2  National Operator vessels may include military vessels used for operational purposes; 3  Takes into consideration the biosecurity methods commonly employed by the Antarctic tourism industry; 4  This estimate does not take into consideration the risk of transportation of non-native species into Antarctica from elsewhere.
