





Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2018/19 intersessional period










Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): summary of activities during the 2018/19 intersessional period
Information Paper submitted by the CEP Chair
Summary
The 21st meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XXI) was held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, from 13 to 15 May 2018. This paper presents a summary of intersessional activities arising from CEP XXI, as identified in CEP Circular: 1 / CEP XXII. Where appropriate, the details of related papers submitted to CEP XXII are provided. 

Priority*
Action
Report Para #
CEP Member/Observer
Related papers to CEP XXII / comments

Agenda Item 4: Operation of the CEP

Communicate the CEP science needs directly to relevant groups, and consider alternative formats of the overview of science needs that may be more accessible to the relevant target audience. 
134
All Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XXII.

Agenda Item 5: Cooperation with other Organisations

Ms Patricia Ortúzar (Argentina), Dr Penhale (United States) and Ms Birgit Njåstad (Norway) to represent the CEP at COMNAP XXX, SC-CAMLR XXXVI and SCAR XXXV, respectively.
147
Argentina/Spain, United Sates and Norway
The CEP was represented in meetings of other organisations as follows: COMNAP XXX – Dr Quesada (Spain); SC-CAMLR XXXVII – Dr Penhale (United States) and SCAR XXXV – Ms. Njåstad (Norway).

IP008 Annual Report for 2018/19 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) (COMNAP) – submitted under CEP 5.

IP013 Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to CEP (CCAMLR) – submitted under CEP 5.

IP030 Report by the CEP Observer to the XXXV SCAR Delegates’ Meeting (Norway) – submitted under CEP 5.




Agenda Item: Repair and Remediation of Environmental Damage
2: Repair or remediation of environmental damage
Participate in finalising the work in the ICG on review of the Antarctic Clean-up Manual (led by Australia)
123

Australia, all Members and Observers
WP046 Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Antarctic Clean-up Manual (Australia) – submitted under CEP 6.

Agenda Item 7: Climate Change Implications for the Environment: Implementation and Review of the CCRWP
1: Climate change implications for the environment
The SGCCR (led by UK)  to continue work in accordance with its Terms of Reference, as well as developing a more user-friendly format for the Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP).
123
SGCCR
WP036 Report of the Subsidiary Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) 2018-2019 (United Kingdom) – submitted under CEP 7b.
1: Climate change implications for the environment 

WMO to report to CEP XXII on how its activities relate to the issues and needs identified in the Climate Change Response Work Programme. 




Communicate the CEP science needs relevant to matters identified in the CCRWP directly to relevant groups.
134
SGCCR
No specific action anticipated for CEP XXII.

Agenda Item 8a: Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations
2: Implementing and Improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
If it decides to proceed with its proposal to construct and operate a new Antarctic research station, China to consider the CEP’s advice and comments from Parties, and address the comments when preparing the required final CEE.
18
China

2: Implementing and Improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
If it decides to proceed with its proposal to construct a new wharf and conduct coastal stabilisation at Rothera, United Kingdom to consider the CEP’s advice and comments from Parties, and address the comments when preparing the required final CEE.
29
United Kingdom
IP029 Update and CEE Compliance Report: Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation Project (United Kingdom) – submitted under CEP 8a.

Agenda Item 8b: Other EIA Matters
2: Implementing and Improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Work to progress and coordinate information that will assist development of guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative impacts

All Members
No specific action anticipated for CEP XXII.
2: Implementing and Improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Consider potential changes required to EIA database to improve its utility

All Members


Compile peer-reviewed literature of impacts of RPAS use and provide a summary that could be used to inform content to be included in the Antarctic Environments Portal.
120
SCAR/COMNAP

1: Tourism and NGO activities
Consider actions to understand better and address the environmental implications of increasing numbers of tourists visiting landing sites, including further consideration of the recommendations stemming from the CEP Tourism Study.
89
All Members
WP019 Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Summary and Key Recommendations (Netherlands, United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP 3.

IP011 Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Report (Netherlands, United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP 3.

IP026 Proactive Management of Antarctic Tourism: Time for a Fresh Approach (Netherlands, New Zealand) – submitted to CEP 3.

IP100 Progress with development of a methodology to assess the relative sensitivity of sites to visits by tourists (Australia, IAATO, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States) – submitted to CEP 11.

Agenda Item 9a: Area Protection and Management Plans: Management Plans
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to continue its intersessional review of the management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 125 Fildes Peninsula, ASPA 145 Port Foster, ASPA 146 South Bay, and ASPA 150 Ardley Island.
103, 106

Chile, SGMP, interested Members and Observers
WP064 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2018-2019 (Argentina) – submitted to CEP 9a.
1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans
SGMP to conduct work under its terms of reference 4 & 5, as outlined in the work plan agreed by CEP XXI, including further considerations of improvements to the Guidance for assessing an area for a potential Antarctic Specially Managed Area designation.
106

SGMP
WP064 Subsidiary Group on Management Plans Report of activities during the intersessional period 2018-2019 (Argentina) – submitted to CEP 9a.

United Kingdom and the Netherlands to work on the development of a management plan for proposed ASPA within the Léonie Islands, Ryder Bay, Antarctic Peninsula 
47
United Kingdom, Netherlands, interested Members
WP035 Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plan for the Léonie Islands and south-east Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula (United Kingdom, Netherlands) – submitted to CEP 9b.

China to work on the development of a management plan for proposed ASPA on Inexpressible Island
52
China, interested Members
WP047 Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area at Inexpressible Island and Seaview Bay, Ross Sea (China, Italy, Republic of Korea) – submitted to CEP 9b.


Belgium to further consider the development of a draft management plan for an ASPA in the Sør Rondane Mountains, in consultation with interested Members and Observers. 

Belgium, interested Members

1: Processing new and revised protected / managed area management plans
Norway to continue work on guidance / criteria for delisting of ASPAs 
65

Norway, interested Members
WP044 Proposed Criteria for de-designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) (Norway, Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP 9e.

Agenda Item 9b: Area Protection and Management Plans: Historic Sites and Monuments
2: Designation and management of Historic Sites and Monuments
Argentina and the United States to lead work to examine the format of the list of Historic Sites and Monuments.
113
Argentina and the United States
WP065 Proposal to redesign the format of the list of Historic Sites and Monuments (Argentina) – submitted to CEP 9b.

Agenda Item 9c: Area Protection and Management Plans: Site Guidelines
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Work on the development of a formal checklist to aid the future review of Site Guidelines
72

Interested Members and Observers
WP055 Visitor Site Guidelines Assessment and Review Checklists (United Kingdom, Argentina, ASOC, Australia, IAATO,United States) – submitted to CEP 9c.
2: Site specific guidelines for tourist-visited sites
Work on the development of a repository of pictures to aid in the regular review of site guidelines.
72
Interested Members and Observers


Agenda Item 9d: Area Protection and Management Plans: Marine Spatial Protection and Management
2: Marine spatial protection and management
New Zealand to lead informal intersessional work on ATCM Resolution 5 (2017) and CEP Five-Year Work Plan action “to consider connectivity between land and ocean, and complementary measures that could be undertaken by Parties with respect to MPAs”
160

New Zealand, interested members
WP048 Harmonisation of Marine Protection Initiatives across the Antarctic Treaty System (New Zealand) – submitted to CEP 9d.

Agenda Item 9f: Other Annex V Matters
2: Overview of the protected areas system
Plan for joint SCAR/CEP workshop on further developing the Antarctic protected area system to be held immediately prior to CEP XXII.
130-132

Workshop Steering Committee (SCAR, Czech, Australia, UK), interested members and observers
The joint SCAR/CEP Workshop on Further Developing the Antarctic Protected Area System will held in the Prague immediately before the CEP. A Working Paper outlining the main outcomes of the workshop is expected to be available at the start of the CEP.
2: Overview of the protected areas system

United Kingdom to lead discussion on Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Important Bird Areas

United Kingdom, interested members





Interested Members collaborate with SCAR or IAATO on work to develop a systematic conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula. 
89
SCAR, IAATO, interested Members
IP024 Systematic Conservation Plan for the Antarctic Peninsula Project Updates (SCAR, IAATO) – submitted to CEP 9e.

Agenda Item 10a: Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna: Quarantine and Non-Native Species
1: Introduction of non-native species
United Kingdom to lead discussion on the further development of a non-mandatory non-native species response protocol.

United Kingdom, Spain, Argentina, interested Members
WP034 Non-native Species Response Protocol (Spain, United Kingdom, Argentina, France, New Zealand) – submitted to CEP 10a.
1: Introduction of non-native species
To help the Committee in assessing the effectiveness of the CEP Non-Native Species Manual, request a report from COMNAP on the implementation of quarantine and biosecurity measures by its Members. 

COMNAP
WP050 Review and Update of the “Checklists for supply chain managers of National Antarctic Programs for the reduction in risk of transfer of non-native species” (COMNAP, SCAR) and IP038 Report on the extent of sewage treatment plant infestations across the Antarctic Treaty area: Survey results (COMNAP) – both submitted to CEP 10a – are relevant to this item. 
1: Introduction of non-native species
Initiate work to develop a non-native species response strategy, including appropriate responses to diseases of wildlife.

Interested Members

1: Introduction of non-native species
SCAR to bring forward information to CEP XXII regarding existing work and expertise that would be available for identifying non-native species. 

SCAR


Item 11: Environmental Monitoring and Reporting
2: Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United Kingdom and the United States to further develop a methodology for assessing the sensitivity of sites used by visitors, in consultation with IAATO and interested Members and Observers. 

New Zealand, Australia, Norway, United Kingdom, United States, IAATO, interested Members and Observers 

IP100 Progress with development of a methodology to assess the relative sensitivity of sites to visits by tourists (Australia, IAATO, New Zealand, Norway, United Kingdom, United States) – submitted to CEP 11.

Agenda Item 13: General Matters
1. Tourism and NGO activities
Members to further consider matters related to timely, proactive and precautionary approaches to address tourism growth and bring forward related proposals for consideration at future meetings
85-86
All members
WP019 Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Summary and Key Recommendations (Netherlands, United Kingdom) – submitted to CEP 3.







Contribute to informal discussions led by China on a Code of Conduct for the exploration and research in Dome A area.
161
China, interested Members
WP045 Report of the Informal Discussion for the intersessional period of 2018/19 on the revised draft Code of Conduct for Protection of Dome A area in Antarctica (China) – submitted to CEP 11. 
2. Monitoring and state of the environment 


SCAR to present its Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica for the Committee’s consideration 
at CEP XXII. 

SCAR
WP017 SCAR’s Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica (SCAR) – submitted to CEP 10c.






