





Results from the international workshop “The Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals in Antarctica” held in November 2018 in Germany









Results from the international workshop “The Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals in Antarctica” held in November 2018 in Germany
Information Paper submitted by Germany 

    1. Introduction
Over the last years increasing concern on the impacts of underwater sound on the marine environment has been raised internationally which lead to new series of conferences like the International Conference on “The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life” (5. Conference in Den Haag in July 2019). Among other things participants identified the importance of noise as an issue to be regulated and fostered intensive and controversial discussion about possible protection thresholds. However, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has not discussed impacts of underwater sound in Antarctic waters since 2007 (see ATCM XXIX WP41 SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and the Southern Ocean or ATCM XXX IP80 Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean), though SCAR provided an Update on Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean (ATCM XXXV IP 21) and intends to provide further input to ATCM XLII.
Arguably, amongst the species most vulnerable to noise are marine mammals since they are specialised in using sound for communication, navigation and foraging, and therefore have evolved the highest auditory sensitivity among marine organisms (Au et al., 2000). Antarctica is of critical importance to migrating baleen whales and to pinnipeds. Species of both groups either stay here all year round or forage here during the austral summer as part of their migratory pattern. During this time, they take in a large proportion (possibly up to 80 %) of their annual energy requirements and store substantial amounts of lipids, with some species increasing their body weight by 30-100 % (Brodie 1975, Lockyer 1981, Reilly et al. 2004).
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Environmental Protocol, EP) aims at safeguarding native animals at population (Art. 3) and individual level (Annex II) which prohibits, among others, activities that molest, handle, capture, injure or kill a native mammal or bird. These legal requirements are being considered by the national competent authority when evaluating requests for permits. 
For all requests for permits that involve activities that generate underwater noise, significant gaps in knowledge on the effects of underwater noise on Antarctic marine mammals have made the assessment of these requests difficult. Therefore, Germany hosted a workshop to determine the current state of knowledge on effects of noise on marine mammals in Antarctica, to identify knowledge gaps, and to investigate what marine mammal experts would prioritise in terms of research needs.

    2. Background
Almost all anthropogenic marine activities in Antarctica result in underwater noise, ranging from deliberately generated sounds for scientific seismic surveys to sounds produced as unwanted by-product by ship traffic or construction activities. Such noise can have profound effects on marine organisms and has been identified as a major stressor in the marine environment (Popper und Hawkins 2016, Southall et al. 2019). Yet, no specific guidelines for noise production in Antarctica have been established and noise has not been reviewed at the Meetings of the CEP since 2012.
The European Union includes underwater noise in the definition of “pollution” in its 2008 Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). “Monitoring guidance for underwater noise in European Seas” was provided in 2014 (Dekeling et al. 2014). In 2017, the European Commission revised its criteria and methodological standards and specifically included the development of thresholds in its decision (COMMISSION DECISION (EU) 2017/848). 
In 2018, the United Nations Informal Consultative Process addressed underwater noise as a focus theme. 
Several Contracting Parties of the Antarctic Treaty have regulations or guidelines in place to deal with underwater noise under national jurisdiction. A few examples of national regulations or guidelines are the following:
    • The Australian Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) protects certain marine mammals which are specified in guidelines developed under the EPBC Act (Policy Statement 2.1, September 2008). 
    • Germany introduced thresholds as reference values in 2006 and published a sound protection concept for Harbour Porpoise for pile-driving in 20131 (engl. version: Germany (2014)).
    • The Netherlands and Belgium use thresholds values and introduced a ban on pile-driving during key reproductive periods to prevent interference to vital habitats and to avoid detrimental impacts at sensitive times of year (Rumes et al. 2016).
    • The UK developed the first national guidelines for seismic surveys. They were first published in 1995 and have last been updated in 2017 (JNCC 2017). 
    • In the USA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) published acoustic guidelines in 2018 that include procedures for assessing acoustic effects under the Marine Protection Act (MPA) and the Endangered Species Act (ESA) (NMFS 2018). 
The discussions in previous years showed that thresholds and procedures to protect marine species from harmful underwater sound vary nationally and are debated controversially within the scientific community. However, considerable progress has been made in understanding the impacts of underwater noise in the last years. 
Any activity in the Antarctic authorised by a competent authority of a Contracting Party needs to be in compliance with their domestic law. Hence, the development and implementation of national guidelines and regulations referring to the impacts of underwater sound will also affect the implementation of the provisions of the EP. 
    3. Workshop Overview
Germany hosted a workshop to determine the current state of knowledge on effects of noise on marine mammals in Antarctica in order to identify knowledge gaps, and to investigate what aspects marine mammal experts would prioritise in terms of research needs. This international workshop took place in Berlin, Germany, from 12th to 14th Nov. 2018. Twenty-nine participants represented diverse stakeholders, including scientists, regulators, and NGO’s. Participants came from Germany, Australia, the UK and the USA. 
The following information was compiled for the workshop and discussed accordingly: 
    • overview of international activities in Antarctica, including research and tourism,
    • overview of sources of underwater noise and the Antarctic sound propagation environment,
    • Antarctic marine mammal species, their geographic distribution, seasonal abundance, and critical behaviours, 
    • effects of underwater noise including behavioural responses to masking, stress, and hearing loss, 
    • marine mammal prey and what is known about noise-related impacts on those species (considering indirect effects to marine mammal foraging).
This information provides the necessary context for the evaluation of permit requests that are assessed within the permitting process for the Antarctic Treaty area. As most of the above topics deal with (sometimes temporary) effects on individual animals, the question how such effects propagate through a population and potentially lead to population-level impacts was part of the final discussion. Methods to reduce exposure to underwater noise and hence mitigate impacts were reviewed, leading into discussions on underwater noise management.
Based on these discussions, a table of available information on Antarctic marine mammal geographic and seasonal distribution, behaviour, hearing capabilities, noise-induced impacts (hearing loss, stress, masking, and behavioural responses), prey species and noise impacts, and population consequences of noise exposure was compiled. ’Empty cells’ were indicative of knowledge gaps and led to a list of possible research topics and management needs. All workshop participants scored each topic on a scale of 0 (unimportant) to 5 (very important). While the responses were anonymous, people were asked to identify themselves as proponent (i.e., applicant for a permit to produce underwater noise), regulator, external advisor, or others. Discussions on all three days also addressed how to manage underwater noise in the presence of knowledge gaps. The results of the workshop are in the process of being published (Erbe et al. 2019). 
    4. Workshop Recommendations / Outlook
Assessing and managing underwater noise and its potential impacts on marine mammals in Antarctica is complex and difficult. Multiple countries operate in Antarctica, and many stakeholders have an interest in Antarctica (mainly scientific research, conservation, tourism, fisheries and shipping). In addition to the complicated management framework, there are significant scientific gaps of knowledge: Antarctic species are understudied. Some species undergo critical life functions while being in Antarctica (such as feeding by mysticetes before migration to breeding grounds at lower latitudes) and it can only be speculated how impacts potentially incurred in Antarctica will affect the fitness of these animals while in other areas. The validity of applying data on underwater noise impacts from other areas or species is debatable. Last but not least, sound propagation characteristics can vary significantly in Antarctica and are different to those observed in other and more temperate areas of the oceans.
International collaboration on noise research and management is crucial and there are several organisations through which this can be promoted. Many of the research needs have been internationally recognised and some are at least partially addressed by other entities: For example, the urgent need to identify marine mammal hotspots has also recently (October 2018) been recognised by the IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force, proposing 15 candidate Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) for the Southern Ocean and Sub-Antarctic Islands2. The Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology (SOST), which is a partnership between the United States Office of Naval Research, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the Marine Mammal Commission, called for proposals for mysticete audiograms in mid-20183. The Joint Industry Program of Oil and Gas Producers is currently evaluating proposals to study masking in marine mammals. Some research needs, such as the effectiveness of certain mitigation methods, behavioural responses, and prey responses (e.g., availability of krill), could potentially be developed as proposals for future research expeditions to Antarctica.
A brief series of future workshops (over the course of 12-18 months) in Germany was recommended by the workshop participants to refine marine mammal noise exposure criteria for Antarctica: one workshop each for mysticetes, odontocetes, and pinnipeds and one for mitigation measures. International experts on underwater noise, the target species, and development of noise exposure criteria should be invited. The idea is to have a criteria matrix that addresses specifically the 24 native marine mammal species and the three main sources of underwater noise: seismic airguns, hydroacoustic equipment, and ships. The advantage of such an Antarctic-specific matrix would be that no other regulation (e.g., the national noise management protocol in place in German waters) would be affected.
Germany will publish a call for the workshop series in the second half of 20194. Germany will inform the CEP contact points and invites interested parties to collaborate or to answer the call. 

    5. Literature
Brodie, P. F. (1975). "Cetacean Energetics, an Overview of Intraspecific Size Variation." Ecology 56(1): 152-161.

Dekeling, R. P. A., Tasker, M.L., Van der Graaf, A.J., Ainslie, M.A, Andersson, M.H., André, M., Borsani, J.F., Brensing, K.,, Castellote, M., Cronin, D., Dalen, J., Folegot, T., Leaper, R., Pajala, J., Redman, P., Robinson, S.P., Sigray, P., Sutton, G., and Thomsen, F., Werner, S., Wittekind, D., Young, J.V., (2014). Monitoring Guidance for Underwater Noise in European Seas, Part I: Executive Summary. JRC Scientific and Policy Report. Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union.

Erbe, C., Dähne, M., Gordon, J., Herata, H., Houser, D. S., Janik, V. M., . . . C., V. O. I. (2019). "Managing the Effects of Noise from Ship Traffic, Seismic Surveying and Construction on Marine Mammals in Antarctica." Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution (submitted/in review): 40.

Germany (2014). Concept for the Protection of Harbour Porpoises from Sound Exposures during the Construction of Offshore Wind Farms in the German North Sea. Gothenburg, Sweden, 21st ASCOBANS Advisory Committee Meeting. AC21/Inf.3.2.2.a.

JNCC (2017). JNCC guidelines for minimising the risk of injury to marine mammals from geophysical surveys. Aberdeen, UK, JNCC: 28.

Lockyer, C. (1981). Growth and Energy Budget of large Baleen Whales from the Southern Hemisphere. Mammals in the Seas, FAO. III: 379-487.

NMFS (2018). 2018 Revisions to: Technical Guidance for Assessing the Effects of Anthropogenic Sound on Marine Mammal Hearing (Version 2.0): Underwater Thresholds for Onset of Permanent and Temporary Threshold Shifts. U.S. Dept. of Commer., NOAA: 167.

Popper, A. N. and Hawkins, A. (2016). The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life II.

Reilly, S., Hedley, S., Borberg, J., Hewitt, R., Thiele, D., Watkins, J. and Naganobu, M. (2004). "Biomass and energy transfer to baleen whales in the South Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean." Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography 51(12-13): 1397-1409.

Rumes, B., Erkman, A. and Haelters, J. (2016). Evaluating Underwater Noise Regulations for Piling Noise in Belgium and the Netherlands. Environmental impacts of offshore wind farms in the Belgian part of the North Sea: Environmental impact monitoring reloaded. S. Degraer. Brussels, Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, OD Natural Environment, Marine Ecology and Management Section: 12.

Southall, B. L., Finneran, J. J., Reichmuth, C., Nachtigall, P. E., Ketten, D. R., Bowles, A. E., . . . Tyack, P. L. (2019). "Marine Mammal Noise Exposure Criteria: Updated Scientific Recommendations for Residual Hearing Effects." Aquatic Mammals 45(2): 125-232.


