





Report of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group










Report of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 Larsemann Hills Management Group

Information Paper submitted by Australia, China, India and Russian Federation
Summary
A management group continues to oversee the implementation of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills. This group has commenced a review of the ASMA management plan, and the management plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 174 Stornes, which lies within the ASMA. 
Introduction
The Larsemann Hills are located between the Vestfold Hills and the Amery Ice Shelf on the south-eastern coast of Prydz Bay, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica (69o30’S, 76o19’58”E). They were designated an ASMA under Measure 2 (2007) following a proposal by Australia, China, India, Romania and the Russian Federation. 
The ASMA management plan aims to protect the Larsemann Hills environment by promoting cooperation and coordination among Parties planning and conducting scientific and operational activities in the Area. Consistent with the approach taken for several other ASMAs, the Parties active in the Area established a management group to oversee the implementation of the plan. This information paper follows previous reports to the CEP on the management group’s activities.1 
2018 ASMA Management Group meeting
Members of the Larsemann Hills ASMA Management Group met at the XXXth COMNAP annual general meeting held in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany in June 2018. The meeting was chaired by China and attended by representatives from Australia (Australian Antarctic Division), China (Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration and the Polar Research Institute of China) and the Russian Federation (Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute). The position of chair is generally held for 2-year periods. 
Management plan review
Members discussed the need to commence a review of the management plans for ASMA No. 6 Larsemann Hills and ASPA No. 174 Stornes (located within the ASMA), in accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The reviews are being led by Australia and are expected to be concluded when the management group meets at the XXXI COMNAP annual general meeting in Plovdiv, Bulgaria in July 2019.
Discussions on the Larsemann Hills ASMA management plan to date have identified the need for some modifications, including:
    • the addition of references to the Environmental Domains Analysis for Antarctica (Resolution 3 (2008)) and Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Resolution 3 (2017) 
    • inclusion of content on the restrictions applying to access to ASPA No. 174 Stones
    • a revised description of the Larsemann Hills’ lake and stream biota
    • updates to the maps and the descriptions of infrastructure, and
    • the addition of information on Historic Site and Monument #92.
Discussions on the Stornes ASPA management plan have been focussed on the possible need for changes to access provisions.
Information exchange	
Reports of operational and scientific activities undertaken in the 2017-18 season and planned for the 2018-19 season were shared and discussed by attendees. 
Aviation co-ordination
Members acknowledged the potential for increasing aviation activities in the region and renewed their commitment to:
    • daily email communication between station leaders to forecast aviation activities
    • continuous monitoring of VHF Channel 16 for vessel and aircraft operations, and
    • communicating the location, start and finish time of ship-shore flight operations when multiple ships are in the area. 
Station leaders
In order to facilitate communication between stations within the region, Management Group members exchanged contact details for incoming station leaders. 

