





State of Antarctic Penguins 2019 Report









State of Antarctic Penguins 2019 Report
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Oceanites’s State of Antarctic Penguins 2019 report is now available at: https://oceanites.org/future-of-antarctica/penguin-conservation/state-of-antarctic-penguins-reports/.  The report summarizes the status — population size and population trends — of Antarctica’s five penguin species, continent-wide and in key regions.
Introduction
Oceanites, Inc. is a nonprofit scientific and educational organization founded in 1987 (https://oceanites.org). Since 1994, its Antarctic Site Inventory has been monitoring and analyzing penguin and seabird population changes across the entirety of the Antarctic Peninsula, and is focused on distinguishing the direct and interactive effects of climate change, fishing, tourism, and other human activities on the Antarctic Peninsula ecosystem. 
In 2016, the Mapping Application for Penguin Populations and Projected Dynamics (MAPPPD) launched.  MAPPPD is an open access, decision-support tool developed for Oceanites that assembles Antarctic penguin population data and makes them publicly available.  Over the past three years, it has quickly become a primary resource for scientific and other information about Antarctic penguins, integrating expert biological field surveys, satellite imagery analyses, and citizen science.  This continent-wide penguin population database is continually being updated and, as described in IP81 Report of Oceanites, Inc. submitted by SCAR at ATCM XL, is utilized by Oceanites to generate its annual State of Antarctic Penguins reports.1  As in previous reports, this year’s report encourages those who have not yet contributed data to do so.
State of Antarctic Penguins Report 2019
The new State of Antarctic Penguins 2019 report comprehensively summarizes the present status — population size and population trends — of Antarctica’s five penguin species, continent-wide and in key regions.  These species total at least 6.186 million breeding pairs nesting at 662 or more sites across the entire Antarctic continent.  This report uses the most current scientific data, including 3,736 records from 116 sources of on-the-ground colony counts and satellite image analyses. 
The report and its underlying database provide evidence to assist all Antarctic stakeholders in their deliberations and activities: decision-makers and governments, scientists, NGOs, the private sector including fishing and tourism operators, and concerned citizens throughout the world. The goal is to make available the latest, most accurate population data about Antarctic penguins, both continent-wide and regionally, and of the latest trends in such numbers.
This report may be accessed via the Oceanites website (https://oceanites.org/future-of-antarctica/penguin-conservation/state-of-antarctic-penguins-reports/), either online or through mobile devices.

Key Report Findings
Oceanites continues to closely track the notable changes in the Antarctic Peninsula.  Its work indicates that there, Adélie (Pygoscelis adeliae) and chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarctica) penguins have declined and gentoo (Pygoscelis papua) penguins have increased; however, there are indications that the warming trend has levelled off and that the Adélie population in the southern Antarctic Peninsula has stabilized.  The report also notes key concerns, including ice sheet and glacier collapses both in West Antarctica and East Antarctica that potentially affect penguin populations. 
The report further notes that the 2018/2019 austral spring/summer season was unusual in the Antarctic Peninsula, with deeper than usual snow at sites in the Gerlache Strait.  Mid-season visits (late January) found many colonies with gentoo penguins still sitting on eggs, when by that time, most should have hatched.  At some sites, it was clear that gentoos had either re-lain eggs or had abandoned nests for the season, which is likely why this year’s report notes a decrease in the most recent estimate of the gentoo penguin population. 
Inevitably, these trends and concerns encourage further work distinguishing climate change impacts from other factors potentially causing Antarctic penguin population changes.  Oceanites and colleagues are contributing to this effort (https://oceanites.org/future-of-antarctica/climate-challenge/) while keeping abreast of work by other researchers around Antarctica. 
Primary Contacts:
Ron Naveen, Oceanites, Inc. oceanites@icloud.com 
Grant Humphries, Black Bawks Data Science Ltd, Data Manager, MAPPPD grwhumphries@blackbawks.net


