





An update on the World Meteorological Organization-Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Joint Fellowship Programme









An update on the World Meteorological Organization-Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Joint Fellowship Programme
Information Paper submitted by SCAR and the WMO
Summary
This paper announces the launch on 8th May 2019 of a Joint WMO-SCAR Fellowship Programme for early career scientists, which was originally announced in ATCM XLI IP044 A New WMO-SCAR Joint Fellowship Program. Fellows will be expected to undertake research on a topic that is relevant to the programme priority areas of WMO and SCAR, at major international laboratories, field facilities, and/or institutes in or operated by SCAR member countries, with the goal of exposing them to recent advances in Antarctic research and to develop long-term scientific links and partnerships. Selected fellows will not be expected to come from SCAR member countries, in keeping with aims of the WMO Fellowship Programme to support the education and training of qualified and suitable candidates, particularly from least developed and developing countries.
Background
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have long had a focus on education and outreach activities, reflected, for example, in the Intersessional Contact Group on Education and Outreach and the listing of this activity as a priority in the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has a well-established Education and Training programme. Its fellowship programme aims to build capacity in all WMO Members’, supporting the education and training of qualified and suitable candidates, particularly from least developed and developing countries and Small Island Developing States.1 In particular, it is important to promote the development of research and cooperation between academic institutions and National Meteorological and Hydrological Services. Eventually, it aims to strengthen the network between researchers, operational meteorologists and policy makers alike on various important issues regarding science, operations and sustainable development.
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) similarly has an extensive education, outreach and capacity building programme. In 2018, SCAR offered five 5 fellowships to early-career researchers from New Zealand, India, Argentina, Uruguay and Chile. In 2019, SCAR is offering additional fellowship and scholarship opportunities with the support of India, France, Switzerland and the Republic of Korea. SCAR is committed to helping scientists, in all of its Member countries and beyond, to participate in understanding the processes at work in the Antarctic region and to use that understanding to predict change both there and elsewhere in the world. SCAR is also committed to providing objective and independent advice to policy makers, especially the Antarctic Treaty System. 
SCAR has a long history of working with WMO, in particular through its co-sponsored World Climate Research Programme1, on science activities in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean region, and with regard to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. The two organisations are currently developing a revised Memorandum of Understanding (also including the International Arctic Science Committee) to support future collaboration. 

The Joint Fellowship Program 
Recognising shared capacity building priorities and long history of collaborative work, the WMO and SCAR have agreed to co-fund one fellowship in 2019, with plans for future years subject to evaluation of the first year of the scheme.  
The Joint Fellowship Programme is targeted at those within five years of having completed a PhD working in a weather, climate, or operational hydrology related discipline. Successful candidates will undertake research on a topic that is relevant to the programme priority areas of WMO and SCAR. 
Candidates will undertake this work at major international laboratories, field facilities, and/or institutes, in or operated by SCAR member countries. The goal is to expose candidates to recent advances in research and to develop long-term scientific capability, links and partnerships. 
The Joint Fellowship Programme candidates will be selected from countries with developing economies, who are members of the WMO. Importantly, applicants need not be from SCAR Member countries, with the aim to encourage capacity to research Antarctic topics of relevance to countries which do not necessarily have active national Antarctic programmes. 
Announcement of the Programme 
The opportunity has been announced on the SCAR website concurrently with the launch of SCAR’s own fellowship scheme (see https://www.scar.org/capacity-building/capacity-building) and advertised via multiple channels.

