





United Kingdom Hydrographic Charting


IHO Seminar





United Kingdom Hydrographic Charting

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary

This information paper summarises recent work by the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO), British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the Royal Navy in the provision and usage of hydrographic data for navigation. Sound nautical charts are crucial for the conduct of safe travel in Antarctica. The United Kingdom is meeting its commitments under the Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) to complete the 25 charts for which it is responsible around the Antarctic Peninsula. 

Background

The Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) is a special Hydrographic Commission of the International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO). The HCA is the coordinating body for hydrographic surveying and nautical charting matters in International Region M (Antarctica). Membership of the HCA is open to any IHO Member State whose government has acceded to the Antarctic Treaty and which contributes resources and/or data to coverage of Region M, and which becomes a signatory to the Statutes of the HCA.

The International (INT) Chart and Electronic Navigational Chart (ENC) Schemes are a series of charts and cells providing navigational coverage of each Region that confirm to internationally agreed standards and specifications. There are currently 115 INT charts in the Region M series that are the responsibility of 17 Nations (see Figure 1 below). To date, 92 of these have been published and are available to the mariner.

United Kingdom Navigational work

The UK recognises the crucial importance of accurate, up to date navigational charts for the Antarctic, especially in the heavily used Peninsula region. The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO) has been producing navigational charts for over 200 years and work collaboratively with the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and the Royal Navy to develop data sets that support science and chart production. Chart production is extremely labour intensive and requires experienced cartographers to reconcile many original documents that range from modern state-of-the-art surveys to old lines of passage soundings that were positioned from visual fixes on ice features that are no longer present.  Modern satellite imagery is used within the production of charts to ensure the latest coastline features are accurate and positioned correctly.  

The Royal Navy ice patrol ship, HMS Protector plans her Antarctic work programme with note of the IHO survey priority list, giving particular attention to the UK’s areas of responsibility. Of the 115 INT charts, the UK are responsible for 25 of these charts (See Figure 2). 

Partnership between the UK Government and the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office

In 2017, to ensure the UK speedily fulfils its commitment to the INT chart scheme, the UK Government (funded by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office) provided a three-year funding platform to the UKHO to enable a concentrated work package to ensure the completion of the 12 charts for which the UK is responsible in Region M. This has allowed for the completion of seven new charts in the last two years:

Fig 3. 	INT9159 Pendleton Strait and Grandidier Channel. 
INT9160 Matha Strait to Larrouy Island 
INT9131 Crystal Sound to Pendleton Strait.

Fig 4. 	INT9165 Gerlache Strait to Orleans Strait. 
INT9166 Bluff Island to Emma Island.

Fig 5. 	INT9117 Detaille Island, Melchior Islands and English Strait. 
INT9114 Paulet Island, Brown Bluff and Fridtjof Sound

The United Kingdom will ensure the remaining five charts are completed by July 2020. 
















































Figures


Figure 1 – Map of INT charts for Antarctica




Figure 2 – UK responsibility INT Charts 




















Figure 3 - INT9159 Pendleton Strait and Grandidier Channel. INT9160 Matha Strait to Larrouy Island and INT9131 Crystal Sound to Pendleton Strait.



Figure 4 - INT9165 Gerlache Strait to Orleans Strait. INT9166 Bluff Island to Emma Island.




Figure 5 - INT9117 Detaille Island, Melchior Islands and English Strait. INT9114 Paulet Island, Brown Bluff and Fridtjof Sound



