





Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Report










Antarctic Tourism Workshop, 3-5 April in Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Chair’s Report
Information Paper submitted by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom 

Summary

The Netherlands and the United Kingdom present the Chair’s Report from an informal workshop on the management of Antarctic Tourism.

Background

    1. The Netherlands and the United Kingdom co-chaired an informal workshop on managing the future growth and diversification of Antarctic tourism, hosted by the Netherlands in Rotterdam on 3-5 April.  Attended by representatives of 17 Treaty Parties, as well as by external experts and observer organisations ASOC, IAATO and SCAR, the workshop also considered the challenges for National Competent Authorities (NCAs) in strengthening compliance with existing Treaty regulations, informal guidance and permit conditions.

    2. The background document prepared for this workshop is being submitted to the ATCM/CEP as a separate Information Paper, and the key recommendations from this workshop are presented in a Working Paper for the ATCM and CEP to consider.

Day I (Morning session 09:00-12:30): 
Current trends in Antarctic tourism and inventory of management measures considered by the CEP and ATCM in the past

    3. Arthur Eijs (Co-Chair NL) welcomed attendees to the Netherlands for this workshop and was delighted to see so many parties interested in the future of Antarctic tourism. He noted with regret that the Netherlands State Secretary for Infrastructure and Water Management was sadly unable to attend as planned and sent her apologies.

    4. The workshop opened with a keynote speech from Dutch Arctic Ambassador, Carola van Rijnsoever. She welcomed attendees to Rotterdam, highlighting the city’s international heritage. She emphasised the importance of developing Antarctic Ambassadors and the positive role of tourism in creating these Ambassadors. At the same time, she pointed out that the amount of Antarctic Ambassadors we can create this way is limited. While we normally speak of responsible tourism “leaving nothing but footprints”, in Antarctica even footprints can have a lasting impact. The key question for this workshop is how far, and in what way, we can allow tourism to develop in Antarctica. The Arctic Ambassador stressed the need for a long-term vision for the future management of tourism in Antarctica, which this workshop will provide for the upcoming meeting of the ATCM in Prague.

    5. Arthur Eijs thanked Neil Gilbert (NZ) and Kees Bastmeijer (NL) for their work in producing the background documents for the workshop. He explained that the overall goal of the workshop was not only to take stock of the present state of Antarctic tourism, but also to develop a fresh approach to tourism with concrete actions, as well as identifying strategic issues that need to be put on the agenda for the ATCM and CEP for further consideration and decision-making.

    6. Lisa Kelley (IAATO) presented a hands-on perspective of current Antarctic tourism practice, explaining the role of IAATO in ensuring operators have no more than a minor or transitory impact. Lisa highlighted several useful tools used by IAATO for visitor management. These included IAATO’s ship scheduler, which controls vessel bookings at visitor sites using pre-set rules in the database based on parameters set by IAATO and the ATCM; the IAATO Polar Guide ‘App’, the IAATO Observer Scheme; the IAATO Vessel tracking scheme; and IAATO’s online assessment for field staff and crew. 

    7. Eelco Leemans (ASOC) introduced the work of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition, recommending: a regional (or sub-regional) focus on tourism management, rather than just site-specific; a change of modus operandi, meaning fewer landings; seasonal closures for specific sites during sensitive periods; closure of specific sites on a rotational basis; a cap for specific landing sites; the designation of ASPAs to protect sensitive areas that might be affected in the future; learning from national parks in other areas; legally-binding measures to cover non-IAATO operators; and revisiting the concept of carrying capacity.

    8. Neil Gilbert (NZ) introduced the background document that was prepared for the workshop with Kees Bastmeijer (NL), with contributions from the UK, USA, France and IAATO. The intention was to avoid repeating past conversations on tourism over several decades, to summarise the regulatory measures in place and that have previously been considered but not taken forward. The document provides a platform for looking ahead and supporting evidence-based considerations.

    9. Steven Chown (SCAR) introduced the work of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research and noted that SCAR is attending the workshop to listen to views on the growth of tourism and environmental impacts, and to understand the questions that are worrying the Parties from an environmental perspective. SCAR would like to draw attention to the joint SCAR/IAATO/Monash University project to develop systematic conservation planning, and would like to invite parties to participate in their liaison group in order to benefit from the expertise of key stakeholders. Steven highlighted the risks of introduction of non-native species to Antarctica, the intra-regional transfer of biomass, and long-term disturbance to wildlife.

    10. In discussion, the workshop highlighted the need for better understanding of the challenges relating to the future growth and diversification of tourism; the need for better monitoring and scientific work, particularly around cumulative impacts over the longer term; and the need for clearer understanding of definitions when discussing specific tourist activities or categories of activities. From the perspective of the CEP, the CEP Chair emphasized the importance of cumulative impacts and site management, as well as the need to ensure that those areas that merit protection have been protected before visitation spreads into new areas. 

    11. On compliance, the workshop identified the benefit in developing an observation system that is up to the challenge of managing the growing number and variety of activities of all people, in the harmonisation of approaches of Competent Authorities to certain activities, and in dealing with the issue of nested activities, where one specific activity sits within a wider expedition.

    12. The workshop considered what new or additional measures could be introduced, for instance in tackling illegal, unauthorised tourism, while recognising the richness of the guidance that already exists. Possible measures included economic instruments as a source for science or monitoring; spatial planning to ensure protection in the right place at the right time and in the right form; and strengthened collaboration with IAATO as an element in further designing a package of measures and a coherent approach to managing tourism in Antarctica.

Day I (Afternoon session 14:00-17:00): Managing for tourism growth

    13. Jane Rumble (Co-Chair UK) introduced the afternoon session, related to managing tourism growth, with a particular focus on traditional cruise ship operations.

    14. Damon Stanwell-Smith (IAATO) introduced the industry body’s forecasts for tourism growth, from around 33 vessels currently operating around Antarctica to around 60 vessels by 2021/22, but then likely plateauing. These calculations were based on the number of new vessels currently under construction, which were being specifically built for Antarctica and designed to be more efficient, less polluting, and more suited to scientific collaboration in partnership with national programmes. At their last annual meeting, IAATO operators unanimously agreed four themes with 24 substantive actions for tackling growth: i) “Re-imagining” the Antarctic experience; ii) strengthening environmental and safety standards; iii) site-scale management; iv) strengthening regulatory and scientific collaboration. The four key management recommendations from IAATO to the ATCM/CEP would be: i) strengthening compliance; ii) strengthening enforcement; iii) bringing Measure 15 (2009) into force; and iv) harmonising NCA authorisations.

    15. The workshop split into breakout groups to discuss the question of how proactively the ATCM should manage the growth of the tourism industry, and whether more focus should be given to site-specific management. The groups were tasked with considering what they would like the ATCM to do about managing tourism growth, how the ATCM might go about managing growth, and what barriers were currently stopping the ATCM from taking such approaches.

    16. The groups reported back to the workshop. In reflecting on the main concerns over the growth of tourism, cumulative impacts were often mentioned, but it was also noted that the lack of monitoring makes it difficult to identify such concerns more specifically. Plenary discussions continued around three themes: theoretical capacity limits, site guidelines, and funding for monitoring. The Chairs welcomed SCAR’s offer to conduct research on estimated carrying capacity of existing sites around the Antarctic Peninsula, a process that would enable greater understanding of related environmental risks. The workshop highlighted the important role of site guidelines, and the use of the precautionary approach, in managing tourist activity and the need to consider seasonality in future. Preferably, landings would only take place in sites that have guidelines. Monitoring the effects of tourism was considered fundamental for future tourism management, but attendees were conscious of cost implications for any proposed monitoring scheme. 

Day 2 (Morning session 09:00-12:30): Managing Tourism Diversity

    17. Daniela Portella Sampaio (University of Leeds) presented her research on stakeholder perspectives on Antarctic tourism management, based on interviews with Expedition Leaders, Tour Operators, IAATO, NGOs and National Competent Authorities. Her research has identified four categories of stakeholder: co-operative; sceptical; utopian; enthusiastic. The co-operative stakeholder encouraged more proactive engagement between IAATO and ATS. The sceptical stakeholder favoured increased regulation under the leadership of Treaty Parties. The utopian stakeholder viewed tourism as an educational tool forming Antarctic ambassadors, with no significant harm to the environment. The enthusiastic stakeholder preferred improved management under IAATO leadership with tourist activity held to the same standards as other human activity in Antarctica.

    18. The workshop split into discussion groups to consider whether they deemed diversification a problem, whether certain types of activities should not be permitted in Antarctica, or what alternative restrictive measures might be preferable. The groups also discussed what institutional framework might be needed for a harmonised approach to regulating diversification, how to manage the increase in one-off activities, and the increasing interaction between science and tourism.

    19. The groups agreed that diversity itself was not necessarily a problem, but that certain activities could present safety and environmental challenges, and some activities also raised values-based issues, in particular considering wilderness and aesthetic values. Further elaboration of the Treaty’s wilderness criterion by CEP/SCAR would be welcome in this regard, to help guide decision making, at national and international levels, on particular activities.

    20. The groups identified the benefit of having activity-specific guidelines in addition to site guidelines, with the need to make clear that the existence of guidelines does not necessarily mean the ATCM is endorsing a particular activity but is acting out of concern. Spatial planning tools present a useful mechanism for managing diverse activities, and the workshop welcomed the invitation to contribute to the upcoming CEP/SCAR workshop on ASPAs. Elements from the workshop that may feed into the discussions of the upcoming CEP/SCAR workshop include: a call to consider defining bigger ASPA’s, the designation of pristine areas as references for science, connectivity of areas, and the role of zoning.

    21. The workshop recognised the need for harmonisation in NCA authorisation processes, and for NCAs to have an open, informal opportunity to exchange experiences and discuss operational details in order to reach a more harmonised approach.

Day 2 (Afternoon session 14:00-17:00): Strengthening compliance and dealing with illegal tourism

    22. Maximo Gowland (Argentina) presented Argentine experiences from Ushuaia as an Antarctic gateway. Around 43,000 passengers travel through Ushuaia to Antarctica. A small number of those remain in Ushuaia for more than a day, presenting an opportunity to develop the local economy. Visiting yachts were increasingly diverse in origin, with a variety of nationalities represented.  Increased dialogue between national, local and naval authorities has provided a useful tool for managing yachting activities, though they cannot prevent an unauthorised vessel from sailing to Antarctica. The future diversification of activities such as fly-cruise operations is a concern for the Argentine NCA, although also a further potential source of revenue for investment in Ushuaia.

    23. Jacqueline Hilbert (Germany) presented a case study on the challenge of ‘nested permits’, where different NCAs were permitting different activities on the same expedition.   The Netherlands had given authorisation to an IAATO cruise vessel to visit Antarctica, but the permit did not include the use of personal RPAS use, in line with IAATO guidelines. A passenger from this vessel (German national) applied to the German NCA for a separate permit to use a RPAS for commercial purposes on land at the respective landing sites during the voyage of the vessel. The German NCA had no legal basis under national law or ATCM guidelines to prohibit this activity and therefore had to issue the permit. It was highlighted that the ATCM has not currently codified the relevant IAATO guidelines, and that harmonisation of this approach might aid NCA decisions.

Jos de Visser (Netherlands) presented the case of the yacht Sarah Vorwerk, which has been operating without any permit a number of times. Until now, although a Dutch citizen, the owner could not apply for a permit in the Netherlands, since he is not a resident and is undertaking his activities from elsewhere. The Netherlands has changed the law to ensure that anyone with the Dutch nationality can apply for a permit, thus diminishing the chance that the owner will once again undertake unpermitted activities. If he does, compliance and enforcement is easier. 

    24. Discussion continued around five core areas relating to compliance: clarity around existing rules; the question of jurisdiction with a plurality of nationalities and nested activities; harmonisation of standards to ensure consistency of guidelines; identifying and prosecuting illegal activity; and engagement between Competent Authorities.

    25. A recommendation was given that NCAs should ask whether the proposed activity interacts with, or depends on, another activity, and whether that activity has been permitted by another NCA. This would be in keeping with Resolution 3 (2004):

“Where Parties are notified, or become aware, of an activity involving a vessel or aircraft flagged or registered with another Treaty Party; or where the organisers are nationals of another Treaty Party, that they consult those relevant Parties as appropriate during the process of evaluating such activities and, where applicable, prior to any decision to authorise the activity or permit to proceed.”

    26. The question was raised as to whether the Environmental Protocol might need updating to make it appropriate for managing modern and future tourist activities, for example through a new Annex on tourism.  Alternatively, it was suggested that a stand-alone Tourism Protocol would be helpful to bring together all the existing measures relating to tourism activities.

    27. The workshop welcomed a French proposal for the establishment of a manual, bringing together all the relevant Treaty regulation regarding Antarctic tourism. Currently, it is scattered in different places, making compliance more difficult, for both the NCAs and operators.

    28. It was recognised that the increasing internationalisation of Antarctic tourism presents challenges to NCAs in permitting and compliance, further complicated by the presence of nationals from non-Treaty party states. The workshop discussed blacklisting vessels or operators who had been refused a permit or who had breached previous permit conditions; it was felt a “whitelist” of approved vessels or operators would be more appropriate, though with the need for more transparency about who is authorised for what activities and at what times.  It was noted that the EIES summary of authorised tourism and non-governmental vessels is available on the ATS website, but it was hard to locate and not always complete or up-to-date.

    29. While the workshop acknowledged the existing information exchange platforms on the ATS website forum, it was felt more informal networks at a working level would facilitate greater coordination and harmonisation between NCAs, whether through physical meetings or making use of modern technology through video calls or topic-based webinars. This network might benefit from a nominated convenor.

    30. The workshop agreed that an observer scheme would provide greater monitoring and awareness of activities in Antarctica; the IAATO observer scheme could be a model for a more formal CEP/ATCM-endorsed scheme in future, and the development of IAATO’s scheme was encouraged.

Day 3 (Morning session 09:00-12:30): Discussions on next steps, key elements for Working Papers and closure of the workshop

    31. Jane Rumble (Co-Chair, UK) chaired the final session of the workshop to identify the practical suggestions made during the previous workshop discussions and to identify concrete actions to take forward for the ATCM and CEP in Prague. 

    32. First, considering the topic of Growth, the workshop welcomed the proposed SCAR research into theoretical carrying capacity of particular sites or areas, including sites that have not yet been visited, in conjunction with elaborating wilderness value, and would ask CEP to work with SCAR on this issue. 

    33. Specifically, the workshop agreed to encourage CEP to work with SCAR and other relevant bodies to identify, define, establish or consider how to implement an environmental monitoring programme.

    34. The workshop welcomed the ongoing CEP work reviewing site guidelines, including the need to consider seasonality, and would encourage parties to engage with this work.

    35. The workshop recognised the anticipated rate of tourism growth is faster than the rate at which academic research can be produced, but welcomed the SCAR/IAATO systematic conservation planning approach, which will be presented in an IP to CEP, as a basis for spatial planning inter alia in relation to tourism activities.

    36. The workshop recalled the general tourism guidelines established under Recommendation 1 (1994), and the general guidelines for all visitors adopted in Resolution 3 (2011), and considered that the CEP could review these guidelines to ensure they are relevant to modern activities. 

    37. It was also noted with concern that existing measures that have been agreed, notably Measure 4 (2004) and Measure 15 (2009), have still not been brought into force by all Treaty Parties. The workshop would encourage the formal approval of these Measures by Treaty Parties.

    38. The workshop explored the issue of funding for any new monitoring, and considered existing CCAMLR mechanisms as interesting models for further exploration.

    39. Secondly, turning to Diversification, the workshop recognised the need for harmonisation of standards to ensure all competent authorities apply the same standards to all visitors. The workshop welcomed IAATO’s offer to produce an IP setting out clearer definitions and categorisations for different activities, to assist NCAs in considering permit applications.

    40. The USA and Canada agreed to elaborate on the work they are doing to standardise their respective approaches to coastal camping applications, as an example to other Parties of harmonisation and NCA engagement.

    41. It was highlighted that site guidelines should be as specific as possible in terms of which activities are permitted at that site, where needed on the basis of the precautionary approach.

    42. The workshop discussed the question of whether there are certain types of undesirable activities that should not be permitted in Antarctica. This discussion highlighted the challenge for NCAs in considering proposed activities that have not been conducted before, or only by a few operators to date, with applications often made with little time in which to properly assess the likely risks and environmental impacts. The workshop agreed it would be helpful if the CEP, and possibly the ATCM, could consider the risks and impacts of new activities, to provide guidance to NCAs when they receive applications. The meeting would recommend that CEP initiate a discussion to establish a mechanism for pre-assessment of certain activities, with heli-skiing and jet-skiing as concrete examples of the types of new activity that would benefit from being subject to this sort of assessment.

    43. This assessment might mitigate the need for activity-specific guidelines, though the workshop was clear that the existence of activity-specific guidelines should not be considered an automatic approval of that particular activity.

    44. Considering the educational value of tourism as set out in the General Principles of Antarctic Tourism in Resolution 7 (2009), there was concern that visitors simply try to add an educational aspect to their proposed activity, and that further elaboration of this principle would be beneficial to deliver benefits to Antarctica from that education.

    45. It was noted that in the past, the ATCM has discussed the need to prohibit or regulate the establishment of new permanent facilities for tourism in Antarctica without reaching consensus, and that it would be important to revisit this issue.

    46. The use of scientific stations for tourist visits was raised, and the workshop welcomed the guidelines for tourists visiting South Pole Station that have been developed, similar to those at other stations such as Palmer. It was suggested that stations that do or might in future have tourist visits should have a similar clear code of conduct. 

    47. Finally, on the theme of Compliance, France stressed that a WP putting forward the need for an observer scheme would be helpful, and offered to contribute to the reflections on this issue. Argentina and New Zealand who could draw on experience from their own national observer scheme reported their interest as well. The workshop welcomed a proposed IP from IAATO codifying how their observation scheme works, as a model that the ATCM might endorse to give consistency and ensure compliance for non-IAATO vessels. 

    48. It was recognised that Parties should be encouraged to include tourism activities within existing inspection regimes, and that specific tourism checklists might be beneficial.

    49. The question of blacklisting vessels that have been refused a permit or have breached a previous permit remained an issue, though the workshop highlighted the importance of an easily accessible whitelist of approved vessels and activities that can be consulted by operators in Antarctica to monitor compliance. Questions were raised as to how evidence of non-compliance should be collected from operators and tourists, what information should be collated, where it should be sent and what Parties could do with that information. These questions could be remitted from Tourism WG2 to the legal WG1 for further consideration.

    50. Having identified the need for greater engagement between NCAs, the workshop considered how such a network could be established and whether it might need a convenor to make the network effective. Terms of reference, developed through the ATCM, were deemed useful. The network would need to be acknowledged as an important body in order to ensure engagement, while being able to operate at arm’s length of the ATCM. In drafting Terms of Reference, this network could initially be tasked with considering the issues of “permit shopping”, listing vessels of concern, and nested permits.

    51. The workshop acknowledged the need for guidelines to be made available to all visitors to Antarctica, including military and science operators, and for reference to be made to general conduct in Antarctica, not only tourist activity.

    52. A French proposal to produce a guidance manual was again welcomed, and interested Parties were invited to engage in co-sponsoring the WP, which would be submitted to ATCM XLII.

    53. The Co-Chairs summarised the key recommendations and closed the workshop, thanking participants for their active contributions that have produced a long list of concrete actions to take forward to the CEP and ATCM.



Appendix 1: Agenda

Appendix 2: List of Participants

Appendix 1: Agenda

Day I (morning session)
Current trends in Antarctic tourism and inventory of management measures considered by the CEP and ATCM in the past

Keynote speech:
Dutch Arctic Ambassador, Carola van Rijnsoever, MFA

Presentations
    • Delivering Practical Visitor Management – A Year with IAATO Operations (Lisa Kelley, IAATO)
    • Trends and challenges in Antarctic Tourism (Eelco Leemans, ASOC)
    • Presentation of the background document for the workshop (Neil Gilbert, NZ)
    • Introduction to the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (Steven Chown, SCAR)

Discussion


Day I (afternoon session)
Managing for tourism growth

Keynote Presentation:
    • IAATO’s view on managing for growth (Damon Stanwell-Smith, IAATO)

Discussion


Day II (morning session)
Managing Tourism Diversity

Keynote Presentation:
    • Daniela Portella Sampaio, Marie-Curie Research Fellow, University of Leeds

Discussion


Day II (afternoon session)
Strengthening compliance and dealing with illegal tourism

Keynote Presentations:
    • Experiences from an Antarctic gateway country (Máximo Gowland, Argentina)
    • Competent Authorities (Jacqueline Hilbert, Germany; Jos de Visser, Netherlands)

Discussion


Day III (morning session)
Discussions on next steps, key elements for the Working Paper(s) and closure of the workshop

Presentation of preliminary findings / issues raised (Organising Committee)

Discussion

Closing Remarks

Appendix 2: List of Participants

Co-Chairs
Jane Rumble (UK)
Arthur Eijs (NL)
Rapporteurs
Tom Chance (UK)
Kevin Kruiter (NL)
Josine van den Elsen (NL)
Argentina
Máximo Gowland
ASOC
Eelco Leemans
Australia
Philip Tracey
Belgium
Koen Verheyen
Canada
David Taillefer
Chair CEP
Birgit Njaastad
Czech Republic
Martina Filippiova
Finland
Liisa Valjento
France
Guillaume Cottarel
Germany
Heike Herata
Jacqueline Hilbert
IAATO
Amanda Lynnes
Lisa Kelley
Damon Stanwell-Smith
Mark van der Hulst (Oceanwide Expeditions)
Netherlands
Helen Gorter
Liz ter Kuile
Jos de Visser
New Zealand
Neil Gilbert
Norway
Kristin Heggelund
Poland
Joanna Krawczyk-Grzesiowska
SCAR
Steven Chown
Jasmine Lee
Aleks Terauds
South Africa
Funanani Ditinti
Mbulelo Tomie
Spain
Sonia Ramos
United Kingdom
Stuart Doubleday
United States
Polly Penhale
William Muntean
Uruguay
Mariana Rios
External Experts
Kees Bastmeijer (Tilburg University)
Bas Amelung (Wageningen University and Research)
Daniela Portella Sampaio (University of Leeds)


