





ASOC report to the ATCM








ASOC report to the ATCM
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Introduction

ASOC is pleased to be in Prague for the XLII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work over the past year and outlines some key issues for this ATCM.

ASOC’s Secretariat is in Washington, DC, USA, and its website is https://www.asoc.org. ASOC has fifteen member groups in nine countries and supporting groups in those and several other countries.
Intersessional activities

Since the XLI ATCM ASOC and its member groups’ representatives participated actively in intersessional activities related to Antarctic conservation and science. 

In 2018 and 2019, ASOC and member group representatives attended a range of meetings relevant to Antarctic environmental protection including the XXXVII CCAMLR Meeting, International Maritime Organization meetings relating to the Polar Code, the SCAR Open Science Conference 2018, the SCAR SC-HASS Conference 2019, the Antarctic Tourism Workshop convened by The Netherlands and the United Kingdom in 2019, the IAATO annual meeting 2019, and others. ASOC participated actively in these events including through the presentation of position papers, abstracts, and research papers. In addition, ASOC representatives hosted MPA science workshops in China and Korea (ROK). ASOC also participated actively in intersessional discussions of the CEP.

On 10-14 June, 2019, ASOC Members The Pew Charitable Trusts and WWF sponsored a workshop in Concarneau, France, for CCAMLR scientists to discuss further development of ecosystem—based management approaches for the krill fishery.  

ASOC and WWF are also founding members of the Antarctic Wildlife Research Fund (AWR), which in 2018 provided $147,000 USD to fund projects exploring the role of fish in the Scotia Sea foodweb and estimating accurate krill biomass using spatio-temporal acoustic strength modeling.

WWF participated in an expedition to the Antarctic Peninsula to conduct research designed to identify critical whale habitat that can be incorporated into the design of marine protected areas (MPAs). Greenpeace undertook an Antarctic expedition as well, and released a report detailing their findings demonstrating that hat even the most remote and pristine habitats of the Antarctic are contaminated with microplastic waste and persistent hazardous chemicals1.
ASOC asks for the XLII ATCM
Below, ASOC summarizes our key asks for the ATCM.
Tourism
Over the years, Antarctic tourism has been one of the most discussed topics by the ATCM but discussions have often been non-conclusive and circular. With significant increases in visitor numbers expected in coming seasons, ASOC recommends that the ATCM look to its most successful initiatives to guide proactive management efforts. These may include identifying areas of representative habitat/biodiversity in the Antarctic Peninsula where tourism is not a permitted activity; developing frameworks for the assessment of new activities (as recommended by the April 2019  tourism workshop) which are relatively likely to result in defined outcomes, as demonstrated by similar efforts on other management issues in the past; promoting harmonisation/compatibility of permitting standards; and taking a precautionary approach to the regular conduct of tourism landings at new sites. (See IP 128 for further information.)
Vessel management
Although the first phase of the Polar Code has entered into force, there are still a number of areas in which vessel management could be improved. ASOC recommends that the ATCM undertake further vessel management actions to protect the Antarctic environment, such as agreeing to collaborate meaningfully in the exchange of best practice with respect to the Polar Code, learning from experience in the Arctic, engaging fully in further negotiations on measures for non-SOLAS vessels at the IMO, applying CMS guidelines to reduce underwater noise, supporting the IMO’s actions on plastics, and exploring ways to further minimize whale strikes in the Southern Ocean. (See IP 131 for further information.)
Climate change
In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released an important report on the consequences of 1.5C of global warming. In this paper, ASOC summarizes key Antarctic findings from this report. Antarctic ice sheets are expected to contribute to global sea level rise through 2100 even if warming is limited to 1.5C. The Antarctic Peninsula region is expected to continue to experience significantly higher temperature increases and associated impacts than those projected for a global 1.5C increase. While the ATCM cannot itself reduce global emissions, it can take steps to promote ecosystem resilience and limit the impacts of climate change, including: incorporating climate considerations into EIAs, creating a strategic plan for representative protected areas across the Antarctic Treaty Area, to promote climate resilience, implementing the Climate Change Response Work Programme, and supporting action at the IMO to reduce emissions from shipping by 2023. (See IP 132 for further information.)
Protected areas
Currently there are no legal, scientific or practical arguments to delay the expansion of the protected area in Antarctica in accordance to the requirements of the Protocol and other Antarctic Treaty System instruments. Rather, the obstacles seem to lie elsewhere. In this context ASOC urges Parties to work together towards achieving the area protection objectives of the Protocol to which all Parties have committed. Specific actions for ATCPs include committing to a timeline of key activities for expanding the protected system and increasing protection levels for all ACBRs; considering ways to streamline the process of ASPA listing and review so that there can be a focus on expansion of the network and less work spent on the minutiae of minor reviews; developing a process to earmark new areas as part of a systematic planning process rather than individually; and expand this same analysis elsewhere in Antarctica beyond solely ACBRs. (See IP 134 for further information.)
MPAs
ASOC encourages all ATCPs who are also CCAMLR Members to support efforts to enhance marine protection in the Southern Ocean using the tools available under the Protocol and the CCAMLR instruments, as well as to make progress on issues of adjacency and connectivity between the terrestrial and marine environments. (See IP 130 for further information.)
Microplastics
ASOC is pleased to see increasing attention to the issue of plastic pollution in the Southern Ocean. We have provided information to this ATCM on easily implementable methods for filtering laundry water, a common source of local microplastic pollution, in the hopes of encouraging their use on vessels and at research stations. These methods are already in use in the Antarctic, including by fishing vessels operating in the Southern Ocean. We encourage national programs to explore implementing these methods and to adopt other measures for reducing plastic pollution, such as prohibiting the use of personal care products containing microbeads by station personnel. ASOC strongly supports the resolution on plastic pollution proposed by the United Kingdom in ATCM-XLII/WP/14. (See IP 133 for further information.)
Concluding remarks

2019 marks the 60th Anniversary of the signing of the Antarctic Treaty, and ASOC has been reflecting on the significance of this occasion. The operation of the ATCM has changed significantly since the Treaty’s entry into force, and continues to mature. ASOC is pleased to have played a role in this evolution, and looks forward to continued cooperation. We appreciate the dedication of ATCPs, Experts, and Observers to implementing the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol, and value the constructive discussions and collaborations we are able to have with ATS colleagues, including other Observers and Experts such as IAATO, SCAR, COLTO, and ARK. At a time when many global environmental issues are contentious, it is encouraging that we are able to find common ground with a wide variety of countries and organizations.

Furthermore, ASOC was saddened to learn of the passing of Bob Hawke, former Prime Minister of Australia (1983-1991). We will remember Mr. Hawke as a visionary whose leadership was instrumental in the creation of the Environment Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. We are forever grateful to Mr. Hawke and Michel Rocard for their political courage in realizing that the Antarctic wilderness was far too important to be put at risk. 

May their legacy of acting in the best interests of humankind and the environment stand as a shining example for the ATS. We hope that the next 60 years of the Treaty will continue to uphold these principles of peace, science and environmental protection. 


