





Current Ice Core and Paleoclimate Research Activity in the Vicinity of Vostok Station

English version provided by the author









Current ice core and paleoclimate research activity in the vicinity of Vostok Station
Information Paper submitted by the Russian Federation
Summary
The typical timescale of many processes that govern the global changes on our planet (climate oscillations, variations in continental ice volume and sea level, and redistribution of carbon dioxide between the ocean, atmosphere and biosphere) considerably exceeds the period of instrumental observations. This implies that the study of these processes and their correct representation in the prognostic models is only possible by means of reconstruction and interpretation of the time-series that quantitatively describe the characteristics and composition of atmosphere, hydrosphere, and cryosphere in the past. Ice cores retrieved by drilling on the contemporary polar ice sheets have provided much information about changes in climate forcings, and in climatic and environmental parameters, ranging in duration from decades to hundreds of thousands of years.
Russian scientists, in collaboration with their international partners, have continued paleoclimate research based on studies of ice cores obtained in the vicinity of the Russian Vostok Station. The works are being carried out as part of two projects, one of which aims to search for and study the oldest Antarctic ice (the Vostok Oldest Ice Challenge project, or VOICE [Lipenkov & Raynaud, 2015]), and the other to investigate climate variability in Antarctica over the past 2,000 years (the Vostok 2k project [Ekaykin et al., 2018]).
VOICE
One of the current priority tasks for the international Antarctic community is drilling and studying old Antarctic ice - ice which is more than 1 million years old - in order to investigate the reasons for the Mid-Pleistocene climatic Transition (MPT). Solving this task is the main target of the Oldest Ice Project (http://pastglobalchanges.org/ini/end-aff/ipics/documents) proposed by the expert group of International Partnership in Ice Core Science (IPICS) within SCAR’s Physical Sciences Group. Implementing this project would help to answer some of the questions which were identified by the First SCAR Horizon Scan as the key scientific questions for Antarctic and Southern Ocean science for the next two decades and beyond [Kennicutt II et al., 2014].
A number of publications have predicted that atmospheric ice with an age exceeding 1 million years may be found in the vicinity of Antarctic domes A, C, and F [Fisher et al., 2013; Parrenin et al., 2017; Karlsson et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018; Passalacqua et al., 2018]. However these predictions have yet to be proved experimentally. 
In the quest for the oldest Antarctic ice, we revisited the deepest sections of the Vostok core and attempted to date the old stratigraphically disturbed meteoric ice bedded between 3318 and 3538 m using three different dating techniques:
    • a new method based on the phenomenon of air-hydrate crystal growth in polar ice,
    • 81Kr radiometric dating,
    • by measuring the 40Ar/38Ar isotope ratio in trapped air.
The collaborative study, involving scientists from Russia, China, the US, France and Japan, provided a strong indication that at the bottom section of the Vostok core (3500–3538 m) the age of meteoric ice reaches 1.2 Ma [Lipenkov et al., 2019]. This is the first direct confirmation that such old ice survived in the central part of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, which supports the international effort aimed at obtaining pre-MPT ice cores in this region of Antarctica.
The finding of ice older than 1 Ma in the vicinity of Vostok implies that upstream of the station, in the Ridge B area, where the ice-flow line which passes through the Vostok borehole originates, very old ice, with undisturbed stratigraphy, may exist. This makes Ridge B an appropriate target for dedicated investigations aimed at locating the formation site of the old ice discovered in the Vostok core. With this in mind, we carried out a preliminary investigation of the Ridge B area with regard to its potential as one of the oldest-ice areas in Antarctica. At this initial stage of research, our study was based on the existing models and data sets [Pollard & DeConto, 2009; Martos et al., 2017; Van Liefferinge et al., 2018; Quiquet et al., 2018]. We first reconstructed the old ice trajectory between Ridge B and Vostok, and located Dome B, i.e. the formation site of the oldest meteoric ice found in the Vostok core. The research showed that Dome B has been relatively stable over the last 1 million years (its displacement did not exceed 50 km), and that the probability that the basal ice reached the pressure melting point over the last 1.5 Ma is low (<50%) [Skakun et al., 2019]. Consequently, the Dome B area can be suggested for a detailed reconnaissance programme aimed at identifying specific candidate sites for new deep drilling for the oldest ice. 
Following up the Vostok Oldest Ice Challenge initiative, in the 2018/19 austral season (during the 64th Russian Antarctic Expedition), a new deviation from deep hole 5G-1 at Vostok was made at a depth of 3270 m with the goal of obtaining a replicate, continuous core of the old disturbed ice. By the end of the season, the new 5G-5 branch-hole had reached 3320 m. The completion of the 5G-5 drilling is planned in two seasons at a depth of about 3620 m. High-resolution measurements of atmospheric dust and methane concentrations using a continuous flow analysis (CFA) system, as well as stable water isotope and ice texture measurements, will be performed on the new core of old ice at the Climate and Environmental Research Laboratory (CERL) of the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI) in St Petersburg. Other studies, including CO2 measurements and new dating efforts, are also planned in collaboration with French, US and Chinese scientists.
A comprehensive study of the already available and expected Vostok cores of old disturbed ice may improve our understanding as to how and to what extent the oldest Antarctic ice may help in deciphering the enigma of the MPT. Meanwhile, the Russian Antarctic Expedition is now planning glacio-geophysical traverses to Ridge B in order to implement a detailed reconnaissance study of the Dome B area aimed at identifying the most suitable site(s) for a new deep drilling project which would be targeted at obtaining old Antarctic ice with undisturbed stratigraphy.
The planned and ongoing activities within VOICE have direct relevance to the Oldest Ice Project proposed by IPICS and in particular to the recently accepted European project Beyond EPICA – Oldest Ice (BE-OI). Both the VOICE and BE-OI communities are supportive of the idea of several oldest ice attempts at various Antarctic sites, and intend to develop partnership relations between the two projects including the exchange of scientific, technological and operational knowledge and expertise where possible.
Vostok 2k
The past two millennia provide baseline information about Earth’s natural climate variability – the natural background on which the present-day anthropogenic influence has been increasingly developing since about 1850. Study of the climate of our planet during the past 2,000 years is thus one of the top priority tasks for climatologists. 
The efforts of the international scientific community to investigate climate during this time interval have led to several major scientific publications [PAGES 2k Consortium, 2013, 2017]. It has been noted in these works that the Antarctic continent remains poorly represented in the existing data set. The air temperature over the last 2,000 years in Antarctica can be reconstructed from the stable water isotope content of firn and ice cores. The available paleotemperature records are distributed in an extremely non-uniform way: the relatively dense network of the boreholes in Dronning Maud Land and West Antarctica contrasts with the vast area of central East Antarctica, which still remains a white spot [Stenni et al., 2017]. The situation is even worse with another important climatological parameter, the snow accumulation rate: the time series spanning 2,000 years are only available for 3 Antarctic sites [Thomas et al., 2017].
In order to fill these gaps in data, in 2016 we launched the Vostok 2k project aimed at robust reconstruction of climatic variability at Vostok Station over the past 2,000 years. The field works within the project consisted of the drilling of three shallow holes to about 70 m depth in the close vicinity (up to 2 km) of the station. For firn drilling, we used the light mechanical drill provided by our French partners. In December 2016 (the 62nd Russian Antarctic Expedition) the first hole, VK16, was commenced; it was finished in December 2017 at a depth of 70 m. The age of the firn at this depth is about 2,200 years. In January 2018 (63rd RAE), the new VK18 hole was started, and it was completed in December 2018 at a depth of 55 m; the obtained firn core covers 1,600 years of snow accumulation. Finally, in January 2019 (64th RAE) hole VK19 was drilled to 65 m; the maximum age of the firn is about 2,000 years.
Precise density measurements and continues electrical conductivity measurements (ECM) of firn were performed along the cores in the glaciological lab at Vostok. The obtained ECM records enabled the identification of several dozen volcanic peaks that will be used for robust dating of the firn, and for synchronizing the firn core records from three different sites. We continuously sampled all three cores for stable water isotope analysis with a resolution of 10 cm. The isotopic measurements will be carried out in CERL AARI. Segments of the VK16 core which remained after the isotope sampling were delivered to Limnological Institute of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Irkutsk) for chemical analyses. Cores VK18 and VK19 are stored in the Vostok undersnow core storage.
Interpretation of the newly obtained data will allow us to reconstruct the climatic variability over the past 2,000 years in the vicinity of Vostok, as well as in the moisture source regions. Aside from this, the project will for the first time allow comprehensive investigation of the climate signal-to-stratigraphic noise ratio in the ice core climatic records, obtained at low-accumulation sites, for different timescales of climatic variability, from decadal to centennial.
The Vostok 2k project is considered to be a contribution to the international PAGES 2k Network (http://www.pages-igbp.org/ini/wg/2k-network/scientific-goals), and in particular to its ice core-based component IPICS 2k Array (http://pastglobalchanges.org/ini/end-aff/ipics/document).
