





Incident with a Brazilian container








Incident with a Brazilian container

Summary
On April 7th 2019 a container from Brazil's Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF), placed on board of the ship "MV Magnolia", fell down into the sea due to bad weather conditions in Admiralty Bay. It crashed near the lighthouse at the Polish Antarctic Arctowski Station, and debris stored inside the container scattered in the area, including shore of ASPA No 128. Immediate response actions were taken by the EACF crew, the company "China National Electronics Import & Export Corporation" (CEIEC, responsible for the reconstruction of the EACF) and the Henryk Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station crew, via their own resources, due to the risk of environmental pollution. There was no immediate risk to the environment, since there were no dangerous products or contaminants stored inside it – nevertheless, continuous monitoring was established as a precautionary action. Details of the incident are provided in this paper.

Background
On April 7th 2019, the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station (EACF) received information from the Arctowski Station team that a Brazilian container had been found on the beach close to the nearby lighthouse.

















Fig. 1 – Brazilian container found near Arctowski Station, on 07/APR/2019

Photos received on that occasion showed it was a container formerly used by the Brazilian Station as a chemistry lab and which had since 2016 been turned into an office for the company "China National Electronics Import & Export Corporation" (CEIEC), responsible for the reconstruction of the EACF. The container was on board of the ship "MV Magnolia" on April 5th so as to be removed from the area by CEIEC, which is also responsible for the correct disposal of the construction waste that was inside the container.


Fig. 2 – Chemistry lab module placed near EACF, MAR/2009


Because the container lacked specific attaching points on its upper part, the CEIEC used steel wire ropes to fix the container’s bottom foundations to the ship’s deck. Unfortunately, due to the strong wind, the steel wire ropes snapped and the container fell into the sea in Admiralty Bay, unbeknownst to the ship’s crew. It is worth noting that, even if the fallen container had been spotted immediately, it would not have been possible to rescue it at that moment for safety reasons, given the particularly bad sea conditions at the time (wind and waves).

Due to hard weather conditions that day (winds of over 60 knots), the vessel left Admiralty Bay, near EACF, and stayed in the open area South of King George Island for 2 days, waiting for favorable weather conditions.


Measures adopted
In the morning of April 7th 2019, after receiving a message from the Arctowski Station team who had spotted the container, the EACF crew asked the vessel’s team and the CEIEC's team to conduct a survey and on-site evaluation at the Arctowski Station surroundings as soon as weather allowed it. In the afternoon of the same day, equipment was transported to the Polish station area in order to facilitate cleaning tasks. The Polish team was actively involved in that operation, having already started the cleaning up so as to secure the container and to avoid the spreading of the debris. Early on April 8th, at low tide, the container was transferred to the "MV Magnolia". Later on that same day, CEIEC workers cleaned up the land and maritime area nearby.



Fig. 3 – Container transferred from Arctowski Station's vicinity to "MV Magnolia", 08/APR/2019

Fig. 4 – Clean-up of the area near Arctowski Station, 08/APR/2019
In order to prevent further incidents modifications were made on the container so as to guarantee it would be safely strapped to the MV Magnolia’s deck until it reaches its final destination in China.

During the morning of April 16th EACF crew returned to Arctowski Station and conducted a full survey with a view to further cleaning and removing of debris in the vicinity of APA 128, from Thomas Point to Rakusa Point.

The personnel at EACF were able to continuously conduct further inspections with a Zodiac boat and monitor the Admiralty Bay area, so as to report back any observations related to debris and other materials, as well as the cleaning up of the resulting pollution from the incident.

Crews of the Polish and Brazilian Antarctic Stations have been trained (according to Resolution 2 (2013) Annex – CEP Clean-up Mannual) to search and remove debris from the environment and procedures has been established. A Group dedicated to this activity has been selected. Environmental assessment of clean-up activities was made, and impact was recognized to be minor or transitory.





Fig 5 to 7 – Cleaning up of the Arctowski area, 16/APR/2019



Conclusion
In accordance with Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, all the corresponding measures were taken in order to clean up the debris found in the Admiralty Bay region as a result of the container's fall. 
Brazil's Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station and the Henry Arctowski Polish Antarctic Station will continue to monitor the area and enhance cooperation to promote any necessary further response that could help minimize possible impacts in the ASMA 1 environment. 
As well as Brazil and Poland, the other countries present in ASMA 1 are committed to the proper management and maintenance of the on-site environment, and the lessons learned from this event will be taken into account when reviewing the ASMA management plan.
We would like to thank crews from both stations – Arctowski Station and Ferraz Station for fast and properly conducted action.

Recommendations
We do recommend enhancing the training of the national teams and crews operating in the Antarctic Treaty area in order to better prevent accidents of this sort. Immediate information about such accidents should be sent at once to nearby stations and vessels, and immediate action should be taken to minimize the risk of possible contamination. We also recommend continuing the ongoing environmental monitoring with special attention to anthropogenic impacts on the Western Shore of Admiralty Bay. All teams operating in the area of the accident should be aware of the situation and of the possibility of finding remains of that accident or debris from other sources in Admiralty Bay.

