





Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting








Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Second Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Report of the 37th 
Meeting of the Commission
(Hobart, Australia, 22 October -2 November 2018)
Opening of the meeting
1.	The 37th Annual Meeting of CCAMLR (CCAMLR-XXXVII), which was held in Hobart, Australia, from 22 October to 2 November 2018, was chaired by Dr Monde Mayekiso (South Africa).
2.	Twenty-three Members, two Acceding States, four State Observers and 15 Observers from other organisations participated. 
3. 	The Report of the Meeting is in the public domain (www.ccamlr.org/node/97053). Paragraph citations below refer to that Report.  
4.	Australia, as Depository, reported that the status of the Convention had not changed during the last intersessional period. 
Implementation and compliance (paragraphs 3.1 to 3.37)
5. 	The Commission noted the report of the Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance, and took the following actions:
    • It amended Conservation Measure 10-05 on the Catch Document Scheme (CDS) to allow for states trading in toothfish but not engaged in harvesting or landing toothfish to be granted permanent limited access to the CDS.
    • It granted such permanent access to Singapore.
    • It granted Ecuador the status of a Non-Contracting Party (NCP) cooperating with CCAMLR by participating in the CDS.
    • It approved further engagement with NCPs, and particularly with Viet Nam which has a significant trade in toothfish.
    • It approved a proposal by France to conduct further trials in 2019 of satellite monitoring to detect illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing activity.
    • The Commission added no new vessels to its IUU lists. Angola made an application to have the Northern Warrior removed from the NCP-IUU list, but this was not approved on the evidence that there were still links between the current and previous owners of the vessel.
Administration and Finance (paragraphs 4.1 to 4.15)
6. 	The Commission noted the report of the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance, and took the following actions:
    • It approved a new Strategic Plan for the Secretariat (2019–2022) and the accompanying Staffing and Salary Strategy (2019–2022). 
    • It approved the budget for 2019 and the forecast budget for 2020 and established a Working Capital Fund.
    • It asked the Intersessional Correspondence Group on Sustainable Financing to undertake further work on a revision of the formula for calculating notification fees.
    • It agreed a limited pilot project of funding one working group convener for two years and agreed to provide funding to enable scientists to attend meetings of the SCAR Krill Action Group.
Report of the Scientific Committee (paragraphs 5.1 to 5.74)
7. 	A more detailed report that focuses on the five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC‑CAMLR, as identified in 2009 at the joint CEP–SC‑CAMLR Workshop in Baltimore, USA, will be presented to CEP by the CCAMLR Scientific Committee Chair, Dr Mark Belchier (United Kingdom). Additional matters on which the Scientific Committee provided advice to the Commission at its last meeting are described below.
Krill resources
8.	The Commission noted that up to 30 September 2018 the total catch of krill reported for the 2017/18 season was 306 145 tonnes. Five Members notified for a total of 12 vessels for the 2018/19 season.
9. 	The Commission requested that the Scientific Committee make the development of a preferred option for the management of krill in Area 48 a priority in 2019.
10. 	The Commission noted that a multi-Member synoptic krill survey of Area 48 would take place in the austral summer of 2018/19.
Fish resources
11.	In 2017/18, 13 Members fished for Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) and/or Antarctic toothfish (D. mawsoni). Members also conducted research fishing for toothfish in closed areas. The reported total catch in the Convention Area of D. eleginoides to 30 September 2018 was 12 565 tonnes and that of D. mawsoni was 4 353 tonnes
12.	In 2017/18, two Members fished for mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari). 
13.  	The Commission also endorsed the advice from the Scientific Committee on proposals for fishery-related research, listing them and their catch limits in Conservation Measure 24-05. 
Non-target species
14. 	The Commission noted that the 2017/18 season had the lowest extrapolated seabird mortality figure in CCAMLR’s history.
15.	The Commission added four sites in the western Antarctic Peninsula and three sites in the South Orkney Islands to the CCAMLR vulnerable marine ecosystem (VME) registry.
Spatial management (paragraphs 6.1 to 6.69)
16. 	The Commission discussed the two existing marine protected areas (MPAs). It noted that the Scientific Committee had encouraged the preparation of a draft Research and Monitoring Plan for the 2019 review of the South Orkney Islands MPA, and it conducted further discussions on the Ross Sea region MPA research and monitoring plan.
17. 	The Commission reviewed revised proposals for MPAs in East Antarctica (submitted by Australia, the EU and France), the Weddell Sea (submitted by the European Union and its member States) and the Antarctic Peninsula region (submitted by Argentina and Chile). Whilst many Members supported these proposals, the Commission did not reach consensus on them.
18. 	The Commission noted that the Scientific Committee was progressing discussions on spatial management relating to sub-Antarctic areas of the Atlantic and Indian Ocean Planning Domains 4, 5 and 6.
Climate change (paragraphs 8.1 to 8.21)
19.	The Commission considered a proposal submitted by Australia, Norway and the UK that climate change summary statements should be included in papers submitted to the Scientific Committee and the Commission. The Commission could not reach consensus on this proposal, although it noted that the inclusion of voluntary summaries of the implications of climate change in papers would be useful.
20. 	The Commission was unable to reach consensus on adopting a revised Climate Change Response Work Program proposed by the Climate Change Intersessional Correspondence Group. 
Conservation measures (paragraphs 9.1 to 9.28)
21. 	The Commission’s consideration of revised and new conservation measures and resolutions, and related matters, is recorded in the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force 2018/19, published in late 2018 (www.ccamlr.org/node/57043). 
Implementation of Convention objectives (paragraphs 10.1 to 10.9)
22.	The Commission reviewed actions taken by it, the Scientific Committee and their subsidiary bodies to address the recommendations of the Second Performance Review, and agreed to publish this progress on the CCAMLR website. 
23. 	The Commission agreed to establish an ICG on Capacity Building (ICG-CB) and to hold a capacity building workshop to develop proposals for a capacity building program as well as administrative and financial mechanisms to support it. 
Cooperation with the Antarctic Treaty System and international organisations
24. 	The Executive Secretary provided the Commission with a summary of relevant issues arising from the 41st Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XLI).
25. 	The Commission reaffirmed and strengthened formal arrangements with the Agreement for the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP), the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT), the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC), the South East Atlantic Fisheries Organisation (SEAFO), the South Pacific Regional Fisheries Management Organisation (SPRFMO) and the Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Arrangement (SIOFA). 
Next meeting
26. 	Spain will Chair the Commission for the 2019 meeting. Germany will serve as Vice-Chair. 
27. 	The 38th Meeting of the Commission will be held in Hobart, Australia, from 21 October to 1 November 2019. The 38th Meeting of the Scientific Committee will be held from 21 to 25 October 2019.
