





Australian Antarctic Science Program: highlights of the 2018/19 season








Australian Antarctic Science Program: highlights of the 2018/19 season

Information paper submitted by Australia

Introduction

The Australian Antarctic Science Program conducts research guided by the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21. In 2018/191 the program undertook 63 science projects involving 95 scientists and support personnel in Antarctica and the subantarctic. This includes 49 international collaborative projects involving 76 international institutions across 25 countries. The program continues to benefit enormously from national and international research and operational collaborations.
The Australian Antarctic Science Program has a strong strategic focus by undertaking research designed to inform Australia’s environmental policy and conservation management. This includes contributing to regional and global issues through international bodies such as the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP), the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), International Whaling Commission (IWC), and Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP). 
Public summaries of all projects, past and present, undertaken by the Australian Antarctic Science Program are available on the Australian Antarctic Division website.
Selected research highlights from the 2018/19 season
The 2018/19 Australian Antarctic Science Program has delivered projects aligning with the four themes identified in the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan 2011-12 to 2020-21:
	Theme 1: Climate Processes and Change
	Theme 2: Terrestrial and Nearshore Ecosystems: Environmental Change and Conservation
	Theme 3: Southern Ocean Ecosystems: Environmental Change and Conservation
	Theme 4: Frontier Science
Research highlights include:
    • Reconstructing Carbon-14 of Carbon Monoxide to Constrain Long-Term Atmospheric Hydroxyl Variability Project
This joint Australia/United States deep field project melted ice cores onsite to extract trapped air in the ice to measure past atmospheric concentrations of the hydroxyl radical. The hydroxyl radical plays an important role in the breakdown of other chemicals and control of pollutants including the greenhouse gas methane. The research measures the amount of hydroxyl in pre-industrial era air to better predict pollutant longevity and to improve model predictions of the future climate and atmospheric chemistry.
In 2018/19 this project involved a three month field season with a team of seven scientists and field support at Law Dome (130km inland from Casey Research Station).  For more information: http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/2018/antarctic-ice-mission-seeks-mystery-molecules-that-scrub-the-sky
    • Totten Glacier Research
Research at the Totten Glacier continued in 2018/19 with field teams undertaking seismic testing. This collaborative research program (involving Australia, United States, Switzerland, Japan, New Zealand and France) has revealed a network of lakes beneath the glacier containing a substantial amount of water. This research has implications for the understanding and prediction of how the glacier will move as well as the rate of melting and consequent impacts. For more information: http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/2019/seismic-study-allows-scientists-to-see-below-glacier

    • ICECAP II
The ICECAP (Investigating Cryospheric Evolution through Collaborative Aerogeophyiscal Profiling) project is an international partnership involving Australia, United States, United Kingdom, France, and China working to survey the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and bounding continental shelf.  It aims to better understand the stability of the Antarctic ice sheet and the associated consequences for global sea-level rise. It focuses on ice sheet/ocean interactions, undertaking measurements of grounded and floating ice, as well as continental shelf ocean properties relevant to the stability of the ice shelves fringing the East Antarctic Ice sheet.  Survey results provide key information for numerical models of the ice sheet, fringing ice shelves and surrounding ocean.  

The 2018/19 field season utilised both the Australian and Chinese Basler (through logistic sharing arrangements) and received logistical station support from China (hosting the Australian Basler during installation of the survey equipment), France and Republic of Korea. The focus on the surveys was the Amery, Cook and West Ice shelves.

    • ACRE and PLATO 
The Antarctic Clouds and Radiation Experiment (ACRE) and Precipitation over Land And the souThern Ocean (PLATO) projects used a suite of instruments aboard RSV Aurora Australis, at Davis Research Station to characterise clouds, quantify and understand high-latitude precipitation processes, validate satellite retrievals, and evaluate weather forecasting and climate models. These collaborative research programs include partnership between Australia, United States, France, New Zealand, Italy, Switzerland and Germany. 

    • Continental-scale assessments
Using the most comprehensive database of terrestrial biodiversity records yet compiled, together with an updated spatial layer of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, an Australian Antarctic Program study (in collaboration with Cambridge University)  provided the first continent wide assessment of the coverage of Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity by Antarctic Specially Protected Areas2 http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/2019/enhancing-biodiversity-protection-in-antarctica. In another study, Australian researchers mapped all Antarctic infrastructure visible through Google Earth, providing new insights into the human footprint across the continent, assist in understanding, minimising and monitoring human activities in Antarctica3.

    • ENRICH Voyage (Euphausiids and Nutrient Recycling in Cetacean Hotspots).
This 49 day voyage on MNF Investigator involved 28 scientists (from Australia, United States and United Kingdom) and covered some 200,000 square kilometres in the Southern Ocean. The purpose of the voyage was to survey blue whales as part of a project examining population abundance, trend, structure and distribution of the endangered Antarctic blue whale. For the first time drones were used to collected ‘blow’ samples. It was also the first time a survey of blue whales has been conducted together with a structured survey of their prey including 3D surveys of massive swarms of krill. The team encountered 25 individual blue whales with 36 encounters recorded. A BBC Natural History film crew also accompanied the voyage. For more information: http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/2019/technology-provides-new-insights-to-antarctic-blue-whales-and-krill

    • AIRBOX Campaign
A mobile air chemistry laboratory fixed on Aurora Australis examined the properties of aerosols in clouds above the Southern Ocean. This will provide vital details about the contribution of Southern Ocean clouds to regulating the Earth’s temperature and remove some uncertainties in global climate models. The project aims to better understand where the aerosols are coming from that influence the clouds and how they are chemically made. For more information: http://www.antarctica.gov.au/news/2018/seeding-southern-clouds

The 2018/19 season has been successful for the Australian Antarctic Science Program. It has seen the continuation of a number of multiyear projects and field work in the vicinity of each of Australia’s Antarctic research stations and beyond. International scientific collaboration and logistics cooperation continue to support the success of the program. The Australian Antarctic Science Program is undergoing a revitalisation process with the development of new science funding and governance arrangements as foreshadowed in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan. This revitalisation will position the Australian Antarctic Science Program to maximise the benefits of the new science capabilities coming online, including Australia’s new Icebreaker RSV Nuyina, the inland traverse capability, modernisation of Australia’s research stations and potential year-round aviation access to east Antarctica. 

SCAR COMNAP 2020
Australia is looking forward to hosting the 2020 SCAR Open Science Conference and Delegates Meeting and the COMNAP Annual General Meeting concurrently in Hobart in July-August next year. As the final year for SCAR’s current series of Science Research Projects this will be an important milestone to showcase Antarctic science and to prepare the way for the next program of SCAR-led research. For more information please go to the SCAR COMNAP conference website: scarcomnap2020.org. 

