





Relevance of Rip Point, Nelson Island, to be proposed as ASPA


English version provided by the author





Relevance of Rip Point, Nelson Island, to be proposed as ASPA 
Information Paper submitted by Chile
Summary
Due to the new paleontological findings in Rip Point, Stansbury Peninsula, Nelson Island, Chile starts the review of the scientific information available for the site with the aim of protect the zone as a new ASPA or to include the zone as part of the actual ASPA No. 125, inviting other Parties to participate in the review.
Rip Point´s paleontological studies
During the last years, researchers from Brazil and Chile have been developing activities in Rip Point, Stansbury Peninsula, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands. The discovery of a new fossiliferous locality with the presence of an important record of the paleoflora for the end of the Cretaceous is highlighted in this region. The findings correspond to an exclusive association of macro and microfossils represented by pteridophytas, gymnosperms and angiosperms, becoming a special area of fossil heritage in the region of the Antarctic Peninsula
The presence of macrofossils corresponds to pteridophytas of the order Polypodiales and Cyatheales, and of the genera Coniopteris and Blechnum; conifers such as Papuacedrus, of the Cupresaceae family; morphs related to Lauraceae and probable Melastomataceae, besides gymnosperm trunks preserved in coal (Trevisan et al., 2012, Bastos et al., 2013, Reguero et al., 2013, Manfroi et al., 2015, Leppe et al., 2016). The microfossil record, meanwhile, is represented by the presence of spores of the families Osmundaceae, Gleicheniaeceae, Blechnaceae and Cyatheaceae, and pollen of Araucariaceae, Podocarpaceae, Cupressaceae, Cycadaceae, Proteaceae, Elaeocarpaceae / Anarcadiaceae and Proteaceae (Cao, 1992).
These records indicate that the outcrop of Rip Point has great importance, with a high diversity of fossils which preservation contributes to the knowledge of the Antarctic natural history.
As these findings are considered good evidence to discuss the origin of the diversification of these plant groups, Chile is considering proposing that the Rip Point area, on Nelson Island, to receive a special protection.
Next steps
In the period 2019-2020, Chilean researchers will continue to review the available scientific information on Rip Point, to study the possibility of proposing the area as a new Antarctic Specially Protected Area, ASPA, or to include the site within the current ASPA No. 125, Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, based on guidelines established by the Environmental Protection Committee. 
Chile invites other Parties interested in the values present in the area to participate in this review.
Bibliographic review
Bastos, B.L. 2012. Flora fossil do pontal Rip, Ilha Nelson, Península Antártica: Taxonomia e context geológico. Thesis for Master Degree on Geology, Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, UNISINOS, Sao Leopoldo, Brazil. 99 pp.
Bastos, B.L., T.L. Dutra, T.P. Wilberger & D.A. Spiazzi. 2012. Registro inédito de Nothofagus blume para o pontal Rip (Cretáceo Superior), Ilha Nelson, Península Antártica. In: Leppe, M.,  J.C. Aravena & R. Villa-Martínez (Eds.) Abriendo ventanas al pasado. Libro de Resúmenes III Simposio - Paleontología en Chile, Punta Arenas, 11-13 de octubre de  2012. Pp 34-37.
Bastos, B. L., T. L. Dutra, T. P. Wilberger & C. Trevisan. 2013. Uma flora do final do Cretáceo na Ilha Nelson, Ilhas Shetland do Sul, Península Antártica. Rev. bras. paleontol. 16 (3):439-462.
Cao, L. 1992. Late Cretaceous and Eocene palynofloras from Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (South Shetland Islands), Antarctica. In: Yoshida, Y., K. Kaminuma & K. Shiraishi (Eds.). Recent Progress in Antarctic Earth Science. Tokyo: Terra Scientific Publishing Company. Pp 363-369.
Leppe, M., T. Wilberger, M. J. Ortuya, H. Ortiz, J. Bastias, H. Mansilla & T. Dutra. 2016. Oldest record of nothofagus leaves in Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica: Implicances for biogeography. In: Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research: Biennial Meetings & Open Science Conference 2016. Antarctica in the Global Earth System: From the Poles to the Tropics. Abstract Book. ISBN 978-0-948277-32-0. Pp 603.
Leppe, M., W. Stinnesbeck, F. Hinojosa, H. Nishida, T. Dutra, T. Wilberger, C. Trevisan, R. Fernandez, M.J. Ortuya, L. Manriquez, H. Mansilla & J. Bastias. 2017. Interpreting the Early Cretaceous record of Nothofagus in Antarctica and Patagonia. In: B. Sames (Ed.) 10th International Symposium on the Cretaceous Vienna, August 21–26, 2017 – ABSTRACTS. Berichte der Geologischen Bundesanstalt (ISSN 1017-8880) Band 120. Pp 156.
Manfroi, J., T. L. Dutra, S. Gnaedinger, Dieter Uhl & A. Jasper. 2015. The first report of a Campanian palaeo-wildfire in the West Antarctic Peninsula. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 418: 12-18.
Reguero, M., F. Goin, C. Acosta Hospitaleche, T. Dutra & S. Marenssi. 2013. Paleofloras of Antarctic Peninsula. Chapter 5. Late Cretaceous/Paleogene West Antarctica Terrestrial Biota and Its Intercontinental Affinities. Springer Briefs in Earth System Sciences. 119 pp.
Trevisan, C., T.  Dutra, R. Iannuzzi, A. Sander & T. Wilberger. 2012. Fossil Record of filicales at Rip Point, Nelson Island, Antarctic Peninsula. In: Leppe, M.,  J.C. Aravena & R. Villa-Martínez (Eds.) Abriendo ventanas al pasado. Libro de Resúmenes III Simposio - Paleontología en Chile, Punta Arenas, 11-13 de octubre de  2012. 178-180 pp.

