





The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report 2019 to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XLII








The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report 2019 to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XLII
Information Paper submitted by SCAR

Summary
This paper presents the annual report of The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. For ease of consideration, the main features of the report are presented as an infographic. 
Background 
The mission of SCAR is to advance Antarctic research, including observations from Antarctica, and to promote scientific knowledge, understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic region. To this end, SCAR is charged with the initiation and international coordination of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to global society. SCAR provides independent and objective scientific advice and information to the Antarctic Treaty System and other bodies, and acts as the main international exchange of Antarctic information within the scientific community. Descriptions of SCAR’s activities and scientific outputs are available at: http://www.scar.org/. 

SCAR celebrated its 60th anniversary in 2018. 
Recent Developments 
In addition to the synopsis of key outcomes and activities of SCAR presented in Figure 1, SCAR’s three science groups, six research programmes, and several specialized subsidiary groups have undertaken a wide variety of activities and produced many outputs, a suite of which are formally presented at this meeting, including in the SCAR Lecture. 

At the XXXV SCAR Meeting and Open Science Conference, held in Davos, Switzerland, three new executive committee members were elected by the Delegates: Dr Catherine Ritz (Vice-President), Prof Gary Wilson (Vice-President), Dr M Ravichandran (Vice-President), with Prof Jefferson Cardia Simões (Vice-President) and Prof Steven Chown (President) remaining in position. Dr Chandrika Nath is SCAR’s Executive Director. Dr Aleks Terauds is SCAR’s representative to the Committee for Environmental Protection. 
Selected Forthcoming Meetings 
XIII SCAR Earth Science Symposium. 22-26 July 2019, Incheon, Rebublic of Korea https://www.isaes2019.org

XXXVI SCAR Meetings and Open Science Conference. 31 July - 11 August 2020, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. Its theme ‘Antarctic Science: Global Connections’ recognises the significance of the scientific connections between Antarctica and the global system. It also reflects the strongly connected Antarctic science community and, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty system, the importance of collaboration in Antarctic science. For the first time since 2012 the COMNAP AGM will also run concurrently with SCAR 2020. https://scarcomnap2020.antarctica.gov.au/

