





Biological Prospecting in Antarctica: An update on the review by SCAR








Biological prospecting in the Antarctic: An update on the review by SCAR
Background
At the request of ATCM XXXI (2008), SCAR undertook a review of published research on biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty region and a survey of biological prospecting research being undertaken within the SCAR community.
The results of that work were submitted to ATCM XXXIII (2010) (see ATCM XXXIII WP2 Biological prospecting in the Antarctic region: a conservative overview of current research).
In light of continuing discussions on the issue, ATCM XLI (2018) requested SCAR to provide an update to its 2010 report (paras 57 and 58 of the Final Report of ATCM XLI refer).
Progress
As SCAR noted in 2010, there are challenges in establishing an accurate assessment of bioprospecting activity in Antarctica for several reasons including that:
    • often bioprospecting is not identified as a goal in research activity, even though the initial steps in such a process requires identification of organisms that may be of later benefit for further investigation for commercial applications. Disentangling systematic research from bioprospecting requires an extensive review of the literature;
    • many activities are not comprehensively reported in scientific reports submitted to SCAR. As a consequence, ascertaining whether a particular scientific activity has a goal of bioprospecting requires more than a simple assessment of scientific activities reported to SCAR;
    • initial field work (where biological collections are taken) is often published in local journals that are more difficult to access than regional or international periodicals. Accordingly, a substantially larger group of scientists will need to be involved if a comprehensive assessment is to be the result, and
    • search results of relevant national patent databases require thorough assessment if accurate numbers of patent applications or approvals are to be obtained.  Database searches using terms ‘Antarctic’ or ‘Antarctica’ produce a raft of responses, though not all relate to bioprospecting. 

Notwithstanding these challenges, to meet the request of the ATCM, SCAR has commenced a review of published research as well as a review of relevant patent databases.  
SCAR will also circulate a questionnaire survey to its members (Appendix A).  Parties may wish to encourage their national SCAR representatives to respond to the survey so as to maximise the returns and the comprehensiveness of the results.
As part of its review, SCAR will take into account recent information provided to the ATCM, including in ATCM XLI IP29 Biological Prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area submitted by the Netherlands. 
Conclusion and prospectus
Due to the above factors, more time will be necessary to adequately fulfil the request by ATCM XLI. 
SCAR will continue to assess the available information, including the survey results, and provide a full report by ATCM XLIII.
Appendix A
Antarctic Biological prospecting
Survey of SCAR [Members] [National Committees]

Context

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) has been considering the issue of biological prospecting in Antarctica for a number of years.  At the request of the 31st ATCM (2008)1, SCAR undertook a survey among its members (in 2009) so as to determine the extent of ongoing biological prospecting research being undertaken within the SCAR community.

The results of that survey, along with the outputs from a review of the published literature, and searches of various patent databases were presented to the 33rd ATCM (2010)2.

At the 41st ATCM (2018), SCAR was requested to provide an update to its 2010 report.

This survey is circulated to all SCAR [members] [National Committees] for completion so as to assist with responding to the ATCM’s request.


Biological Prospecting / Natural Products Research

Definitions for ‘biological prospecting’ or ‘bioprospecting’ continue to be considered in various forums globally though no definition has yet been concluded.

The descriptions of the activity that SCAR used in its 2009 survey are repeated here for the benefit of comparison between the two surveys.  Bioprospecting or natural products research can be thought of as:

The collection of biological material and the analysis of its material properties, or its molecular, biochemical or genetic content, for the purpose of developing a commercial product.
 
or
 
The search for valuable chemical compounds and genetic material from plants, animals and microorganisms. 


Survey

SCAR members are requested to complete the following short survey by [date to be confirmed]
Please return all responses to [return e-mail address to be confirmed]

Questions

Given the above descriptions of bioprospecting / natural products research, please respond to the following questions.

    1. During the last 10 years (or as appropriate for the data available to you) of activities of your National Antarctic Programme (logistics, or direct funding support, or both), has any research been carried out, or is any research being carried out that is considered to be bioprospecting or natural products research? 

NB: The activity may be a small component of a larger project. In which case, the answer would still be yes.
 
Yes/No

    2. If the answer to Question 1 is Yes, please provide the project title or titles. If these are not available to you, please provide a contact name and e-mail address for a source (or sources) who would be able to supply the project titles?

Insert details here or on a supplementary sheet.



    3. During the last 10 years (or as appropriate for the data available to you) of activities of your National Antarctic Programme (logistics, or direct funding support, or both), has any research been carried out, or is any research being carried out that could contribute to, or later be used for bioprospecting or natural products research? 
E.g. gene sequencing, collections of genetic material, biochemical analyses or extractions, isolation of microorganisms or taxanomic research.
 
Yes/No

    4. If the answer to Question 3 is Yes, please provide the project title or titles. If these are not available to you, please provide a contact name and e-mail address for a source (or sources) who would be able to supply the project titles.

Insert details here or on a supplementary sheet.



    5. During the last 10 years (or as appropriate given the data available to you), has your National Antarctic Programme had, or does it have any associations with other research or commercial entities that are directly associated with bioprospecting or natural products research or commercialisation?

Yes/No




    6. During the last 10 years (or as appropriate given the data available to you), has your National Antarctic Programme or researchers or other organisations associated with your National Antarctic Programme applied for any patents that could be classified, under any definition, as the outcome of bioprospecting or natural products research activities? 

Yes/No

    7. If the answer to Question 7 is Yes, please provide: the title of the patent(s); the date of application; the country or countries in which the patent was applied for, and whether or not the patent has been granted.  If this information is not available to you, please provide a contact name and e-mail address for a source (or sources) who would be able to supply the information.

Insert details here or on a supplementary sheet.

Patent title	Date of application	Country / countries where patent applied for		Patent granted (Y/N)







Thank you for completing the survey

