





International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration: The Future of Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution
 to Sea-level Rise










International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration: The Future of Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution to Sea-level Rise
Information paper submitted by the United States and the United Kingdom
Introduction
Considerable uncertainty remains in projections of timing and magnitude of future global sea-level rise, and much of this uncertainty arises from projections of ice-loss from West Antarctica.  Thwaites Glacier (TG) would contribute ~1m by itself, but is thought to be a rosetta stone to broader collapse of West Antarctica, which contains ~3m of sea-level equivalent.  Projections of the demise of TG vary from millennia to just two centuries.  This uncertainty arises from gaps in data, inadequate process understanding, and computer modeling approaches. Reducing this uncertainty is an international priority that was underscored by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research in its “Horizon Scan 2020” (http://www.scar.org/horizonscan).  This is also the top Antarctic research priority of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report, A Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21741/a-strategic-vision-for-nsf-investments-in-antarctic-and-southern-ocean-research).
Since the 1990s, satellites have shown accelerating ice loss driven by ocean change in five neighboring glacier catchments including Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers (see Figure 1), which, together, drain more than one third of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS).  The rate of ice loss from this region grew significantly in the period 2005-2010, and has since accounted for more than 10 per cent of global sea-level rise.  The most rapid ice loss is currently from Pine Island Glacier, which has been the focus of several recent U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF)-funded projects and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) iSTAR Programme (2010-2017, http://www.istar.ac.uk/).  However, a consistent result obtained by recent ice-sheet modeling studies is that on societally-relevant decade-to-century timescales, the most significant, and potentially irreversible changes in West Antarctica are likely to occur on TG (e.g., National Academies of Sciences, 2015).  Satellite studies confirm that significant changes are already underway on this glacier, but the potential contribution to sea-level rise cannot currently be assessed with certainty.
Building on shared priorities, and recognizing that such research is becoming an increasingly global endeavor, with demands that exceed the capacities of any one nation, NSF and NERC have begun to lead a collaborative program with the objective to substantially improve both decadal and longer-term (century-to-multi-century) projections of ice loss and sea-level rise originating from TG (NSF Program Solicitation https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2017/nsf17505/nsf17505.htm). 
Grants to science teams, each involving a core of U.S. and U.K. participants, were awarded in April 2018 (see https://thwaitesglacier.org).  Together, these projects form a collaborative program—the International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration (ITGC)—that is intended to produce a direct and significant improvement in understanding of the stability of marine ice sheets and specifically the West Antarctic Ice Sheet in the vicinity of TG.  The program will improve the ice-sheet modeling community’s capability to simulate ice sheets and thus reduce the uncertainties in sea-level projections.  In addition, the program will contribute to improving risk assessments that coastal communities need for decisions about adaptation and long-range planning.
Research program description
The ITGC will support an observational and modeling campaign in the TG and neighboring Amundsen Sea region to understand the changes taking place and the processes driving these changes.  Modeling activities will proceed hand-in-hand with data collection to help optimize measurement strategies, decipher external drivers, and, ultimately, contribute to improved projections of sea-level rise.  Teams will collect observations from the zone where TG comes into contact with the ocean, as well as contextual data on TG and its catchment.  These data will feed into coupled models to enhance decadal projections.  Longer-term projections will be constrained by answering the critical question “did TG survive the last interglacial?”  Observational evidence will constrain the extent and timing of past deglaciation of TG.  This will provide a key opportunity to test hypotheses regarding the instability of marine ice sheets.
A Science Coordination Office facilitates collaboration, data management, education and outreach, and media engagement for the ITGC as a whole.  The eight ITGC science projects collectively address boundary conditions, external drivers of change, processes leading to collapse, past change, and forecasts of future change.  Projects include U.S. and U.K. researchers from 39 institutions, with logistical and scientific collaboration with partners in South Korea, Sweden, Germany, Norway, Finland, France, New Zealand, and Abu Dhabi. 
The funded projects address the most significant science questions, with specific focus on: 
    • the past and recent behavior of the ice sheet 
    • the role of ice-sheet beds and margins in shaping and controlling ice flow
    • the role of ocean-change in driving recent ice-sheet retreat
    • the potential for recent retreat to become irreversible in future
Field seasons
The initial field season of 2018/19 focused on marine science, and, on the ice, on logistics staging and scoping of field sites, as well as initial aerogeophysical surveys.  The major field component is anticipated to be carried out in the summer field seasons of 2019/20, 2020/21, and 2021/22.  These seasons will involve both marine and over-snow field campaigns.
Contacts for international collaboration and cooperation
Additional international collaboration would be welcomed.  The contacts listed below are interested in learning of other nations who are or intend to be engaged in research in this region over this time frame, with the hope that synergistic activities might be developed.  The primary contacts are:

NSF and NERC:
Paul Cutler, NSF; telephone: +1 (703) 292-4961, email: pcutler@nsf.gov
Helen Beadman, NERC; telephone: +44 (0)1793 411600, email: habe@nerc.ac.uk

Science Coordination Office:
Ted Scambos, University of Colorado; telephone: +1 (303) 492-1113, email: tascambos@colorado.edu
	David Vaughan, British Antarctic Survey; telephone: +44 (0) 1223-221643, email: dgv@bas.ac.uk



Figure 1 – Location map for Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers.  The background image shows the ice-loss 2010-2013 measured using data from ESA’s Cryosat-2 satellite (McMillan et al.  2014). 

References
McMillan, M., Shepherd, A., Sundal, A., Briggs, K., Muir, A., Ridout, A., Hogg, A., & Wingham, D.  (2014).  Increased ice losses from Antarctica detected by CryoSat‐2.  Geophysical Research Letters, 41(11), 3899-3905.  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2014GL060111/full
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2015).  A Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research.  Washington, DC: National Academies Press.  https://www.nap.edu/catalog/21741/a-strategic-vision-for-nsf-investments-in-antarctic-and-southern-ocean-research

