





Cooperation between Romania and Republic of Korea - Antarctic Scientific Researches and Logistics Facilities
 2015 – 2018









Cooperation between Romania and Republic of Korea - Antarctic Scientific Researches and Logistics Facilities 
2015 – 2018
Background
Romania, as a non-Consultative Party, ratified on September 15th 1971 (by Decree 255/1971) the Antarctic Treaty, adopted on December 1st 1959, and which entered into force on 23 June 1961. Since that date, different people or institutions from our country (explorers, expeditioners, and scientific researchers) have always been in a position to seek to cooperate with states that are Consultative Party and have a strong and appreciable infrastructure that allows other expeditioners to be accommodated in their stations, in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.
Summary
Romania, through this IP, wants to let the Antarctic community know about the cooperation between its scientific researchers and researchers from the Republic of Korea in Antarctica.  Based on a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed in 2015 between KOPRI and INCDSB, three research expeditions (named ROICE) from Romania took place at King Sejong Station of KOPRI, on the King George Island, Barton Peninsula, West Antarctica.
KOPRI was founded in 1987, as a government supported research institute, specializing in polar sciences and as the operator of the Korean Antarctic Research Programme (KARP). KOPRI has one of the largest research infrastructures in this field, in the world.
INCDSB was founded in 1996 by the Romanian Government as an important player in life sciences. By order of the Ministry of Research and Innovation and with the scientific guarantee of the Romanian Academy, in 2014, within INCDSB a Department for Arctic and Antarctic Research (DCAA) was established.  The mission of this department is to perform scientific research in the field of life sciences in Antarctic and Arctic areas. All three ROICE expeditions were organized by this department beginning 2015.
Introduction
INCDSB is an important institute in Romania, which promotes fundamental and applied research in life sciences. Its mission is excellence in research in the life sciences domain, assumed by the process of integrating research in biological sciences and cooperating with national and international partners in order to understand life’s processes and solve environmental, health, food and social problems in the context of climate change.
In the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, INCDSB has developed and increased an important international cooperation with KOPRI, having a Framework Agreement for 5 (five) years, in force from February 2015. 
Executive Summary
In 2015, the researchers developed the first ROICE Research Plan, taking into account the mission of DCAA and the Romanian Strategic Plan for Antarctic Research 2014-2020 of the National Commission of Antarctic Research (CNCA) within the Romanian Academy (Thematic Area 1 - Antarctic Ecosystems: Biodiversity and Vulnerability, Conservation and Bioprospecting) in correlation with the SCAR Program.
The scientists who have been selected (from INCDSB and the Institute of Biology – IBB of the Romanian Academy) by the Scientific Board of INCDSB and who were accepted after the selection process by KOPRI staff, based on a research plan, were able to take part in expeditions, according to the Annual Project Annex to the Framework Agreement between the two institutes. 
The Romanian Scientific Expeditions in Antarctica, ROICE, has been conducted to identify and characterize microbial communities of different habitats, and to study the effects and adaptations of organisms in extreme environments.
Trough IP 13/2018 at ATCM XLI, KOPRI highlighted Republic of Korea’s 3rd Basic Plan for the Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica (2017-2022), which is the Korea’s vision to “become a leading nation of Antarctic research, which contributes to the resolution of the global changes faced by humanity”. Also, the paper noted Korea’s major goals, one of them meaning to Enhance Antarctic Governance Leadership by:  Strengthen the partnership through international cooperation in the field of Antarctic research & Develop and lead the agenda of Antarctic environmental protection and research cooperation.
“KOPRI will remain committed to the steady progress of stations in Polar Regions and to research in a multifaceted way, supported by its 30 years of knowledge on polar exploration”, declared the President of KOPRI, Ho Il Yoon, in their Annual Report 2018.
King Sejong Antarctic Station, together with the Dasan Arctic Station, the Jang Bogo Antarctic Research Station, as well as the Araon Icebreaker, represents a large and modern research infrastructure which will enable KOPRI to achieve its goals.
King Sejong Station of KOPRI, from King George Island, was inaugurated in 1988 as a research platform with permanent activity, also during polar winters. Since its opening, the station has gone through successive and significant processes of modernization and development. The latest, in 2018 - consisting in the upgrade of buildings and the acquisition of two additional ships, led to a fewer number of visiting scientists in the station that year, compared to previous years. 
Romanian expeditions ROICE 2015, ROICE 2016, ROICE 2019 has benefited from KOPRI’s logistic: to reach Antarctica from Punta Arenas and back, to ensure transfer from the point of aircraft landing in Antarctica to King Sejong Station by boat, the use equipment for communication, access to the research laboratories, medical assistance in the station and on the field was assured and so on. 
All mentioned above have led to sustained research activities in Antarctica (collecting samples followed by primary sample processing in the KOPRI laboratories), and have contributed to joint achievements of Romanian and Korean researchers. All the scientific results obtained from the research have been disseminated by scientific papers, presentations at national or international events.
Conclusion
The international collaboration between the two institutes (INCDSB & KOPRI) has been a success and will continue to be a success in the future. Finally, we inform the Antarctic Community that the ROICE Scientific Expeditions implemented based on the international collaboration with the Republic of Korea has put Romania on the official map of KOPRI’s collaborators, in 2019.









