





Update and CEE Compliance Report: Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation Project 









Update and CEE Compliance Report: Rothera Wharf Reconstruction and Coastal Stabilisation Project 
An information paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Rothera Wharf reconstruction and coastal stabilisation project was prepared by British Antarctic Survey (BAS), circulated to Parties in September 2018, and the activity permitted by the UK competent authority.  The first seasons dismantling and construction activities ran from December 2018 to May 2019.

This paper updates the CEP on progress with the Rothera Wharf construction and explains how compliance with the CEE was ensured during the first season of construction.  

The paper concludes that the first year of the Rothera Wharf construction project has been successful, compliance with the CEE has been good, the CEE was effective in predicting the likely environmental impacts, and the mitigation measures described have been effective.

CEE handling and permitting 

Following the presentation of the Draft CEE at the CEP XXI, the final CEE for the Rothera Wharf project was prepared taking into account feedback from Parties and the ICG review process.  It was circulated to Parties in September 2018, and available on this webpage: https://www.bas.ac.uk/Rothera CEE

The UK Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO) gave BAS the authorisation to proceed in September 2018.  This authorisation stipulated that “the CEE, including all mitigation measures, must be followed during the course of the construction works.  Any substantive deviation from the plans set out in the CEE must be reported to the permitting authority for consideration before the changes take place”.  
Description of activities during 2018/19 season 
The construction team (approximately 50 staff), travelled to Rothera in advance of the arrival of the charter vessel at the end of December 2018.  All plant, equipment and materials were offloaded by early January 19. 

Since then the team has built a temporary jetty and boat shed in South Cove to allow science diving operations to continue safely throughout the season, away from the construction works.  They have erected a plant fitter's workshop, which is used to maintain plant and do minor steel fabrication works.  

The team have carried out 12 blasts (using around 16 tonnes of explosives) and extracted 26,000 tonnes of rock fill.  The largest rocks (> 300kg) have been set aside for use as primary armour in the coastal stabilisation works.  30-80mm graded rock fill has been stockpiled and will be or has been used to back fill the new wharf as needed.  The remaining material (< 30mm) has been screened again and will be used as fines for repairing the runway surfacing.  

The dismantling of the existing Biscoe Wharf began as soon as the charter vessel carrying plant and equipment for the project left Rothera.  This was a complex operation that required close supervision and assessment by the Project Team to ensure there was no risk of uncontrolled collapse.  The dismantling process included digging out the existing fill, which was then processed and added to the appropriate stockpiles for potential reuse. The condition of the existing wharf steelwork was assessed at this stage and it was determined that the rate of corrosion was such that cathodic protection will not be required on the new wharf.  Two assembly jigs were erected and have been used to assemble the rear frames (the internal structure of the new wharf).  Six of these rear frames have been completed and installed in their final positions. Installation includes drilling and grouting tension anchors and grouting an underwater pad to resist compressive forces.  

At the end of the season, the west wall of the wharf, and the north western corner section had been installed. In addition the temporary ice shields on the six frames have also been installed. This has enabled the partially constructed wharf to be backfilled thus making it safe to be left over winter. 

All the above has been done safely and with full consideration of the impact on the environment and ongoing station operations. Selected photos of the work in progress are included below.
Compliance with the CEE findings

To ensure compliance with the CEE (and therefore Permit requirements), environmental responsibilities were allocated to key project staff (as set out in the CEE), environmental requirements were written into operating procedures, and a strong link with clear reporting requirements maintained between the construction team and BAS Environment Office.  

A BAS Environmental Manager was on site during December 2018 and January 2019 whilst the charter ship was being unloaded.  She was able to oversee the comprehensive biosecurity checks that were undertaken on the cargo and plant. Checks were also made on the location and functionality of monitoring equipment. Both biosecurity and monitoring procedures were outlined in the CEE.  

As the construction site laydown areas began to be populated with plant and equipment, regular meetings were held with the Project Manager and Environmental Engineer to ensure that compliance with the CEE was fully understood and being met.

In addition two compliance audits were carried out by the BAS Project Team to check that the procedures and plans (including those included as Appendices A, B, D, E and F of the CEE) were being adhered to and that no unpredicted environmental impacts were occurring.  This requirement was specified in the CEE (Chapter 13: Monitoring & Audit Requirements).

The audit process confirmed that compliance with the CEE was clearly evident and that good environmental practice was being observed, although some opportunities for improvement were noted.  These included maintaining better records of environmental training provided on site, and ensuring the construction team are clear on who reports environmental incidents. 

To ensure that any deviation from the planned works outlined in the CEE were captured, a ‘Register of Project Variations’ was kept.   This recorded events such as unexpected ground conditions resulting in minor design alterations, changes in the locations proposed for storing equipment/containers, and any environmental incidents.

In the event of a deviation, the register was promptly submitted to the BAS Environment Office to assess the significance of the event.  Each event was communicated to the FCO and, where appropriate, the agreement to undertake the variance sought.  At the time of writing this paper, 20 activities were recorded on the ‘Register of Project Variations’ and none have materially affected the environmental impact of the project.

Any environmental incident occurring associated with the project was reported on the BAS incident reporting database (and subsequently investigated by BAS Environment Office).  Six environmental incidents occurred during the construction period and included for example minor oil spills and the importation of non-native species and non-sterile soil on incoming cargo (which were identified and incinerated before the cargo was offloaded).  Some of these incidents had been identified as risks in the CEE and mitigation measures and response strategies were implemented accordingly. 

The above audit and reporting mechanisms will be applied throughout the project’s duration and, taking into account the results of the environmental monitoring, a more complete EIA review will be submitted on completion of the project.  This intention was described in the CEE and is consistent with Resolution 2 (1997) and the EIA guidelines.


Conclusions

    • The first year of the Rothera Wharf construction project has been successful and the project is on track to be completed in the timeframe set out in the CEE.
    • Undertaking compliance audits have been invaluable in checking that the CEE is being adhered to.
    • Compliance with the CEE has been good.  Nevertheless, some opportunities for improvement were highlighted in the audit reports and some variance events have occurred.
    • Some variance from that described in the CEE are inevitable given the refinement of the project design since submitting the CEE, and the uncertainties inherent in a complex construction project. 
    • The variances have been recorded on a Register of Project Variations and the variances have been discussed with the UK competent authority (and their approval sought) before the activity commenced.
    • The Project Team, Environment Office and the UK competent authority agreed it was helpful to have established how variances would be managed and communicated before they occurred. 
    • Based on the findings of the audits and monitoring undertaken to date, the CEE was effective in predicting the likely environmental impacts and the mitigation measures described have been effective.
    • A further update will be given next year.





Rothera Wharf reconstruction and coastal stabilisation project – selected photographs


Temporary quarry overview 



Storing uncrushed material at the top of the temporary quarry.  Crushing will re-commence next season.




Excavating Material Removed from the east side of the Wharf




West Side Wall Construction




Backfilled wharf



Site overview

