





Turkey-Chile Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica









Turkey-Chile Scientific Collaboration in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Turkey 
Summary 
On the context of the Third Turkish Scientific Expedition (TAE-III) to Antarctica; collaboration with the Chilean Antarctic Institute is reported.
Turkey - Chile Scientific Collaboration
During the Antarctic Season 2018-2019, the project submitted by Prof. Dr. Latife Çakır Bayram from Erciyes University / Faculty of Veterinary Medicine Department of Pathology was supported by the Ministry of Industry and Technology, and coordinated by the Istanbul Technical University Polar Research Center (PolReC). INACH (Chilean Antarctic Institute) accepted Prof. Dr. Latife Çakır Bayram’s scientific project proposal within the scope of international cooperation opportunities

The INACH 55 Chilean Antarctic Expedition 2018-2019 (ECA 55, for the Spanish Acronym) took place in two stages. The sea stage of the Expedition was carried out by AP-41 Aquiles of the Chilean navy. During the expedition, 44 domestic and foreign scientists remained on board. AP-41 Aquiles departed from Punta Arenasta on 08.01.2019. The South Shetland Islands and the northern part of the Antarctic Peninsula planned for sea and land sampling. Approximately 8 thousand kilometers traveled to the islands of South Shetland. Within the leadership of Veronica Vallejos-Marchant, Prof. Dr. Latife Çakır Bayram conducted research on “The Cytological, Microbiological and Ophthalmic Evaluation of Ocular Surface Samples Taken from Penguin Species of the Antarctic Peninsula” between January 8 - 24 of 2019, during the 55th Chilean Scientific Antarctic Expedition. Samples were taken from Cabo Legoupil (General Bernardo OHiggins) and Doumer Island (Yelchoo). Cooperation established between Dr. Rafael Medina and Dr. Latife Cakir Bayram including the work of Dr. Medina’s group (RT_46-16, Ecology of avian influenza in Antarctica: role of migratory birds, Assistant Professor Rafael A Medina, Pediatric Division, School of Medicina, Pontifical Catholic University, PUC).

The research of Prof. Dr. Latife Çakır Bayram was completed successfully with INACH support. We would like to thank to INACH, Chilean authorities, Director of INACH Dr. Marcelo Leppe, AP-41 Aquiles and “Karpuj" staff for their support and kind hospitality. Additionally, we thank former director of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) Dr. José Retamales and Veronica Vallejos-Marchant for outstanding support. 

