





Benefits of intercontinental aviation cooperation in support of Antarctic science: Australia’s experience in 2018-19








Benefits of intercontinental aviation cooperation to support Antarctic science: Australia’s experience in 2018-19
Information Paper submitted by Australia

Summary

This paper reports on the high degree of international collaboration in Australia’s intercontinental aviation operations, including arrangements during the 2018-19 season with several National Antarctic Programs.

Introduction
The remoteness of East Antarctica poses particular challenges for the conduct and support of science, including due to the large distances from ports and airports outside the Antarctic region and between Antarctic research stations. Reliable and efficient access to East Antarctica is increasingly important with growing recognition of the importance of scientific research in the region.
Australia commenced operation of an intercontinental ‘Airlink’ in 2007-2008, and has since operated regular summer-season flights of a wheeled Airbus A319 aircraft between Hobart and the glacial ice runway at Wilkins Aerodrome near Australia’s Casey research station (see ATCM XXXVI/BP8). The Airlink has been valuable for transporting personnel and small cargo, with an annual pause in operations for several weeks in the middle of the season due to elevated surface temperatures at Wilkins. Since 2016-17 the Royal Australian Air Force has also operated several C17A Globemaster flights to Wilkins each season, as part of the Australian Antarctic Program, providing additional capability for the intercontinental transport of larger cargo and personnel.
For many years the A319 aircraft has also supported the activities of several other National Antarctic Programs (NAPs), providing intercontinental transport to Wilkins Aerodrome, where personnel link to other NAP intracontinental aircraft, and also to other runways in the broader East Antarctic and Ross Sea regions. 

Intercontinental aviation collaboration during the 2018-19 season
The 2018-19 season again saw a high degree of collaborative use of the Airlink and A319, including:
    • Under bilateral agreements, Australia transported Chinese and French Antarctic program personnel from Hobart to Wilkins Aerodrome. 
    • Following recent similar arrangements, the Norwegian Antarctic program used the A319 for three flights between Cape Town and Troll airfield in Dronning Maud Land. The Australian and Norwegian Antarctic programs continue to build and share knowledge on aviation operations and logistics following an exchange of intercontinental aviation operations personnel in the 2016-17 and 2018-19 seasons. In the 2018-19 season, Australia’s Aviation Manager visited Troll station to share information on runway construction techniques, standard operating procedures and ground support equipment. 
    • As part of a long-standing collaboration, the United States Antarctic Program used the A319 for six flights between Christchurch and Phoenix runway at McMurdo station.
    • The Italian National Antarctic Research Program used the A319 to fly from Hobart to the Italian sea ice runway near Mario Zucchelli station for the first time. Over 240 passengers from Italy, France, China, Germany and New Zealand flew on flights chartered by the Italian Antarctic Program. 
Conclusion
Logistics collaboration between national Antarctic programs supports the science and international cooperation objectives of the Antarctic Treaty. It can deliver mutual benefits through reducing costs and duplication of activities, while at the same time supporting the delivery of a wider range scientific research across a variety of disciplines and locations. While this report focuses on Australia’s recent experience with the collaborative use of Australia’s Antarctic Airlink and A319 aircraft, the Australian Antarctic Program has also benefited from collaborative arrangements with other programs on intracontinental aviation, shipping and traverse, and looks forward to pursuing similar opportunities in the future to efficiently and effectively support internationally significant research in Antarctica. 

