ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
SEVENTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   SEPTIEME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         TRATADO ANTARTICO
СЕДЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  SEPTIMA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                  WELLINGTON
ANT/INF/%                     30 October 1972
                                  Original: English

SEVENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING ADDRESS BY THE
FOREIGN MINISTER OF NEW ZEALAND RT. HON. SIR KEITH HOLYOAKE

New Zealanders are adventurers, activists. We like to do things.

We are also, in our practical fashion, idealists. We think about
ways in which society or political arrangements might be improved -
and then we generally try to do something about it.

These two threads run through our interest and our involvement,
in Antarctica.

For several of the heroes of Antarctic exploration, New Zealand
was a final port of call. We provided what assistance we could.
Some New Zealanders joined their expeditions; those who stayed at
home followed their progress with close attention.

In 1839-40 a New Zealander with the Maori name of Tuati sailed
with Wilkes; and in 1895 another, Nicholas von Tunzelman, was the
first man to set foot on the Antarctic continent. He was with Bull
and Borchgrevink.

It is one of our national legends that Sir Edmund Hillary drove
to the South Pole on an ordinary farm tractor.

Because of our connections with Shackleton, Scott, Amundsen and
Byrd it was to be taken for granted, when the International Geophysical
Year was being planned, that New Zealand would participate. Sixteen
years later we can say with some satisfaction that our scientists,
servicemen, university people, Boy Scouts even - ordinary New Zealanders -
have helped to clear away the mists from a little-known continent.

In general terms we are aware of the significance of what has been
achieved since 1957, the work of mapping and surveying, the research
that has impelled scientists to revise their earlier ideas of the earth's
history, the forming of continents, the causes of earthquakes and future
physical changes to the surface of the earth that can now be predicted
with reasonable certainty. We know about Antarctic waters as a potential
food source. We have a better understanding of how primitive life
forms adapt and survive. Of direct importance to New Zealand, we have
a better understanding of the part Antarctica plays in the world's
weather pattern.
E                                                         2.

This has been an international co-operative effort. No one
nation alone could possibly have achieved what has been done by 12
nations working together.

There has been adventure enough, even for New Zealanders, and
idealism.too.

New Zealand was also an original signatory of the Antarctic
Treaty.

It seemed plain that to avoid conflict, and to make possible a
continuing international scientific effort, a new regime was required.
For 12 years this has worked remarkably well. Now we can speak with
confidence of the significance of this initiative, noting that despite
its shortcomings the Antarctic Treaty was a valuable precedent for
the 1967 treaty governing the use of outer space, the treaties covering
the banning of nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space
and under the sea, and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The
Treaty precluding placement of weapons of mass destruction on the sea
bed, also, and current efforts by the United Nations to establish an
international regime for the deep seabed, can in certain respects be
said to have a precedent in the Antarctic Treaty.

The provision in the Treaty for inspection to ensure that the
objectives are being fully observed in practice is unparalleled in the
field of modern disarmament diplomacy.

So what of the future?

It is easy enough to record the past, especially when there are
noteworthy achievements to be listed. Do we have a reasonably clear
idea of where we are going next?

A scientific programme will continue. It will not be so dramatic,
so glamorous perhaps, but there is plenty to be done. The techniques
of international co-operation can be extended and perfected.

There are new problems to think about, problems of our own
creation. In large part they flow from increasing ease of access to
Antarctica, and increased mobility. It is all too easy to forget
that only a few short years ago flights to Antarctica were not simple
routine affairs.

Today people fly in quite regularly, as a matter of course. Ships
carry tourists to the continent.
E                                                   3.

Our responsibility therefore is to protect the continent we
have discovered and explored, which is both a unique scientific
laboratory and also a political laboratory, from too many visitors.
How to manage this fairly and justly will exercise us for some while.

People all over the world are rapidly becoming aware of the
damage that man has done and is still doing to his environment.
Scientists, on the other hand, have understood for some while the impor-
tance of preserving Antarctica and minimising damage to the environment.
They were somewhat ahead of most people. Now we must all work to
prevent the dangers that are evident in other parts of the world.

Finally, we must preserve, or as need be, develop and elaborate,
the regime created by the Antarctic Treaty, which may be regarded as
the most hopeful development in international law, in international
relations, for many years.

All the nations represented around this table have their
adventurers and idealists. All have tales to tell of brave men who
have explored Antarctica. All can be proud of the Antarctic Treaty.

I am confident that we can maintain in a changing world the
traditions of co-operation in every aspect of endeavour that we have
built up since 1957, and which are of so much importance and significance.

But this will not happen without conscious effort on our part.
We must give thought to the problems and possibilities. The plant
that we have grown we must continue to nurture.

Imagination, diplomacy, and thoughtfulness for others have been
required to create the present regime; continued care and attention
will be required to maintain and adapt it in new and changing situations.

This is the challenge to us. This is our responsibility to
future generations.

On behalf of the Government and people of New Zealand I welcome
to Wellington and to this Conference all the representatives of the
consultative parties. I wish you well for the success of your discussions.
I have explained.to you, I hope, the importance that New Zealanders
attach to them.
