The SCAR Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Action Group
The SCAR Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Action Group
Summary
SCAR’s Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Action Group (AG),
established in 2021, now has over 150 members. The group is
active in a number of areas such as developing a SCAR Code of
Conduct on EDI issues, reviewing existing external diversity and
inclusion resources, and working with other organisations to share
experience and best practices. The AG also includes representatives
from COMNAP, the Association of Polar Early Career Scientists
(APECS) and the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS). The
EDI AG is collaborating with the SCAR Executive Committee,
Secretariat, and Capacity Building, Education and Training (CBET)
Committee to address the issues identified during a scoping phase,
and to advance SCAR's goal of becoming a truly inclusive
organisation, in line with the desire expressed in the Final Report
from ATCM XLIV, Berlin 2022, “to ensure that everyone working on
Antarctic matters [is] safe, welcomed, respected and free from
discrimination”.
Introduction
In 2020, SCAR brought together a scoping group to determine the
best course of action for SCAR in tackling issues of equality,
diversity, and inclusion (EDI). The membership of the scoping
group drew on expertise both within SCAR and external to it. To
acknowledge and learn from the efforts made by other polar
organisations, the group included some members of the SOOS
Working Group on EDI.
The scoping group's principal recommendation to the SCAR
Delegates was to form a specific SCAR Action Group (AG) on EDI.
The AG is tasked with broadly looking at how EDI issues can be
effectively dealt with within SCAR and what practical actions are
relevant for the organisation.
Early priorities identified by the scoping group included an audit of
existing information about diversity within SCAR – looking at
diversity in leadership positions as well as in applications to award
schemes, and in attendance at meetings and conferences. Other
priorities included: building a baseline of relevant SCAR and
community data to guide the work of the AG; reviewing other
organisations’ codes of conduct on EDI and on how to promote best
practices; providing feedback and guidance on SCAR Capacity
Building activities; and engaging the many existing EDI AG
volunteers in support of these and other activities. The scoping
group highlighted that taking these priorities forward would require
the engagement and support of the many volunteers who drive
SCAR’s activities.
The formation of the EDI AG was accepted by the SCAR Delegates
at their meeting in March 2021, and the SCAR Executive Committee
approved the formal AG proposal in May 2021.
The AG's leadership was chosen from over 150 community
volunteers, consisting of a Senior Leadership team made up of a
Chief-Officer (Dr Adriana María Gulisano), a Deputy Chief Officer
(Dr Jilda Alicia Caccavo), a Secretary (Pilvi Mischitiello) and a
wider leadership steering group (LSG). The LSG has 15 members
who are responsible for different working areas. They represent the
Antarctic research community from all career stages, disciplines and
geographical regions.
More details are available at https://www.scar.org/capacity-
building/edi/home/
This Paper is submitted by SCAR in recognition of priority 13 of the
ATCM Multi-year Strategic Work Plan calling for Parties to:
Address equality, diversity and inclusion issues, by promoting full
participation of underrepresented groups in Antarctic science and
operations activities across all Antarctic issues, including science,
operations, policy and law.
For ATCM XLV (2023) this called for “Parties, Observers and
Experts to share information on their plans on these issues”.
These statements have been taken into account in setting the
priorities and future plans of the SCAR AG and are in line with the
statement on diversity and inclusion from the Final Report of ATCM
44:
The ATCM highlighted the importance of ensuring that everyone
working in Antarctica is safe, welcome, respected and free from
discrimination. Participants affirmed their commitment to
enhancing diversity and promoting an inclusive culture for
everyone contributing to the work of the Antarctic Treaty system.
External Representation
The SCAR EDI AG includes representatives from the Association of
Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS), the Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS) as well as the Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP). In addition, members of
the SCAR EDI AG are active in other EDI initiatives such as the
International Science Council (ISC) Standing Committee for Gender
Equality in Science (SCGES) and the SOOS Working Group on EDI
issues.
Recent Activities
Building on the activities suggested by the scoping group, the EDI
Action Group has added further areas of work and below we
summarise these ongoing activities.
One of the first activities undertaken by the AG was to review all of
the existing data available from SCAR Capacity Building activities
from an EDI perspective. This was successfully completed, and a
paper to be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal on this activity is
currently in preparation.
A number of activities relating to the 2022 SCAR Open Science
Conference (OSC) (https://scar2022.org/) were undertaken. For the
first time, the AG was represented on the OSC’s International
Science Organising Committee to help ensure the involvement of
Early Career Researchers and to help deliver a good balance
between gender, age and ethnicity in, for example, invited speakers
and session conveners. The AG will also be involved in the planning
of the next OSC in 2024.
Another activity led by the AG was the creation of a demographic
survey for the SCAR community to be rolled out as part of the OSC.
The AG worked with the SCAR Secretariat and local organisers to
develop and implement the survey as part of the registration
process. The initial survey was filled out by over 700 participants
and covered questions concerning career stage, age, gender,
nationality and race/ethnicity, as well as research background and
participation level (presenter, co-author, etc.). All questions were
voluntary and further responses were gathered in a post-conference
poll. The AG will use this information both to gauge diversity and
inclusion as it relates to the OSC, but also to further refine survey
methodology for future SCAR meetings.
During the OSC itself, the AG helped to organise and was actively
involved in two sessions dedicated to EDI topics, as well as
dedicated workshops. The sessions were very well attended and had
speakers from many different EDI-related fields. Recordings are
available from the SCAR YouTube channel (https://
www.youtube.com/@scar-antarctica/about).
A significant theme emerging during the OSC was the need to
facilitate safe space discussion groups and identify the most
effective platforms to do so. This has been added to the list of AG
priorities.
A draft SCAR Code of Conduct on EDI issues has been created, and
is being reviewed and shared beyond the AG with EDI professionals,
along with a community glossary of terms that explains the
language used in the policy. It also includes an EDI statement for
SCAR which will be developed through different community
engagement activities.
To disseminate the work of the AG to the wider SCAR community
as well as to other polar and non-polar organisations, a range of
outreach activities has been planned. For example, in November
2022, the AG celebrated the third international Polar Pride Day
along with many other organisations. In addition, campaigns for
“Women and Girls in Science Day” proposed by the United Nations
have been launched and will be supported by the AG.
To further develop its relationship with the International Science
Council’s Standing Committee for Gender Equality in Science, the
AG is planning a webinar to highlight SCAR experiences in dealing
with EDI issues, to take place in June 2023.
The AG has also developed an EDI calendar to enhance awareness
of EDI-relevant events from other organisations, including online,
hybrid as well as in-person conferences, webinars, activities and
more. This calendar is regularly being updated.
