Tourism monitoring in Antarctica – Report on the progress in
develop-ing a concept for the analysis of the impacts of tourism on
the assets to be protected in the Antarctic
Tourism monitoring in Antarctica – Report on the progress in
developing a concept for the analysis of the impacts of tourism on
the assets to be protected in the Antarctic
Summary
The continued expansion of Antarctic tourism involves the risk that
the environmental impacts will be more than minor or transitory.
The sensitive Antarctic ecosystem is exposed to multiple human
pressures and repeated visits to sites can lead to changes, which are
not necessarily linear but can occur rapidly with only limited
potential for recovery. However, we do not know enough about the
long-term and cumulative impacts of tourism, and also little is
known about the effectiveness of current tourism management
measures. The German Environment Agency (UBA) therefore
initiated a research project to develop a comprehensive monitoring
concept to investigate and monitor the environmental impacts of
tourism in Antarctica. This IP provides an update on the progress of
the project as well as an outlook on next steps.
Background
Since the 90s, visitor numbers have increased rapidly and reached a
preliminary peak in the 2019/2020 season, which was already
influenced through the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
pandemic has not ended the overall upward trend, as a new record
number of visitors was reached in the 2022/23 season with more
than 100.000 tourists visiting the Antarctic. Besides, new tourist
activities are emerging, diversifying Antarctic tourism. Antarctic
ecosystems are highly sensitive due to the isolation of the Antarctic
continent and the extreme conditions under which flora and fauna
have evolved. Increasing pressures from tourism therefore
potentially contribute to the degradation of the environment or
some of its individual components and values. Despite growing
concerns over the sustainability of tourism, the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties (ATCPs) have so far been unable to agree on a
comprehensive approach to regulate and manage tourism.
Knowledge on the cumulative and long-term impacts of tourism
should form the basis to manage and regulate tourism effectively
and proactively. However, the knowledge of the impacts of tourism
is limited to some impacts, which have been researched extensively,
such as potential effects on penguin and seabird populations. Other
impacts have not received sufficient attention and remain widely
unknown. Therefore, UBA commissioned a research project with
funding from the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection to develop a
monitoring concept to reveal the overall and long-term impacts of
tourism.
Aim and scope of the project
In this project, a comprehensive long-term monitoring system for
frequently visited tourist sites in the Antarctic will be developed to
systematically detect the impacts of tourist activities on the assets
to be protected as defined in the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol, Article 3, para. 2
b). The results of the monitoring will establish a comprehensive
knowledge base to decide on the future management and regulation
of tourist activities.
The project has started in September 2021 and will end in
September 2024. UBA, as representative of Germany in the CEP,
will make the outcomes of this project available to the community
of Antarctic Treaty Parties and other stakeholders and thus
contribute to the advancement of international environmental
protection in the Antarctic.
Approach and current status
The development of the monitoring concept primarily relies on a
review of scientific literature and existing monitoring systems. In a
first step, documents on the impacts of tourism activities on the
Antarctic environment and, in particular, on the assets to be
protected according to Art. 3 (para. 2 b) of the Protocol have been
systematically compiled. In addition, so-called "citizen science
projects" were included in the research.
The documents were then used to identify indicators and
monitoring methods along the elements of the DPSIR (Drivers,
Pressures, State, Impacts and Responses) concept, which was
developed by the European Environment Agency (EEA) in 1999 and
has been widely used since then. This model aims to reflect the
relations between the environmental and the human system
through simple causal relations. One example for such a causal
chain for the Driver “Movement on land” is depicted below.
Figure 1: DPSIR causal chain for the Driver “Movement on Land”
An approach to the development of an overarching monitoring
scheme was discussed with stakeholders from science, competent
authorities, the tourism industry and NGOs in a workshop, which
was held as a side-event at the ATCM 2022 in Berlin. The workshop
reflected earlier discussions within CEP/ATCM and clearly indicated
the need for an overarching monitoring system in Antarctica. The
development of such a concept is a demanding task due to multiple
pressures from tourism, uncertainties regarding the causalities
between pressures and impacts, and the lack of indicators for some
pressures and impacts. Moreover, the knowledge on the state of the
environment is mostly limited to single parameters at the local
level, and a comprehensive understanding of different components
of the environment and their interactions on a larger scale is
lacking. Therefore, there is no baseline data from which any
subsequent observed changes can be measured. However, such
knowledge gaps should not be a barrier to the implementation of
the monitoring, as the monitoring needs to evolve dynamically with
the growing knowledge base.
Moreover, it is important to consider the implementation of the
monitoring. The workshop fostered discussions on organisational
aspects, such as responsibilities and financing. Involving the
perspectives of different stakeholders contributes to developing
realistic options. In general, monitoring requires sufficient funding
over a longer time span. Using synergies with existing
monitoring approaches helps to use resources efficiently and to
facilitate the implementation of the monitoring system.
Furthermore, it was recommended by participants that the
monitoring should be embedded in the Antarctic Treaty System,
and should involve several stakeholders, such as tourists, tourism
operators, national competent authorities and scientists in national
Antarctic programs. For the coordination of the monitoring, it is
likely the best solution to set up a new management body.
Outlook
The draft monitoring concept will be discussed at a second
workshop, which will be held online in October 2023. This will
include the development of criteria for prioritizing the impacts
which should be monitored, taking into account existing approaches
and methods. All parties, stakeholders and other interested groups
are invited to participate in the project. Participants from the first
workshop who agreed to be contacted for the second workshop will
automatically receive an invitation. Further information on the
workshop will soon be available here: https://tourism-monitoring-
antarctica2.fresh-thoughts.eu/.
References
European Environment Agency (EEA). (1999). Environmental
indicators: Typology and overview. Technical report No 25/1999.
Hughes, K. S. & Convey, P. (2020). Implications of the COVID-19
pandemic for Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 32(6), 426–439.
https://doi.org/10.1017/s095410202000053x
IAATO. (2022). Report of the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators 2021-22. Information Paper for the XLIV
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
Mayer, M., Lange, B., Lucke, K., Schuster, M., von Juterzenka, K.,
Reinthaler, H.-P. (2017). Nutzung aktueller Erkenntnisse aus der
Polarforschung für die Antarktis-Umweltschutzaufgaben- UBA-Texte
76/2017.
Trathan, P. N., García-Borboroglu, P., Boersma, D., Bost, C.-A.,
Crawford, R. J. M., Crossin, G. T., Cuthbert, R. J., Dann, P., Davis,
L. S., De La Puente, S., Ellenberg, U., Lynch, H. J., Mattern, T., Pütz,
K., Seddon, P. J., Trivelpiece, W., & Wienecke, B. (2015). Pollution,
habitat loss, fishing, and climate change as critical threats to
penguins. Conservation Biology: The Journal of the Society for
Conservation Biology, 29(1), 31–41. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cobi.12349
Verbitsky, J. (2018). Ecosystem services and Antarctica: The time
has come? Ecosystem Services, 29, 381–394. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.10.015
Vöneky, S., Wisehart, D. (2016). Analyse und Weiterentwicklung
vorhandener rechtlicher Instrumente – Handlungsbedarf zur
Anpassung an die aktuellen Entwicklungen des Tourismus in der
Antarktis. UBA-Texte 05/2016.
Walton, D. W. H., & Shears, J. (1994). The Need for Environmental
Monitoring in Antarctica: Baselines, Environmental Impact
Assessments, Accidents and Footprints. International Journal of
Environmental Analytical Chemistry, 55(1-4), 77–90. https://
doi.org/10.1080/03067319408026210 https://
www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/nutzung-aktueller-
erkenntnisse-aus-der
