The Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Project of the World Climate
Research Programme (WCRP)
The Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Project of the World Climate
Research Programme (WCRP)
Summary
The World Climate Research Programme’s Climate and Cryosphere
(CliC) project is a global community of researchers with expertise
and knowledge of the cryosphere (polar seas, permafrost, snow-
covered land and glaciated regions, including ice sheets and
mountainous areas) and its interactions with the climate system.
Activities span observations, modelling, process understanding,
predictions and projections and cross-cutting activities. Climate
change is affecting Antarctica, and in return Antarctic change is
impacting our planet. Here we present CliC endorsed activities in
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, a better understanding of: (i)
changes to the Antarctic outlet glaciers and ice sheets that have a
direct impact on global sea level rise and (ii) changes in sea-ice
extent that may accelerate surface warming, destabilising ice
shelves leading to rapid and potentially unstoppable loss of up to
one third of the Antarctica’s ice sheets. Moreover sea-ice loss
weakens ocean circulation impacting global heat distribution, and
together with changes in marine biogeochemistry, reduce nutrient
supplies that currently support 75% of global ocean productivity
and the ability of the southern ocean to store atmospheric CO2.
CliC is working closely with its partners to improve knowledge of
these critical Antarctic climate change and ecosystem processes and
related impacts, which are outlined in the new CliC strategic plan.
This work also directly addresses SCAR’s 2022 ACCE Decadal
Synopsis Report which includes policy and research
recommendations that were presented in ATCMXLIV WP30 rev.1
and ATCMXLIV WP31 rev.1 and recognised in ATCM XLIV
Resolution 4 (2022). CliC plans to work with SCAR to provide
regular information and updates to support the Parties in taking
action on mitigation and adaptation.
Introduction
The Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) Core Project of the World
Climate Research Programme (WCRP) co-sponsored by WMO, is a
global community of researchers with expertise and knowledge of
the cryosphere and its interactions with the climate system. CliC
identifies key research questions, priorities, gaps, and challenges
pertaining to the cryosphere and its interaction with the global
climate system and coordinates international activities to promote
activities that address these matters. CliC highlights emerging
issues, facilitates exchanges amongst scientists and relevant external
stakeholders, and promotes international cooperation. The project
also communicates cryosphere-related science to policymakers,
funding agencies, and the general public. To ensure that we are
preparing for the future, CliC also promotes the career development
of Early Career Researchers, through the provision of (normally
annual) research grants.
For the upcoming decade CliC has broadened its vision and mission
to include research that is co-designed and executed with relevant
stakeholders and user communities, while continuing to support
fundamental science research on climate/cryosphere processes. The
CliC Strategic Plan 2022-2031 is a response to an improved
understanding of the cryosphere. It reflects an increased awareness
of the large impact that human activities are having on the planet
and how these changes, in turn, are affecting human and natural
systems. In the cryosphere, the rate of loss of land ice, sea ice, and
permafrost, has rapidly increased over the last few decades and
continues to do so, representing arguably the clearest planetary-
wide response to human-induced global warming.
CliC strives to support a systematic understanding of the cryosphere
and its services by encouraging co-designed research projects
between natural and social scientists, stakeholders and affected
communities. CliC´s new decadal strategy aligns with the vision of
the WCRP Strategic Plan 2019-2028, for “…sound, relevant, and
timely climate science to ensure a more resilient present and
sustainable future for humankind”, and directly addresses the
strategic objective of “bridging climate science and society.” A key
factor in implementing the strategy will be developing strong
partnerships with other organisations (e.g. SCAR) with aligned
priorities.
Below, we describe CliC endorsed activities in Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean that also deliver key information for IPCC
projections
Modelling
The Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison for CMIP6 (ISMIP6) has the
key objective of improving projections of ice mass contribution
from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets to sea level. As
uncertainties in future sea level arise due to both the climate
forcing and the response of the ice sheets, a primary focus for
ISMIP6 was to become better integrated in the CMIP6 initiative.
ISMIP6 became an endorsed activity of CMIP6 in 2015 allowing, for
the first time in CMIP, ice sheets to be considered as a component
of the Earth system. ISMIP, with its partner SCAR-INSTANT, is also
interested in reducing uncertainty through a better understanding
of “low-confidence” processes that may promote instability of the
Antarctic Ice sheet. Contact: Sophie Nowicki, University at Buffalo,
USA (sophien@buffalo.edu).
The aim of the Marine Ice Sheet Ocean Model Intercomparison
Project (MISOMIP) is to address the uncertain role of ocean forcing
on marine-based sectors of both the Greenland and Antarctic Ice
Sheets. These regions have potential for rapid and irreversible
threshold behaviour. This is achieved through nurturing strong
relationships between the ocean and ice-sheet modelling
communities and to further investigate the robustness and biases of
ocean and/or ice-sheet models in a range of Antarctic
environments. Phase 2 of MISOMIP will provide a platform to assess
the ability of ocean models to simulate melt rates for different
realistic forcings and variable cavity geometries and assess the
sensitivity of ice dynamics to various perturbations in a realistic
environment. Contacts: Jan De Rydt, Northumbria University, UK
(jan.rydt@northumbria.ac.uk); Nicolas Jourdain, U. Grenoble,
France (nicolas.jourdain@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr)
The Land Surface, Snow and Soil Moisture Intercomparison Project
(LS3MIP) is an endorsed subproject of CMIP6. The ESM Snow
Model Intercomparison (ESM-SnowMIP) is an extension to LS3MIP
focusing on the evaluation of the representation of snow in global
and dedicated process models. In addition to global land surface
and coupled simulations like LS3MIP, ESM-SnowMIP also includes
site-scale simulations designed to evaluate model performance at
local scales. Contact: Gerhard Krinner, Institut des Géosciences de l
´Environment, France (gerhard.krinner@cnrs.fr)
The Global Scale Glacier Intercomparison Model Project
(GlacierMIP) is a model intercomparison project focusing on all
glaciers in the world outside the ice sheets. It provides a framework
for a coordinated intercomparison of global-scale glacier evolution
models, to foster model improvements and reduce uncertainties in
global glacier projections and related sea-level projections.
Contacts: Regine Hock, University of Oslo, Norway
(regine.hock@geo.uio.no); Ben Marzeion, University of Bremen,
Germany (ben.marzeion@uni-bremen.de)
The Diagnostic Sea Ice Intercomparison Model Project (SIMIP)
contributes to a better understanding of the role of sea ice in the
changing climate of our planet. They coordinate large-scale model
simulations and facilitate the exchange of ideas between modelers
and observers through joint workshops. As part of this effort, the
Diagnostic Sea Ice Model Intercomparison Project (SIMIP) facilitates
process-based model analysis of sea ice in CMIP6, through an
updated variable request, community coordination, and workshops.
SIMIP is an endorsed diagnostic MIP for CMIP6 that defines a list of
variables to understand the evolution of sea ice in any experiment
using the sea ice model as part of CMIP6. Contacts: Alexandra Jahn,
University of Colorado, Boulder, USA
(Alexandra.Jahn@Colorado.edu); Dirk Notz, MPI/University of
Hamburg, Germany (dirk.notz@mpimet.mpg.de)
The Polar Climate Predictability Initiative (PCPI) is an initiative of
WCRP, whose goal is to improve the understanding of the
predictability of climate and the effect of human activities on
climate. The PCPI focuses on polar regions and their role in the
global climate system and aims to improve predictability of climate
on all time scales by improving our understanding of the underlying
physical mechanisms and their representation in climate models.
The PCPI is supported by both CliC and the WCRP Stratosphere-
troposphere Processes And their Role in Climate Project (SPARC)
Core Project. Contacts: Marilyn Raphael, UCLA, USA
(raphael@geog.ucla.edu), Julie Jones, University of Sheffield, UK
(julie.jones@sheffield.ac.uk)
Observations, process understanding and cross-disciplinary
activities
The SCAR/CliC Antarctic Sea Ice Processes and Climate (ASPeCt) is
an expert group on multi-disciplinary Antarctic sea ice zone
research with the key objective of improving our understanding of
the Antarctic sea ice zone and its response to climate change. This is
achieved through focused field programs, the systematic monitoring
of the ice cover, and the analysis of remote sensing and numerical
modelling tools. Contacts: Marilyn Raphael, UCLA, USA
(Raphael@geog.ucla.edu); Petra Heil, Antarctic Climate and
Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, Australia
(petra.heil@utas.edu.au)
The goal of the Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea Level (ISMASS)
project is to promote research on the estimation of the mass balance
of ice sheets and its contribution to sea level, to facilitate
coordination among the different international efforts focused on
this field of research, to propose directions for future research in
this area, to integrate observations and modelling efforts, as well as
the distribution and archiving of the corresponding data, to attract
a new generation of scientists into this field of research, and to
contribute to the dissemination, to society and policymakers, of the
current scientific knowledge and the main achievements in this field
of science. Contact: Heiko Goelzer, NORCE and Bjerknes Centre for
Climate Research, Norway (heig@norceresearch.no)
The CliC/CLIVAR (Climate and Ocean – Variability, Predictability,
and Change Core Project of WCRP) /SCAR Southern Ocean Regional
Panel (SORP) serves as a forum for the discussion and
communication of scientific advances on the understanding of
climate variability and change in the Southern Ocean. It also
advises CLIVAR, CliC, and SCAR on progress, achievements, new
opportunities, and impediments in internationally coordinated
Southern Ocean research. Contacts: Torge Martin, GEOMAR,
Germany (tomartin@geomar.de), Ariann Purich, Monash U,
Australia (ariaan.purich@monash.edu)
Polar CORDEX is a CliC/CORDEX endorsed activity that aims at
improving the understanding of polar processes and the generation
of regional climate change projections in the Arctic and Antarctica.
Contact: Andrew Orr, British Antarctic Survey, UK
(anmcr@bas.ac.uk). See accompanying IP.
The Biogeochemical Exchange Processes at Sea Ice Interface
(BEPSII) is an endorsed SOLAS-CliC forum as well as a SCAR Action
Group. BEPSII coordinates community activities linked to the
biogeochemistry of sea ice-influenced environments, involving
about 120 scientists. Contact: Jackeline Stefens, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands (j.stefels@rug.nl); Nadja Steiner,
Fisheries and Oceans Canada (Nadja.Steiner@dfo-mpo.gc.ca)
Governance
CliC activities are overseen by a Scientific Steering Group (SSG)
which has the overall responsibility for planning and guiding the
work of the Core Project. The SSG is composed of international
experts spanning all cryosphere research fields, with a balance in
the representation of gender, career stage and geographical
distribution. An International Project Office (currently moving to
the University of Massachusetts Amherst in the US) supports the
SSG and the wider CliC community in their work and is the main
point of contact for CliC.
Recommendations
WCRP-CliC supports SCAR in its efforts to encourage CEP Members
and Antarctic Treaty Parties (as outlined in ATCMXLIV WP042) to:
continue to implement the 2022 ACCE Decadal Synopsis
recommendations with urgency (particularly in communicating
internationally the critical importance of meeting and exceeding
targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, and the need
for resources to address research priorities to understand global
impacts, as well as impacts on Antarctica (IP 95 Understanding
Future Sea-level Change Around Antarctica)
continue to engage with the research community to deepen
understanding of the key messages emerging from research as well
as to determine what science and what types of information will
best support the development of robust policies and actions;
consider how to provide regular assessments of progress against the
recommendations and priority actions identified by the 2022 ACCE
Decadal Synopsis and the 2023 joint CEP/ATCM session on climate
change.
Further details
Contact: International Project Office at info@climate-cryosphere.org
Web: www.climate-cryosphere.org
