Deployment of the first permanent Argentine Volcano Monitoring
Network in Deception Island
Deployment of the first permanent Argentine Volcano Monitoring
Network in Deception Island
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
In this document we provide a summary of the efforts made by a
consortium of Argentinian institutions to install the first permanent
Argentine volcano monitoring network in Deception Island, one of
the most active volcanoes in Antarctica. The deployment of the
monitoring network will improve our understanding of this volcanic
system and contribute to forecast future volcanic events. This is
relevant from a scientific point of view, but more importantly
because Deception Island receives thousands of visitors every
summer. This network will contribute to the volcanic risk
management of the island and the Antarctic region, providing early
warning to people in the proximity of the island, as well as to air
and naval traffic.
Background
Volcanic activity in southern South America is principally linked to
the Andean volcanic arc along the Pacific margin. In this tectonic
setting, the subduction of the Nazca and Antarctic plates beneath
the South American plate controls the occurrence of volcanism,
which is distributed in three volcanic zones. Further south, in the
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic areas, tectonic plates also conjugate to
constitute two zones with active volcanism: 1) South Sandwich
Islands, with several active volcanoes and, 2) South Shetland Island,
with Penguin, Bridgeman and Deception Island as the main active
volcanic structures (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Simplified regional tectonic map and location of the South
Shetland Islands (Taken from Geyer et al. 2019)
Deception Island is located in the South Shetland Islands
archipelago, northeast of the Antarctic Peninsula, and is considered
one of the most active volcanoes in Antarctica. It is a < 750,000
years old horseshoe-shaped shield volcano of basaltic to andesitic
composition, with a below-sea-level diameter of 25 km and an
above-sea-level diameter of around 13 km. A sea-flooded depression
known as Port Foster, –related to the partial collapse of the volcano
edifice–, occupies the central part of the island.
Deception Island eruptive record includes more than 20 volcanic
events during the Holocene. The last eruptions of this volcano
occurred in 1967, 1969, and 1970 and generated important impacts
within the island, including the destruction of the British and
Chilean stations and forcing the
evacuation of the Argentine station. Also, volcanic unrest episodes
in 1992, 1999, and 2014–2015 demonstrated that the occurrence of
future volcanic activity is a valid and pressing concern for scientists,
technical and logistic personnel, and also tourists, who visit or work
on or near the island. Currently, the island shows fumarolic activity,
thermal anomalies, active deformation processes and seismic
activity.
Volcanic eruptions are generally preceded by signs of “unrest” that
can be detected by instrumental monitoring networks. Some of
these signals, such as earthquakes, increased degassing, or changes
in hydrothermal systems, can be detected by local communities or
casual observers. However, not all the pre-eruptive signals are so
evident and not all the episodes of unrest lead to an eruption. These
are the reasons why qualified scientific-technical institutions must
analyze the scenario, deal with uncertainties and advise civil
authorities. This can be particularly challenging if instrumentation
is limited, as was demonstrated in several eruptions that took place
in different parts of the world during the last decades. This way,
volcano observatories are institutions or specific areas within
organizations (Geological Surveys, Universities, Research
institutions, Meteorological Offices) whose primary responsibility is
to monitor volcanoes considered active, producing early warnings
for authorities and population, with the goal of saving human lives
and mitigate the impacts over infrastructure and regional
economies.
The Geological and Mining Survey of Argentina (SEGEMAR)
In Latin America, until a few years ago Argentina and Bolivia where
the only two countries with active volcanoes in their territory that
did not have permanent volcano observatories. This was
particularly relevant considering Argentina is among the top 10
countries with the most active volcanoes in the world, as well as
having been affected by repeated eruptions in the last century
(Quizapu 1932; Láscar 1986–1993; Hudson 1991; Chaitén 2008;
Planchón-Peteroa 1991, 2011, 2018; Cordón Caulle 2011, Copahue
2012; Calbuco 2015), which brought about serious damage on
thousands of people and economic and material losses valued in
millions of US dollars, specially hindering civil aviation.
It was not until 2017 that the activities of the “Observatorio
Argentino de Vigilancia Volcánica” (OAVV) from the Geological and
Mining Survey of Argentina (SEGEMAR) officially began. The
observatory was created as a specialized area within SEGEMAR
dedicated to the study and monitoring of active volcanoes that may
affect Argentine territory. Currently, OAVV is the youngest volcano
observatory in Latin America -and probably the world- and the
official institution in Argentina that issues volcanic alerts.
Since then, OAVV has grown over time, becoming operational in
2019, and so far has already deployed 4 of the 10 planned
monitoring networks, including Copahue, Lanín, Laguna del Maule,
and Planchón Peteroa volcanoes. Up to this moment, the
observatory is formed by a multidisciplinary team of 10 people,
including geologist, geophysicist, geodesists, and electronic and
computer engineers, that use a standard suite of geophysical,
geochemical, and visual techniques employed at observatories
around the world to monitor active volcanoes in the country. In
2023 the OAVV plans to expand its staff to 19 professionals.
Volcanic monitoring in Deception Island
Volcano monitoring instrumentation in Deception Island began with
the installation of the first seismometer in 1950, which operated in
the basement of the then Argentine Naval Station. Since 1985,
several research projects entailing Argentine and Spanish
collaboration have deployed temporal monitoring stations and
arrays to characterize seismo-volcanic activity on the island. Efforts
have also been made to study the geological structure of the island
in order to understand the dynamics of the volcano and guarantee
volcanic surveillance during the summer months, when personnel
are stationed on the island.
During the 1991-1992 summer seismic crises, volcanic surveillance
allowed the evacuation of all staff from the island. In 1993, the
Deception Volcano Observatory (OVD) was created as a
collaboration between the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA), the
University of Buenos Aires (UBA), the University of La Plata (UNLP)
and the National Museum of Natural Science (MNCN)
from the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC). In 1998-1999
another seismic crisis was recorded, demonstrating the temporal
and spatial migration of the seismic sources from greater depths in
the center of Port Foster to areas closer to the surface.
In 2015, over a period of 5 months, there were a series of seismic
swarms from deep sources (<10 km) of large magnitudes, with
epicenters distributed all around the island. These swarms
evidenced the presence and displacement of large volumes of
magma to the shallower part of the volcanic edifice.
In 2020, the Geographical Institute of Spain (IGN) installed the first
permanent online seismic station on the island.
In 2022, by an agreement between SEGEMAR and the Argentine
Antarctic Institute (IAA), a decision was made to install the first
permanent online monitoring network on Deception Island. The
project was presented as part of Argentina’s Annual Antarctic Plan
2022-2023.
In this context, during March 2023 a team of professionals from
OAVV installed a total of 4 multiparametric monitoring stations
(Figure 2), including 3 broadband seismic stations, 2 Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS), 1 IP Camera, and 1 satellite
node.
Figure 2: OAVV-SEGEMAR Pendulum Cove (PEN) multiparametric
volcano monitoring station.
The network is already working, allowing us to monitor the volcano
in real-time, 365 days a year, and issue volcanic alerts and also
Volcanic Activity Reports (Figure 3). Besides, a new section within
the OAVV online website was created where online monitoring
information can be found (in Spanish only): https://
oavv.segemar.gob.ar/monitoreo-volcanico/isla-decepcion/
Finally, to complement this and also to support and strengthen
scientific cooperation within the Antarctic continent between
Argentine and Spain, SEGEMAR and IGN Spain will sign a
cooperation agreement, with the support from the Antarctic
Institutions from both countries, with the goal of creating a joint
volcano monitoring network in Deception Island and to coordinate
volcanic risk management activities on the island.
Figure 3: Deception Island Argentine permanent volcano monitoring
network.
