Improving Tools for Preventing and Responding to Sexual Assault
and Sexual Harassment in the U.S. Antarctic Program
Improving Tools for Preventing and Responding to
Sexual Assault and Sexual Harassment in the U.S. Antarctic Program
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
The U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) consists of a range of research
environments – from deep field camps to more populous stations
with participants from many institutions and organizations. These
diverse situations and populations present unique challenges for
preventing and responding to sexual assault and sexual harassment.
Recently, USAP enlisted subject matter experts to assess the current
state of sexual harassment and sexual assault in the USAP
Community. The assessment concluded that sexual assault, sexual
harassment, and stalking are ongoing, continuing problems for our
deployers. Since receiving the report, NSF has launched a broad,
strategic effort to strengthen prevention and response tools not only
for USAP but also for all research locations where work is funded by
the National Science Foundation (NSF).
Background
NSF has Agency-wide policies and requirements to promote
research environments that are free from sexual assault and sexual
harassment. In 2018, NSF published its expectations for the
community. A major component of this notice was the
establishment of new policies requiring scientific grant awardee
organizations to report when Principal Investigators (PI) or Co-PIs
working on NSF-funded research are placed on administrative
leave; PIs or Co-PIs are subjected to administrative actions as a
result of investigations of sexual or other forms of harassment; or
there are findings or determinations by the organizations that PIs or
Co-PIs engaged in sexual assault, sexual harassment, or other forms
of harassment. In addition, NSF established a secure online portal
for awardee institutions to submit harassment notifications. At the
same time, NSF’s Office of Polar Programs took additional steps in
the form of strengthening the language in the Polar Code of
Conduct and increasing communication on harassment issues and
reporting mechanisms through briefings, training, and postings at
stations and on vessels.
Building on these efforts, OPP enlisted external subject-matter
experts in 2021 to examine sexual harassment and sexual assault in
the USAP Community. Their findings and recommendations were
detailed in the recently released Sexual Assault Harassment
Prevention and Response (SAHPR) Needs Assessment Report and
Implementation Plan. The Report presented both serious concerns
and a clear path for improvement.
The Report’s key conclusions included:
Multi-jurisdictional enforcement mechanisms across USAP create
gaps that hinder response and prevention efforts;
There is a lack of trust among the contractor community in their
employer’s human resource organizations;
Reporting and response mechanisms to NSF are inadequate;
Prevention infrastructure, including training, clear mechanisms for
reporting, and evaluation of the efficacy of training and reporting is
lacking; and
There is significant motivation within the USAP Community to
engage in prevention efforts, despite currently insufficient
opportunities to do so
Immediate Improvements
At the beginning of the 2022-2023 summer research season, NSF
identified key action items through the NSF SAHPR Action Plan.
The Plan ensured that there was a cross-agency effort to address the
immediate concerns highlighted in the Report. The highlights of
that Plan included obtaining input from the community to inform
NSF’ next steps, improving training, and providing additional
resources for support, communication, and reporting.
NSF held seven in-person listening sessions at McMurdo Station that
included 160 deployers. Another six listening sessions were held
virtually, open to current and former participants. Additionally, NSF
leadership held two town halls for the USAP Community on the
research and working environment. Each of these engagements
expanded NSF’s understanding about individual experiences
regarding sexual assault and sexual harassment in USAP, and
community members provided meaningful recommendations for
improvement, some of which were implemented immediately. For
example, additional training for supervisors was immediately
provided, and other informational materials were distributed.
NSF also implemented more than 70 bystander intervention training
sessions this past season that reached over 1,200 deployers. 
Sessions focused on scenarios tailored to the USAP environment,
and key messages from the training were reinforced throughout the
season through message boards and emails.
NSF deployed a confidential, Victim Advocate for the first time this
past season. The Victim Advocate was available to provide
confidential support, safety planning, and advocacy to the USAP
community on issues related to sexual harassment and assault. The
advocate was based in McMurdo Station for the austral summer but
available to any deployer by phone and email, and they continue to
provide remote support to all deployers during the austral winter.
NSF also added SAHPR intranet pages at the stations to provide
easy access to key documents and contact information in one place,
and the Victim Advocate contact information was added to the
“emergency contacts” page on the intranet and on postings around
station. The response from community members was positive.
To increase NSF’s oversight of incidents of sexual misconduct,
changes were made to contract terms for the USAP operations
contractor to include additional reporting on contractor and
subcontractor investigations of sexual misconduct, and additional
criteria for screening potential employees on the contract.
NSF put in place some additional security measures, including
increased satellite communication devices for all field teams, the
addition of door viewers to all lodging rooms, and the ability for all
lodging room doors to be locked from the outside as well as the
inside at every station.
A new SAHPR Office was established at NSF to serve as a
centralized communication point for sexual assault and harassment
matters, ensuring issues are appropriately referred and providing
access to resources and guidance to help prevent and address sexual
assault and harassment.  The office is also responsible for ensuring
the timely, appropriate, and transparent processing and resolution
of USAP sexual assault and harassment complaints and reports.
Individuals who wish to report sexual assault or sexual harassment
can reach the NSF SAHPR Office via its secure inbox at
saferscience@nsf.gov. Individuals can also contact the NSF SAHPR
Office with questions about or suggestions for NSF’s SAHPR efforts.
To combat challenges related to the many different employers and
institutions involved in USAP, the SAHPR Office established
executive-level points of contact at USAP federal and military
partners in addition to existing contacts for academic institutions
and contractors. This is to build collaborative relationships with all
USAP partners and ensure clear communication as NSF continues to
build upon the SAHPR program.
Recently, the SAHPR Office stood up a 24/7 crisis hotline for USAP
participants to provide immediate crisis intervention and emotional
support to survivors of sexual assault and sexual
harassment. Services are available via phone, text, and online chat
as an additional resource for the community. 
Path Forward
Actions implemented to date are just the beginning and much work
remains. Additional steps are planned in three main areas;
continuing to expand and improve training, conducting an annual
survey to establish incidence and prevalence baseline data, and re-
evaluating NSF’s on-ice staffing posture.
The bystander intervention training provided last year was well
received, and NSF is continuing to improve that content and roll out
new courses. The current focus is on developing a supervisor
“toolkit” that will include training in how to receive a complaint of
sexual misconduct, how to include SAHPR-related messages in pre-
job safety meetings, and how to develop an individual safety plan
when necessary.
While the 2021 Needs Assessment Report provided important
information, it was not designed to pinpoint the incidence or
prevalence of sexual misconduct across USAP. To measure the
impact our SAHPR efforts have on the USAP Community, we need a
baseline against which to monitor. A detailed survey has been
developed for this purpose, and it will be implemented in July and
August for input from current and former deployers.
The SAHPR Needs Assessment Report and feedback received during
subsequent listening sessions indicate a need for NSF to increase its
on-site presence at our Antarctic stations. Over the years, the
number of deployed NSF federal staff has decreased to a level that
does not provide adequate engagement with and oversight of
station operations. In addition, our law enforcement capabilities
across USAP have always been limited and may need to be
expanded. As the next season approaches, NSF is re-evaluating these
two factors for potential future changes.
