Current initiatives for a structured sample and data collection of
envi-ronmental contamination in the Ant-arctic
Current initiatives for a structured sample and data collection of
environmental contamination in the Antarctic
Summary
The purpose of this paper is to outline the progress that has been
made in establishing an international network – following ATCM
XLIV – aimed at promoting and coordinating a more structured
sample and data collection of environmental contamination in the
Antarctic. This paper follows up on the results of the international
Expert Workshop ‘Act now – Legacy and Emerging Contaminants in
Polar Regions’, co-hosted in January 2022 by the German
Environment Agency (UBA) and the Institute of Coastal
Environmental Chemistry, Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon (Geesthacht,
Germany). In order to support information exchange on
environmental contamination we have summarised priority actions
and a conceptual framework across stakeholders in the so-called
Berlin Statement (Ebinghaus et al. 2023), that is now open for
supporting signatures.
Background
Antarctica is considered as one of the last pristine regions of the
planet with limited anthropogenic activity and emissions. But there
is growing evidence that the Antarctic environment is increasingly
exposed to chemical stressors. Antarctica is impacted by global
issues such as climate change and long-range transport of
chemicals. Furthermore, expanding tourism and research activities
(including logistical activities serving their conduct or preparation)
can affect the pristine environment. Serious threats to the
conservation of the Antarctic environment do exist, including
chemical contamination related to various sources, such as research
stations, scientific activities, tourism and fishing operations, vessels
incidents, and long-range transport of legacy pollutants and
contaminants of emerging concern (CEC) from mid-latitudes. As a
result, the presence of persistent organic pollutants (POPs), trace
elements and emerging contaminants have been reported in
Antarctica for several years (ATCM XXXI/IP097, ATCM XXXII/
IP069, ATCM XXXVII/IP008, ATCM XL/IP022, ATCM XLIII IP021,
Xie et al. 2022). To address this threat of environmental
contamination, SCAR as well as Member States introduced potential
approaches for a more coordinated research and a more structured
data sampling and collection (ATCM XLIII/ IP137, ATCM XLIV/
IP007 rev1, ATCM XLIV/WP011rev1). During last year’s ATCM,
CEP acknowledged the value of enhancing collective efforts towards
the development of a structured sample database of environmental
contamination and encouraged Member States to intensify
cooperation between all stakeholders to initiate a more structured
sample and data collection of environmental contamination in the
Antarctic (ATCM XLIV Final Report).
Berlin Statement on Legacy and Emerging Contaminants in Polar
Regions
The Berlin Statement (Ebinghaus et al. 2023) is the outcome of the
international expert Workshop ”Act now – Legacy and Emerging
Contaminants in Polar Regions” convened in Geesthacht, Germany,
on 25-26 January 2022 https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/
dokument/act-now-legacy-emerging-contaminants-in-polar with
international experts in contaminant research, regulatory chemical
assessment and monitoring in polar regions, Environmental
Specimen Banks, and information and data platforms. The
statement addresses urgent chemical pollution issues in the polar
regions and provides recommendations for improving screening,
monitoring, risk assessment, research cooperation, and open data
sharing to provide environmental policy makers and chemicals
management decision-makers with relevant and reliable
contaminant data to better protect the polar environments. To
achieve this, the authors
have identified a number of priority actions, primarily in
management and research, and recommend their facilitation
through a multi-stakeholder co-development framework for both
polar regions. The Berlin Statement addresses the following priority
topics: contaminant screening; source elucidation, monitoring and
assessment of contaminants; cooperation between scientists with a
focus on the science–policy interface; concepts, opportunities and
technical solutions for data-sharing; and the provision of tailored
scientific information for policy makers (Fig.1).
Fig 1: Conceptual framework across stakeholders with priority
actions (Ebinghaus et al. 2023)
Conclusions and next steps
A harmonized and multidisciplinary science-based approach across
stakeholders is urgently needed for a comprehensive understanding,
prevention, and the reduction of environmental contamination in
the Antarctic. A conceptual framework across stakeholders has now
been published in the Berlin Statement on Legacy and Emerging
Contaminants in Polar Regions. It is our hope, that the Berlin
Statement will serve as a nucleus for the development of a network
that will be fostered and expanded to create a regular platform for
polar collaborations on environmental contamination. To facilitate
support for the Berlin Statement by scientists, regulators, decision-
makers and interested laymen, we established an internet webpage
that provides more insight and allows signing the Berlin Statement.
Interested and supporting Treaty Parties are encouraged to read and
sign the Berlin Statement via the following link: https://
www.coastalpollutiontoolbox.org/.
Germany underlines the intention to cooperate in order to enable a
more structured sample and data collection of environmental
contamination in the Antarctic. As next steps, we will report on a
follow-up project with international partners such as environmental
specimen banks and National Antarctic Programmes to compile and
make available further data.
References
ATCM XXXI IP097, Antarctic Persistent Organic Pollutants Notes on
a Request from the Stockholm Convention.
ATCM XXXII IP069, SCAR report on Persistent Organic Pollutants in
the Antarctic: An Update
ATCM XXXVII IP008, Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in
Admiralty Bay - Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA 1):
Bioaccumulation and temporal trend.
ATCM XL IP022, Trace element contamination and availability
within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
ATCM XLIII IP021, A step towards a structured sample and data
collection of environmental contamination in the Antarctic.
ATCM XLIII IP137, SCAR report on Persistent Organic Chemicals in
Antarctica: A horizon scan of priority challenges.
ATCM XLIV IP007, Update on current initiatives for a more
structured sample and data collection of environmental
contamination in the Antarctic.
ATCM XLIV WP011, Further steps towards a structured sample and
data collection of environmental contamination.
ATCM XLIV Final Report, Final report of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting 2022, 287pp.
Ebinghaus R., Barbaro E., Bengtson Nash S., de Avila C., de Wit
C.A., Dulio V., Felden J., Franco A., Gandrass J., Grotti M., Herata
H., Hughes K.A., Jartun M., Joerss H., Kallenborn R., Koschorreck
J., Küster A., Lohmann R., Wang Z., MacLeod M., Pugh R., Rauert
C., Slobodnik J., Sühring R., Vorkamp K., Xie Z. (2023). Berlin
Statement on Legacy and Emerging Contaminants in Polar Regions.
Chemosphere 327 (2023) 138530, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.chemosphere.2023.138530.
Xie Z., Zhang P., Wu Z., Zhang S., Wei L., Mi L., Kuester A.,
Gandrass J., Ebinghaus R., Yang R., Wang Z., Mi W. (2022). Legacy
and emerging organic contaminants in the polar regions. Science of
The Total Environment, 155376, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2022.155376.
