Japan's Antarctic Research Highlights 2022 - 23
Japan's Antarctic Research Highlights 2022 - 23
Summary
Among various research activities carried out by the Japanese
Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE) in the Japanese Antarctic
Syowa Station area, three topics are introduced; (1) Year of Polar
Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH); (2)
Reconstruction of East Antarctic ice sheet fluctuations and rapid ice
sheet melting mechanisms; (3) Elucidation of the mechanisms of sea
ice fluctuations in the ice edge, the pack ice zone, and the fast ice.
1. Introduction
The headquarters of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
(JARE), Japan's national Antarctic program, was established in
1955 by the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (now the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, or
MEXT). The headquarters comprises departments and agencies of
various government ministries, including the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defense;
the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism; and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. The scientific
research and observation programs of JARE are considered and
adopted as midterm research plans at general meetings of the
headquarters.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from
scientific projects carried out by overwintering and summer
members of the 63rd and 64th JAREs, respectively, at and around
Syowa Station (69° 00′ S, 39° 35′ E) during the 2022 - 23 season.
The JARE 63rd wintering team conducted as many year-round
science projects at Syowa Station as in previous winters. The JARE
64th summer activities in the 2022-23 Antarctic season almost
returned to the pre-pandemic level. The following WEB (in
Japanese) displays a summary of those activities. https://
www.nipr.ac.jp/antarctic/jare/topics63-64.html
2. Selected Research Highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by JARE 63rd
overwintering team at and around Syowa Station. Seasonal
observations are also carried out by summer expedition personnel
aboard the Shirase for oceanographic observations and in the
vicinity of Syowa Station. In addition, the small seasonal team was
deployed by the air bridge. After completing the appropriate MIQ,
all expeditioners departed to the Antarctic, and no COVID-19 case
was reported throughout the 2022-23 Antarctic summer season.
2.1 Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere: YOPP-SH
The World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) has been working
on a polar forecasting project since 2013 to observe and study polar
meteorology and oceanography in order to improve forecasts of
climate, weather and sea ice conditions in the Antarctic and Arctic,
where rapid environmental changes are occurring. 2022 was the
second Year Of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere
(YOPP-SH) planned in the Polar Prediction Project (PPP). During
the intensified observation period, more high-precision
meteorological sondes were deployed from stations and vessels in
the Southern Hemisphere high latitudes, including many Antarctic
stations, to capture significant precipitation events during the
winter months. At Syowa Station, the JARE
63rd wintering team conducted high-precision meteorological
observations up to four times daily during the 2022 winter.
More reliable predictions of Antarctic ice sheet mass loss and sea-
level rise due to global warming are required. It is now known that
significant precipitation events, which occur only a few times a
year, contribute significantly to maintaining the mass of the
Antarctic ice sheet. The enhanced observations will improve the
accuracy of our understanding and forecasting capabilities for such
phenomena. As a result, more accurate future predictions of
Antarctic ice sheet mass changes will be possible
Figure 1. YOPP-SH Radiosonde Sites（Winter TOPs） (left) and
Ballon launching during Blizzard(right).
2.2. Reconstruction of East Antarctic ice sheet fluctuations and
rapid ice sheet melting mechanisms
As the advance party of the JARE 64th, a team entered Antarctica
earlier than the main body of the JARE 64th expedition team by air
and conducted coring of sea and lake sediments (Fig. 2). In
addition, the team mapped bottom topography using an ROV from
sea and lake ice before the summer melting in the vicinity of
Langhovde and Ongul Island. After the arrival of the Shirase,
onshore sediments coring using a newly introduced boring machine
and glacial topographic surveys and rock sample collection were
carried out.
The project aims to reconstruct the changes in the Antarctic ice
sheet since the last interglacial period about 120,000-130,000 years
ago and to elucidate the mechanisms of these changes. The team
successfully collected valuable sediment and rock samples from
land, lakes and shallow waters. The samples collected were brought
back to Japan for laboratory analysis and data analysis to
reconstruct past Antarctic ice sheet fluctuations in detail and to
elucidate the mechanisms behind the rapid and large-scale melting
of the Antarctic ice sheet. Progress in this research is expected to
lead to more accurate predictions of Antarctic ice sheet melting and
sea-level rise in the near future.
Figure 2. Coring of lake sediments on the ice.
2.3. Elucidation of the mechanisms of sea ice fluctuations in the ice
edge, the pack ice zone, and the fast ice
It is now known that in Lutzow-Holm Bay, where the Syowa Station
is located, sea ice attached to the land collapses every few decades
and flows out to the north. One of the causes of this sea ice break-
up is thought to be swells generated by strong winds in the
southern hemisphere, which penetrate the sea ice and shake the
thick ice. This study will measure such waves travelling under the
sea ice. In addition, by clarifying the relationship between the ice
melting process and the difficulty of navigation based on the past
navigation records of the icebreaker Shirase, the possibility of
shortening the steaming time to Syowa Station by selecting an
appropriate route will be examined
The JARE 64th summer Expedition carried out various
observations, such as; ice thickness measurements by EM
(electromagnetic induction ice thickness gauge), wave and seaice
measurements by the stereo camera, seawater spray measurements
by sea spray meter, and deploying wave buoys on fast ice and in the
pack ice (Fig. 3). This observation is designed to measure the
movement of the in fast ice the Lutzow-Holm Bay and drift ice and
the swell penetration (from the ice edge through the pack ice zone
and to the fast ice) that leads to the break-up of the fast ice. In
addition, the relationship between Shirase's ice navigation
performance and ice conditions will be clarified in the future. In
particular, knowledge of the causes and responses to besetting in
the drift ice zone is expected to be obtained.
Figure 3. The initial position of wave buoys deployed in Lutzow-
Holm Bay and the trajectory of the buoys until the beginning of
March 2023.
