Implementation for Behavioral Protocol in Antarctica and
Monitoring for the Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) Virus
in the Magallanes Region
English version provided by the author
Implementation for Behavioral Protocol in Antarctica and
Monitoring for the Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) Virus
in the Magallanes Region
Summary
The article reports on the occurrence of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza in Chile, with a particular focus on the Magallanes region,
and its impact on wildlife. Considering the dissemination patterns
of the virus towards the southern cone, the study suggests that it
may potentially affect significant bird and marine mammal colonies
in Antarctica. The article also discusses the implementation of a
prevention and control protocol that operators should adhere to in
order to prevent the anthropogenic spread of the virus.
Background
The Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) subtype H5 (H5N1)
has been causing outbreaks in wild birds in the northern
hemisphere since the year 2021. These have become more
pronounced in 2022. The virus has spread rapidly in North
America, with a large number of outbreaks in 2022.
There are currently reports of the virus in South America in
countries such as Ecuador, Peru, and Chile, in the Pacific Ocean
(coastal) sector. To date, Chile has confirmed the presence of the
virus in birds in most of its territory. On December 7, 2022, the first
case of HPAI (H5N1) was reported in the north of the country,
associated with contact with seabird populations along the Peruvian
coast. It is concerning that Peru has confirmed the presence of the
virus and the death of about 800 sea lions in February 2023. We
currently have reports of positive cases throughout Chile, reaching
as far as Tierra del Fuego in April 2023, affecting black-necked
swans (Cygnus melancoryphus). During the month of May, 1,082
dead birds were reported in the Magallanes region, with 17
confirmed cases of HPAI (H5N1). This included domestic chickens
and wild birds.
The detection of the virus in domestic and wild bird populations
presents a disturbing scenario for the Magallanes and Chilean
Antarctica Region, due to the interactions of Antarctic birds that
frequently visit sub-Antarctic areas. These birds may include
Southern Giant Petrels (Macronectes giganteus), Southern Fulmars
(Antarctic Fulmars) (Fulmarus glacialoides), Snowy Sheathbills
(Chionis albus), Cape Petrels (Daption capense), South Polar Skua
(Catharacta maccormicki) and Brown Skua (Catharacta antarctica),
but in low numbers. We have data that proves that giant petrels
breeding in Antarctica visit South America during their breeding
season, and can cross the Drake Passage in less than two days.
Also, populations of black-browed albatrosses (Thalassarche
melanophris) from Diego Ramirez and Tierra del Fuego islands, in
the Admiralty Sound Protected Multi-Use Marine Coastal Area
("Área Marina Costera Protegida de Múltiples Usos - AMCP-MU"),
could be affected by the virus and could travel to Antarctic areas.
Given that the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula
have large colonies of birds and marine mammals, and that current
evidence indicates that the virus is spreading in the Southern Cone,
this region poses a high risk for an HPAI outbreak in the austral
summer of 2022/23, which could affect important colonies of birds
and marine mammals such as fur seals.
Due to the evidence above, Chile has implemented a protocol based
on the recommendations of experts from the Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR), in conjunction with a
group of avian experts from the Chilean National Antarctic Science
Program (PROCIEN). This protocol applies to PROCIEN and
members of National Antarctic Programs from Antarctic Treaty
countries participating in the Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ECA)
as well as to all Armed Forces personnel traveling to Chilean bases
in the Antarctic territory.
Scientific and logistics personnel working in or visiting these
regions should act as if HPAI were to arrive in Antarctica and the
sub-Antarctic islands, and should take appropriate precautions. If an
outbreak is reported, the suggested prevention and control
measures should be applied immediately by operators to prevent
the spread of HPAI.
This document is based on current documentation from Chile's
Agriculture and Livestock Service (SAG), the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC, USA), the World Health Organization
(WHO), the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), the
Antarctic Wildlife Health Working Group (AWHWG) of SCAR, and a
group of experts associated with the National Antarctic Science
Program (PROCIEN) on epidemiological surveillance actions that
South American countries are facing and the concern of the member
countries of the Antarctic Treaty. This protocol will be tailored to
the epidemiological and health situation in Chile and particularly to
the region that includes Magallanes and Chilean Antarctica, at the
time of its application. Leaflet dissemination materials have also
been prepared with the most relevant information on the protocol
(see figures below).
Additional work is underway for a prevention protocol to be
applied in the city of Punta Arenas, and in Puerto Williams, on
Navarino Island. We believe it is vitally important that the gateway
cities apply protocols to prevent the spread of the virus through
human activities. We are also working on the validation of rapid
detection kits to confirm or rule out HPAI-related deaths in bird or
mammal species. This testing is expected for this year and for the
following summer season (2023/2024) in Antarctica.
