The Antarctic Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program: An
Enduring Approach to Maintaining and Modernizing Antarctic
Stations
The Antarctic Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program:
An Enduring Approach to Maintaining and Modernizing Antarctic
Stations
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
The National Science Foundation (NSF) is responsible for managing
research infrastructure that advances science at the frontiers of
many disciplines. The U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) infrastructure
portfolio includes a wide range of research and related facilities,
utilities, equipment, and vehicles, spanning three permanent
stations, seasonal field camps, and three gateway/port locations, all
of which supports science ranging from astronomy to biology. Most
of this infrastructure operates year-round in one of the harshest
environments on Earth. NSF has initiated the Antarctic
Infrastructure Recapitalization (AIR) Program as a strategic
approach to ensure that critical science needs are met through an
enduring and dedicated effort to recapitalize our stations.
Background
If the infrastructure that enables Antarctic science is not kept robust
and efficient, USAP is at risk of losing science capabilities year over
year as facilities, utilities, equipment, and vehicle fleet degrade.
High priority research that is best, or only, achieved in Antarctica
relies on USAP infrastructure and logistics. The table below
illustrates this interconnectedness; it shows the current U.S.
research priorities as recommended by the National Academies and
their associated infrastructure and logistics support components.
Table 1 - Current U.S. research priorities as recommended by the
National Academies and their associated infrastructure and logistics
support components.
U.S. Research Priorities
Why Antarctica?
Supported Science
Infrastructure and Logistics
How much and how fast will sea level rise?
Two of the planet’s three remaining large ice sheets are in
Antarctica; understanding their stability in a warming world is
critical for predicting global sea level rise
Thwaites Glacier International Collaboration
Hercules Dome
McMurdo Dry Valleys Glacial Geomorphology
Airlift and flight operations
Deep field camp support
Transits through McMurdo and South Pole
Communications and data links
Science traverse
Inter-continental and intra-continental cargo transportation
Ice-breaking research vessels
How do Antarctic biota evolve and adapt to changing
environmental conditions?
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean contain unique organisms and
ecosystems that provide early warning
signals for climate change impacts on the biosphere
Palmer and Dry Valleys Long-Term Ecological Research projects
Studies on Southern Ocean productivity, fish ecology and
adaptation, carbon
cycling and biogeochemistry; freshwater and soil microbial ecology
Airlift and flight operations
Field camp support
Transits through McMurdo and Palmer Stations
Communications and data links
Inter-continental and intra-continental cargo transportation
Ice-strengthened research vessels
Small boat operations
How did the universe begin, and what are the underlying physical
laws that govern its evolution and ultimate fate?
Dry and stable atmospheric conditions, uniformity of weather, and
thick ice sheets provide a critical platform for astrophysics research
South Pole Telescope
Ice Cube Neutrino Observatory
Cosmic Microwave Background
Long Duration Balloon projects
Airlift and flight operations
Transits through McMurdo
Long Duration Balloon field site on the Ross Ice Shelf
In-Residence at South Pole station
Communications and data links
South Pole Operations Traverse
Inter-continental and intra-continental cargo transportation
A key objective of the AIR Program is to not only support current
infrastructure, but also take advantage of opportunities where
advancements in infrastructure can open new doors for science
capabilities. Improved data connectivity, as one example, can
facilitate discovery at greater speed and scale and broaden
participation in Antarctic science. As another example, expanded
traverse capabilities can dramatically reduce risk and cost for
science teams accessing deep field locations. The AIR program will
include technical support for needs assessments, cost-benefit
analyses, and preliminary designs, to define transformative
solutions to Antarctica’s unique challenges as an integral part of
infrastructure renewal.
NSF has been working towards a dedicated capital plan and budget
for USAP for many years, and the Antarctic Infrastructure
Modernization for Science (AIMS) project begun in 2019 was an
important first step for infrastructure renewal. The AIMS project
successfully completed demolition of the old warehouses and began
demolishing an old lodging building to make way for new
structures; however, progress was halted in March 2020 by
deployment restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The
extended on-ice work stoppage that followed, as well as disruptions
to workforce and supply chains, forced NSF to re-plan the AIMS
project and to develop a new approach to revitalization of USAP
infrastructure. Two of the five original components of AIMS are
moving forward – the Vehicle Equipment and Operations Center
and a new Lodging Building. Construction on those buildings
resumed during the 2022-2023 field season; remaining scope
elements will form the foundation of the AIR Program.
AIR Program
The AIR Program is a portfolio of investments in facilities and
infrastructure across USAP stations and gateways that will assure
safety, enhance efficiency, increase resilience, and support USAP’s
continued leadership on the continent. The AIR program is
managed as a portfolio of investments guided by Station Master
Plans that have been developed with robust engagement from
across the science community (South Pole Master Planning is
underway). The Station Master Plans define the future of each
station, and the AIR portfolio is the prioritized and time-phased set
of individual activities – e.g., construction projects, renovations,
acquisitions – that are required to achieve that future.
The AIR program encompasses improvements to core infrastructure,
which includes general-purpose facilities, utilities, equipment, and
fleet used across USAP or for general station operations rather than
for a single research activity. Work scope includes construction and
renovation of facilities and utilities, purchase of equipment and
fleet, and demolition/removal of obsolete infrastructure. Activities
are prioritized and regularly assessed across all USAP locations by a
Capital Investment Review Board as conditions and requirements
change, allowing the program to be responsive to the research
community, proactive in mitigating risks, and well-positioned to
take advantage of opportunities.
Path Forward
AIR funds were first approved by the U.S. Congress in 2022, and the
first project to be initiated was the construction of a new,
permanent barge pier for resupply activities at McMurdo Station,
slated to be delivered in 2025. Among the remaining near-term
priorities are remediating degrading infrastructure at South Pole
Station and lifting the buildings out of the accumulating snow,
refreshing and expanding overland traverse equipment, investing in
upgrades to flight-support equipment and facilities, and improving
communications and power generation. As work is further planned,
EIAs will be conducted for scope beyond the boundaries of what has
already been assessed under current environmental documentation.
