Need for Rapid Detection of Avian Influenza Virus in Antarctic
Wildlife
Need for Rapid Detection of Avian Influenza Virus in Antarctic
Wildlife
Summary
Recent global outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza
(HPAI) and its potential impact on Antarctic wildlife call for
proactive monitoring and rapid diagnosis. Birds and seals in the
Antarctic region are at risk, with some species being susceptible to
high mortality rates. Rapid diagnosis tool can be used to detect the
virus in accordance with established protocols by WHO and WOAH.
Prompt response and control measures are crucial to prevent further
transmission, requiring collaboration among the Parties,
particularly between those operating in the Antarctic Peninsula
region.
Background
The Committee for Environmental Protection and the Consultative
Parties have been continuing their efforts to prevent the
introduction of non-natives species including viruses and micro-
organisms in accordance with Annex II (Art. 4, Appendix C) and
Annex III (Art. 2). Discussions on the concerns of infectious disease
outbreaks in Antarctic wildlife had been actively held among the
Committee, SCAR, COMNAP, and relevant organizations (ATCM
XXII-CEP I−IP4, ATCM XXIII-CEP II−WP32, SATCM XII-CEP III
−WP20, ATCM XXIV-CEP IV−WP10, 11, ATCM XXVIII-CEP VIII
−WP28, IP63).
The Antarctic Environments Portal has provided a comprehensive
information summary on Antarctic wildlife diseases and pointed out
the need to establish a structured Antarctic wildlife health
surveillance program, as well as the limited or lack of diagnostic
investigations in the majority of mortality cases (https://
environments.aq/publications/antarctic-wildlife-diseases-2).
Since 2022, thousands of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)
outbreaks have been recorded worldwide, and these outbreaks of
HPAI (H5N1) have raised concern for wildlife conservation. Avian
influenza virus (AIV) can infect birds and mammals, and it is
transmitted through feces, contaminated water and soil, direct
contact and respiratory droplets. Massive mortality associated with
a HPAI in sea lions were reported in Peru (Gamarra-Toledo et al.
2023) and the outbreak of HPAI (H5N1) in non-poultry has also
been detected in Chile and Ecuador (WOAH 2023). The recent
outbreaks in the countries of South America suggest high risk of
introduction to the sub-Antarctic and Antarctic regions. These
regions host a diverse range of bird species and seals which are
exposed to the risk of HPAI. In this context, the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) Expert Group of Birds and
Marine Mammals (EG-BAMM)’s Antarctic Wildlife Health Working
Group (AWHWG) has released a practical guide for operators who
will interact with Antarctic wildlife in August 2022 (Dewar et al.
2022). Given the worldwide reports of outbreaks, particularly in the
Antarctic gateway countries, and SCAR’s high alertness, a proactive
and collaborative approach is required to monitor and reduce the
risk of the HPAI.
Rapid Detection of Avian Influenza Virus and Response
Aquatic birds, Anseriformes (e.g. ducks and geese) and
Charadriiformes (e.g. gulls and terns), are natural reservoir for
avian influenza virus. The HPAI virus can be sufficiently spread by
asymptomatic aquatic birds (Khomenko et al. 2018). However, in
the case of African penguins, they are more susceptible to the HPAI
infection, resulting in high mortality (Mollini et al. 2020). Antarctic
seabirds are taxonomically close to Southern Ocean birds; therefore,
monitoring and rapid diagnosis of AIV infection in unsusceptible as
well as susceptible species are important.
For rapid AIV detection, commercial diagnostic kits can be used for
seabirds and seals in Antarctica, sub-Antarctic regions and
neighbouring areas in accordance with the official diagnostic
protocols established by the World Health Organization (WHO) and
the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH). Monitoring
efforts for early detection of AIV can involve using antigen kits such
as AIV Ag Rapid Kit, which can detect AIV antigen in the fecal
matter from the cloaca and in scattered feces. The diagnostic
reagent in the test kit can detect AIV antigens at 15 minutes after
injection of samples. User manual provided by the manufacturer is
attached to this information paper. The rapid kits will be distributed
free of charge upon request to the monitoring team at the Korea
Polar Research Institute (KOPRI), the lead agency for the Korean
Antarctic Program (please refer to contact information below for
details).
Rapid Diagnosis Procedures
First step
Researchers, experts and trained staffs perform early diagnosis
using the pre-provided AIV Ag rapid kit. The sample to be used is
cloacal swab, oral swab or feces. The attached manual provides
detailed introduction.
Second step
The samples that were diagnosed as positive or suspected to be
positive through the test kit should be sent to King Sejong station or
KOPRI to identify their genotypes and low or high pathogenicity of
AIV. The entire process will take 1 to 2 weeks for the results to be
obtained after the sample arrives.
If any of the samples are positive for the HPAI, the findings will be
immediately notified to the sample collector and the Parties
conducting activities near the sampling site, and will also be
reported to the SCAR’s EG-BAMM and COMNAP.
Response, Prevention and Control
In the event that HPAI is detected in Antarctic wildlife, SCAR
AWHWG Guide should be consulted first. In addition, the following
measures could be suggested:
Control measures
To reduce the risk of further transmission of HPAI, control measures
should be implemented to restrict the movement of people and to
exhaustively disinfect the outer clothing and equipment of
researchers who had been in contact with the infected animals, and
those who are authorized to be close contact with wild animals.
Communication and coordination
It is crucial to communicate the situation to the Antarctic Treaty
parties, coordinate with the relevant stakeholders, and seek expert
advice from organizations such as the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH).
Research and investigation
Further research should be conducted to better understand the
transmission and ecology of HPAI in the Antarctic ecosystem to
inform future prevention and control measures.
Monitoring and surveillance
All wildlife populations in the affected area should be closely
monitored and tested for HPAI to detect any further cases of the
disease and prevent its spread.
Conclusion and Call for Collaboration
Early detection of HPAI in wildlife can help prevent the spread of
the virus, reduce its impact on the Antarctic wildlife populations,
and protect the health of ecologically related animals and humans
that may come into contact with infected animals. In this light, we
propose a collaborative effort among the Parties the members of the
Committee, and especially the operators who are currently
operating in the Antarctic Peninsula region.
Contact Information:
Dr. Sanghee Kim
Molecular Biologist
Division of Life Science, KOPRI
26, Songdomirae-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 21990, Republic of Korea
E-mail: sangheekim@kopri.re.kr
Tel. +82 32 760 5515
Dr. Ji Hee Kim
CEP representative of ROK, Biologist
Division of Life Science, KOPRI.
26, Songdomirae-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 21990, Republic of Korea
E-mail: jhalgae@kopri.re.kr
Tel. +82 32 760 5512
Bibliography
Dewar M. et al. 2022. The risk of avian influenza in the Southern
Ocean. Ecoevorxiv. https://doi.org/10.32942/osf.io/8jrbu
Gamarra-Toledo, V. et al. 2023. First mass mortality of marine
mammals caused by Highly Pathogenic Influenza virus (H5N1) in
South America. bioRxiv.
Khomenko S. et al. 2018. 2016-2018 spread of H5N8 highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in sub-Saharan African. Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Molini, U, Aikukutu, G, Roux, J.P, Kemper, J, Ntahonshikira, C,
Marruchella, G, Khaiseb, S, Cattoli, G, Dundon, W.G. 2020. Avian
Influenza H5N8 Outbreak in African Penguins (Spheniscus
demersus), Namibia, 2019. Journal of Wildlife Disease 56(1) pp.
214-218.
WOAH (World Organisation for Animal Health) 2023. Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI)-Situation report. 11.03.2023.
