Scientific use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in
Antarctica: a review
Scientific use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in
Antarctica: a review
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Germany, United
Kingdom
Summary
The use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) for research
within the Antarctic Treaty area has been noted since the mid-2000
´s. Since then, there have been various policy developments to
minimise the impacts of RPAS use (e.g. the adoption of the
Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (Resolution 4 (2018)). This paper
presents a summary of a recent comprehensive review concerning
the use of RPAS for scientific activities in Antarctica (Pina & Vieira
2022). A total of 190 scientific publications were identified, on a
wide range of research topics, which shows the usefulness of RPAS
for Antarctic research. With an increase in RPAS use for Antarctic
research predicted in the future, we encourage (i) more
collaborative UAVs research, (ii) continued efforts to minimize
associated environmental impacts, (iii) the sharing of research data
and (iv) regularly review and update existing policy documents and
guidelines, as necessary.
Introduction
Remote sensing is a powerful tool that has been used to identify,
map and monitor Antarctic features and processes for nearly a
century. Satellite remote sensing has played a main role for the last
c. five decades, as it is the only way to provide multi-temporal
views at continental scales. However, the emergence of small
consumer-grade Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) over the
past two decades has resulted in the generation of spatial data at
very high resolutions. The scientific benefits of RPAS is evident
through their use in field research activities relevant to a diverse
range of research topics (Mustafa et al. 2018).
In recent years, several guidelines and policy document have been
generated relevant to RPAS:
Parties have prepared practical manuals for RPAS use (e.g., Spain,
New Zealand)(ATCM XXXIX/IP28; ATCM XL/IP27; ATCM XL/IP86);
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
(COMNAP) has produced guidelines on RPAS operational and safety
issues (ATCM XXXIX/WP14; ATCM XLI/IP43);
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
has produced policies for their members’ use of RPAS (ATCM
XXXIX/IP120); and
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has
produced advisory information on recommended precautionary
overflight distances (ATCM XXXVIII/WP27)
Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (Resolution 4 (2018) and Harris et al.
(2019))
Additionally, Germany recommend a substantive revision of the
Environmental Guidelines for operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft
Systems (RPAS) in Antarctica (Resolution 4 (2018)), and
encouraged Parties to carry out more research on the potential
impacts of RPAS on Antarctic wildlife (ATCM XLII/IP10; ATCM
XLIV/WP14). This Information Paper presents a summary of result
generated by a recent comprehensive review of RPAS use for
scientific activities in Antarctica (Pina & Vieira 2022).
Recent developments on RPAS use in Antarctic science
Analysis of 190 scientific publications (published in peer-reviewed
journals and proceedings of conferences) was carried out, that
included a detailed overview of the activities and identified
advantages and difficulties. An evaluation of future opportunities
and challenges for expanding the use of RPAS in Antarctic field
activities was also carried out (Pina & Vieira 2022) (Table 1).
Table 1. Main topics of scientific papers using RPAS in Antarctica
(Pina & Vieira 2022).
The importance of using RPAS to support numerous and diverse
scientific activities in Antarctica becomes clear after analysing the
scientific publications. To some degree, RPAS use has
revolutionized the remote acquisition of data. RPAS use can deliver
high resolution image or other date in a rapid and cost-effective
manner. RPAS are particularly useful in locations that would
otherwise be largely inaccessible or difficult to access. Indeed, many
of the studies were only possible through the use of RPAS-derived
data.
Many of the scientific advances undertaken across Antarctica
resulted from overflight of:
terrestrial areas (e.g., detailed 3D mapping; vegetation mapping,
terrestrial community discrimination and health assessment;
periglacial form characterization, etc.);
ice and snow (e.g., detailed topography, depth and features of ice-
sheets, glaciers and sea-ice);
fauna (counts of penguins, seals and flying birds and detailed
morphometrics); and
areas relevant to atmosphere studies (more detailed meteorological
measurements and air-surface couplings) (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. (a) Location of RPAS surveys in Antarctica reported in
published papers; (b) Insert shows data for northern Antarctic
Peninsula.
Despite the likely low environmental impact of RPAS-based surveys,
the increasing number of applications and increasing levels of use
may lead to impacts in the most sensitive Antarctic ecosystems. We
encourage (i) more international cooperation in RPAS research (ii)
continued efforts to minimize associated environmental impacts,
(iii) the sharing of research data and (iv) regularly review and
update existing policy documents, and guidelines, as necessary.
References
Harris CM, Herata H, Hertel F (2019) Environmental guidelines for
operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS): experience
from Antarctica. Biological conservation 236:521-531
Mustafa O, Barbosa A, Krause DJ, Peter H-U, Vieira G, Rümmler M-
C (2018) State of knowledge: Antarctic wildlife response to
unmanned aerial systems. Polar Biology 41:2387-2398
Pina P, Vieira G (2022) UAVs for Science in Antarctica. Remote
Sensing 14:1610
