Diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic program
Diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic program
Summary
The Australian Government has a steadfast and ongoing
commitment to be at the forefront of efforts to promote gender
equality and social inclusion, in Australia, Antarctica, and in our
international relations. Ensuring diversity and inclusion is centred
in our policy development and decision making, strengthens our
thinking and reflects Australia’s modern society.
Recalling priority item 13 in the ATCM’s Multi-Year Strategic Work
Plan encouraging Parties to “address equality, diversity and
inclusion issues, by promoting full participation of
underrepresented groups in Antarctic science and operations
activities across all Antarctic issues including science, operations,
policy and law”, Australia provides this update on ongoing work to
improve diversity and inclusion in the Australian Antarctic
Program.
As the manager of the Australian Antarctic program (AAP) the
Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) of the Department of Climate
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) is
committed to increasing diversity and inclusion and ensuring that
Australia’s Antarctic workforce in all locations, from employees to
expeditioners feel safe, welcome and respected. AAD is committed
to prioritising action, informed by research and evidence, and
consistent with Australia’s commitment to safety, diversity and
inclusion.
Background
The Australian Antarctic Division of DCCEEW has an important role
to play in delivering world class science and stewardship of
Antarctica. The Australian Antarctic workforce brings together
people from a wide range of Australian and international
organisations, located in head office, on Antarctic research stations,
in the field, and on Australian Antarctic vessels. As with other
Antarctic programs, our Antarctic workplaces are also personal,
living and social places. Australia seeks to ensure that all employees
and expeditioners are safe, welcome and respected, and free from
any discrimination, and is committed to increasing diversity across
all aspects of the AAP.
As advised in 2022, Professor Meredith Nash from the University of
Tasmania was engaged to undertake research into barriers and
challenges for women in the AAP.
Following the release of this research, a workplace culture
consultant (Russell Performance Co.) was appointed by DCCEEW to
advise and provide recommendations on organisational culture, and
on enhancing existing integrity processes and systems. The Russell
Review and DCCEEW’s response plan for implementing
recommendations were published in early April 2023.
The Department is now focusing on implementing the Russell
Review recommendations, and have committed to actions, which
include:
A new Respect and Equality Reform Council to guide and oversee
changes
Reinforcing the obligation to prevent unacceptable behaviour and
workplace harm
Creating a safe reporting culture, ensuring support and no adverse
consequences
Facilities to support “Independent Safe Space”
Additional resources to provide advice, support and incident
response
Raising awareness of the nature and impacts of bullying,
harassment and discrimination
Training for all staff in unconscious bias and bystander obligations
Training for all leaders to address unacceptable behaviour and
provide support
Breaking down barriers to progression based on gender or
background
Antarctic workplace facilities and equipment designed for safety,
inclusion and respect
International collaboration to prevent workplace harm in
Antarctica.
Additionally, Australia is convening eGroup discussion on the
development of a Code of Conduct for meetings of the Commission
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
(CCAMLR), which will assist CCAMLR in enabling events at which
everyone can participate in an inclusive, respectful and safe
environment. The Code of Conduct (the Code) will identify
behaviours expected from all attendees of CCAMLR events, define
unacceptable behaviours, and specify actions to be taken if there
are breaches, or allegations of breaches, of the Code. Australia looks
forward to engaging with CCAMLR Members on the development of
the Code ahead of CCAMLR-42.
In sharing this information with Parties, Australia aims to
encourage the practice of respect, safety and non-discrimination
across Antarctic national programs through encouraging reflection
and openness in breaking biases and challenging behaviours that
exclude or harm individuals.
