Update: Managing the Effects of an-thropogenic noise in the
Antarctic – Steps towards the development of an underwater noise
protection
concept for Antarctica
Update: Managing the Effects of anthropogenic noise in the
Antarctic – Steps towards the development of an underwater noise
protection concept for Antarctica
Introduction
One of the key pollutants created by human activities in the
Antarctic is underwater noise, which is primarily caused by ship
traffic, but also by research activities (e.g. seismic surveys) or
logistic activities. Concern about the potential impacts of
anthropogenic noise in the Southern Ocean was first raised at the
ATCM in 2000. However, the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP) has not discussed impacts of underwater noise in
Antarctic waters since 2007 (see ATCM XXIX WP 41, SCAR Report
on Marine Acoustics and the Southern Ocean or ATCM XXX IP 80,
Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean), though
SCAR provided Updates on Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern
Ocean in 2012 (ATCM XXXV IP 21) and 2019 (ATCM XLII WP 68
and BP 03, also published as SCAR Bulletin 204 (2021).
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(the Protocol) provides for comprehensive protection for native
birds and mammals (Article 3 Annex II to the Protocol) and
specifies that the impacts of activities must undergo a prior
assessment according to Annex I of the Protocol (Article 8 para. 1 of
the Protocol). New tools such as the Animal Audiogram Database
can aid this assessment process (see also ATCM XLIII BP 06).
Nevertheless, gaps in knowledge of the effects of anthropogenic
underwater noise on Antarctic marine mammals make the
assessment of such activities difficult and it is still unresolved,
which noise exposure limits and noise mitigation measures should
be used to ensure the full level of protection for Antarctic marine
mammals and birds pursuant to the Protocol. Further, there is no
common understanding by all Treaty Parties on how to implement
the Protocol when evaluating activities in the Antarctic organised in
their respective country or proceed from their respective territory.
This leads to different assessment methodologies for such activities.
The SCAR Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science Horizon Scan
undertaken in 2014 identified "How will organisms and ecosystems
respond to a changing soundscape in the Southern Ocean?" as one
of the 80 most pressing questions regarding the future of Antarctica.
In its recent update on Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean
(ATCM XLII BP 03 and SCAR Bulletin 204 (2021): ‘Anthropogenic
Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update’), SCAR polled a committee
of experts on the current status of underwater noise as the first step
of a qualitative assessment of the state of knowledge. According to
the SCAR experts, the state of knowledge of potential impacts on
cetaceans (and marine mammals in general) and the understanding
of the sources and types of anthropogenic noise present in Antarctic
marine waters is fair to good.
Germany reported in ATCM XLIII IP 19 on a research project
commissioned by the German Environment Agency (UBA) with
funding from the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation, Nuclear Safety and Consumer Protection that will run
from January 2020 to July 2023. This project was based on a 2018
workshop that aimed to determine the current state of knowledge
on the effects of noise on marine mammals in Antarctica (results
presented in ATCM XLII IP 31 and Erbe et al. 2019). The
participating international experts on marine mammals highlighted
a variety of research and management needs. The management
need with the highest score was a refinement of noise exposure
criteria for the Antarctic: the participating experts recommended
that a series of focused international expert workshops should be
held in order to develop a criteria matrix specifically for Antarctic
marine mammal species and the main anthropogenic sound sources
as the basis for an underwater noise protection concept for
Antarctica.
Short Project Overview
The objective of the current project “Managing the Effects of
anthropogenic noise in the Antarctic – Steps towards the
development of an underwater noise protection concept for
Antarctica” is to develop a criteria matrix that specifically addresses
the 25 native Antarctic marine mammal species and the three main
sources of anthropogenic underwater noise: seismic airguns,
hydroacoustic research equipment and vessels.
To achieve this, a series of short studies was developed to support
two workshops at which the maximum sound exposure values were
developed with the aim to prevent 1) “injury” and 2) “molesting”
by anthropogenic sound. However, the large number of species and
sound sources constituted a considerable challenge, as there are
several uncertainties involved in deriving such thresholds. To
address this, the project used an Expert Elicitation (EE) approach.
EE is a heuristic process typically used in situations with a scarcity
of empirical data but a need for conservation or management
decisions (Martin et al. 2012). It is best suited to situations in which
the state of knowledge will remain too insufficient to support timely
informed assessment and decision making (Morgan 2014). It is most
robust when it builds on the best available research and knowledge.
These EE approaches generate probabilistic distributions which
quantify scientific uncertainty and minimize inadvertent bias in the
elicited information.
The short studies developed covered the sound sources to be
considered, the distribution of marine mammals in the Antarctic, as
well as the current knowledge of auditory injury and behavioural
response to noise. Once these were prepared, two EE workshops
were designed and planned – with global subject knowledge experts
invited to participate. The two 3-day EE workshops took place on
the 20th to 22nd April (auditory injury) and 3rd to 5th May 2022
(behavioural response) in Berlin, Germany. In two preceding
webinars, participants were introduced to the expert elicitation
process and the topics, and the relevant definitions, scenarios and
questions were outlined and discussed. This collaborative approach
ensured experts guided this process with their expert knowledge
and helped ensure the quality of the outcomes. It was decided that
in order to develop a criteria matrix, marine mammal species will
be divided into groups of similar hearing abilities and sensitivities
and considered in hearing groups similar to those proposed by
Southall et al. (2019), and evaluated against the following sound
sources: vessel, seismic airguns and hydroacoustic research
equipment. Noise thresholds were then elicited for:
“injury” being defined as significant (=non-negligible) damage to
the physical integrity or health of an animal, which can be a
temporary/reversable impairment, and
“molesting” being defined as all actions and activities that either
have an impact on individual fitness, a physiological impact or
result in disruption to or interference with an organism’s
behavioural pattern or life processes, or that have a negative impact
on the psychological well-being of the animal.
Finally, new thresholds could be determined which can be used to
support the evaluation of activities in the German permitting
procedure according to the German Act Implementing the Protocol
of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
The results of the project were presented to a panel of experts and
stakeholders in a closing conference on the 14th and 15th March
2023 in Berlin. This process allowed discussion with stakeholders to
help ensure a common understanding and acceptance of the
developed thresholds and the elaboration of the future steps
required to advance this subject area and form the basis for a noise
protection concept in the Antarctic. The project is now being
finalised and the results will then be published in the series
“TEXTE” of the German Environment Agency.
References
ATCM XXIX WP 41, SCAR Report on Marine Acoustics and the
Southern Ocean
ATCM XXX IP 80, Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern
Ocean)
ATCM XXXV IP 21, Anthropogenic Sound in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII WP 68, Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII BP 03, Anthropogenic Noise in the Southern Ocean: an
Update
ATCM XLII IP 31, Results from the international workshop “The
Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals in Antarctica” held in
November 2018 in Germany
ATCM XLIII BP 06, The Animal Audiogram Database
ATCM XLIII IP 19, Managing the Effects of Anthropogenic Noise in
the Antarctic – Steps towards the development of an underwater
noise protection concept for ‘Antarctica’
Erbe C, Dähne M, Gordon J, Herata H, Houser DS, Koschinski S,
Leaper R, McCauley R, Miller B, Müller M, Murray A, Oswald JN,
Scholik-Schlomer AR, Schuster M, Van Opzeeland IC and Janik VM
(2019). Managing the Effects of Noise From Ship Traffic, Seismic
Surveying and Construction on Marine Mammals in Antarctica.
Frontiers in Marine Science 6:647. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2019.00647
Martin, T. G., Burgman, M. A., Fidler, F., Kuhnert, P. M., Low‐Choy,
S., McBride, M., & Mengersen, K. (2012). Eliciting expert
knowledge in conservation science. Conservation Biology 26, 29–
38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.01806.x
Morgan, MG (2014). "Use (and abuse) of expert elicitation in
support of decision making for public policy." Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111(20): 7176-7184. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319946111
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (2021). "Anthropogenic
Noise in the Southern Ocean: an Update". SCAR Bulletin 204, 43 pp.
https://scar.org/scar-library/reports-and-bulletins/scar-
bulletins/5589-scar-bulletin-204/file/
Southall, B., J. J. Finneran, C. Reichmuth, P. E. Nachtigall, D. R.
Ketten, A. E. Bowles, W. T. Ellison, D. Nowacek and P. Tyack
(2019). "Marine Mammal Noise Exposure Criteria: Updated
Scientific Recommendations for Residual Hearing Effects." Aquatic
Mammals 45(2): 125-232.
