Natural Hazards Awareness in Antarctica: An update on the
COMNAP project
Natural Hazards Awareness in Antarctica: An update on the
COMNAP project
Summary
The Antarctic season 2020/21 marked unusual, increased, seismic
activities around the Antarctic Peninsula region as discussed in
ATCM XLIII (2021) WP65 Earthquake Emergency Management
System submitted by Chile. After ATCM XLIII discussion, Resolution
7 (2021) Earthquake Emergency Management System was agreed.
That Resolution invited COMNAP to “present a report to assess the
general situation of emergency plans at Antarctic bases and its
support operations, and the degree of implementation of natural
disaster risk assessment programmes”. COMNAP responded to this
request and presented the results in ATCM XLIV (2022) WP018
Report on Emergency Plans and Implementation of Natural Disaster
Risk Assessment at Antarctic Stations. WP018 signaled that further
work would be undertaken by COMNAP on this topic. This
Information Paper reports on the progress against that additional
work.
Background
In response to national Antarctic programmes’ concern about
unusual, increased, seismic activity around the Antarctic Peninsula,
COMNAP launched the project “Earthquake, Tsunami, Volcanic
Events Awareness”.
The project began with a desktop exercise to assess the locations of
all sixty-seven (67) Antarctic stations especially in regards to their
distance from the coast and height above mean sea level (see ATCM
XLIV (2022) WP 18 Report on emergency plans and implementation
of natural disaster risk assessment at Antarctic stations).
During the intersessional period between ATCM XLIV (2022) and
ATCM XLV (2023), COMNAP invited national Antarctic
programmes to include experts in a “Technical Collaboration
Group.” The group’s initial aims were to review the current
Antarctic seismic/volcanic monitoring stations emplaced in
Antarctica, identify knowledge gaps and collaboratively strengthen
our ability to prepare for offering information to operators in the
area about the risk presented by seismic-related (earthquake,
volcano and tsunami) hazards. The project group has met (virtually)
on three occasions and discussion continues.
There has also been an exchange of information with SCAR experts
undertaking related work on seismicity and associated risk in
Antarctica. Various COMNAP Member programmes have suggested
that the project’s focus should be widened from seismic-related
hazards to all natural hazards in Antarctica. This will be further
discussed at the COMNAP AGM 35 (June 2023) through the
COMNAP Safety Expert Group. That group has done significant
work on safety in relation to natural hazards in Antarctica to date.
COMNAP Technical Collaboration Group
COMNAP convened the first meeting (virtual) of the Technical
Collaboration Group on earthquakes and volcanic risk on UTC
Wednesday 13 April 2022 with sixty-two participants in attendance.
The group is a practical and technical group that focused on
understanding the distribution of the current seismic monitoring
equipment in the Peninsula region of Antarctica. Five presentations
were introduced to provide examples of systems already in place
and update on progress and studies:
“Seismic-volcanic surveillance at Deception Island and the Scotia
plate” Manuel Berrocoso and Antonio Quesada (Comité Polar
Español (CPE), Spain).
“Status of the KOPRI seismic network in Antarctica” Yongcheol Park
(Korea Polar Research Institute (KOPRI), Republic of Korea).
"Turkish Antarctic seismic station on Horseshoe Island and a low-
cost approach to seismic network" Hasan Hakan Yavasoglu and
Yusuf Engin Tetik (TÜBITAK, Türkiye).
“Progress on Volcanic & Tsunami Risk Assessments for the new
Scott Base” John Cottle (Antarctica New Zealand, New Zealand).
“Identification of natural hazards in the area of influence of the
Pedro Maldonado scientific station and integrated network for
monitoring tsunami warning” Ashley Casierra Tomalá (Instituto
Oceanográfico y Antartico de la Armada (INOCAR), Ecuador).
This first meeting agreed that while there has not been a history of
big earthquakes (> 6.5 magnitude) in Antarctica, a seismic
monitoring network, recording large and small magnitude
earthquakes and volcanic activities, can give a better understanding
of the level of activity, hazards and risks in the area. The terms of
reference for the group and ideas for the conceptual framework
were discussed.
A second meeting, “Towards a regional network for seismic
surveillance in the Peninsula region” was held virtually on UTC 18
October 2022 and attended by members from ten countries
operating in the Antarctic Peninsula. The aim of this meeting was to
discuss the intention to create a network connecting the established
seismic systems in the Antarctic Peninsula. During the meeting the
distinction between data collection for scientific purposes rather
than for safety purposes was highlighted and there were discussions
on the technical nature of the network.
Further meetings are scheduled for UTC 4 May 2023 at 1200hrs
(virtual) and June 2023 (in-person discussion during the COMNAP
AGM 35).
Update to the Tsunami Awareness in Antarctica brochure
An additional aspect of the project is to review and update the
COMNAP brochure Tsunami Awareness in Antarctica (July 2014)
(https://www.comnap.aq/handbooks-manuals-operational-
guidelines). With many national Antarctic programmes undergoing
refurbishments at their station, it seemed timely to revisit the topic
and provide updated COMNAP information and guidance. The
brochure has been through a review in contact with the Joint
Australian Tsunami Warning Centre and the updated version will be
shared during the COMNAP AGM 35 (2023). After which, it will be
made publicly available. COMNAP is also currently consulting on
guidance for national Antarctic programmes on what to do in the
event of an earthquake that is felt or affects Antarctic facilities and
personnel.
