Australian Antarctic Science Program Highlights 2022-23
Australian Antarctic Science Program Highlights 2022-23
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australia operated a successful Antarctic science program in
2022-23. Forty-seven projects were supported, across multiple
disciplines and through strong collaboration with Australian and
international research programs and institutions. Research
highlights include: retrieval of the first test ice cores from the site of
the Million Year Ice Core Project; participation in the International
Year of Polar Prediction – Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH), with
Davis station acting as the East Antarctica super site; establishment
of a field camp in the Bunger Hills to support the upcoming
Denman Terrestrial Campaign; and field work at Australia’s three
continental stations to support ongoing climate science, wildlife
monitoring, and environmental protection and management.
Overview
The Australian Antarctic Science Program (AASP) is made up of
Australian Government agencies and Australian and international
universities and research institutions. In 2022/23 the program
undertook 47 science projects across multiple disciplines. Well over
50 per cent of these projects included international collaborations
across 23 countries. The AASP continues to benefit enormously
from national and international research and operational
collaborations.
The program has a strong focus on research designed to inform the
protection and management of Antarctica. This includes research
that contributes to understanding and addressing regional and
global issues through international organisations such as the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM), the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the
International Whaling Commission (IWC), and the Agreement on
the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP).
The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) of the Department of
Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water leads,
manages and coordinates the AASP with oversight provided by the
Australian Antarctic Science Council. Public summaries of all
science projects, past and present, are available on the AAD
website.
In 2022, two new programs were initiated at the AAD – the East
Antarctic Monitoring Program (EAMP) and the Integrated Digital
East Antarctica Program (IDEA). EAMP will provide a framework
for sustained, long-term scientific observations of essential
biological and physico-chemical variables in East Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean. IDEA will facilitate and coordinate the acquisition,
integration, analysis, synthesis and delivery of Antarctic and
Southern Ocean data and data products, providing seamless access
to multiple and integrated sources of data and data products to
underpin science and inform decision making. Both initiatives will
facilitate collaboration and cooperation nationally and
internationally.
Work is currently underway to develop a decadal plan for
Australian Antarctic science. The decadal plan will establish a
strategically prioritised, integrated and collaborative Australian
Antarctic Science Program and will:
articulate the priority science questions and policy needs to be
addressed by Australian Government supported research over the
next 10 years;
identify the research programs that will be conducted to address
these priorities; and
assess the existing and required capabilities to address these
priorities, identifying any gaps, and developing plans to fill these
gaps, and setting out agreed deliverables, timelines, performance
measures and responsibilities.
The decadal plan is expected to be completed by the end of 2023.
Research Highlights 2022-23
Million Year Ice Core project
Australia completed the first journey to the drill site for the Million
Year Ice Core project, at Little Dome C, 1200 km inland from Casey
station at an elevation of 3200 m. The team proved a safe 2300 km
round trip path to the site while testing the tractors and traverse
machinery required to transport all the people and equipment. The
team also successfully collected the first ice cores, representing the
climate record over the past 200 years, which were successfully
flown back to Australia without degradation or defrosting. The
2023-24 season will see drilling begin to retrieve an ice core to an
ultimate depth of 2.8 km. This project will provide new information
to test climate models and resolve long-standing questions about
the timing of ice ages. Further information about the project is
available the AAD website.
Test drilling for the Million Year Ice Core Project at Little Dome C.
(Photo: AAD)
Preparations for Denman Terrestrial Campaign
A field camp was established at Edgeworth David Base, 440 km
west of Casey station in the Bunger Hills, near the Denman Glacier.
Commencing next season, the camp will support the three-year
Denman Terrestrial Campaign, which will address key research
questions including the risk of ice mass loss over time and the
responses of biodiversity to climate and environmental change.
Further information about the project is available on the AAD
website.
Contribution to International Year of Polar Prediction
The AAD contributed to the International Year of Polar Prediction –
Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH) co-ordinated field campaign
around Antarctica from April – August 2022, with
Davis station acting as the East Antarctica supersite. One of the
YOPP-SH goals is to challenge numerical prediction models by
presenting them with detailed cloud and snowfall observations. A
suite of instruments operated at Davis collected data for this
purpose. These data will be used to evaluate and improve the
performance of high-resolution models for the Davis region.
Marine acoustics research
The annual recovery and deployment of a moored acoustic recorder
(MAR) off Casey station was successfully completed. This marked
the AAD's 10th consecutive year of long-term autonomous
underwater acoustic monitoring off East Antarctica, and the 15th
year of data collection. The hundreds of thousands of hours of
Antarctic underwater sounds recorded by these moorings, and those
of international collaborators, are one of IWC’s primary modern
data sources for critically endangered Antarctic blue whales, and
also provide valuable information on a dozen other Antarctic
animals. The data also provide a means of monitoring for trends in
sounds of ice, storms, and human activities including shipping and
geophysical surveys. Australia’s present fleet of Antarctic MARs
were designed, built, and have been operated by AAD Science
Technical Support since 2013.
Australian Research Council Special Research Initiatives – SAEF and
ACEAS
A Securing Antarctica’s Environmental Future (SAEF) project team
used drones, artificial intelligence and machine learning over two
months at Casey station to develop improved methods to monitor
the moss beds that have been shown to be declining in general
health over the past 20 years. The new technology included a
world-first state-of-the-art monitoring platform, the “Artificial
Intelligence of Things” (AIoT) platform, which allows for
continuous images of the moss beds, air and moss temperatures,
light intensity, humidity and soil-air energy exchange to be
transmitted to Australia. This work forms part of a broader program
continuing next season in the Bunger Hills as part of the Denman
Terrestrial Campaign. A team from the SAEF program also worked
on Macquarie Island sampling the lakes, soils, invertebrates, taking
peat cores and surveying critically endangered and invasive plant
species to inform the remote sensing work being undertaken as part
of the broader project.
Scientists with the Australian Centre for Excellence in Antarctic
Science (ACEAS) deployed seismometers in defined configurations
at locations close to Casey station to collect data to inform ice-
sheet-bedrock interface zone models. This will help improve
understanding of how changes in Antarctic ice sheets may impact
sea-level rise and will be expanded in the following seasons at the
Denman Glacier and further inland.
Long-term monitoring
The Australian Antarctic Program continued its focus on
maintaining long term monitoring projects, many of which employ
technology solutions to ensure the automated collection of data.
Examples include:
cosmic ray monitoring using neutron monitors and muon telescopes
at Mawson station and Kingston, Tasmania, to contribute to
international databases and space weather warning systems
collecting year-round and multi-year datasets using a network of
GPS and seismic monitors to provide information on the internal
structure of the solid earth deformation and structure in East
Antarctica
monitoring of Antarctic breeding seabirds through a network of
remotely operating time-lapse cameras
sea level determination using tide gauges deployed at all three
Australian continental stations and one subantarctic station
greenhouse gas monitoring at two Australian continental stations
and one sub Antarctic station to contribute to the most extensive
atmospheric composition observational network in the region.
Krill Aquarium
Plans to establish a new world-leading Antarctic krill aquarium and
research facility in Tasmania advanced. The AAD, in cooperation
with the University of Tasmania will construct a Southern Ocean
research aquarium in Hobart, expanding upon one of the world’s
only Antarctic krill aquarium research facilities at the AAD. The
exciting new laboratory will provide a sophisticated experimental
research platform to understand future impacts of climate change
on the krill to meet a key commitment in the Australian Antarctic
Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan.
Publication Highlights
A number of significant manuscripts were published during the
period, with highlights including:
Lee JR, Terauds A, Carwardine J, Shaw JD, Fuller RA, Possingham
HP, … McIvor E, … Bergstrom DM, et al. (2022) Threat
management priorities for conserving Antarctic biodiversity. PLoS
Biol 20(12): e3001921. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.3001921
An Australian led multi-national research project culminated in this
recent publication. This study found that up to 65% of Antarctic
terrestrial species (or species groups) are likely to decline by 2100.
It highlighted the potential impact of climate change and showed
that simultaneously pursuing global and regional management
actions will provide the best chance of protecting Antarctica’s
terrestrial biodiversity into the future. See Information Paper 45
Managing threats to Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity.
Pedro, JB, et al., (2022). Dansgaard-Oeschger and Heinrich event
temperature anomalies in the North Atlantic set by sea ice, frontal
position and thermocline structure. Quat.Sci.Rev 289, 107599,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2022.107599.
This study advances our understanding of abrupt climate changes
during the last glacial period, specifically around the roles of sea ice
extent, ocean front position and thermocline structure in the
spatiotemporal pattern of climate changes. While the study has a
northern hemisphere focus there are far-field impacts on millennial-
scale climate change at southern high latitudes.
Poppelmeier F, Baggenstos D, Grimmer M, Liu Z, Schmitt J, Fischer
H, Stocker T (2023) The effect of past saturation changes on noble
gas reconstructions of mean ocean temperature. Geophysical
Research letters 50: e2022GL102055 https://
doi.org/10.1029/2022GL102055
This modelling studed tests some of the assumptions that are
usually made when using the mean ocean temperature proxy based
on noble gases in ice cores. The model explicitly simulated noble
gases in the ocean and allowed an assessment of how changes in
wind, sea ice, and circulation impact the saturation state of the
gases. The study found that noble gas saturation potentially varied
significantly in the past, which needs to be taken into account when
applying the mean ocean temperature proxy.
Suter L., Wotherspoon SJ, Kawaguchi S, King R, MacDonald
AJ, Nester GM, Polanowski AM, Raymond B, Deagle BE (2023)
Environmental DNA of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba):
Measuring DNA fragmentation adds a temporal aspect to
quantitative surveys. Environmental DNA 00:1-15 https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/edn3.394.
This study aimed to enhance environmental DNA (eDNA)-based
monitoring of Antarctic krill to complement conventional krill
surveys. Antarctic krill eDNA could be quantified in addition to
estimating a relative time since shedding (“recent” vs “older”). The
method developed could not only determine where Antarctic krill
eDNA is present but sheds light
on how krill may be using certain habitats, expanding our
understanding of this important species’ life cycle and contributing
to more accurate abundance and distribution estimates.
Emmerson L, Southwell C (2022) Environment-triggered
demographic changes cascade and compound to propel a dramatic
decline of an Antarctic seabird metapopulation. Global Change
Biology 28:7234-7249 https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.16437.
This study interrogated key demographic parameters and their
biophysical drivers to understand the role of intrinsic and extrinsic
processes during a recent near halving of a large Adélie penguin
(Pygoscelis adeliae) metapopulation. The loss of 154,000 breeding
birds along the 100-km East Antarctic coastline centred around
63°E over the last decade diverges from a sustained increase over
preceding decades and is contrary to recent models that predict a
continued increase. The study showed that failure to capture both
intrinsic and extrinsic drivers in predictive population models may
mean that the real impacts of climate change on species'
populations are more severe than projections would lead us to
believe.
Stark JS. (2022) Effects of lubricant oil and diesel on macrofaunal
communities in marine sediments: A five-year field experiment in
Antarctica. Environmental Pollution 311:119885. https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35977637/
This study involved a controlled field experiment in a shallow
Antarctic marine embayment to investigate the effects of four
different hydrocarbon products (diesel fuel and three lubricating
oils) on sediment macrofaunal communities in the Antarctic near-
shore marine environment. The experiment showed that the
impacts of spilled hydrocarbons in Antarctica will persist well
beyond five years, but diesel impacts will recover faster than oil.
Cox MJ, Macaulay G, Brasier MJ, Burns A, Johnson OJ, King
R, Maschette D, Melvin J, Smith AJR., Weldrick CK, Wotherspoon
SJ, Kawaguchi S (2022) Two scales of distribution and biomass of
Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) in the eastern sector of the
CCAMLR Division 58.4.2 (55°E to 80°E). PLoS ONE 17(8):
e0271078. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0271078
This study provides a biomass estimate for Antarctic krill in the
eastern sector of the CCAMLR Division 58.4.2 using data collected
during an acoustic-trawl survey carried out in February and March
2021. The biomass density was estimated as 8.3 gm-2 giving a total
areal krill biomass of 6.48 million tonnes. The study assessed the
efficacy of extrapolating smaller surveys to a wider area.
Thompson SS, Kulessa B, Luckman A, Halpin JA, Greenbaum JS,
Pelle T, Habbal F, Guo J, Jong LM, Roberts JL, Sun B, and
Blankenship DD (2023) Glaciological history and structural
evolution of the Shackleton Ice Shelf system, East Antarctica, over
the past 60 years, The Cryosphere 17:157–174 https://
tc.copernicus.org/articles/17/157/2023/tc-17-157-2023.html
This paper seeks to better understand the controls driving Denman
Glacier's dynamic evolution by focussing on the Shackleton system,
comprised of the Shackleton Ice Shelf, Denman Glacier, and the
adjacent Scott, Northcliff, Roscoe and Apfel glaciers, about which
almost nothing is known. This study draws on 60 years of
observations and integrating new satellite observations of ice
structure and airborne radar data with changes in ice front position
and ice flow velocities. Over the period 2017–2022 the study found
a significant increase in ice flow speed (up to 50 %) on the floating
part of Scott Glacier, coincident with small-scale calving and rift
propagation close to the ice front.
