Anthropogenic noise in Antarctic terrestrial environments
Anthropogenic noise in Antarctic terrestrial environments
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
Anthropogenic noise resulting from human activities can have
detrimental effects on both Antarctic wildlife and wilderness and
aesthetic values. This paper provides information on sources,
methods of monitoring and wildlife impacts of terrestrial
anthropogenic noise, which is an emerging area of Antarctic
research SCAR acknowledges the contribution of the 2023 Ant-
ICON (Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation) SC-ATS (SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic
Treaty System) Science-Policy Fellow towards the preparation of
this paper..
Background
Anthropogenic noise is a common by-product of human activities,
and its effects on wildlife and ecosystem function have been
reported worldwide. A substantial body of research exists
concerning noise from anthropogenic sources in the marine
environment, including issues such as sources and levels of
anthropogenic underwater noise, and the potential for interactions
and impacts on Antarctic marine wildlife. Much of the relevant
research has been presented to the Committee previously (ATCM
XXVI WP 34, ATCM XXX IP 80, ATCM XLII WP 68, ATCM XLII IP
31, ATCM XLIV IP 38). In contrast, less attention has been given to
the specific effects of terrestrial anthropogenic noise on Antarctic
environmental, scientific, wilderness and aesthetic values (ATCM XL
WP20; ATCM XXVII WP10; ATCM XXXVI WP35). For example, little
is known about the short- or longer-term impacts of terrestrial noise
on flying birds, penguins and seals, or how the potential effects of
noise on penguins and seals differs between marine and terrestrial
environments.
The topic of anthropogenic noise in terrestrial environments is of
relevance to several CEP priority issues as set out in the CEP Five-
Year Work Plan, including:
‘Tourism and NGO activities’ (Priority 1)
‘Monitoring and state of the environment reporting’ (Priority 2);
and
‘Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I’
(Priority 2).
The aim of this Information Paper is to bring to the attention of the
Committee the emerging issue of terrestrial noise derived from
human activities as a potential source of impact on Antarctic
wildlife and intrinsic values. This paper also highlights the fact that
acoustic monitoring could be integrated into the set of
environmental monitoring and assessment tools in Antarctica, as it
can provide information on species, ecosystems health, and human
intervention impacts.
Anthropogenic noise in terrestrial Antarctica: sources and potential
impacts
The ‘soundscape’ is composed of all the sounds present in a
landscape. Sounds from animals and from non-biological sources
such as wind or rain are the most notable components of
soundscapes in terrestrial natural environments. Urban areas are
more characterized by sounds
produced by humans, which are called anthrophonies. However,
there is increasing evidence that humans have an acoustic footprint
that extends beyond those areas subject to direct human activity.
Sources
Human activities are almost always accompanied by noise, which
may propagate to areas well beyond the line of sight of the sound
source. Terrestrial environments may be subject to potentially
uncontrolled and unpredictable sources of noise. Furthermore, even
if anthropogenic sources of noise tend to be concentrated around
human settlements, human-generated noise can travel beyond
settlement boundaries into natural areas.
In Antarctica, the main sources of terrestrial anthropogenic noise
are from aircraft, vessels, land vehicles, and diesel generators. Other
sources of noise include construction and repair work, and some
types of scientific activities such as coring or drilling. Sound sources
may vary in duration and intensity (power or volume) and may
range from, e.g., transient-low intensity to continuous-high intensity
sounds.
Impacts
Depending on their intensity, spectral frequency and duration,
different sounds may provoke varying responses and effects on
wildlife. Empirical data on the effects of noise on wildlife in
terrestrial and aquatic environments elsewhere in the world show
that these manifest on different levels, with varying degrees of
severity. Responses are frequently behavioural, or noise may affect
behavioural patterns. However, animal responses to noise exposure
can also be physiological, with existing research reporting impacts
such as hearing loss, elevated stress hormones and hypertension
(reviewed in Shannon et al. 2016). It is worth highlighting that
physiological responses can be cryptic, i.e., there may be no
external (visible) effects on wildlife.
In extreme cases, animal deaths have been caused indirectly by
human noise. One such example concerns a mass mortality of
penguins on sub-Antarctic Macquarie Island after a stampede, the
most probable cause of which has been attributed to an overflight
of a large aircraft near the bird colony (Rounsevell and Binns 1991,
as cited in Harris, 2005). Although not representative of the most
common effects on wildlife, this incident highlights that some types
of noise could have substantial negative impacts on Antarctic
wildlife and intrinsic values.
As reported for protected areas in other parts of the world, noise
can travel into Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and
Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs), and could impact upon the
values under protection, including wilderness and aesthetic values.
While some attention has been paid to the visual impact of the
placement of man-made objects and structures on Antarctic
wilderness and aesthetic values, the impacts of noise have been less
considered, leaving scope for further research. A preliminary
systematic mapping analysis on noise in terrestrial ecosystems in
Antarctica (Acosta 2021) identified less than 10 scientific articles
mentioning terrestrial anthropogenic noise as important issue to be
considered when assessing impacts of human activities.
Monitoring anthropogenic noise in Antarctica
Technological advances in passive acoustic monitoring coupled with
the on-site provision of power from renewable sources, allow for
the gathering of detailed information with little need for on-going
human attention. Once the data are collected, powerful software
and algorithms enable researchers to analyse often large audio
datasets.
Noise in terrestrial environments has received little attention from
the scientific community; however, since 2020, an ongoing project
undertaken by researchers from Uruguay has monitored the
structure of the acoustic landscapes on Fildes Peninsula and the
incidence of
sources of noise from human activities. Fildes Peninsula is a logistic
hub on the South Shetland Islands, Antarctic Peninsula, which is
used for scientific, logistic and touristic purposes. The project relies
on the use of passive acoustic recording units to gather hourly
acoustic data at sites across Fildes Peninsula throughout the
Antarctic summer (Nov-Dec to Mar-Apr). Monitored sites were
chosen to represent the diversity of landscapes and attributes/uses
of Fildes Peninsula, and include the surroundings of scientific bases,
main connecting roads, ASPAs and remote/isolated sites without
nearby human settlements. Results obtained in this area could be
useful to understand potential noise sources and characteristics in
other geographic areas of human activity in Antarctica.
Conclusions
To help Parties in their management of anthropogenic noise in the
Antarctic terrestrial environment, further research is required,
including the identification of noise sources, their spectral and
temporal characteristics, their daily and year-around patterns and
their location and cumulative impacts. Research concerning short
and longer-term impacts of noise upon wildlife is also needed,
preferably using standardised methodologies and experimental
approaches in order to have comparable results across sites and
species. Such research may help inform the management of
terrestrial anthropogenic noise, including through the
environmental impact assessment process and the development of
management plans for protected areas (particularly those near areas
with high levels of human activity). Furthermore, acoustic
monitoring could be incorporated as a tool to provide information
on wildlife, ecosystem structure and function, and human
interventions, contributing to regular environmental monitoring in
Antarctica.
References
Acevedo, E., Espinosa, M. N., Stolovas, I. (2023). Sensado,
monitoreo y estudio de entorno sonoro para la evaluación del
impacto antropogénico en la Antártida (SERENA). [Unpublished
final project, Electrical Engeneering]. Instituto de Ingeniería
Eléctrica, Facultad de Ingeniería. Universidad de la República
Acosta, L. (2021). Mapeo sistemático del sonido antrópico terrestre
en la Antártida. [Unpublished undergraduate monographic work,
Degree in Environmental Management]. Licenciatura en Gestión
Ambiental, Centro Universitario Regional del Este. Universidad de
la República.
ATCM XXVI WP34. Anthropogenic acoustic noises and discharges
and their impact on marine mammal populations
ATCM XXVII WP10. Working Paper on guidelines for the operation
of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica
ATCM XXX IP 80. Taking action on marine noise in the Southern
Ocean
ATCM XXXVI WP35. Possible guidance material to assist Parties to
take account of wilderness values when undertaking environmental
impact assessments
ATCM XL WP20. State of knowledge of wildlife responses to
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS)
ATCM XLII WP 68. Anthropogenic noise in the Southern Ocean: an
update
ATCM XLII IP31. Results from the international workshop “The
Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals in Antarctica” held in
November 2018 in Germany
ATCM XLIV IP 38. Update: Managing the effects of anthropogenic
noise in the Antarctic – Steps towards the development of an
underwater noise protection concept for Antarctica
Barber, J. R., Crooks, K. R., & Fristrup, K. M. (2010). The costs of
chronic noise exposure for terrestrial organisms. Trends in Ecology
& Evolution, 25(3), 180-189.
Buxton, R. T., McKenna, M. F., Mennitt, D., Fristrup, K., Crooks, K.,
Angeloni, L., & Wittemyer, G. (2017). Noise pollution is pervasive
in US protected areas. Science, 356(6337), 531-533.
Harris, C. M. (2005). Aircraft operations near concentrations of
birds in Antarctica: the development of practical
guidelines. Biological Conservation, 125(3), 309-322.
Rounsevell, D., & Binns, D. (1991). Mass deaths of king penguins
(Aptenodytes patagonica) at Lusitania Bay, Macquarie
Island. Aurora, 10(4), 8-10.
Shannon, G., McKenna, M. F., Angeloni, L. M., Crooks, K. R.,
Fristrup, K. M., Brown, E., Warner, K. A., Nelson, M. D., White, C.,
Briggs, J., McFarland, S., & Wittemyer, G. (2016). A synthesis of
two decades of research documenting the effects of noise on
wildlife. Biological Reviews, 91(4), 982-1005.
