DEAIS: Changes in the Drainage Pattern of the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet through Time
DEAIS: Changes in the Drainage Pattern of the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet through Time
Information Paper submitted by Switzerland
Summary
This information paper outlines the research activities of the
scientists from the Glacial Geology Research Group at the Institute
of Geological Sciences of the University of Bern at the Belgian Polar
Station Princess Elisabeth Antarctica (PEA). Scientists focused on
the changes in the drainage of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet as a
response to climate forcing and associated ice surface lowering
through time.
Background
Currently, the Antarctic cryosphere is experiencing a rapid
environmental change. Continuing ice decay directly contributes to
the global sea level rise that threatens the world’s population living
in coastal areas. However, the behavior of the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet (EAIS) under global warming and its future contribution to
global sea level rise is extremely uncertain; model projections for
the next centuries vary from tens of cm to 15 m. The timing and
amplitude of changes in the behavior of the EAIS under climatic
forcing in the past are of utmost importance for assembling
information about what could happen in the future.
DEAIS Research Project
As the drainage of the EAIS is poorly constrained in the coastal
outflow regions, the Sør Rondane Mountains (SRM) in Queen Maud
Land afford the unique opportunity to elucidate how the EAIS
responds to changes in climate over time because the SRM dam the
ice in the south and play a key role in the drainage pattern of the
ice. To track the pace of EAIS’ response to climate forcing and
associated surface lowering for the last 8 million years, DEAIS
reconstructs the ice surface lowering rates through the detailed
study of glacial morphological features on the nunataks and the
blue-ice moraines built by the major ice streams in the region.
The project started in 2017 and the research team successfully
completed two field campaigns during the BELARE 2017-2018 and
2018-2019 Expeditions during the Austral summers. These field
campaigns were carried out under the auspices of the Turkish
Republic Presidency, supported by the Ministry of Science, Industry
and Technology, and coordinated by Polar Research Institute,
TÜBITAK Marmara Research Center. The researchers first identified
five sites in the SRM, which are crucial to reach the goals of the
project. Then, they employed an UAV to take aerial photographs.
These were then converted into first orthophotographic pictures and
then into high-resolution DEM (digital elevation model) using the
software Agisoft Metashape 1.5.1®, which is a software used in
aerial photogrammetry. The DEMs were used as the base for the
detailed study of glacial morphological features. To determine the
timing of the changes in the drainage and surface lowering, the
research team collected 73 rock surface samples from erratic
boulders deposited on the nunataks for the analysis of cosmogenic
10Be, in-situ 14C, 26Al, 21Ne, and 36Cl. DEAIS was financed by the
Polar Research Institute (TÜBITAK Marmara Research Center),
Swiss National Science Foundation [grant number 200021-172475],
Swiss Polar Institute, and University of Bern.
Conclusions
First results from the BELARE 2017-2018 and 2018-2019
Expeditions have shown, that the ice masses on the high-elevated
plateau and the lower elevated foreland started to separate between
3 and 1 Ma (million years) (i.e., decoupling of the drainage), which
suggests that since then, the ice on the plateau and the foreland
responded differently and independently from each other to climate
changes.
