Managing threats to Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity
Managing threats to Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity
Information Paper submitted by Australia, Belgium, France, Japan,
New Zealand, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom, United States,
SCAR, ASOC, IAATO
Summary
Recent research published in PLOS Biology by Lee et al. (2022), on
strategies for managing threats to Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity,
found that an estimated 65% of terrestrial species groups and land-
associated seabirds are likely to decline by 2100 under current
trajectories. In assessing the benefits of several possible threat
management strategies, it found that influencing global policy to
effectively mitigate climate change would deliver the greatest
benefits, while a range of actions to minimise threats from activities
within the Antarctic region would also be highly beneficial. The
study concluded that simultaneously pursuing global and regional
efforts would provide the best chance of protecting Antarctica’s
terrestrial biodiversity into the future. These findings are relevant to
the Committee’s work on several priority issues, including to
maintain awareness of threats to biodiversity, and to prepare for,
and build resilience to the environmental impacts of a changing
climate.
Background
There is substantial information available to the CEP on threats to
Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems, such as non-native species,
pollution, human activities, and climate change. However, as
identified in the CEP Five-Year Work Plan and Climate Change
Response Work Program (CCRWP), there is a need for greater
understanding of how vulnerable terrestrial species are to such
threats. For example, science, knowledge and information needs
identified in the Five-Year Work Plan include to ‘improve
understanding of current and future changes to the terrestrial biotic
and abiotic environment due to climate change’, as well as to
‘understand population status, trends, vulnerability and distribution
of key Antarctic species’. A recent publication in the journal PLOS
Biology by Lee et al. (2022) on ‘Threat management priorities for
conserving Antarctic biodiversity’ assesses the vulnerability of
Antarctic terrestrial species to multiple threats. This paper
summarises the research and key findings likely to be of interest to
the CEP.
Research approach
The study used a participatory decision-science approach that
incorporated expert knowledge and available empirical data,
involving 29 diverse experts from 12 countries. Each expert had
comprehensive knowledge of at least one of the following:
biodiversity, policymaking, logistics, tourism, or conservation.
Terrestrial species were considered in 38 groups, representing
species expected to respond similarly to threats and management
actions. Experts in each species group assessed the future (2100)
status of that group compared to the current (2017) status under
existing management mechanisms and under two
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Representative
Concentration Pathway (RCP) climate forcing scenarios (RCP4.5
and RCP8.5). They then assessed the future status of each group
when applying 13 management strategies that could be undertaken
by the Antarctic community (Table 1), each of which consisted of a
number of independent actions See supplementary materials – S1
Data. to meet the strategy’s objectives. The difference between the
current and future status gave the benefit of each strategy for each
group.
Key findings
The study estimated that 65% of the species groups (at best 37%, at
worst 97%) are likely to decline by 2100 under current
management efforts and climate trajectories, with the degree of
decline varying for each group (see Figure 1). Groups of highly
adapted, endemic species (e.g. emperor penguins, Adélie penguins
and dry soil nematodes) were identified as the most vulnerable,
with emperor penguins being the only group at risk of extinction by
2100.
Some groups, such as bank-forming moss and the two native
vascular plants (Colobanthus quitensis and Deschampsia antarctica)
were predicted to benefit from climate change, and may expand
their populations or ranges, at least initially. Gentoo penguins were
the only land-associated seabird predicted to benefit from climate
change. The study noted these species would not continue
expanding indefinitely and the longer-term impacts of
environmental change for all species remained uncertain and
complex.
The study found implementing ten key management strategies in
parallel could benefit up to 84% of species groups. Influencing
global policy to effectively mitigate climate change would provide
the highest benefit to all groups, while minimising threats from
activities within the Antarctic region is also highly beneficial,
including managing non-native species and disease, managing and
protecting species, and managing transport and new infrastructure
(see Figure 2).
Conclusions
This research is relevant to the Committee’s work on several
priority issues, including to ‘maintain awareness of threats to
existing biodiversity’, and to ‘prepare for, and build resilience to the
environmental impacts of a changing climate’ through
implementation and review of the CCRWP. It is also likely to be
valuable for work in other priority areas, including management of
non-native species, tourism and non-governmental activities, and
repair or remediation of environmental damage, as well as
discussions on reviewing the Committee’s strategic priorities and
associated actions. Consistent with ATCM Resolution 8 (2021) on
Antarctica in a Changing Climate, the findings reaffirm the
importance of simultaneously pursuing global and regional efforts
to protect Antarctica’s terrestrial biodiversity into the future
References
Lee J.R., Terauds A., Carwardine J., Shaw J.D., Fuller R.A.,
Possingham H.P., Chown S.L., Convey, P., Gilbert, N., Hughes, K.A.,
McIvor, E., Robinson, S.A., Ropert-Coudert, Y., Bergstrom, D.M.,
Biersma, E.M., Christian, C., Cowan, D.A., Frenot, Y., Jenouvrier, S.,
Kelley, L., Lee, M.J., Lynch, H., Njåstad, B., Quesada, A., Roura, R.,
Shaw, E.A., Stanwell-Smith, D., Tsujimoto, M., Wall, D.H.,
Wilmotte, A., Chadès, I. (2022) Threat management priorities for
conserving Antarctic biodiversity. PLOS Biology 20(12):e3001921.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3001921
The actions underlying each of the management strategies are
available on the journal website in the supplementary material (S1
Data).
The intactness values representing how vulnerable species groups
are, and how much each management strategy benefits them, are
publicly available for download from the Australian Antarctic Data
Centre: https://doi.org/10.26179/5da8f8e7a2256
Table 1. Overview of proposed strategies for managing threats to
terrestrial Antarctic biodiversity. Shorthand strategy names are
given in brackets. ‘Current’ refers to the state of the Antarctic
environment and associated management actions in 2017. Grey
shading identifies global strategies or a combination of regional and
global strategies. More details on each strategy are provided in S1
Data.
Strategy Name
Objectives and details
Business as usual (Baseline)
Continue with actions and strategies currently in use, but neither
expand on these strategies nor employ new strategies. Baseline
against which to measure other strategies.
Remediation (Remediate)
Increase amount of, or improve, quality of habitat available to
biodiversity in comparison to habitat currently available. By
remediating 20 environmentally damaged (physically, chemically,
biologically) sites (including freshwater) that will provide the
greatest benefit to biodiversity, including remediation of legacy
waste sites if necessary.
Manage existing infrastructure (Exist infra.)
Reduce and minimise impacts of existing infrastructure compared to
current levels.
Manage new infrastructure (New infra.)
Prevent, reduce and minimise impacts of new infrastructure.
Transport management (Transport)
Reduce and minimise impacts of transport compared to current
levels.
Manage non-native species and disease (Non-native)
Reduce impacts of non-native species and disease on native
biodiversity.
Where possible prevent establishment of new populations of non-
native species. Eradicate or, if not possible, minimise impacts of
established non-native species.
Protect vegetation from physical impacts (Protect vegetation)
Reduce physical impacts of human activities and native vertebrate
activities on vegetation.
Halt the decline (or loss) of vegetation and associated species due to
direct physical damage/impact at key sites in the Antarctic
Peninsula (e.g. animal damage).
Protecting areas (Protecting areas)
Reduce impacts of human activities on biodiversity by increasing
the amount and representation of habitat in protected areas.
Develop the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) system to
improve representation of the values specified in the Environmental
Protocol and ensure the network incorporates contemporary
systematic conservation planning pillars.
Managing and protecting species (Protecting species)
Reduce threatening impacts on taxonomic groups identified as
threatened by 2100.
Identify and protect threatened species (assume 10 - 15 species to
be identified and listed under this strategy)
Prevent extinction of native species in-situ.
Minimise impacts of human activity (Human activities)
Prevent and minimise physical impacts on biodiversity and habitats
compared to current levels that stem from human activities in
Antarctica (e.g. fieldwork, tourism, station activities). Relevant
where improving education and training, and implementing
standard practices, on-ground operating procedures and compliance
is likely to reduce impacts through changes in human behaviour.
Influence external policy (Influence ext. policy)
Minimise or reduce impacts of threats (primarily climate change) on
Antarctic biodiversity that originate externally via engagement with
appropriate policy bodies and raising public awareness.
Note: Outcome of strategy is an assumption that the Paris Climate
Agreement of <2 °C warming is achieved. Use RCP2.6 instead of
4.5/8.5.
All strategies excluding ‘influence external policy’ (All strats. excl
IEP)
All management strategies combined except ‘Influence external
policy’.
All strategies combined (All strategies)
All management strategies combined.
Figure 1.a. Regional vulnerability of terrestrial Antarctica
biodiversity groups to all potential threats under climate forcing
scenario RCP8.5. Colours represent each species group’s expected
response (positive, neutral, negative) to threats, with darker/lighter
shadings denoting the regional delineation as peninsula or
continent, respectively. Bars represent experts’ best estimate of the
future status of each group relative to current (100%) status if no
additional conservation strategies are implemented. Groups with
values below 100% are predicted to be vulnerable, whilst groups
with values beyond 100% are predicted to benefit. b. The two main
Antarctic regions considered in the study.
Figure 2. Total expected benefit of management strategies summed
for all species groups and both regions under two climate forcing
scenarios (RCP4.5, RCP8.5). Bars represent the experts’ best
estimates when assessing benefit, whilst error bars represent upper
(best case scenario) and lower (worst case scenario) bounds.
