The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2023 to the XLV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research Annual Report
2023 to the XLV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Summary
This paper presents the annual report of the Scientific Committee
on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting. The main features of the report are also presented as an
infographic (attachment 1).
Background
SCAR’s mission is to advance Antarctic research, including
observations from Antarctica, and to promote scientific knowledge,
understanding and education on any aspect of the Antarctic region.
To this end, SCAR is charged with the facilitation and coordination
of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research beneficial to global
society. SCAR provides independent and objective scientific advice
and information to the Antarctic Treaty System and other bodies,
and acts as the main international exchange of information on
Antarctic research within the scientific community. Further
information is available at www.scar.org.
New Strategic Plan
Every five years, SCAR updates its strategic plan to adapt to the
changing environment within which it operates. The new plan for
2023-2028, “Urgent Messages from the South: Antarctic and
Southern Ocean Science and Policy”, was published in April and
will underpin SCAR’s activities over the coming five-year period.
Further details are provided in IP047 Summary of SCAR’s Strategic
Plan 2023-2028.
Science Priorities
SCAR’s three Scientific Research Programmes (www.scar.org/
science/srp/) are the main vehicles through which SCAR facilitates
and coordinates science in, from and about Antarctica.
Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation (Ant-ICON) looks at the conservation and
management of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, focusing on
research to drive and inform international decision-making and
policy change. www.scar.org/science/ant-icon/home/
A workshop held in September 2022 examined Antarctic
conservation from a comparative perspective. A second workshop in
October discussed the potential scope of a community ‘State of the
Antarctic Environment’ project [see WP018 Contribution of
information to inform State of the Antarctic Environment Reporting
(SAER): a potential new SCAR initiative]. A science-policy
fellowship has been initiated jointly with SCAR’s Standing
Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (SC-ATS) aimed at early-
mid career researchers. Lucia Ziegler was appointed as the first
CEP/ATCM fellow and is participating in the current meeting.
INStabilities and Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) focusses on
quantifying Antarctica’s contribution to past and future global sea-
level change, helping decision-makers to better anticipate, manage,
and adapt to sea-level rise. www.scar.org/science/instant/home/
Workshops and seminars were held in 2022 on Antarctic geological
Boundary Conditions (June), the future of geodetic-geophysical
observational networks in Antarctica (September), and geothermal
heat flow anomalies (November). Five SCAR INSTANT fellowships
were awarded in June 2022 for early-career researchers,
particularly from under-represented regions.
The first SCAR INSTANT conference will take place in Italy later
this year (see below).
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (AntClimnow) focuses on near-term Antarctic climate
variability and trends, understanding contemporary climate change,
and modelling future climate projections. www.scar.org/science/
antclimnow/home/
AntClimNow held a hybrid workshop in September 2022 on
“Connecting Models and Observations of the Antarctic Climate
System Across Timescales”, attended by 80 scientists. It runs a well-
attended monthly online seminar.
A new Scientific Research Programme Planning Group on Antarctic
Geospace and ATmosphere reseArch (AGATA), approved in
September 2022, aims to advance knowledge of the Antarctic
atmosphere and geospace (www.scar.org/science/agata/home/).
Other highlights
Events
SCAR’s 10th Open Science Conference (OSC) was held online in
August, hosted by India’s National Centre for Polar and Ocean
Research. Over 2,700 participants registered and 69 events were
held.
The XXXVII SCAR Delegates Meeting in September in Goa, India,
was held in hybrid format. Luxembourg was admitted as a new
Associate Member and Prof Steven L Chown was awarded honorary
membership. Dr Marcelo Leppe (Chile) and Prof Burcu Özsoy
(Türkiye) were elected as Vice Presidents, responsible for
administration and capacity building respectively.
Policy related activities
SCAR advice to CCAMLR in 2022 focussed on climate change in the
Southern Ocean, including presentation of the Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment (ACCE) Decadal Synopsis report
(ATCM XLIV IP072 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
- A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action and its
attachment ATT111) and an invited SCAR Lecture on this topic.
Updates were provided from the SCAR Krill Action Group (SKAG)
and on work to identify Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) in the
Southern Ocean.
SCAR co-organised several side events at the UNFCCC COP27
meeting in Egypt, including an official event on “Slow Onset,
Irreversible Impacts Beyond Adaptation: Global Stocktake,
Implementation and 1.5° Ambition” and five events at the
International Cryosphere Climate Initiative’s Cryosphere Pavilion.
Through its hosting of the Antarctic Environments Portal (IP075),
SCAR provides impartial information based on the best available
science, to support informed discussion on issues relevant to the
CEP and wider stakeholders.
Communications outputs
On Antarctica Day, SCAR released a new animation “Our future
depends on us” summarising the key messages of the ACCE report,
available at youtu.be/P07sDH-kmw0.
In June 2022, SCAR’s Expert Group on Antarctic Volcanism
produced an outreach book for children on “Antarctic Volcanism:
Explore the Remotest Volcanoes of the Planet” available here
(zenodo.org/record/6535775#.ZCHAS7TMJLB) – English
(zenodo.org/record/7699900#.ZCHAyLTMJLA) – Spanish
(zenodo.org/record/7704405#.ZCHA6bTMJLB) – Italian
Group activities
In September 2022, SCAR’s Standing Committee on Antarctic Data
Management drew up an updated data policy, aimed at aligning the
data policies of international scientific bodies coordinating research
in the polar regions. Available from https://www.scar.org/scar-
library/reports-and-bulletins/scar-reports/5797-scar-report-42/file/
The Plastic in Polar Environments group (Plastic-AG) is collating
data for an open-access repository summarising national and
international projects focused on plastic pollution in the Antarctic
and Sub-Antarctic regions. The repository file and a map displaying
project locations will be freely available at www.scar.org/science/
plastic/home/.
The RINGS Action Group aims to provide complete and accurate
bed topography data of the entire Antarctic ice-sheet margin. In
June 2022, an article was published in Eos
(doi.org/10.1029/2022EO220276), followed by a 4-day
international workshop and a white paper on mapping Antarctic
ice-sheet margins. See www.scar.org/science/rings/news/.
The SCAR Krill Group (SKEG), granted Expert Group status in
September 2022, held its annual workshop in March 2023 on
“Development of Krill stock hypothesis (KSH) for CCAMLR 48”. See
www.scar.org/science/skeg/home/.
There are three active action groups in the Humanities and Social
Sciences: Public Engagement with Antarctic Research (PEAR),
whose key activity in 2022 was its Global Mapping Project, an
online survey of public engagement activities and needs in relation
to the Antarctic and Southern Ocean; the Action Group on Intrinsic
Value in Antarctica (AGIVA) which seeks to develop a broad cross-
cultural understanding of the intrinsic value of Antarctica in order
that the intention of the Madrid Protocol to provide protection to
this value can be better understood; and thirdly, the Tourism Action
Group (Ant-TAG) which is discussed further in ATCM XLIV IP075
SCAR Tourism Action Group (Ant-TAG).
SCAR awarded five early-career Fellowships, including the first
Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation Fellowship funded by the
Polar Initiative, and three Visiting Scholarships. SCAR Medals were
awarded to Prof Pippa Whitehouse and Prof Elisabeth Sikes for
Excellence in Antarctic Research, to Prof Stephen Ackley for
International Scientific Coordination and to Dr Bethan Davies for
Education and Communication.
In December 2022 SCAR and the International Arctic Science
Committee announced that preparatory work was underway for a
5th International Polar Year (IPY) in 2032-33. Further information
is provided in IP050 Plans for a fifth International Polar Year
2032/33.
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI)
SCAR’s EDI Action Group, approved in 2021, now has over 150
members. A significant theme emerging during the OSC was the
need to facilitate safe space discussion groups and identify the most
effective platforms to do so. In November 2022, the group
celebrated the third international Polar Pride Day, along with many
others. Subgroups are working on topics such as developing a code
of conduct and surveying diversity across the community and across
SCAR’s capacity-building activities. Further information is provided
in IP077 The SCAR Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Action Group.
Selected Forthcoming Meetings
SCAR SC-HASS Conference 2023, 22-24 June, Lisbon, Portugal
https://scarschass2023.ulusofona.pt/ This year’s Humanities and
Social Sciences conference will be held at Lisbon’s Universidade
Lusófona with the theme “The Antarctic for a Better World”. It will
cover all
disciplinary fields in the social sciences, humanities and arts
concerning the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic regions.
XIII SCAR Biology Symposium 2023, 31 July – 4 August,
Christchurch, New Zealand https://www.confer.co.nz/
scarbiology2023/ The symposium will be held at Te Pae Convention
Centre, combining great science with sustainability and a cultural
experience. Science meetings will be interspersed with excursions
and field trips. Special meetings and workshops will be held at the
University of Canterbury during the weekends before and after the
meeting.
SOOS Symposium, 14-18 August, Hobart, Tasmania https://
SOOSsymposium2023.au/ The inaugural SOOS Symposium’s theme
is “Southern Ocean in a Changing World”. This is a forum for
assessing progress in providing observing systems, observations and
regional programmes delivering timely and accessible information
for the Southern Ocean. It is also an opportunity to tackle the
challenges of providing long-term observations that address societal
issues as well as advancing scientific understanding.
SCAR INSTANT Conference 2023, 11-14 September, Trieste, Italy
https://instant2023.org/ The first major international conference of
SCAR’s INSTANT Programme will bring together researchers across
the geological, geophysical, biological and social sciences interested
in understanding the interactions between the ocean, atmosphere,
solid Earth and the Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) and their global
consequences.
