Heightened Risk of Avian Influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area
Heightened Risk of Avian Influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area
Information Paper submitted by SCAR, IAATO & COMNAP
Background
While there are no known cases of Highly Pathogenic Avian
Influenza (HPAI) H5N1 HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b in the Antarctic
Treaty Area, advice from avian influenza experts in 2022 suggested
there was a heightened risk of the disease (commonly known as
“bird flu”) arriving by way of migrating species during the
2022/2023 austral summer. The SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health
Working Group (AWHWG) raised concerns about the likely arrival
and significant impact HPAI might have on wildlife in the Antarctic
region.
AWHWG advises that the risk of HPAI arriving in the Antarctic
Treaty Area remains high for the next two seasons, 2023/2024 and
2024/2025. We wish to bring this to the attention of the CEP. A
Background Paper submitted by SCAR and IAATO has already
brought the matter to the attention of CCAMLR (SCAR & IAATO,
2022).
Work is underway through SCAR, IAATO and COMNAP to continue
developing practical advice to identify suspected cases and to
eliminate risk associated with direct human contact.
Introduction
Since the beginning of 2022, the increasing intensity of HPAI
(H5N1 strain) outbreaks has resulted in the deaths of hundreds of
thousands of seabirds in the Northern Hemisphere, around the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and southern Africa. Cases of HPAI have
also been detected in wild birds and mammals (including penguins
and sea lions) in South America in 2023. 769 Humboldt, 17
Magellanic, and 1 king penguins & 1,960 sea lions reported in Chile
(SERNAPESCA 12th April 2023); 3487 sea lions and 65,000 wild
birds in Peru (CNN 7th March 2023; World Organisation for Animal
Health WAHIS); cases in Argentina have predominantly been
detected in poultry. See referenced websites for up-to-date figures.
The AWHWG is concerned about the heightened risk and likely
arrival of HPAI in the sub-Antarctic islands and in the Antarctic
Treaty Area due to species migration. There is also a small risk of
direct transfer of the virus from human movements. The arrival of
the disease is likely to have a significant impact on wildlife in the
Antarctic region and could result in mass mortality events.
No known cases have been detected in the Antarctic Treaty Area to
date. However, birds that migrate from regions where cases have
been detected to the sub-Antarctic and Antarctic continent may
carry the disease to Antarctica. We therefore advise vigilance and
suggest preparations for the likely arrival to the Antarctic Treaty
Area of HPAI in 2023/24 and/or the 2024/2025 seasons.
Although the disease primarily affects poultry and wild birds, avian
influenza can occasionally spread to mammals, including humans
and pinnipeds. An increasing number of cases of HPAI have been
reported in various mammals, both terrestrial and aquatic, causing
morbidity and mortality, raising concerns about the threat it poses.
While the risk is low to humans, there are reported instances of
transfer to humans and other mammals resulting in loss of life.
https://www.woah.org/en/statement-on-avian-influenza-and-
mammals/ “Statement on Avian Influenza and Mammals”, posted
13 February 2023.
2022/2023 Actions
Due to the heightened risk of HPAI being introduced to the
Antarctic Treaty Area by migrating seabirds and mammals, the
AWHWG developed “The Risk of Avian Influenza in the Southern
Ocean: A Practical Guide” that provides background information
and practical advice to identify suspected cases should they arise in
the region, and also to reduce additional risk from direct transfer of
the virus from human activity in the Antarctic region, for example
through further enhancing biosecurity procedures. The draft
document prepared by the AWHWG is available as a preprint from:
https://ecoevorxiv.org/repository/view/3686/.
COMNAP shared guidance on the heightened risk of HPAI with
their membership on 14 October 2022. A further reminder was
issued to national Antarctic programs on 16 February 2023.
Guidance remains available on the COMNAP website at https://
www.comnap.aq/environmental-protection and is regularly
updated, including through the COMNAP Environmental Protection
Expert Group AGM session on 28 June 2023.
IAATO alerted its membership to the global HPAI situation on 11
August 2022, advising on biosecurity procedures that would be in
place for the upcoming season in addition to IAATO’s standard
decontamination procedures. These were incorporated into IAATO’s
2022-23 Biosecurity Instructions for the IAATO Field Operations
Manual which are routinely reviewed and updated on an annual
basis. Additionally, IAATO made guidance available on its website
(https://iaato.org/iaato-2022-23-biosecurity-protocols-regarding-
avian-influenza/) and used webinars and video to help
communicate information about the risks of HPAI and IAATO’s
biosecurity procedures to field staff and onwards to clients. Further
updates were issued often throughout the season and following
advice from the SCAR AWHWG.
Continuing Actions in Advance of the 2023/24 Antarctic Season
Since the large-scale spread of HPAI is primarily through the long-
distance, latitudinal migration of birds, preventing the introduction
of the disease to Antarctic species may not be possible. It is,
however, possible to prepare for the likely arrival of HPAI in the
Antarctic region and to reduce the additional risks through direct
human activities. The SCAR AWHWG is tracking the progress of
identified cases through the World Organisation for Animal Health
(WOAH) as HPAI is a globally reportable disease (https://
www.woah.org/en/disease/avian-influenza). A collaborative group
is being formed by COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR (through AWHWG
leadership) to focus on the issue for the upcoming season. This
group has agreed to convene an expert workshop to work on a
practical guidance that will be shared with the community before
the start of the 2023/24 Antarctic season.
For the 2023/24 season, we have an opportunity to remain vigilant
for any signs that the disease is present in sub-Antarctic and
Antarctic species. Ensuring biosecurity guidelines and procedures
are robustly implemented is also important to eliminate or mitigate
the risk of spreading the disease within Antarctica by way of direct
human activity.
COMNAP, IAATO and SCAR encourage wide participation of
experts from the CEP to participate in the work described above.
Further information will be distributed via the SCAR, COMNAP and
IAATO community lists soon. An update on the status of HPAI and
its potential impacts on Antarctic birds and mammals will be
provided to CEP XVLI (2024).
References
SCAR and IAATO (2022) Heightened risk of avian influenza in the
Southern Ocean. SC-CAMLR-41/BG/20.
SERNAPESCA http://www.sernapesca.cl/noticias/sernapesca-
entrega-reporte-de-animales-marinos-varados-muertos-por-
situacion-de-influenza
CNN https://edition.cnn.com/2023/03/06/americas/bird-flu-sea-
lion-deaths-peru-intl-latam/index.html#:~:text=At%20least
%203%2C487%20sea%20lions,linked%20to%20the%20bird%20flu
World Organisation for Animal Health - World Animal Health
Information System (https://wahis.woah.org/#/event-management)
