Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
Report by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
Quick overview of matters of interest for the region and some
considerations on the impact of climate change and the
implementation of the IMO Polar Code
Report by the Secretariat of the International Hydrographic
Organization as Chair of the IHO Hydrographic Commission on
Antarctica
Introduction
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) is an
intergovernmental consultative and technical organization. It
comprises 98 Member States. Each State is normally represented by
its National Hydrographer.
The IHO coordinates on a worldwide basis the setting of standards
for hydrographic data and the provision of hydrographic services in
support of safety of navigation and the protection and sustainable
use of the marine environment. The principal aim of the IHO is to
ensure that all the world's seas, oceans and navigable waters are
surveyed and charted.
Importance of Hydrography in Antarctica
Hydrographic information is a fundamental pre-requisite for the
development of successful and environmentally sustainable human
activities in the seas and oceans. Unfortunately, there is little or no
hydrographic information for a number of parts of the world,
especially in Antarctica.
IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) and even more
The HCA is the main body in the hands of the IHO to deal with
Antarctica matters.
The HCA comprises 24 IHO Member States (Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Ecuador, France, Germany, Greece,
India, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom, Uruguay,
USA, Venezuela), all of them have acceded to the Antarctic Treaty
and are therefore also directly represented in the ATCM.
Three IHO Member States (Netherlands, Poland, and Türkiye) have
applied to become HCA Members in 2023.
The IHO Hydrographic Commission on Antarctica (HCA) was
formed in 1998 aimed at coordinating activities between its
Member States to improve the quality, coverage and availability of
nautical charting and other marine geospatial and hydrographic
information and services covering the Antarctic region.
The HCA Statutes were revised in 2021 and came into force before
ATCM 44 in Berlin in May 2022. The main objective of the
amendments were to better align the
activities of the HCA with the Antarctic Treaty System Antarctic
Treaty, Article III 1.(c) in particular which states that “scientific
observations and results from Antarctica shall be exchanged and
made freely available”. and the last ATCM Resolutions on
hydrographic matters ATCM Resolutions 5 (2008), 5 (2014) and 6
(2019)..
The IHO is engaged in Polar Regions activities in general, through
the HCA for the Antarctic, but also through the Arctic Regional
Hydrographic Commission (ARHC) for the Arctic Region in support
of the Arctic Council and its Working Group for the Protection of
the Arctic Marine Environment Working Group (PAME) in
particular. This dual commitment in Polar Regions in the IHO is a
key enabler for the development of synergies in various domains
(seabed mapping autonomous technologies, development of new
S-100 operational services and geospatial portals in support of user
requirements).
In both Polar Regions, due to climate change effects, new
unsurveyed and unchartered large areas are becoming ice-free and
therefore potentially open to navigation. The HCA requests ATCM
to keep the IHO informed on their geographical priorities to map
these new areas, if appropriate. New strategic performance
indicators have been recently implemented by the IHO to assess the
adequacy of surveys and chart coverage over the world, Polar
Regions included.
New hydrographic data services using the IHO Universal
Hydrographic Data Model (S-100) are under development. The IMO
approved the introduction of new S-100 ECDIS from 2026 to 2029.
Current sections and recommendations in the IMO Polar Code
dealing with navigation in Polar waters are still relevant but the
introduction of new S-100 services, bringing together new modern
and qualified data sets for route monitoring (and planning) aimed
to improve safety in particular in Polar regions. Amendments to the
Polar Code will be submitted by the IHO to the IMO if appropriate,
once these new S-100 data services become operational.
HCA and GEBCO IBCSO
Dr Boris Dorschel (Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine
Research, Germany) is responsible for the compilation of the 2nd
version of the GEBCO General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans, an
IHO-IOC programme. International Bathymetric Chart of the
Southern Ocean (IBCSO) data set, which is based on a new high
resolution (500 m) gridded bathymetric model. A plea was made by
the HCA early 2021 to HCA Members to share their bathymetric
data holdings of the region with the project manager in order to
support the compilation phase. This plea applies not only to the
Hydrographic Offices representing their nations at the IHO but also
to the scientific and research institutes around the world.
HCA and ATCM
HCA has established good links with ATCM, the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty and other supporting organizations (IAATO, SCAR,
COMNAP, Quantarctica, …) for many years through data collection,
information exchange, regular participation in ATCM consultative
meetings as observer or running seminar and workshops back-to-
back to ATCM Working Groups meetings.
Since ATCM XL in Beijing in 2017, the Executive Secretary of the
Antarctic Treaty kindly invites the IHO to consider sending experts
to each ATCM including ATCM XLV in Helsinki.
The IHO is pleased to confirm that the 19th Conference of the HCA
(HCA-19) is planned to be held in Italy in April 2024, kindly hosted
by the Istituto Idrografico della Marina (IIM), the Italian
Hydrographic Institute.
From an ATCM perspective, the main outcome of this long standing
cooperation between the ATCM and the IHO can be summarized
simply by reminding three important ATCM Resolutions adopted
from 2008 to 2019. They are:
ATCM Resolution 5 (2008): Improving Hydrographic Surveying and
Charting to Support Safety of Navigation in the Antarctic Region.
ATCM Resolution 5 (2014): Strengthening Cooperation in
Hydrographic Surveying and Charting of Antarctic Waters.
ATCM Resolution 6 (2019): Hydrographic Mapping of Antarctic
Waters.
There is no doubt that recommendations provided in these
Resolutions are key enablers for some nations involved in scientific
research in Antarctic waters.
To transform the Resolutions however into an effective operation
plan that can be supported by the IHO, the 1st step is certainly to
identify, collect and prioritize these requirements. This task is under
the responsibility of ATCM.
Any requirement in the outcome of ATCM XLV having a possible
impact on hydrographic activities will be considered at HCA-19.
The 3rd Session of the IHO Assembly (A-3) IHO 3rd Session of the
Assembly., 450 participants, is planned in Monaco from 1 to 5 May
2023.
The ATCM is informed that a proposal for a new IHO Resolution on
the Recognition of the existence and the limits of the Southern
Ocean around Antarctica has been submitted by the HCA Chair to
A-3 At the date of submission of this IHO Report to the ATS, the
outcome of discussions on this proposal is unknown. Useful
Reference: IHO A-3 PRO 3.3.. National positions and/or
reservations on this Resolution are planned to be included in this
Resolution.
Proposals for consideration by ATCM
The ATCM is invited to note the report and recommendations and
highlights in particular.
