Australian experience with implementation of the International
Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code)
Australian experience with implementation of the International
Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters
Summary
This paper summarises Australia’s experience with implementation
of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (the
Polar Code) from the perspective of a flag State and as an owner
and operator of a Polar Class vessel supporting the Australian
Antarctic Program.
Australia strongly supports safe and sustainable shipping the Polar
regions and looks forward to hearing experiences of other flag
States on their Polar Code implementation. Australia is particularly
interested in sharing experiences and potential best practices for
Polar Code implementation with States and operators active in the
remote regions of continental Antarctica, including the East
Antarctic region.
Australia Flag State implementation of the Polar Code
The responsible agency for implementation of the Polar Code for
Australian-flagged vessels is the Australian Maritime Safety
Authority (AMSA). The safety construction and equipment
requirements of the Polar Code are enacted domestically through
Marine Order 53 (Vessels in polar waters) 2016 which sets out
certification requirements for vessels that undertake voyages in
polar waters, and also sets out arrangements for the safe operation
of vessels in polar waters. The pollution prevention requirements of
the Polar Code are implemented under the Navigation Act 2012, the
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Act 1983
and separate marine orders.
As the national regulator, AMSA works with a range of
Classification Societies, which undertake plan approval, survey and
certification functions on AMSA’s behalf. Australia has two vessels
under its flag which operate in Antarctic waters under Polar Code
requirements: the RSV Nuyina, a Polar Class 3 icebreaker owned by
the Australian Antarctic Division, and the RV Investigator, a
multipurpose research vessel owned by the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO).
Polar Code compliance of Australian-owned and Australian-
registered ships is confirmed through regular flag State inspections
by AMSA marine surveyors. Aside from the two Australian Polar
Code compliant vessels, relatively few vessels visit Australian ports
which operate in the Polar Code area and would be subject to Polar
Code requirements.
With the relatively recent entry into force and small number of
Australian-flagged Polar Code vessels, in comparison with other flag
and port states, Australia welcomes opportunities to share
experiences and best practices on Polar Code implementation in the
Antarctic region.
Australian Antarctic Program: experiences with Polar class
certification for Antarctic operations
The Australian Government took delivery of its new Antarctic
icebreaker, the RSV Nuyina (pronounced ‘noy-yee-nah’) in October
2021 and the vessel completed its maiden voyage to Antarctica in
late January 2022. Owned by the Australian Government
(Australian Antarctic Division) and operated and crewed by Serco,
the vessel provides a state-of-the-art capability to conduct multi-
disciplinary science, both in sea ice and open water, and will be the
primary means of moving cargo and equipment to and from
Australia’s Antarctic and sub-Antarctic research stations. The RSV
Nuyina’s capacity to transport special personnel will also
supplement Australia’s Antarctic airlink for personnel.
RSV Nuyina is a Polar Class 3 Icebreaker (+). It is 50 metres high,
160.3 metres long and can carry 117 special personnel, 32 crew,
1200 tonnes of cargo, and 1.9 million litres of fuel. The vessel’s
helideck can support four small helicopters or two medium-sized
helicopters.
The RSV Nuyina complies with mandatory IMO and Antarctic
environmental regulations, including those implemented in the
Polar Code. The vessel incorporates into its design, construction and
operation environmental standards for ballast water, biofouling,
grey water, refrigeration systems, exhaust emissions, and the ship’s
energy efficiency management – all of which exceed statutory
environmental performance regulations.
The RSV Nuyina’s home port is Hobart, and its operations will
largely focus on servicing Australian stations in the East Antarctic
and the sub-Antarctic along with conducting marine scientific
research activities.
Polar Code compliance was considered in the design, build and
commissioning of the RSV Nuyina prior to its first voyage to the
Antarctic in 2022. Design of the vessel commenced in 2016, after
the Polar code was adopted, and construction began in mid 2017,
after its entry into force.
AMSA commissioned Lloyds Register (LR) to carry out plan
approval and onsite verification of Polar Code compliance under
AMSA oversight and authority, including on interpretations of rules
and alternate proposals. Currently RSV Nuyina is operating on an
interim Polar Code certificate whilst winterisation systems trials are
concluded.
The East Antarctic, where most of Australia’s Antarctic operations
occur, is remote and distant from mainland ports and other ships,
resulting in circumstances unique to this operating region. In
working through Polar Code requirements and to ultimately achieve
the full-term Polar Ship Certificate for the RSV Nuyina, AAD and
the vessel operator were successful in overcoming some testing
challenges. For this vessel, the combination of the ship being built
and commissioned distant from polar waters (in Romania and the
Netherlands) added complexity to the Polar Code certification
process, with a need to schedule deployments to polar regions at a
suitable time of year to test specialised systems.
Other challenges associated with operations in the remote East
Antarctic region include retention and onboard management of
treated black water, treated oily water, and garbage for extended
periods due to the long voyages.
Interpretation of the Polar Code provisions relating to extended
‘time to rescue’ for operating in very remote regions is an area
where work was required to find the best solutions. Depending on
the time of year the ship is operating, time to rescue could be up to
90 days if there are no other capable and available icebreaking
ships in the Southern Hemisphere. This requires large quantities of
rations, water and support equipment to be carried. This issue is
particularly challenging for East Antarctica, compared with Arctic
regions and the Antarctic Peninsula, which have a wider range of
alternative rescue opportunities.
Australia’s experience with Polar Code implementation has focused
on our operations in East Antarctica, and on the application of the
Polar Code to the design, construction and operation of the RSV
Nuyina. Australia is happy to continue to share with other Parties
and National Antarctic Programs our approach to the
implementation challenges arising from these two priorities, and
any future lessons learned through ongoing operations and
implementation of the Polar Code.
