IAATO Operational Procedures for responsible wildlife watching –
An update
IAATO Operational Procedures for responsible wildlife watching –
An update
Summary
This paper provides information from IAATO about recent updates
to its operational procedures for responsible wildlife watching in
Antarctica. These are reviewed routinely by relevant committees
and working groups within the Association, in consultation with
outside experts as required. Overall, the procedures were
strengthened by emphasizing the importance of monitoring
behavior for disturbance, no matter the distance from wildlife, and
take account of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI). The
guide to passenger ratio for visiting emperor penguin colonies has
been reduced from 1:20 to 1:15. A document has been created for
IAATO Operators outlining overarching obligations for responsible
wildlife watching, derived from ATCM and IAATO requirements. 
Background
IAATO’s suite of operational procedures for responsible wildlife
watching are integral tools for enabling the association to further its
mission to promote the practice of safe, environmentally
responsible private sector travel to Antarctica. IAATO supports the
view that any well-managed wildlife watching experience avoids
disturbance and harmful impacts while creating an enriching
learning opportunity for visitors. Since its inception in 1991, IAATO
has used its own and ATCM adopted guidance to support effective
visitor management and implementation of the Environment
Protocol, first presenting its “Guidelines of conduct for Antarctica
visitors” to the ATCM in 1992 (ATCM XVII IP065 Tourism in
Antarctica guidelines for a low-impact presence and IP076
Responsible tourism in Antarctica). In 1994, at ATCM XVIII-1 in
Kyoto, IAATO’s “Visitor Guidelines” and “Tour Operator
Guidelines” were codified by the Parties into Recommendation
XVIII-1. These guidelines, among others that were used at the time,
including Oceanites’ guidelines, provided expedition leaders and
ship’s command with standard operating procedures for viewing
wildlife.
Standard operating procedures, guidelines and decisions by IAATO,
ATCM, SCAR, COMNAP and other relevant bodies are housed in
IAATO’s Field Operations Manual (FOM) which is updated regularly
and available to National Competent Authorities (ATCM XLII IP144
IAATO Field Operations Manual (FOM)). The FOM is essential in
ensuring member Operators and their field staff know their
obligations for conducting safe, environmentally responsible
activities in Antarctica and have reference to the appropriate
documentation to assist in having no more than a minor or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. IAATO also makes
an abridged version of the FOM publicly available for download
through its App, IAATO Polar Guide: Antarctica (ATCM XLII IP 098
Education and Outreach by IAATO – an update for 2019).
IAATO regularly reviews procedural documents in the FOM and
considers whether new ones need to be created. This process
involves the association’s thematic committees and working groups,
in consultation with outside experts as required. IAATO reports new
procedures and guidelines to the ATCM and CEP, as appropriate
(e.g., ATCM XXXIX-CEP XIX IP 121 IAATO Wildlife Watching
Guidelines for Emperor penguins and leopard seals; and ATCM
XXIX – CEP IX IP39 Antarctic Whales and Antarctic Tourism).
IAATO hopes this would be helpful to provide an update to ATCM
XLV – CEP XXV on the latest industry led improvements to its
procedures related to responsible wildlife viewing is useful.
IAATO Review in 2022
The following procedures were reviewed, updated and formally
adopted at IAATO’s Annual Meeting in Hamburg, Germany, 24-27
April, 2023:
IAATO Operational Procedures for Wildlife Watching (Attachment
A)
IAATO Operational Procedures for Viewing Birds (Attachment B)
IAATO Operational Procedures for Viewing Seals (Attachment C)
IAATO Operational Procedures for Visiting Emperor Penguin
Colonies (Attachment D)
IAATO Operational Procedures for Watching Whales (Attachment E)
IAATO Procedures Upon the Discovery of a High or
Unusual Mortality Event (Attachment F)
IAATO additionally created a short reference guide for member
Operators that outlines their overarching obligations for responsible
wildlife watching, derived from ATCM and IAATO requirements.
This was also adopted at IAATO’s 2023 Annual Meeting in
Hamburg:
IAATO Overarching Principles for Wildlife Watching (Attachment
G).
A note on Avian Influenza
In 2022, several IAATO procedures that support responsible
watching wildlife were identified for updating, further prioritized
due to concerns about the global Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza
(HPAI) pandemic. Advice from SCAR about the risks of HPAI have
been added to relevant documents. Note that IAATO implemented
specific HPAI biosecurity procedures ahead of the 2022-2023
season to mitigate the introduction of HPAI from direct human
activities (ATCM XLV – CEP XXV IP101 Heightened Risk of Avian
Influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area). These were in addition to
IAATO’s standard decontamination procedures.
In 2016, IAATO presented its new procedures upon the discovery of
a high mortality event to the ATCM (ATCM XXXIX IP119). These
procedures were updated in 2022, following consultation with the
SCAR Antarctic Wildlife Health Working Group and guidance from
the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH). The updated
procedures include references to finding an ‘unusual’ as well as
‘high’ mortality event.
Monitoring behaviour – a holistic approach
Additionally, following discussions with Operators, field staff, and
feedback from National Competent Authorities, IAATO has further
strengthened relevant procedures by emphasizing the importance of
monitoring for changes in animal behavior no matter the distance
from wildlife. This is to reinforce the understanding that while
minimum recommended distances from wildlife are provided, they
assume that wildlife is showing no signs of disturbance from the
presence of recreational visitors or related activities (e.g. vessels,
fixed or rotary wing aircraft and vehicles).
Further, the IAATO Emperor Penguin Working Group (EPWG)
recommended that while Operators typically manage groups
smaller than 20 visitors in the field, they felt it would be more
appropriate to reduce the guide to visitor ratio from 1:20 (Measure
15 (2009)) to 1:15 when visiting emperor penguin colonies. IAATO
will continue to review the effective application of guide to visitor
ratios in other visitor management situations.
The EPWG utilized the CEP Draft Specially Protected Action Plan
for the Emperor Penguin (ATCM XLIV-CEP XXIV WP034 Report of
the CEP Intersessional Contact Group established to develop a
Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the emperor penguin)
during the review of IAATO Procedures for Visiting Emperor
Penguin Colonies and requested it is made available to member
Operators.
