Feedback on the monitoring on board tourist vessels conducted
during the 2022 / 2023 season
Feedback on the monitoring on board tourist vessels conducted
during the 2022 / 2023 season
Summary
This Information Paper reports on the monitoring carried out under
Resolution 9 (2021) Voluntary on-board observer operational
framework for vessel-based tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area
during the 2022 / 2023 Antarctic season, in partnership between
France and New Zealand and France and IAATO. It highlights the
benefits and challenges of implementing R9 (2021) at the
international level. It calls on Parties authorizing tourism activities
to consider joining this international effort to better monitor
tourism activities in Antarctica.
Background
Resolution 9 (2021) recommend that Parties monitor, on a
voluntary basis, vessel-based tourism under their jurisdiction in the
Antarctic Treaty area, based on the framework proposed by the
Resolution. The Resolution further calls on Parties to cooperate in
this context. In parallel, New Zealand has had an on-board observer
scheme for New Zealand-approved Antarctic tour vessels since
1996, following the entry into force of the Environmental Protocol
to the Antarctic Treaty. IAATO as well, has a Mandatory observer
scheme on-board its Operator’s vessel.
France and IAATO joint monitoring
Between November 27 and December 8, 2022, France, through its
National Competent Authority (NCA), the “Prefet, administrateur
supérieur des Terres australes et antarctiques françaises” (TAAF)
and IAATO conducted a joint monitoring on board Le Commandant
Charcot, from the company Ponant. The vessel was to be observed
in accordance with the IAATO scheme schedule. It visited the north-
east peninsula (Weddell Sea).
The observer was a public officer specialized in maritime affairs
issues, including the monitoring and control of activities at sea. He
was proposed by France, and had to pass the IAATO online
assessment, guaranteeing his good knowledge of the Antarctic and
of the regulations and directives in force. He carried out a
monitoring under R9 (2021), according to the "monitoring
checklist" provided by the Resolution, and reported to the French
ANC in accordance with this framework. At the same time, he
carried out an IAATO observation under the “IAATO Mandatory
Observation Scheme” and provided a report to IAATO on this basis.
The observer reported no difficulties in completing both reports,
which were found to be similar.
Regarding financial aspects, the operator, Ponant, provided free
boarding. France covered the observer’s salary, IAATO took care of
transit costs to and from the ship.
New Zealand and France joint monitoring
Between February 14 and March 12, 2023, New Zealand and
France, through their respective National Competent Authorities,
conducted joint monitoring on board the same vessel, Le
Commandant Charcot, which departed from New Zealand
(Dunedin) to Argentina (Ushuaia).
The observer was selected and appointed by New Zealand. She was
trained by New Zealand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Department of Conservation, and Antarctica New Zealand, and met
every expectation listed by R9 (2021).
New Zealand provided the observer with all relevant and required
information and documentation, such as relevant management
plans; relevant site-specific guidelines; health & safety guidance;
etc. Specific equipment including a satellite phone, and appropriate
clothing and gear were also provided by New Zealand.
The observer reported to New Zealand and France on the operator’s
compliance with the national authorisations that reflected the
requirements of the Antarctic Treaty, its Environmental Protocol
and relevant Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting instruments.
The observer considered issues set out in the compliance section of
the voluntary on-board observer framework, particularly the
operator’s impact on the Antarctic environment and dependant and
associated ecosystems.
The observer’s overall assessment was that the expedition’s staff
were well experienced and trained in the requirements of the
Antarctic Treaty System, and the operator’s activities were
implemented with due care and respect to the Antarctic
Environment. Ponant’s Le Commandant Charcot operated with
minimal environmental impact, having been designed with high
environmental specifications that were evident to be successful
throughout the voyage. Compulsory briefings were provided to all
passengers on specific activities, and site visits were conducted with
site-specific guidelines.
International benefits of on-board monitoring
Overall benefits of the implementation of on-board monitoring
The above-described monitoring has met objectives set by R9
(2021), as well as the ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan,
particularly Priorities 11 and 12 by:
Allowing NCAs to monitor the consistency with domestic and
international regulations and standards adopted within the
Antarctic Treaty System framework (regulations from the Antarctic
Treaty; the Environment Protocol and its annexes; Measures,
Resolutions and Recommendations set out by the ATCM;
information provided for the application; and domestic
authorisations mechanisms).
Enhancing New Zealand and France NCAs’ understanding of
activities they authorise in the Antarctic Treaty area, and
knowledge of visited sites and operator practices. A better
understanding of field activities allowing NCAs to carry out their
duties more effectively, in line with the actual operations.
Contributing to strengthen the dialogue between Parties, IAATO
and tourist operators (i.e., Ponant) in Antarctica.
Promoting and supporting responsible and supervised tourism
practices in Antarctica.
Monitoring the effectiveness of guidelines (e.g., Visitor Site
Guidelines).
Providing the opportunity for the observer to carry out basic
landing site monitoring.
Operational and financial benefits of the implementation of on-
board monitoring
Beyond these general interests, such partnership allows for
logistical, operational and financial benefits.
Financial aspects
It allows for a more cost-effective approach for NCAs, within the
framework of a NCA / IAATO cooperation, thanks to the payment
of transportation costs by IAATO. These costs represent a significant
part of the total budget of the operation.
A cooperation between two NCAs also offers great opportunities for
cost sharing and pooling. For example, the pooling of an observer
moving from one NCA vessel to another from the same port of
departure and arrival would significantly reduce transportation
costs. This deserves further attention.
Operational aspects
From an operational perspective, a cooperation between an NCA
and IAATO, such as the one described above, streamlines and
facilitates the observation process. It allows simultaneous
observations in accordance with R9 (2021) and the IAATO
Mandatory Scheme, limiting the burden for the operator in terms of
additional passengers to be accommodated on board.
Cooperation between NCAs also facilitates operational aspects.
France was therefore able to monitor the cruise from New Zealand
to Argentina, thanks to New Zealand. In general, international
collaboration opens up new possibilities by overcoming certain
logistical challenges.
International and “inter-actors” cooperation
Beyond financial and operational aspects, international cooperation
strengthens the relationships between NCAs, and between NCAs and
IAATO, in line with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty System.
Challenges 
Generally speaking, ATCPs wishing to engage in such process may
face two main challenges:
The willingness of operators to collaborate and accommodate an
additional passenger on board. The experiences reported in this IP
provide a good example of effective collaboration.
The logistical arrangements, responsibilities and financial
modalities must be discussed well ahead of the cruise. Work is
needed to design robust, long-term solutions in order to achieve a
sustainable cooperation for broader implementation of these
schemes.
Recommendations
Large-scale implementation of on-board monitoring at the
international level will increase the above benefits, pooling
possibilities, cost sharing opportunities, etc. France and New
Zealand encourage interested Parties to consider the
implementation of R9 (2021). They remain fully available to discuss
this issue.
Logistical and financial arrangements for the observations are key
issues for a broader implementation of R9 (2021). France and New
Zealand encourage Parties to include this issue in a broader
discussion on tourism or environmental monitoring.
