Further Plans of the Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern
Hemisphere (YOPP-SH) and Completion of the Polar Prediction
Project
Further Plans of the Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern
Hemisphere (YOPP-SH) and Completion of the Polar Prediction
Project
Summary
This IP summarises recent activities undertaken in the Antarctic
region as part of the World Weather Research Programme (WWRP)
of the World Meteorological Organization's (WMO) Polar Prediction
Project (PPP).
PPP formally concluded on 31 December 2022 but activities in
three key areas (Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern
Hemisphere (YOPP-SH), the Model Intercomparison and
Improvement Project (MIIP) and the PPP Societal and
Environmental Research Applications group (PPP-SERA)) will
continue during 2023. The WWRP is finalising approvals for a
follow-on project currently known as the Polar Coupled Analysis
and Prediction Services which is expected to commence in 2024.
Introduction
PPP coordinated international research with the main goal of
significantly improving weather and sea-ice prediction capabilities
in the polar regions, on time scales from hours to seasonal. It is part
of the World Weather Research Programme (WWRP) of WMO, with
close links to its sister programme, the WMO/IOC-UNESCO/ISC
World Climate Research Programme (WCRP). SCAR has been a
partner and supportive of PPP activities over the last ten years.
The YOPP included Special Observing Periods (SOP) and Targeted
Observing Periods (TOPS) in the Arctic and Antarctic to increase
the number of atmospheric and oceanographic observations. Extra
radiosondes were launched from polar meteorological stations, and
additional buoys were deployed from research vessels. The
additional data enables improved representation of polar key
processes in uncoupled and coupled models used for high-quality
prediction in polar regions.
Winter Antarctic Special Observing Period (SOP) in 2022
The second YOPP-SH SOP from mid-April to the end of August 2022
coincided with the rapid expansion of the Antarctic sea-ice cover.
The goal of this winter SOP was to improve forecast capabilities
during the non-summer months as nations contemplate expanding
to year-round scientific field investigations. In recognition of
limited personnel and resources at this time of year, the TOP
approach was adopted and included seven intensive observing
periods during the overall structure of the SOP, each ranging from 5
to 10 days in duration.
Four of these TOPS were Pan-Antarctic and three were regional
TOPS, with two focused on the East Antarctica/Ross Sea and one on
the Antarctic Peninsula. The scientific focus was on major oceanic
cyclones, atmospheric rivers and related events. The primary
additional observations were extra radiosonde ascents (totalling
1100 during the 7 TOPS, see Fig. 1) although additional
instrumentation was added at many
stations, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula to aid in the
investigation of the atmospheric-river events.
A manuscript for the Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society is being prepared that describes the TOPS. With support
from the U.S. National Science Foundation, The Ohio State
University and the National Center for Atmospheric Research are
performing data-denial experiments with the Antarctic Mesoscale
Prediction System (AMPS) to explore the forecast improvement
resulting from the extra radiosondes launched during the TOPS. In
addition, more advanced data assimilation is being tested in the
AMPS system, and the best microphysics scheme to capture the
atmospheric river events is under investigation.
Sea-ice prediction in the Antarctic
One of the flagship activities of YOPP-SH is the Sea Ice Prediction
Network South (SIPN South), which was initiated in 2017 and has
run without interruption since then. SIPN South was launched due
to the increasing need for sea-ice information in the Southern
Ocean, the existence of predictability mechanisms for summer sea
ice recently suggested in the scientific literature, and the lack of
knowledge regarding the skill of state-of-the-art operational
forecasts at the seasonal time scale.
In the five years, SIPN South received more than 3000 forecasts of
sea-ice area and concentrations from 21 unique groups representing
five continents, many of which were ensembles. Forecasts
conducted for the 2022-2023 summer season (Figure 2) are
currently being analysed but the early results shown below reveal a
continued overestimate of Antarctic sea-ice area, at least at the
beginning of the forecast period. Notably, the minimum extent
during February 2023 was a record low for the satellite era that
started in 1979 (https://nsidc.org/news-analyses/news-stories/
antarctic-sea-ice-settles-record-low-2023). A scientific paper
(Massonnet et al. 2023) describes the skill of contemporary
dynamical models and statistical models in predicting summer
Antarctic sea ice at the global and regional scales. SIPN South will
continue for the next few years, and a pending evaluation of model
predictions during the sea-ice growth season was conducted during
the SOP of May-August 2022 that had the embedded TOPs.
Figure 1. Stations (red dots) releasing extra radiosondes during the
YOPP-SH winter Targeted Observing Periods in 2022. Numbers
given for each station explained at bottom left of the figure.
Figure 2: Forecasts of total Antarctic sea-ice area for the 2022-2023
melting season (submitted before 1st December 2022) contributed
by 17 groups. Verifying observations are in black.
YOPP-SH TOP Outreach
Facebook, Twitter and Instagram social media sites were established
and maintained by the Polar Meteorology Group of the Byrd Polar
and Climate Research Center at Ohio State University during the
TOPS. Videos and pictures obtained from the participants in the
TOPS at the research stations were regularly posted:
https://www.facebook.com/YOPPSHOSUPolar?ref=page_internal
https://mobile.twitter.com/YOPPSHOSUPolar
https://www.instagram.com/yoppshosu/
A video publicizing the TOPS was prepared by the Byrd Polar and
Climate Research Center and is available here: https://
vimeo.com/784878087
YOPP-SH Data Archival
With funding provided by the U.S. National Science Foundation, the
Antarctic Meteorological Research and Data Center (AMRDC) is the
official data center for YOPP-SH. All YOPP-SH data sets it holds can
be found here: https://amrdcdata.ssec.wisc.edu/group/year-of-
polar-prediction-in-the-southern-hemisphere. These include the
radiosonde observations from the winter TOPS and all data sets
have digital object identifier (doi) numbers.
Meetings
YOPP-SH Community
The seventh YOPP-SH meeting was a hybrid meeting held on 6
August 2022 at the Pyle Centre at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. The meeting was organized by the Byrd Polar and Climate
Research Center and was aligned with the annual Workshop on
Antarctic Meteorology and Climate (WAMC, 4 and 5 August 2022).
During the meeting the first results from the TOPs were discussed.
The presentations are available online (https://polarmet.osu.edu/
YOPP-SH_2022/) as is a meeting report (Wang et al. 2022; https://
polarmet.osu.edu/YOPP-SH_2022/
BPCRC_tech_report_2022-001.pdf), and a scientific article
summarising the WAMC and the YOPP-SH meeting is presently
under review (Tomanek et al., 2023).
YOPP Final Summit
The YOPP Final Summit (https://yoppfinalsummit.com/) took place
in Montreal, Canada, 29 August - 1 September 2022, and brought
together the polar prediction community – from operational
centres, academia, environment services, polar prediction users and
northern communities. The Summit showcased the successes of
YOPP and included Science-to-Service sessions where key users
described their engagement with environmental predictions. The
YOPP-SH efforts provided an important contribution to the Summit.
The successes of YOPP from the Summit presentations included:
a better understanding of the impact of key polar measurements
(radiosondes and space-based instruments such as microwave
radiometers), and recent advancements in the current NWP
observing system, achieved through coordinated OSEs in both polar
regions (e.g., Sandu et al 2021);
enhanced understanding of the linkages between Arctic and mid-
latitude weather (e.g., Day et al 2019);
advancements in the atmosphere-ocean-sea ice and atmosphere-
land-cryosphere coupling in NWP, and in assessing and recognizing
the added value of coupling in Earth System Models (e.g., Bauer et
al 2016);
deployment of tailored polar observation campaigns to address yet
unresolved polar processes (e.g., Renfrew et al 2022);
progress in verification and forecasting techniques for sea-ice,
including a novel headline score (e.g., Goessling and Jung, 2018);
advances in process understanding and process-based evaluation
with the establishment of the YOPPsiteMIP framework and tools
(Svensson 2020);
better understanding of emerging societal and stakeholder needs in
the Arctic and Antarctic (e.g., Dawson et al 2017); and
innovative transdisciplinary methodologies for co-producing salient
information services for various user groups (Jeuring and Lamers
2021).
The YOPP Final Summit identified a number of areas worthy of
prioritized research in the area of environmental prediction and
services for the polar regions:
coupled atmosphere, sea-ice and ocean models with an emphasis on
advanced parameterisations and enhanced resolution at which
critical phenomena start to be resolved (e.g., ocean eddies);
improved definition and representation of stable boundary layer
processes, including mixed-phase clouds and aerosols; incorporation
of wave-ice-ocean interactions;
radiance assimilation over sea ice, land ice, and ice sheets
understanding of linkages between polar regions and lower
latitudes from a prediction perspective;
exploring the limits of predictability of the atmosphere-cryosphere-
ocean system;
an examination of the observational representativeness over land,
sea ice and ocean; better representation of the hydrological cycle;
and,
transdisciplinary work with social scientists around the use of
forecasting services and operational decision-making.
The discussions around the Science and Service sessions identified
that, whilst good progress had been made in identifying key user
groups and their needs, more effort is needed to expand research
around identifying the range of information needs of a greater
diversity of user groups as well as tailoring services to their needs.
Societal and Environmental Research Applications (SERA)
The PPP-SERA group are currently compiling a review paper for the
journal “Weather, Climate and Society” that synthesises the work
done over the last few years on the use of WWIC information. Some
key themes that will be explored in the review paper include:
user requirements
service reliability
barriers to use
mismatch between services and user needs
the importance of experience and local knowledge
community-based monitoring
planning and decision-making
safety and risk
education and training
search and rescue
The group will further discuss the legacies of the PPP for users of
WWIC in the conclusion. 
A WWRP/PPP-SERA workshop held in Hobart, Australia, 17-19
April 2023, is expected to help to formulate a strategy for the next
polar research project of the WWRP, proposed to begin in 2024 that
takes into consideration social-science aspects and establishes
strong connections with stakeholders in order to move towards co-
production. 
Acknowledgement
The Polar Prediction Project has been a ten-year effort of the
WMO’s World Weather Research Programme and has been very
successful, in part due to the enormous support provided to the
project by many partner organisations and support of the Antarctic
Treaty partners. WMO would like to thank those contributors and
acknowledge their support.
References:
Bauer, P., Magnusson, L., Thépaut, J.-N., Hamill, T.M.,
2016: Aspects of ECMWF model performance in polar areas. Quart.
J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 142: 583–596, DOI:10.1002/qj.2449.
Dawson, J., et al, 2017. Navigating weather, water, Ice and climate
information for Safe polar mobilities. Available: https://
zenodo.org/record/7440086#.Y6llGhVBzrc.
Day, JJ., et al, 2019. Increased Arctic influence on the midlatitude
flow during Scandinavian Blocking episodes. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor.
Soc., 145 [725], 3846–3862. https://www.zenodo.org/
record/3548329#.Y6lQDxVBzrd.
Goessling, H. and Jung, T. (2018) A probabilistic verification score
for contours: Methodology and application to Arctic ice-edge
forecasts. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 144, [712], 735–743. https://
doi.org/10.1002/qj.3242.
Jeuring, J., and Lamers, M., 2021. Towards useful forms of co-
production in metocean services for the European Arctic. Report
from PPP-SERA Special Services Workshop Online meeting. https://
zenodo.org/record/7483419#.Y6ltnBVBzrc.
Massonnet, F., S. Barreira, A. Barthélemy, R. Bilbao, E. Blanchard,
E. Blockley, D. Bromwich, M. Bushuk, X. Dong, H. F. Goessling, W.
Hobbs, D. Iovino, W.-S. Lee, C. Li, W. N. Meier, W. J. Merryfield, E.
Moreno- Chamarro, Y. Morioka, X. Li, B. Niraula, A. Petty, A.
Sanna, M. Scilingo, Q. Shu, M. Sigmond, N. Sun, S. Tietsche, X. Wu,
Q. Yang, and X. Yuan, 2023: SIPN South: five years of coordinated
seasonal Antarctic sea ice predictions. Frontiers in Marine Science,
provisionally accepted.
Renfrew, I.A., et al. (2019): The Iceland Greenland seas project.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 100, 1795– 1817.
https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-18-0217.1.
Sandu, I., et al, 2021: The potential of numerical prediction systems
to supportthe design of Arctic observing systems: Insights from the
APPLICATE and YOPP projects. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 147,
[741], 3863-3877. https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1002/qj.4182
Svensson, G., (2020): YOPPsiteMIP: Year of Polar Prediction site
Model Inter-comparison Project. EGU General Assembly Conference
Abstracts, May 2020. DOI: 10.5194/egusphere-egu2020-11272
Tomanek, A.J., M.A. Lazzara, D.E. Mikolajczyk, T.P. Norton, I.I.
Onsi, D.H. Bromwich, and M.F. Litell, 2023: The 17th Workshop on
Antarctic Meteorology and Climate and the 7th Year of Polar
Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere Meeting. Advances in
Atmospheric Sciences, in review.
Wang, S.-H., D. H. Bromwich, and M. Fontolan Litell, 2022: The 7th
Year of Polar Prediction in the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH)
Meeting, Pyle Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, August
6, 2022. BPCRC Technical Report 2022-001, Byrd Polar and Climate
Research Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA,
21 pp.
https://polarmet.osu.edu/YOPP-SH_2022/
BPCRC_tech_report_2022-001.pdf
