Update on Canada’s Engagement in the Antarctic
Update on Canada’s Engagement in the Antarctic
Information Paper submitted by Canada
Summary
Canada has a long history of Antarctic research and engagement.
On October 22, 2021, Canada submitted its application for
Consultative Party status in the Antarctic Treaty System,
highlighting its credentials. Since then, Canada has bolstered its
application by becoming a full member of the Council of Managers
of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) and advancing several
important programmatic considerations, including potential
knowledge mobilization and youth engagement opportunities;
planning new Antarctic research activities led by Canadian
researchers; and identifying potential international partners.
Canada’s Engagement in the Antarctic
For over 100 years, Canada has been involved in scientific research
in the Antarctic. Canadian researchers have authored approximately
1500 science journals on Antarctic and Southern Ocean science.
Additionally, domestic and international communities continue to
benefit from Canadian experience, information, and technologies,
including data and derived data products, to advance research,
operational programs, environmental monitoring and intelligence,
critical services and emergency response serving both polar regions.
Since ATCM-44, Canada has pursued its involvement in different
areas of the Antarctic Treaty System. Canada was approved as a full
member of COMNAP on July 27, 2022, after having been an
observer since 2006. Canada has joined some COMNAP Expert
Groups and anticipates playing a role in promoting and sharing our
expertise of polar research infrastructure, technology, and practices.
Canada is also an observer to the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), attended the
annual meeting in Hobart, and will participate to the special
meeting on marine protected areas in June 2023. Conscious of the
importance of sustainable tourism, Canada has also participated to
the Antarctic Tourism Workshop that was held in March 2023.
Canada is committed to the advancement of scientific research in
the Antarctic and is developing a Canadian Antarctic Research
Program, including Space Science and Technology, to further
support and expand ongoing Antarctic research undertaken by
Canadian researchers. In November-December 2022, Canada hosted
a Canadian Antarctic Research Program workshop at the Canadian
High Arctic Research Station in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut. The
workshop involved Canadian Antarctic scientists and researchers
from academia and the Government of Canada, Canadian
government officials, and representatives from the Scientific
Committee on Arctic Research (SCAR) and COMNAP. Below we
provide a summary of Canada’s current Antarctic research activities
followed by Canada’s plan to advance a Canadian Antarctic
Research Program. In addition, Canada’s Antarctic engagements are
supported by a senior-level interdepartmental International Polar
Committee.
Canadian Antarctic Research
Canada’s research contributions span the three Science Groups of
SCAR, as described in Canada and the Antarctic Treaty, the
application for Consultative Party status in the Antarctic Treaty
System that Canada deposited in October of 2021. Some examples
include:
Canada’s research on ground ice (permafrost) in the Antarctic and
its role in shaping landscapes have contributed to the understanding
of the distribution and origin of permafrost in Antarctica.
Canada’s RADARSAT I and II: Earth observation satellites supported
mapping Antarctic ice and its surface motion, including ice streams,
while Canada’s RADARSAT Constellation Mission (RCM) continues
to provide Earth Observation coverage for sea ice and glacier
monitoring. Canada is also presenting an information paper entitled
Advancing Canadian and International Antarctic Research through
Space Science and Technology under Agenda item 15.
Monitoring and modelling ozone depletion from Canadian space
assets in the Antarctic: Canada’s atmospheric space missions are
instrumental in informing evidence-based decision-making and
contributing to global assessment reports.
Antarctica in the global climate system: Canada’s seasonal
predictions of Antarctic sea ice are world-leading and Canada is co-
leading a SCAR climate model intercomparison initiative to
understand the profound impacts of Antarctic ice sheet melting on
the Southern Ocean and Southern Hemisphere climate.
Several researchers based at Canadian universities were active in
Antarctica in the last field season (2022/23), including the
following:
Four researchers joined a German cruise for biological sampling in
the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean;
Four researchers participated in investigations of perennially frozen
Lake Untersee with researchers from several nations;
One researcher undertook geomorphological field work to discern
glacial retreat on Horseshoe Island with Turkey;
Two researchers were involved in biological field work on microbial
ecosystems on Livingstone Island with Spain; and,
One researcher participated in climate variability investigations on
a traverse to Dome C with Italy and France.
Looking forward to the 2023/24 field season, Canadian researchers
will join the POLENET team in West Antarctica to promote
seismological and geodetic network operations with the United
States, participate in glaciological investigations in East Antarctica
with Australia, and continue work in Lake Untersee.
Canadian Antarctic Research Program Framework
Canada’s Antarctic Research Program Framework is focusing on
high level themes/scientific areas of focus. Canada has extensive
polar research experience and expertise which can inform on
Antarctic issues, such as ice sheet stability and sea-level rise, and
circumpolar issues, such as high-latitude landscape evolution, sea-
ice dynamics, and space weather.
Four high-level themes and sub-themes, as applicable, are described
below:
State and fate of the Antarctic Ice Sheet and global sea-level rise
Ice-sheet/ocean interactions: Parts of the Antarctic ice sheet may be
subject to a marine ice sheet instability. Understanding the
processes acting at the ice/ocean interface, and upstream,
contribute to robust projections of global sea-level rise.
Ice-sheet/solid-Earth interactions: Ice sheet evolution depends on
the nature and response of the underlying solid Earth. Geological
and geophysical investigations are required to understand
conditions beneath the ice sheet, to contribute to robust projections
of global sea-level rise.
Antarctica in the global climate system
Atmosphere: Atmospheric composition and processes over
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, such as feedbacks in
atmospheric chemistry (e.g., ozone), aerosols, and cloud formation,
and evolution of the Southern Annular Mode, affect the global
climate system.
Oceans and ecosystems: The Southern Ocean is a key sink for
atmospheric carbon and is a key player in the global climate
system, while Southern Ocean biology is strongly affected by
climate change.
Landscapes and ecosystems: The Antarctic landscape, and the
ecosystems it hosts, are experiencing rapid change due to climate
change, similar to Arctic Canada. The extreme environment of
Antarctica gives rise to organisms adapted to these environments
(extremophiles) and give insights to the potential for life on other
planets (exobiology).
Antarctica as a platform for observing space weather and the
universe
Space weather affects airplane and satellite communications and
electrical transmission lines in high-latitude regions. Antarctic
observations and modelling contribute to improved monitoring and
understanding of this global phenomenon. Antarctica, owing to its
southern polar location, and dry atmosphere, hosts unique
astronomical and astrophysical investigations.
Cross-cutting theme:  Anthropogenic effects on the Antarctic
environment and mitigation by conservation, cold-regions
technology, and green infrastructure solutions
Local and long-range anthropogenic influences on the environment,
such as pollution, micro-plastics, and climate change, affect
Antarctic and Southern Ocean biology, including fisheries.
Conservation efforts, combined with cold-regions technology and
green infrastructure solutions, have the potential to mitigate these
influences.
Canadian Antarctic researchers affiliated with each high-level
theme (and sub-theme where appropriate) were identified.
Discussions of the activities of SCAR, the Committee on
Environmental Protection (CEP), and the COMNAP took place
during and after the workshop to consider the priorities and foci of
these different elements of the Antarctic Treaty System.
Ongoing Program Development
Canada is committed to increasing funding dedicated to Antarctic
research scholarships and awards through a competitive process in
future years. For example, Canada is supporting students to attend a
2023 SCAR training school on glacial isostatic adjustment, training
a new
generation of circumpolar scientists which is a core element of the
Canada’s Antarctic Research Program.
In December 2022, Canada provided support to the Students on Ice
Foundation for a youth delegation to the Antarctic. A federal
government representative joined as a resource for the youth to
discuss the current and potential roles of Canada in the Antarctic.
An important component of Canada’s involvement in the Antarctic
is and will continue to be to foster and encourage activities and
events that promote greater awareness of, and opportunities for
knowledge sharing on polar regions.
Next Steps
Canada recognizes the need to increase scientific collaboration to
address shared challenges in the Antarctic and will continue to
increase its engagement with international partners and
stakeholders.
With the strong linkage between North and South Polar regions,
Canadian researchers have the necessary knowledge and tools to
continue to make substantial contributions to polar science in both
the Arctic and Antarctic. Canada will share the Canadian High
Arctic Research Station with partners in its continued development
of Antarctic partnerships and collaborations. Indigenous rights,
values, and knowledge of cold-climate environments, Antarctic
gateway nations, and Arctic-Antarctic exchanges are other elements
that will be considered throughout Canada’s engagement in the
Antarctic.
Building on its strength as an Arctic nation, the advancement of the
Canadian Antarctic Research Program will provide strategic
direction and new funding for collaborative research activities of
Canadian university researchers with international partners and
complement the Antarctic research activities and technological
developments of the Government of Canada.
