Progress of glaciological research activities at the Dome Fuji II
Camp
Progress of glaciological research activities at the Dome Fuji II
Camp
Summary
Ice cores from the Antarctic interior have provided valuable
information on past climate changes. After the deep ice coring at
the Dome Fuji station in the 2000s, the Japanese Antarctic Research
Expedition (JARE) has completed transporting all the ice core
samples to Japan, providing samples for paleoclimatic studies over
the last 720,000 years. JARE, in collaboration with international
partners, has also conducted field studies to locate a new drilling
site for the oldest ice core in the Dome Fuji II Camp. This
information paper describes the recent field research and associated
activities in the Dome Fuji area.
1. Introduction
In January 1995, JARE established the Dome Fuji Station (77° 19' S,
39° 42' E, 3,810 m above sea level) on the highlands of Dronning
Maud Land. In the following three years, the expedition teams
overwintered at the station and performed deep ice core drilling to
a depth of 2,503 m; this project is referred to as the First Dome Fuji
Project. Starting in 2002, JARE carried out another deep coring,
referred to as the Second Dome Fuji Project, at the Dome Fuji
station, to a depth of 3,035 m by 2007.
The next deep drilling (the Third Dome Fuji Project) is planned, and
preparatory activities for locating old ice, including international
collaborations, have been ongoing in the vicinity of the Dome Fuji
station. The Third Dome Fuji Project aims to collect a deep ice core
reaching back more than 1 million years to reconstruct past
Antarctic environments and atmospheric greenhouse gases
concentrations. It will provide crucial information on the
mechanisms for the dominant periodicity of glacial-interglacial
cycles, which was much shorter than that over approximately
800,000 years. The project is intended to directly contribute to the
IPICS Oldest Ice Core Project, which states the need for multiple ice
cores going back into shorter glacial cycles. IPICS, the International
Partnership in Ice Core Sciences, is an Expert Group of SCAR
Physical Science Group supported by Future Earth PAGES (Past
Global Changes) and IACS (International Association of Cryospheric
Sciences). Implementation of this project is also directly connected
to the SCAR Horizon Scan (5. How did the climate and atmospheric
composition vary prior to the oldest ice records?) (Kennicutt et al.,
Nature, 2014).
2. Ice and snow observations and preparatory activities for the
subsequent deep drilling in the vicinity of Dome Fuji station
JARE has conducted Ice and snow observations and preparatory
activities for the subsequent deep drilling near Dome Fuji station
since the 2018-19 season and reported them in ATCM XLIII IP51
and ATCM XLIV IP95. The JARE 64th (the 2022 - 2023 season)
conducted an inland traverse of approximately 1,000 km each way
to Dome Fuji. The JARE 64th advance party arrived at Syowa
Station by aircraft on 1 November 2022, joined the 63rd wintering
party members, and after preparation, departed for Dome Fuji on
19 November from a departure point on the continental coast. On
the inland route, surface mass balance observations using a snow
scale, snow sample collection, ice sheet surface observations using a
microwave radiometer, and ice sheet surface altitude and ice sheet
flow velocity observations using high-precision GNSS surveying
were carried out. In parallel with the local activities, the final
selection for the third Dome Fuji deep drilling site was conducted in
Japan. Based on a combination of the results of three field surveys
in previous seasons and numerous numerical experiments using ice
sheet
models (Tsutaki et al., Cryosphere, 2022), the site where the oldest
ice was expected to be stable was narrowed down to a location
approximately 5 km south-southwest (77° 21' 40" S, 39° 38' 38" E)
of the Dome Fuji Station (Figure 1). The camp at this location has
been named Dome Fuji II Camp.
Following this decision, the team constructed the Inland
Accommodation Module, which was used as a living place for the
team members once completed. Furthermore, a new drill site was
prepared, including making a drill trench and installing equipment.
In addition, shallow ice core drilling was carried out, and snow and
ice cores 125 m deep were obtained. The team departed there on 17
January and made various observations along the route.
3. Plan for the coming seasons
The third Dome Fuji deep drilling work will be scheduled between
2024 and 2028. Deep drilling, bedrock sampling, deviation drilling,
and borehole logging will be performed in the four consecutive
summers starting in the 2024 - 2025 summer. Each summer activity
at Dome Fuji II Camp is expected to last for about two months. For
the deep drilling, an electromechanical drill will be used with
borehole liquid to prevent borehole closure.
Figure 1. The Location of Dome Fuji II Camp.
