Decarbonizing Antarctic Operations: best practices for renewable
energy deployment at Antarctic research stations
Decarbonizing Antarctic Operations: best practices for renewable
energy deployment at Antarctic research stations
Submitted by ASOC and Uruguay
Summary
Efforts to decarbonize (reduce CO2 emissions) Antarctic operations
have mainly focused on reducing fuel consumption by introducing
energy efficiency measures and renewable energy technologies.
However, these efforts have been highly uneven among National
Antarctic Programs. While some programs have invested in stations
that currently obtain 70 per cent of their energy by renewable
sources, most Antarctic facilities remain entirely dependent on fossil
fuels. There has been greater progress on energy efficiency, where
most of the stations have introduced modifications aimed at
reducing electricity consumption. Antarctic operators who have
introduced clean energy technologies have reduced costs,
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and the risk of incidents and
accidents associated with fossil fuels (e.g., spills, fires).
Decarbonizing Antarctic operations will contribute to reducing
energy consumption, introducing renewable energy sources,
supporting technological research and innovation, and supporting
the global efforts to reach climate neutrality.
Therefore, ASOC recommends that ATCPs and as required other
Antarctic operators take the following steps:
Conduct feasibility studies to decarbonize their operations, bases,
and activities with the aim of achieving a Net Zero condition and
allocate funds to this objective.
Collaborate with public and industry stakeholders to implement
established renewable energy sources and energy efficiency
practices.
Agree on developing a manual that outlines the best practices for
reducing carbon emissions in Antarctic operations, with a specific
focus on using renewable energy and improving energy efficiency at
research facilities.
Introduction
Gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel are the main sources of electricity
generation at Antarctic research stations. These fuels are also used
for ships, boats, and land-based vehicles. Transporting fuel and oil
to Antarctica is a costly and sometimes risky exercise. Nevertheless,
despite harsh polar conditions, renewable energy sources such as
solar and wind have been successfully used for power generation in
Antarctica for more than thirty years. The use of renewable energy
in Antarctica has been the subject of several documents submitted
to the ATCMs. In particular, the Council of Managers of National
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) reported on best practices in energy
management, including renewable energy sources, in their
operations. This paper discusses the importance of decarbonizing
Antarctic operations, and introduces a recent article published in
Antarctic Science1 by researchers associated with ASOC member
Agenda Antártica (attached to this IP) with an updated overview on
the progress of Antarctic Treaty Parties towards reducing their
energy consumption and replacing the fossil fuel system with
renewable energy.
Why is it important to decarbonize Antarctic operations?
Decarbonizing (reducing CO2 emissions) Antarctic energy systems
has shown multiple benefits.
Fuel cost savings
Renewable energy technologies have been shown to reduce the
investment need of fossil fuels and their related transport costs.
Cargo ships, helicopters and other vehicles that are used to
transport fuel to Antarctic stations are costly, representing a
significant part of any Antarctic Treaty Party operational budget.
Moreover, the price of oil is volatile. During 2008, the price of a
barrel of oil surpassed US$100, creating large budget constraints in
Antarctic operations. Renewable energy technologies, even if they
involve large upfront investment, have been shown to lower costs in
the long-term period and have more stable maintenance. An
optimized operation strategy, compared with the original operation
strategy of the system, has an 11.8% energy saving space, and the
total diesel consumption of the system can be reduced by 9.6% per
year in an Antarctic station.
Minimize the environmental impact and the greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions footprint in alignment with national decarbonization
targets
Minimizing the carbon footprint of operations is a key goal of
several Antarctic Treaty Parties. This goal aligns sometimes with the
larger national efforts towards decarbonization and sustainability.
By reducing the reliance on fossil fuels, Antarctic parties can not
only mitigate climate change by emissions reduction by also reduce
the risk of incidents and accidents related to transporting fuels
including spills or fires.
The literature on the subject indicates that wind and solar
electricity generation can significantly benefit the environment. For
example, wind turbines use minimal land area compared to other
energy systems per unit of electricity produced. Additionally, wind
turbines and solar panels have an operational lifespan of 20-25
years, during which they emit zero greenhouse gases once in
operation. While some greenhouse gases are produced during the
construction phase, these emissions are offset by the reduction in
emissions during the first few months of operation. Additionally,
complementing or replacing fossil fuels with clean energy sources
will reduce the number of accidents that might occur when oil is
transported. The Antarctic is more susceptible to oil spills because
of the region’s extreme temperatures that reduce the structural
integrity of equipment (e.g., tanks and fittings) and make fuel
pumping more challenging. Oil and fuel spills are particularly
hazardous in polar regions as the oil decomposes at a slower rate
compared to warmer regions, causing longer impacts on the
ecosystem impacts. Also, most fire accidents in the Antarctic are
due to problems related to fuel handling. For example, an accident
with a fuel transfer inside the Brazilian base Comandante Ferraz’s
engine room set fire to and destroyed the station in 2012.
Development and/or testing of new technologies.
The development of new technologies has been one of the aims of
installing renewable energy in Antarctica. The idea is to test their
performance, endurance, and reliability under sub-zero
temperatures and extreme weather conditions such as ice, wind,
and snowstorms. Traditional renewable energy sources like solar
panels and wind turbines are still a challenge when it comes to
providing energy during winter months. As an example, strong,
gusty winds and freezing temperatures can place enormous stresses
on wind turbine rotors and cause mechanical failures. Lessons
extracted from the challenging Antarctic environment can be highly
valuable for the advancement of renewable energy technologies in
general.
Ethical duty of Parties to keep Antarctica unpolluted
While the emissions produced in Antarctica are insignificant
compared to those at the international level, the operational and
economic benefits are concrete. Reducing emissions has a central
symbolic importance for the protection of Antarctic values as
outlined in Art. 3 of the Protocol. Developing clean energies in the
Antarctic sends a message to the world: if
governments can develop clean energy systems in one of the most
hostile and isolated places on the planet, it can be carried out
anywhere else in the world. In addition, reducing emissions from
the continent is an ethical duty of parties to keep the most pristine
region on the planet unpolluted. Antarctic researchers generate
crucial, cutting-edge climate science for global public interest. If
Antarctica is helping to save the world by understanding climate
change, Antarctica must be a model in every sense.
Progress on introducing renewable energy in Antarctica
In an article recently published in Antarctic Science, Lucci, Alegre
and Vigna (2022) provide an updated summary on the progress of
Antarctic Treaty Parties towards reducing their energy consumption
and replacing the fossil fuel system with renewable energy and
include an interactive database. It also discusses the environmental
and economic benefits of using clean energy versus fossil sources.
According to the authors, by the end of 2021, 29 facilities (out of a
total of 91) have incorporated renewables in their energy systems.
However, only one permanent and four summer stations use
renewables to meet more than 50% of their energy needs.
Recommendations
These experiences have shown that extreme cold weather and gusty
wind conditions are not a limit to the development of renewable
energy systems in Antarctica. Stations designed with energy
efficiency in mind, some of which have been built in recent years,
have the opportunity to be a leading case for future progress. Based
on the literature it is apparent that just over 30% of Antarctic
facilities were using renewable energy.
In addition to actively collaborating and sharing expertise on de-
carbonization among National Antarctic Programs, ASOC is
recommending that ATCPs and as required other Antarctic
operators take the following steps:
Conduct feasibility studies to decarbonize their operations, bases,
and activities with the aim of achieving a Net Zero condition and
allocate funds to this objective.
Collaborate with public and industry stakeholders to implement
established renewable energy sources and energy efficiency
practices.
Agree on developing a manual that outlines the best practices for
reducing carbon emissions in Antarctic operations, with a specific
focus on using renewable energy and improving energy efficiency at
research facilities.
