Live from Antarctica: The National Science Foundation’s Education
and Outreach Event
Live from Antarctica: The National Science Foundation’s Education
and Outreach Event
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
In December 2021, the National Science Foundation (NSF) Office of
Polar Programs (OPP) hosted its first “Live from Antarctica,” event
that virtually connected people from over ten countries to learn
from scientists about research being conducted in Antarctica. Since
then, there have been multiple live-streamed events that have
provided a live, behind-the-scenes look at what it's like to live and
conduct research in Antarctica. Past events have included virtual
tours of Antarctic research stations, demonstrations of scientific
instruments, and equipment used in Antarctic research via the video
conference platform, Zoom. “Live from Antarctica” events aim to
engage and educate the public about the important scientific
research being conducted in Antarctica and to inspire the next
generation of scientists and researchers.
Introduction
“Live from Antarctica” uses live-stream technology to provide a
virtual window into the world of science and research in Antarctica
to people across the globe. The events are organized by the OPP
communications team and aim to increase public awareness and
understanding of the unique scientific research being conducted in
Antarctica. OPP identifies potential presenters for the events by
working with U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) participants to find
those who may be interested.
During the events, attendees can ask questions and interact with the
presenters in real-time using the Question-and-Answer feature in
Zoom, creating an engaging learning experience. The events cover a
wide range of topics related to Antarctica, including climate
change, glaciology, ecology, oceanography, geology, and
astronomy. They are designed for kindergarten through 12th grade
students, educators, and the general public, and are often hosted in
collaboration with schools, museums, and science centers. The
events are designed to be inclusive and accessible to participants of
all backgrounds and ages. “Live from Antarctica” events are
recorded and made available for viewing at any time, which allows
individuals to access the content at their own pace and in a way
that works best for them. All live and recorded events feature closed
captioning and American Sign Language (ASL) interpreters can be
included upon request.
Live-stream technology and challenges
“Live from Antarctica” events are live broadcasted using YouTube
and the webinars are hosted in the video conferencing software,
Zoom. Information on how to live stream Zoom webinars on
YouTube can be found here. Satellite communications in remote
areas of Antarctica where internet connectivity is limited are used
to establish a connection with the individual(s) physically in
Antarctica. Connecting participants to individuals in Antarctica,
where internet connectivity can be limited or unreliable, can
sometimes make it difficult to establish and maintain a stable
connection throughout the event. Other factors that can contribute
to technological difficulties can include extreme weather conditions.
The extreme cold weather can impact the performance of
technology, making it important to ensure that equipment is
properly insulated and protected. However, “Live from Antarctica”
events are usually held during the Austral summer season when
most researchers and scientists are working at the research stations.
Further, live-streaming events in general can be prone to technical
issues, such as poor connectivity, audio or video quality issues, or
equipment failure; therefore, it’s important to
have a backup plan in place to address these issues quickly and
minimize disruptions to the event.
Past events
Since the beginning of this initiative in December 2021, six separate
events (one with two sessions) have successfully occurred. Over
3,000 participants are estimated to have tuned in from 13 different
countries during the events which are scheduled for no longer than
an hour. The full list of events that have occurred to date is
provided in Table 1 which includes the estimated number of
participants and countries.
Event
Date
Participants
Countries
Marine Biologists at McMurdo Station
12/10/21
1000
11
Researchers Aboard an Antarctic Icebreaker
12/16/21
175
13
World Krill Day
8/11/22
161
10
All Things Penguins from Antarctica
1/10/23
983
11
It's Not All Snow and Ice (2 sessions)
2/3/23
500
10
In search of worms and gooey invertebrates
3/6/23
330
6
Table 1 – Information on past events
For those unable to attend, archived recordings of “Live from
Antarctica” presentations can be found on the National Science
Foundation’s YouTube Channel, or directly via these links:
Live from Antarctica! Marine Biologists at McMurdo Station
Live from Antarctica! Researchers Aboard an Antarctic Icebreaker
Live from Antarctica! World Krill Day
Live from Antarctica! All Things Penguins
Live from Antarctica! It’s Not All Snow and Ice (Session 1)
Live from Antarctica! It’s Now All Snow and Ice (Session 2)
Live from Antarctica! In search of worms and gooey invertebrates
Promotion of the events
“Live from Antarctica” events are promoted by OPP through various
channels to reach a wide audience. In an analysis of one of the Live
events, “All Things Penguins,” social media (Twitter, Facebook, and
Instagram) proved to be the most effective way of promoting the
event. Social media had the highest referral method (42.6 %)
followed by the “other” category (34.4%) which included referrals
from friends, family, and colleagues. The other referral methods
that were the least successful included Listserv email (13.4%), the
NSF website (5.8%), and the USAP website (3.8%).
OPP uses social media to post updates, announcements, remind
followers about upcoming events, and encourage participation.
During the promotion of “All Things Penguins,” there were
eight posts by the NSF social media team which reached over
69,000 individuals and had an engagement rate of 1.7% which was
considered successful by the social media team. The engagement
rate on social media is determined by taking the total number of
engagements (likes, comments, shares, and clicks) divided by the
total number of impressions (number of times a post is displayed on
social media, whether it's viewed by a unique user or not) and then
multiplied by 100 to get a percentage. The factors that contribute to
the engagement rate include the number of followers, the time
period over which the engagement rate is calculated, the size of the
industry or organization, the type of content being shared, and the
goals of the social media campaign.
Other ways of promoting the events are through NSF newsletters.
Interested subscribers can sign up using the newsletter registration
form and enter their email address. Both the “Office of Polar
Programs (OPP) Newsletter” and ‘Office of Polar Programs (OPP)
events topics under subscriber preferences contain information on
upcoming events, links to registration pages, and other relevant
information. To be a participant, individuals must register before
the event and questions can be submitted in advance. OPP also
issues news announcements about upcoming events and sometimes
promotes the events to journalists and media outlets.
Feedback and engagement
OPP gathers feedback from participants and viewers in the form of
a post-event survey to evaluate the effectiveness and make
improvements for future events. The surveys typically include
questions about the quality of the content, the effectiveness of the
delivery, and overall satisfaction with the event. OPP also uses
social media to look at comments from participants and viewers
about the event. Follow-up interviews with participants and viewers
may be conducted to gain more detailed insights into their
experiences and opinions about the events. The feedback can help
to ensure that the events are meeting the needs of the audience and
providing valuable insights and perspectives on scientific research
in Antarctica. In the analysis of the “All Things Penguins event,”
survey results were overwhelmingly positive and indicated that
respondents found the event to be excellent. The surveys can also
be used to gather information on what respondents want to see at
future events. Some of the topics that respondents were interested
in for future events included “whales,” “living in the region,” and
“climate change.”
Conclusions
Over 3,000 people across the globe learned about research activities
in Antarctica increasing the public’s awareness and understanding
of Antarctic research and inspiring the next generation of scientists
and researchers. As a result, “Live from Antarctica” events can serve
as a model for other countries looking to increase their outreach
and education efforts. They are relatively easy to facilitate and a
well-planned and executed event can provide a valuable learning
experience for participants and help to promote scientific literacy
and engagement to a wide group of people across the globe.
Although planning events that take place in remote locations in
Antarctica can be difficult due to limited or unreliable internet
connectivity, the benefits of these events in terms of promoting
awareness and understanding of Antarctic research and inspiring
future scientists and researchers make them well worth the effort.
By promoting collaboration between scientists and educators, using
technology to reach a wider audience, focusing on real-world issues,
promoting inclusivity and diversity, and incorporating evaluation
and feedback mechanisms, countries can use events like “Live from
Antarctica” to boost engagement and education outcomes of other
National Antarctic programs.
