Preventing a Potential Circumvention of Measure 15 (2009)
Preventing a Potential Circumvention of Measure 15 (2009)
Summary
The United States has recently learned that some non-governmental
tour operators believe it would be acceptable to land passengers
from a vessel covered by Measure 15 (2009) after temporarily
moving passengers from a vessel covered by that Measure to one
that is not, or to use landing craft from a vessel that is not covered
by that Measure to transport passengers from a vessel that is
covered. Such maneuvers appear designed to attempt to circumvent
the restrictions contained in that Measure regarding landing
passengers from vessels carrying more than 500 passengers. The
United States shares this information with the ATCM to raise
awareness of this potential circumvention of Measure 15 (2009) and
to inform the ATCM that the United States strongly discourages
such behavior.
Situation
Measure 15 (2009) states that “Parties shall require their operators
organizing tourist or other non-governmental activities in the
Antarctic Treaty area … to refrain from making any landings in
Antarctica from vessels carrying more than 500 passengers unless a
lower number is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM measures.”
Although not in force, the approach contained in this Measure is a
cornerstone for managing tourism.
An operator recently discussed moving passengers from a vessel
carrying more than 500 passengers to a vessel with a maximum
capacity of less than 500 passengers. The passengers from the larger
vessel would be on the smaller vessel briefly and then depart from
the smaller vessel to make a landing. A similar scheme would be for
the operator of a smaller vessel to transport passengers from a
larger vessel directly to shore without the intermediary step of
bringing the passengers to the smaller vessel.
In either scenario, the sole purpose of moving the passengers from
the larger vessel to the smaller vessel or using transportation
resources from the smaller vessel would appear to be to assert that
the passengers did not conduct a landing from a vessel carrying
more than 500 passengers. Such an action is plainly designed to
circumvent Measure 15 (2009) and would undermine the
effectiveness of protections adopted by the ATCM.
Next Steps
The United States believes such an act would circumvent the
Measure adopted by consensus of the Consultative Parties. We
inform the ATCM that we strongly discourage such a potential
circumvention of Measure 15 (2009) and encourage Parties to
consider the possibility of circumvention when reviewing operators’
proposed expeditions to the Treaty area.
