Scientific and Science-related Cooperation with the Antarctic
Community and Responses to COVID-19
Scientific and Science-related Cooperation with the Antarctic
Community and Responses to COVID-19
Information Paper submitted by Korea (ROK)
Overview
The Republic of Korea has been a Consultative Party to the
Antarctic Treaty since 1989, and conducted scientific research in
cooperation with other Parties in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty.
This report is prepared to inform the Consultative Parties and the
wider Antarctic community of the highlights of the Korean scientific
activities during 2022-23 Austral summer season, while providing
updates on the sustained management approach against COVID-19
at research stations operated by the Korean Antarctic program.
Research Highlights of 2022-23 Austral summer season
The Antarctic King Sejong Station, located at the tip of the Antarctic
Peninsula, remains as the key research site for Korean Antarctic
program and its scientific collaboration. During the 2022-23
summer season, the station welcomed 120 Korean and international
visitors from 31 research and expert groups, and have supported
their research activities on-site.
Ecosystem science was the focus of research in areas nearby King
Sejong station last season. Research teams have conducted field
studies looking into long-term changes in the terrestrial ecology in
the region, as well as vegetation components around the station.
This is expected to contribute to identifying the correlation between
environmental changes and ecosystem responses in Antarctica.
Atmospheric observation were carried out in order to further
understand physiochemical properties and processes of atmospheric
aerosol in the peninsula.
The Antarctic Jang Bogo Station has become the base camp for
scientific research in the Ross Sea and the Northern Victoria Land
region for the Korean Antarctic program. This past summer season,
70 scientists and experts from multiple disciplines have visited Jang
Bogo to conduct field research activities. The research teams
conducted survey of polar benthic communities and marine
environment in the waters near Jang Bogo station, installed
autonomous space environment observatory in Antarctic inland,
and continued its efforts to monitor the cryospheric changes in
Northern Victoria land.
Changes in the ocean environment and biodiversity are also being
studied to better understand the ecosystems in the Ross Sea Marine
Protected Area. Ice sheet retreat and ocean circulation has been,
and remains a large part of the Korean Antarctic research efforts.
Sustained Management Approach against COVID-19
Throughout the pandemic, Antarctic research community has seen
unprecedented challenges in conducting scientific work in the
region. While field activities in the last 2021-22 season were carried
out with a semblance of normalcy, the sustained management
measures to contain the outbreak continued to prove its
effectiveness this past season, and there were minimum effects of
COVID-19 to the research activities. The elements of management
measures that were put in place were: vaccination, testing and
quarantining prior to entering the station or into Antarctica, and
strict managed isolation with medical care and treatment.
To reduce the risk of exposing the populations at the research
stations to the virus, those who were traveling to Antarctica were
required to complete their vaccination. Upon arriving at the
gateway city of Punta Arenas, Chile or Christchurch, New Zealand,
the Antarctic visitors were
quarantined for four days, and need to have two negative rapid
antigen test (RAT) results before continuing their travel to
Antarctica.
The stations were equipped to deal effectively in case of an
outbreak. PCR and antigen test kits, medication for treating
COVID-19 (Paxlovid), and personal protective equipment (PPE)
were supplied before the start of the season. Personnel were trained
on how to use negative pressure isolation quarters and manuals on
how to respond to an outbreak was provided to all those operating
the station.
The containment plan assisted both stations in operating without
experiencing major outbreaks or other threats to the health and
safety. King Sejong Station had three positive cases among the
arrivals in March, which were contained on time before further
transmission. Jang Bogo Station had zero cases throughout the
season. As the health and safety of the Antarctic community
remains as the highest priority for the Korean Antarctic program,
Korea will continue to implement mitigation measures that allows
safe operations and science activities for those working in
Antarctica.
International Cooperation
The Korean Antarctic program recognizes the importance of
international cooperation in research and logistic support, and has
closely cooperated with the New Zealand and Chilean programs
through the aid of the Korea-New Zealand Antarctic Cooperation
Centre in Christchurch, and Korea-Chile Antarctic Cooperation
Center in Punta Arenas. Strong collaboration continues with the
Italian and US program for logistical support to Jang Bogo Station
and the Ross Sea sector.
The Korean program will continue to collaborate with the
Consultative Parties in a range of research and logistic activities.
During the past season, Korean program has supported and
cooperated with 13 scientists who have visited King Sejong and
Jang Bogo Station. Station-based collaboration efforts were made
with the researchers from Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile,
France, Germany, Lithuania, Portugal, UK, US and Vietnam.
The KOPRI fellowship program, which was on hold for due to the
travel restrictions caused by the pandemic, resumed last year. With
the aim to promote research collaboration and provide future
generation scientists with networking and research opportunities,
the program expanded from supporting Asian scientists to
incorporate early career scientists from Chile and New Zealand as
well. Four early career scientists from Chile, China, and India have
been awarded with the fellowship, and were provided with the
support that enabled them to visit KOPRI and conduct collaborative
research with their Korean host scientists. The selection process for
2023 was held in March and three scientists were selected as
awardees, with the possibility of additional call to be open later in
the year.
