Signing of a Memorandum of Understanding and Scientific
Cooperation between the Republic of Chile and Türkiye
Signing of a Memorandum of Understanding and Scientific
Cooperation between Chile and Türkiye
Information Paper submitted by Chile and Türkiye
Summary
This paper gives information about the signing of a Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) between the Republic of Chile and Türkiye
within the context of cooperation on polar research. It also presents
a summary of the scientific and educational support of Chile for a
Turkish researcher and high-school students in the 2022/2023
season.
The Memorandum of Understanding
The signing process of the MoU between the Republic of Chile and
Türkiye has been completed on behalf of the Parties on April 18,
2023 by the signatures of Subsecretaria Gloria de la Fuente and
Ambassador Gülcan Akoğuz. The signing ceremony was held in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile with the participation of the
respective members of the ministries of foreign affairs of both
Parties.
In the context of developing, promoting and strengthening the
cooperation in polar research, based on equality and mutual
benefits of Chile and Türkiye, this MoU expresses a common
interest to explore the opportunities for pursuing joint activities in
polar sciences.
The areas of cooperation under this MoU include the development
of mutually beneficial academic programs, coordination of
academic activities and staff mobility, exchange of scientific
information and research materials, polar logistic support and
cooperation, exchanges and joint studies on polar policy and
regulations, and other areas considered to be of benefit to each
Participant’s research programs.
TÜBİTAK Marmara Research Center (MAM) Polar Research Institute
(PRI) would like to thank Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) for
this opportunity. Such cooperation is extremely important for both
Participants in their aspiration to provide high-quality polar
research to address global issues for the benefit of humankind and
to strengthen international cooperation in the field of science,
technology, education & outreach.
Scientific Cooperation
Within the scope of bilateral cooperation between INACH and
TÜBİTAK MAM PRI, a Turkish researcher Prof. Didem Özçimen was
hosted in Profesor Julio Escudero Base of INACH between 5 and 17
March 2023 in King George Island to carry out field studies for the
project titled “Establishing the relationship between life sciences
and atmospheric sciences in the context of global warming and
climate change in Antarctica: analysis and modeling of the
relationship between atmospheric conditions and microorganisms
sensitive to environmental conditions such as algae in Antarctica”.
The project was supported by the Scientific and Technological
Research Council of Türkiye (TÜBİTAK) Marmara Research Center
(MAM) Polar Research Institute (PRI).
Education & Outreach
In addition to the support for research, Chile hosted three high-
school students from Türkiye in Profesor Julio Escudero Base of
Chile for education & outreach purposes. The students were the
winners of “the High School Students Polar Research Projects
Competition 2022” organized by TUBITAK MAM PRI and TUBITAK
Science and Society Department, with their project titled
“Bioplastic material production to prevent microplastic pollution in
the polar oceans”. The students were hosted in Profesor Julio
Escudero Base of Chile. During their stay, INACH and Chilean
researchers helped the students to better understand ongoing
research in Antarctica.
Conclusion
Türkiye expresses the gratitude to Chile and INACH for their
valuable collaboration in polar research and hospitality during the
stay of the researcher and students. Chile and Türkiye hope that the
MoU signed will strengthen and develop the existing cooperation
between the two Parties in Antarctica, as the continent dedicated to
science and peace.
