National Measures on Antarctic Legislation
National Measures on Antarctic Legislation
Abstract
The aim of the Indian Antarctic Act, 2022 is to provide for national
measures for protecting the Antarctic environment and dependent
and associated ecosystems and to give effect to the Antarctic Treaty,
the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty. In the Act, provisions are made for the penalty for
contravention of certain activities, involving a person, vessel or
aircraft.
Introduction
India signed the Antarctic Treaty on the 19th of August, 1983 and
in due course was accorded the status of a consultative party on the
12th of September, 1983. Further, on the 17th of June, 1985 India
ratified the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources (CCAMLR) and became a member of the
Commission for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
Finally, India signed the Madrid Protocol which came into force on
the 14th of January, 1998.
According to Article 13 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to Antarctica Treaty, it is incumbent upon each State Party to
undertake appropriate measures as may be within its competence,
including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative
actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Protocol. Since India has provisions for the
protection of the environment in its Constitution, it is imperative to
have its national measures that ensure the protection of the
Antarctic environment along with its dependent and associated
ecosystem
The need to establish a regulatory framework for the management
of various Indian activities in Antarctica in consonance with its
obligations under various instruments of the Antarctic Treaty
System made it necessary to promulgate the Indian Antarctic Act,
2022. This Act assented to by the Hon’ble President of India on 6th
August 2022after passing by the Parliament.
Objectives of the Act
The objectives set forth by Indian Antarctic Act, 2022 are as
follows:
(a) to ensure the fulfilment of obligations as stipulated by the
Antarctic Treaty, to the Convention on the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and to the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty;
(b) to promote Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and
science and ensure that the Antarctic does not become the scene or
object of international discord;
(c) to ensure the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment as well as the dependent and associated ecosystems;
and
(d) to facilitate and promote research in Antarctica by institutions
and individuals permitted under the provisions of the Act.
To whom, Act shall Apply
This Act applies to Indian citizens who are part of the Indian
Antarctic expedition or any other foreign nationals who are part of
the Indian Antarctic expedition but not have obtained authorisation
from another party to the Protocol. Additionally, it is also
applicable to the vessels and aircraft engaged in an Indian
expedition or any vessel or aircraft registered in India but are part
of expediting another party to the Protocol. This Act is applicable
within the Antarctic region including the CCAMLR region.
Implementing Authority
The Committee on Antarctic Governance and Environment
Protection (CAG-EP) under the auspices of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences is designated as the apex decision-making body and shall
facilitate programs and activities permitted under the Law. It shall;
provide a stable, transparent and accountable process for the
sponsorship and supervision of Antarctic research and expeditions;
shall nsure the protection and preservation of the Antarctic
environment; shall ensure compliance by Indian citizens engaged in
the Antarctic programs and activities with relevant rules and
internationally agreed standards.
Salient Features of the Act
(A) General Provisions:
(a) provides all essential permissions and prohibitions for certain
activities as required under the Antarctic Treaty, the Protocol, the
Convention and amendments made thereto as applicable to India;
(b) expounds upon the scope, programmes and activities to promote
scientific research in the Antarctic;
(c) establishes the Committee on Antarctic Governance and
Environment Protection (CAG-EP) and provides for its objectives,
functions, powers, funds etc ;
(d) delineates provisions for the issuance and regulation of permits;
(e) provides for permit procedures, including environmental impact
assessment such as initial environmental evaluation and
comprehensive environmental evaluation;
(f) delineates provisions for the waste management plans and
emergency plans, waste incineration provisions, disposal of liquid
wastes, storage of wastes in general, work sites and waste disposal
sites;
(g) provides general regulation concerning the the prevention of
marine pollution in the Antarctic;
(h) provides for inspections in India and inspections in Antarctica;
(i) provisions relating to liability for an environmental emergency
and emergencies in Antarctica in general.
(B) Permit and Prohibitions
Under this Act, certain activities are not allowed until its Permitted.
Permit required for performing certain activities in Antarctica. No
person in Antarctica shall without a permit or under the written
authorisation of another party to the Protocol; kill, injure capture,
handle or
molest native mammals or native birds, remove or damage the
native plant, fly or land a helicopter or other aircraft that disturbs
concentration of native birds, use vehicle or vessel, etc., use
explosive or firearm, wilfully disturb in a manner that disturbs any
concentration of native birds or seals.
Any person shall not engage in activity that results in a significant
adverse change of the habitat of any specially protected species,
native birds, native plants, or native invertebrates or removes soil
or any biological material native to Antarctica. It also includes that
no person shall introduce into any part of Antarctica any
microscopic organism of a species which is not indigenous to
Antarctica, except in accordance with a permit or under the written
authorisation of another party to the Protocol. It has also provisions
that certain activities are prohibited in Antarctica.
(C) Penalty and Punishment against Offence
In the Act, provisions are made for the penalty for contravention of
certain provisions involving a person, vessel or aircraft. These
penalties and punishments demarcated from moderate to severe
subjected to the gravity of violations of provisions of the Act for
Antarctic environmental degradation.
Enforcement of Rules and Act
The rules thereunder Indian Antarctic Act, 2022 are framed and in
the process of notification and implementation.
