Implementation of the International Code for Ships Operating in
Polar Waters in vessels flying a Chilean flag and their control in
Chilean jurisdiction waters
Implementation of the International Code for Ships Operating in
Polar Waters in vessels flying a Chilean flag and their control in
Chilean jurisdiction waters
Summary:
The purpose of this document is to make the members of the
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) aware of the process of
implementing the Polar Code in Chile, as well as recommendations
to achieve its prompt global implementation.
Background:
The IMO adopted the International Code for Ships Operating in
Polar Waters (Polar Code), as well as corresponding amendments to
the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS)
and corresponding amendments to the International Convention for
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL Convention), in
order to make said Code mandatory. The Polar Code entered into
force on 1 January 2017, thus marking a historic milestone in the
IMO’s work both to protect ships and also the people travelling on
board, whether seafarers or passengers, in the inhospitable
environment of the waters surrounding the two poles. The Code is
divided into a Part A that contains the mandatory prescriptions and
a Part B that is recommendatory.
By means of Supreme Decree (MINREL) No. 219, dated 22 February
2021, enacted in Chile the International Code for Ships Operating in
Polar Waters (Polar Code) and the amendments to the SOLAS
(International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea) and
MARPOL (International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from Ships) and STCW (International Convention on Standards of
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers)
conventions, as well as resolutions IMO MSC. 385(94) and MEPC.
264(68).
By means of Ordinary Resolution of the General Directorate of the
Maritime Territory and Merchant Navy (D.G.T.M. y M.M.)
12600/368 Vrs., dated 12 September 2022, approved Circular
O-75/005, which implements the International Code for Ships
Operating in Polar Waters (Polar Code) in ships flying the Chilean
flag and their control in Chilean jurisdictional waters.
Note No. 5 of the organisation of the XLV Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting is an invitation to a thematic session that aims
to facilitate the understanding and challenges imposed by the
implementation of the Polar Code, and promote the sharing and
exchange of experiences between the States Parties and the
organisations that participate in polar maritime transport, according
to the approach encapsulated in the following questions:
How can we ensure a harmonised implementation of the Code?
Is there a need to improve the Code and any possibilities to do so?
What role should the parties to the Antarctic Treaty have in the
implementation of the Code and in its development?
Assessment:
The Polar Code was fully implemented in our country and in this
regard, considering the importance of Antarctic Affairs, the
prescriptions of Part A (mandatory) and B (recommended) were
established as mandatory in the aforementioned circular.
Regarding what is stated in Note No. 5, we can declare the
following:
Implementation of the Polar Code:
Each member state of the IMO (International Maritime
Organization) undertakes to ratify and implement the requirements
of the Conventions and Codes; the case of the Polar Code is not
exempt from this responsibility. We therefore recommend that the
states ratify the aforementioned Code, even when acting as flag
states, with the understanding that its implementation is a
fundamental contribution to the safety of navigation and protection
of the marine environment, in this case of the Southern Ocean.
Need and possibility of improving the Code:
Regarding this point, we estimate that there is still no information
base that can guide towards raising the need to amend the Code.
From our experience, we can note that in Chile there is one (1) ship
certified as Polar and another in the process of undergoing
certification by considering the recognition guides of the 2022
Harmonized System of Survey and Certification (HSSC). As an
opportunity for improvement, we recommend that the ships comply
with the Polar Waters Operations Manual (PWOM), since the Code
stipulates their preparation and provides general guidelines of what
said manual should contain, but it does not stipulate their revision
or approval by the Administration.
Role of the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty in the implementation
and development of the Code.
The States that have implemented the Code have the responsibility
of exercising control either as a Flag State, based on its
implementation and the certification of the ships, or as a Port State,
carrying out the inspection of foreign ships in national ports.
Regarding the latter, it can be noted that our country is part of two
Memorandums of Understanding (MOU), these being the TOKYO
MOU and the Viña del Mar Agreement, organisations that seek
greater regional coordination for the purposes of exercising control
over the ships that call at the ports of the region.
Bearing in mind all the above, and under the objectives of the
National Antarctic Policy to promote Chilean activities and
specifically those of the Magallanes and Chilean Antarctic Region,
we consider this a favourable time to analyse the feasibility of
strengthening the task of exercising control as a Port State in said
region, once the operation of foreign ships increases, and
specifically those certified under the Polar Code
