Mercury in Antarctic marine ecosystems
Mercury in Antarctic marine ecosystems
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Bulgaria, France,
Germany, Japan, United Kingdom
Summary
Mercury is one of the most toxic elements, highly bioaccumulative
in organisms and biomagnifies along food webs, but information for
the Antarctic region is lacking. This paper describes the most recent
scientific information on total mercury in Antarctic marine
foodwebs. Mercury concentrations increase with trophic levels, with
highest concentrations in top predators (e.g. with known negative
effects in some seabirds). Biomagnification of mercury is greater in
Antarctic foodwebs than in foodwebs in subtropical and tropical
regions. We encourage greater information exchange between
Parties, more monitoring research and increased use of coordinated
methodologies related to mercury and other trace elements/
contaminants that have an Antarctic environmental impact.
Introduction
Mercury (Hg) is one of the most known hazardous elements, with a
global dispersion that reaches remote areas of the planet such as
Antarctica, despite the absence of any manufacturing industry in
the region. Mercury can be transported by atmospheric currents to
Antarctica, where it condenses and precipitates in rain or snow,
with katabatic winds redistributing mercury within Antarctica
(Bargagli 2008). Furthermore, mercury accumulates in aquatic
organisms and biomagnifies within foodwebs, and can be toxic to
top predators. For the Antarctic region, there is a general lack of
monitoring for mercury, which has prevented identification of the
factors controlling the distribution of mercury and their effects
(Cossa et al. 2011, Seco et al. 2021a, Matias et al. 2022).
Following the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, there have been scientific
investigations for monitoring of environmental impact by persistent
organic pollutants (POP´s) (ATCM XXXI/IP097, ATCM XXXII/
IP069), emerging contaminants (ATCM XLIV/IP4) and trace
element contamination (e.g. ATCM XXXIX/IP22; ATCM XXXIX/IP8).
This paper reports on the most recent scientific evidence concerning
mercury in Antarctic foodwebs.
Recent developments concerning mercury levels
An international consortium of scientists from Portugal, Bulgaria,
France, Italy, Germany, Japan, Spain and the United Kingdom,
carried out research to evaluate the mercury in organisms in
Antarctic marine foodwebs. Total mercury levels were obtained
from Antarctic marine food webs (Seco et al. 2021a, Matias et al.
2022), including detailed research on Antarctic krill (Euphausia
superba) (Seco et al. 2019, Seco et al. 2021b), octopods (Matias et
al. 2019, Matias et al. 2020), squid (Seco et al. 2020a) and fish
(Seco et al. 2020b).
Mercury concentrations increased with trophic levels. Values of
mercury were lowest in particulate organic matter (POM) and
zooplankton at the base of the food web (e.g., Antarctic krill),
followed by squid and some species of fish (e.g., myctophid fish).
The highest mercury concentrations were found in predators higher
in the food web (e.g., seabirds, such as wandering albatrosses, giant
petrels and skuas) (Seco et al. 2021a, Matias et al. 2022), with
increasing mercury concentrations in years of lower Antarctic krill
abundance (Seco et al. 2021a; see Figure 1). Biomagnification of
mercury was greater in Antarctic foodwebs than in lower latitude
foodwebs.
Figure 1. Illustrations of a Southern Ocean food web in years with
high Antarctic krill abundance (left/ A) and in years with low
Antarctic krill abundance (right/ B). Shaded/clear areas represent
different trophic levels, boxes represent mercury concentrations
(more Hg and higher concentration) (Seco et al. 2021a).
Increased mercury exposure is likely to negatively impact marine
biota (e.g., reproduction, survival), including in Antarctic fauna
(e.g., seabirds) (Goutte et al. 2014, Mills et al. 2020). As mercury
impacts on the structure and functional dynamics of the Antarctic
food webs, levels are likely to increase in certain groups of marine
organisms (e.g., top predators). Therefore, we encourage further
monitoring of contaminant levels (including mercury) throughout
the Antarctic Treaty area with a view to assessing where
contamination is taking place, the levels of biomagnification and
identifying further possible negative impacts on the fauna.
Following the requirements of Annex I to the Protocol, and mindful
of recent work on the revision of the Guidelines for Environment
Impact Assessment in Antarctica (ATCM XXXVIII/WP13), we would
like to promote greater information exchange between Parties on
contamination to help inform future research (including long-term
monitoring) and policy development. Capacity building and
Antarctic pollution awareness should also be supported. Finally, we
encourage national Antarctic programmes to (i) have a more
structured process for collection of samples and data concerning
environmental contamination in the Antarctic (following ATCM
XLIII/IP21; ATCM XLIV/WP11; ATCM XLIV/IP7) and (ii) engage all
relevant stakeholders, including by seeking advice from the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP).
Supporting documentation
Bargagli R (2008) Environmental contamination in Antarctic
ecosystems. Sci Total Environ 400:212–226
Cossa D, Heimbürger L-E, Lannuzel D, Rintoul SR, Butler EC, Bowie
AR, Averty B, Watson RJ, Remenyi T (2011) Mercury in the
southern ocean. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 75:4037-4052
Goutte A, Barbraud C, Meillère A, Carravieri A, Bustamante P,
Labadie P, Budzinski H, Delord K, Cherel Y, Weimerskirch H (2014)
Demographic consequences of heavy metals and persistent organic
pollutants in a vulnerable long-lived bird, the wandering albatross.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
281:20133313
Matias RS, Gregory S, Ceia FR, Baeta A, Seco J, Rocha MS,
Fernandes EM, Reis RL, Silva TH, Pereira E, Piatkowski U, Ramos
JA, Xavier JC (2019) Show your beaks and we tell you what you
eat: Different ecology in sympatric Antarctic benthic octopods
under a climate change context. Mar Environ Res 150:104757
Matias RS, Guímaro HR, Bustamante P, Seco J, Chipev N, Fragão J,
Tavares S, Ceia FR, Pereira ME, Barbosa A, Xavier JC (2022)
Mercury biomagnification in an Antarctic food web of the Antarctic
Peninsula. Environmental Pollution 304:119199
Matias RS, Seco J, Gregory S, Belchier M, Pereira ME, Bustamante
P, Xavier JC (2020) Antarctic octopod beaks as proxy for mercury
concentrations in soft tissues. Mar Pollut Bull 158:111447
Mills WF, Bustamante P, McGill RAR, Anderson ORJ, Bearhop S,
Cherel Y, Votier SC, Phillips RA (2020) Mercury exposure in an
endangered seabird: long-term changes and relationships with
trophic ecology and breeding success. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 287:20202683
Seco J, Aparício S, Brierley AS, Bustamante P, Ceia FR, Coelho JP,
Philips RA, Saunders RA, Fielding S, Gregory S, Matias R, Pardal
MA, Pereira E, Stowasser G, Tarling GA, Xavier JC (2021a) Mercury
biomagnification in a Southern Ocean food web. Environmental
Pollution:116620
Seco J, Freitas R, Xavier JC, Bustamante P, Coelho JP, Coppola F,
Saunders RA, Almeida Â, Fielding S, Pardal MA, Stowasser G,
Pompeo G, Tarling GA, Brierley AS, Pereira E (2021b) Oxidative
stress, metabolic activity and mercury concentrations in Antarctic
krill Euphausia superba and myctophid fish of the Southern Ocean.
Marine Pollution Bulletin 166:112178
Seco J, Xavier JC, Brierley AS, Bustamante P, Coelho JP, Gregory S,
Fielding S, Pardal MA, Pereira B, Stowasser G (2020a) Mercury
levels in Southern Ocean squid: Variability over the last decade.
Chemosphere 239:124785
Seco J, Xavier JC, Bustamante P, Coelho JP, Saunders RA, Ferreira
N, Fielding S, Pardal MA, Stowasser G, Viana T, Tarling GA, Pereira
E, Brierley AS (2020b) Main drivers of mercury levels in Southern
Ocean lantern fish Myctophidae. Environmental Pollution:114711
Seco J, Xavier JC, Coelho JP, Pereira B, Tarling G, Pardal MA,
Bustamante P, Stowasser G, Brierley AS, Pereira ME (2019) Spatial
variability in total and organic mercury levels in Antarctic krill
Euphausia superba across the Scotia Sea. Environmental Pollution
247:332-339
