Understanding Future Sea-level Change Around Antarctica
Understanding Future Sea-level Change Around Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by SCAR and COMNAP
Summary
In addition to global consequences related to future sea level
change, there will be changes to sea level around the Antarctic
continent. This Information Paper outlines the: (1) Challenges in
accurately predicting location-specific sea-level change for
Antarctica’s coastline; (2) Risks that future sea-level change
represents for operations including science support and tourism,
coastal infrastructure and assets, heritage sites, specially protected
and managed areas, and bioregions; and (3) Future research
requirements and recommendations for actions to mitigate the
identified risks. This directly contributes to ongoing work to address
specific policy and research recommendations presented in the
2022 SCAR Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE)
Decadal Synopsis Report (Chown et al., 2022). The Antarctic region
is a driver and responder to change. A changing Antarctic region
has implications for how we operate in, manage and protect the
region. Research related to sea-level change is ongoing, but key
relevant information is presented here.
Sea-level change around the Antarctic coastline will vary
significantly, especially if more ice mass is lost from a particular
region than others (e.g., West Antarctica). Under the highest global
carbon-emissions scenarios, and if ‘low-confidence’ ice sheet
processes play out, sea-level will ‘likely’ rise by as much as ~1.2 m
in some regions of Antarctica by the end of the century and fall by
as much ~2.2 m in other regions at the same time.
Accurate anticipation of sea-level change for the coastline of
Antarctica, and its associated impacts, requires improved location-
specific knowledge of (i) changes in vertical land elevation due to
Earth processes and ice mass loss; and (ii) changes in sea level
elevation due to ice mass loss and associated changes in Earth’s
gravitational field and rotation.
The impacts on Antarctic built infrastructure, operations including
science and science support, heritage sites, bioregions, ecosystems
and specially protected and managed areas will be complex.
Understanding that complexity will depend on accurate knowledge
of the rate and direction of future sea-level change.
Making substantial improvements to current sea-level projections
for Antarctic coastlines is included within the work plans for SCAR
INSTANT for the period leading up to ATCM XLVI (2024).
ACCE Recommendations
The 2022 SCAR ACCE Decadal Synopsis Report included policy and
research recommendations that were presented in ATCMXLIV WP30
rev.1 and ATCMXLIV WP31 rev.1 and recognised in ATCM XLIV
Resolution 4 (2022). The information, further work, and
recommendations provided in this paper contribute directly to the
following ACCE recommendations:
PR 9: The loss of sea ice, fast ice, and ice shelves [sea-level rise]
together with the expansion of ice-free areas on the Antarctic
continent and changes to temperatures and precipitation, including
extreme weather events, will present new challenges for the
management of areas of high human activity in the Antarctic
(including where infrastructure and other NAP assets are deployed).
RR 1: Further support the research required to reduce uncertainty
about the future of the region and its impact on the Earth System
and to identify commensurate management
responses. Integrated, international and targeted long-term
monitoring programs and observatories are among the most
important for reducing uncertainty and for understanding the likely
impacts of mitigation and adaptation responses.
RR: 4 Determine what the contribution will be of the Antarctic Ice
Sheet to future sea level rise and reduce uncertainties in projections
of the rate and magnitude of that contribution, and effectively
communicate the impacts and risks to stakeholders and users.
Background Information
Our planet is warming. Earth’s average surface temperature has
increased by more than one degree Celsius over the past century
(Masson-Delmotte et al., 2021) and is on track to exceed 1.5 °C
above the pre-industrial average by the early 2030’s (Diffenbaugh &
Barnes, 2023; Matthews & Wynes, 2022). This temperature increase
has already caused sea level to rise by an average of ~20 cm as
warming oceans expand and water from melting glaciers, ice caps
and ice sheets flows into the sea (Fox-Kemper et al., 2021;
Frederikse et al., 2020). Rising sea levels are already impacting
coastal infrastructure and environments around the world and will
continue to do so at increasing frequency. Studies that examine the
impact of sea level rise and the development adaptation planning
and policy action to mitigate these impacts has been a focus across
our planet’s populated regions.
For Antarctica, such studies are rare. This lack of data and
information on climate change impacts in general, and sea-level rise
specifically, is concerning as the Antarctic continent supports
critical coastal infrastructure that enables national Antarctic
programme activities, is home to unique coastal habitats and
bioregions, Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), and HSMs.
Efforts to plan for, and adapt to, unavoidable change should be
encouraged and these efforts require a sound scientific evidence
base.
Accurate estimates of the rate and magnitude of future sea-level rise
underpin hazard and risk assessment required for adaptation
planning. Such estimates are commonly presented as a set of global-
mean sea-level projections and their uncertainties based on carbon
emissions pathways. The melting of the world’s glaciers and ice
sheets does not produce spatially uniform sea-level rise (Stammer et
al., 2013). The exact pattern heavily depends on the geographical
distribution and rate of melting ice and consequent vertical land
motion and changes in Earth’s gravity and rotation.
Generally speaking, in areas close to melting ice sheets the
deviation from a global mean rate is large; sea level will, in fact, fall
(Figure 1). In the Antarctic region, this sea level fall could have
effects on coastal infrastructure and HSMs, and on near-shore
navigation, coastal ecosystems, and sea ice.
Addressing knowledge gaps
Currently there are no robust and spatially comprehensive
projections of sea level change for Antarctica. Our aim is to address
this knowledge gap through research undertaken under the auspices
of the SCAR INStabilities & Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT)
Scientific Research Programme (https://www.scar-instant.org).
Through collaboration between SCAR and COMNAP, the proposal is
for the SCAR INSTANT Programme to lead a project to produce
location-specific sea-level projections for Antarctica. Project
outcomes can then be used by National Antarctic Programmes and
other operators, by the CEP and the ATCMs to assess risk and
develop appropriate response measures and protocols.
Current projections of sea level change around Antarctica
The latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
Assessment Report (AR6) contains global, state-of-the-art sea-level
projections to the year 2100 and beyond These data can be accessed
via an online tool developed by NASA (https://sealevel.nasa.gov/
ipcc-ar6-sea-level-projection-tool), which allows users to click on a
point anywhere in the ocean to obtain the IPCC sea level projection
for that location. (Fox-Kemper et al., 2021). There is strong spatial
variation in sea-level projections around Antarctica. For example,
sea level is ‘likely’ to rise between 21 and 62 cm near Prydz Bay
and fall by as much as 80 cm along the Marie Byrd Land Coast by
2100 if global greenhouse gas emissions follow a middle-of-the-road
pathway (SSP2-4.5) (Meinshausen et al., 2020). Such spatial
variation in sea-level projections is expected because sea-level
change is not geographically uniform. As mean global sea level
rises, local relative sea level in coastal regions may rise or fall, due
to many interdependent factors (e.g., Kopp et al., 2015; Stammer et
al., 2013). Spatial variation in sea level change is strongly
dependent on where the ice melts, with important consequences for
Antarctica’s coastline.
Loss of ice mass from a specific ice sheet, or ice sheet sector,
produces a distinct pattern of sea level change know as a ‘sea level
fingerprint’. The mass of an ice sheet exerts a gravitational ‘pull’ on
the adjacent ocean; melting of the ice sheet decreases that pull and
ocean water migrates away from the melting ice sheet margin,
resulting in sea-level fall (Figure 1). In the ‘far field’, distant from
the melting ice sheet, sea-level rise will exceed the global mean due
to this ocean water migration (Clark & Lingle, 1977; Farrell & Clark,
1976). The ‘sea level fingerprint’ computed for rapid uniform
melting across the entire West Antarctic Ice Sheet is shown in
Figure 2. If the West Antarctic Ice Sheet melted at a rate that raised
global sea levels by 1 mm/yr on average, sea-level around all West
Antarctica and the Antarctic Peninsula would fall by several mm/yr
(areas in red shades), whereas most of the East Antarctic coast
would have greater rise than the global mean (areas in blue
shades). Thus, a necessary consequence of sea level fingerprints is
that much of the Antarctic coastline may experience sea-level fall in
the future, not sea-level rise.
Changes in ice sheet mass from a specific ice sheet sector induce
vertical motion of the land beneath the ice sheet in a distinct
pattern, with maximum uplift typically centred where the largest
ice mass loss occurs. This vertical land motion (VLM) in coastal
regions strongly influences local relative sea level, either lowering
(uplifting coast) or amplifying (subsiding coast) the amount of sea
level rise ‘driven’ by climate change (Fig. 1). The methodology
applied in IPCC AR6 sea level projections (Garner et al., 2021; Kopp
et al., 2023) relied on the availability of multi-decadal tide gauge
data to characterize local vertical land motion.
Deployment and operation of tide gauges in Antarctica is
challenging due to sea ice interfering with conventional tide gauge
operations. Due to this challenge, only two sea level time series
data from two tide gauges in Antarctica (both in the northern
Antarctic Peninsula region) were used to estimate the local
influence of VLM for the entire Antarctic coastline. This lack of
spatial coverage limits the accuracy of sea level projections along
most of Antarctica’s coastal margin. An alternative means to
quantify vertical land motion employs GNSS [GPS] measurements
e.g., (Barletta et al., 2018; King et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2018; Nield
et al., 2014). Recent progress in GNSS instrument deployment and
data sharing yields the direction and magnitude of vertical land
motion at ~35 sites within 50-100 km distance of sites where
infrastructure, heritage structures, ASPAs or penguin rookeries exist
(Figure 3). Rapid uplift is taking place where ice mass is being lost
near the Amundsen Embayment and the Antarctic Peninsula. Due to
complexities in Earth structure and tectonic influences, some
coastal sectors in these regions are moving downward. Similar
variation in vertical land motions occur around the coast of East
Antarctica, but at lower rates. A much greater number of sea-level
projections for Antarctic coastal locations that are constrained by
local observations can be produced by including GNSS-derived
vertical land motion in the projection methodology (Kopp et al.,
2023).
The impact of sea level change around Antarctica
Sea level change around Antarctica has the potential to impact,
inter alia, infrastructure, HSMs, ASPAs, ASMAs, flora, fauna and
coastal bioregions. The assumption that sea level change will be
uniform around the Antarctic coastline creates the potential for
maladaptation as the impact depends on the rate and magnitude of
change and whether sea-level rises or falls.
Regions where sea-level rises will experience:
more frequent coastal inundation including nuisance flooding;
more extensive flooding during storm or tsunami events;
landward shifts in land to sea-ice transition zones;
salinisation of coastal groundwater systems.
Regions where sea level falls may face the following consequences:
more difficult, or blocked access to wharves and harbours as coastal
waterways shallow, as is anecdotally occurring in Greenland due to
ice melting;
possible changes to tidal resonances, especially in enclosed shallow
harbours;
greater distances (horizontally and vertically) from existing
infrastructure to the coast, requiring corrective works to
infrastructure;
ocean-ward shifts in the inter-tidal zone, shallowing of the photic
zone, and consequent effects on coastal ecosystems;
emergence of new islands.
In either case, there is need to update maritime charts to ensure
ongoing safe navigation in shallow waters.
Uncertainties in sea-level projections are primarily due to the
evolving understanding of ice sheet processes. Management
decisions that affect global carbon emissions pathways, require a
flexible ‘dynamic’ approach to coastal adaptation (Haasnoot et al.,
2021; Lawrence et al., 2018; Toimil et al., 2021; van Alphen et al.,
2022). These flexible approaches avoid adaptation solutions that
lock-in coastal plans and designs that may create a false sense of
security or ultimately prove unnecessary. A similar approach could
benefit Antarctica.
Planning for sea-level change in Antarctica – an adaptation example
COMNAP reported in ATCM XLII (2019) IP049 Modernisation of
Antarctic Stations: Survey results that 73% of national Antarctic
programmes were in the planning for or process of modernization
of their Antarctic facilities. During such planning, many national
Antarctic programmes are considering the impacts to their proposed
infrastructure of a changing Antarctic region. Recent work by New
Zealand presents one such example (see also New Zealand papers in
regards to redevelopment of Scott Base including ATCM XLIV
(2022) IP020 Response to comments on the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Scott Base Redevelopment).
Designers and engineers of the new Scott Base station initially
planned to use global mean sea level projections from the IPCC AR5
(Church et al., 2013) to future-proof the design. Following input
from the science community, local sea level projections to include
estimates of vertical land movement from relatively short tide
gauge records, and a range of modelled estimates of land movement
due to ice mass change, were generated for Hut Point Peninsula
(HPP) (Levy et al., 2020) and used to inform the design process.
The site-specific sea-level projections indicated that by 2100, sea
level along the coast of HPP might rise by as much as ~100 cm or
fall up to ~90 cm (Figure 4). These sea level projections (and the
range of possible scenarios) are highly dependent on (1) the ice
sheet model(s) used to simulate glacial retreat in Antarctica and
Greenland since the Last Glacial Maximum (past ~20 kyrs) and
future response to climate change, (2) the model that is used to
calculate vertical land motion in response to changes in ice sheet
volume, and (3) future carbon emissions. These local sea level
projections were also used to assess future tsunami hazard to ensure
the new facility is resilient within its design ‘life’ (e.g., Power et al.,
2019).
Next steps: Location specific sea level projections for Antarctica
An assessment of the implications associated with sea level change
around the Antarctic coastline clearly warrants further exploration
as this information is critical to plan for and adapt to the
unavoidable impacts of climate change. A substantial step toward
robust sea-level projections along the Antarctic coastline is possible
through use of these GNSS vertical land motion data and their
uncertainties that augment decadal tide gauge data. These
additional estimates of local land deformation can be incorporated
in the methodology of Kopp et al. (2023).
Making substantial improvements to current sea-level projections
for Antarctic coastlines is included within the work plans for SCAR
INSTANT for the period leading up to ATCM XLVI (2024). This
work will produce new projections of future sea level at locations
along the Antarctic coastline where GNSS observations of current
vertical land motion are available. Inclusion of these data will
reduce the reliance on the very sparse tide gauge records used in
IPCC AR6. Despite improvement in vertical land motion
measurements by GNSS in Antarctica (Figure 3), there are many
locations of National Antarctic Programme facilities, ASPAs, and
HSMs (top) and penguin rookeries (bottom) without proximal and/
or long-running GNSS instruments (Figure 5). The gaps identified in
Figures 3 and 5 can be filled if National Antarctic Programmes
fund, establish and maintain a spatially extensive network of
observations of vertical land motion (GNSS) and sea level (tide
gauges). This is a goal of the SCAR INSTANT programme which
includes participants from many national Antarctic programmes.
Conclusions
In summary, as the Antarctic Ice Sheet melts, coastlines near to
melting ice may see overall sea-level fall. This will depend on the
distribution and rate of future ice loss in Antarctica and globally
and the properties of the solid Earth, especially beneath Antarctica.
New observational constraints on vertical land motion and modified
methods in producing sea-level projections utilizing GNSS-derived
vertical land motion estimates are required for robust and
comprehensive projections of sea level for sites of interest along the
Antarctic coastline.
While climate change is not explicitly mentioned in the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Parties have a
key role to play through the CEP, for example by reporting to the
ATCM on the state of the Antarctic environment, considering
climate change impacts when reviewing or designating protected
areas 17% of the present ASPA management plans consider climate
change impacts (Hughes et al., 2021)., and in undertaking research
to support implementation of the Climate Change Response Work
Programme (CCRWP).
This paper suggests that Parties support their National Antarctic
Programmes to:
extend the current critical observational infrastructure – especially
the network of long-term continuous geodetic observations (GPS)
and tide gauges that provide location-specific time-series of changes
in land elevation and sea level.
facilitate research to improve projections of Antarctic ice mass loss
and its regional variability.
monitor local sea-level and land elevation near identified coastal
hazards.
identify risk and to adapt with urgency to impacts that are now
unavoidable.
adopt a dynamic decision-making approach that provides resilience
in response to those unavoidable impacts and that can be updated
and modified as new information evolves. This dynamic approach is
key because sea-level projections are uncertain, especially beyond
2060–2070.
Acknowledgements
SCAR and COMNAP wish to acknowledge the work as presented in
this paper of Matt King (The Australian Centre for Excellence in
Antarctic Science/ University of Tasmania) Matt.King@utas.edu.au;
Richard Levy (SCAR INSTANT Theme 3 Co-Leader, GNS Science
and Victoria University of Wellington) r.levy@gns.cri.nz; Terry
Wilson (Ohio State University) wilson.43osu@gmail.com; Fraser
Morgan (Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research)
MorganF@landcareresearch.co.nz; and Tim Naish (SCAR INSTANT
Co-Chair, Victoria University of Wellington)
timothy.naish@vuw.ac.nz.
Figures
Figure 1 (previous page) – Conceptual diagram showing spatial
variability in sea level due to changing ice mass and its effect on
gravitational attraction and load on the solid Earth. A large ice
sheet depresses the crust on which it sits and attracts water close to
its margin – the sea floor rises in response to mantle flow away
from the large ice mass forming a forebulge that causes a local
decrease in relative sea level. Sea level falls next to a melting/
retreating ice sheet (area A – Nunatak/Island) as the gravitational
attraction decreases, despite land uplift due to isostatic rebound.
Sea level rise occurs in areas where the
forebulge subsides (area B – Antarctic Island) and in regions far
from the ice sheet margin (area C – for example, a Subantarctic
island) due to meltwater flux to the ocean and negligible
gravitational attraction.
Figure 2 – Sea level fingerprint for uniform melting from the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet. Uniform mass gain from increased snowfall
would produce the same pattern but with opposite sign. Figure
reproduced from (Hay et al., 2017). Inset shows the same result
centred at the geographic South Pole, and with an expanded colour
scale. Modelled sea level is normalized by global sea level change to
show the ‘fingerprint’ of rise/fall attributable to West Antarctic
melt.
Figure 3 – Vertical motion of the bedrock land surface measured
using GNSS [GPS] instruments. Upward motion is denoted by red
arrows, downward motion by blue arrows, and the annual rate of
vertical motion is shown by the vector length, with 2 mm/yr scale
shown. Velocity solution from Ohio State University; data
compilation from the SCAR-GIANT REGAIN analysis; site selection
based on proximity (50-100 km) to coastal location of interest and
quality and duration of GNSS measurement time series.
Figure 4 – Local sea-level projections for Scott Base (see Levy et al.,
2020 for methods). Zero point is 2000 for ‘Kopp 2014’ and ‘Bamber
2019 H’ projections, 1998 for Stocchi LGM-RCP8.5 projection, and
the mean annual value for 2003 for the Scott Base tide gauge. Photo
at right shows waves breaking over reverse osmosis (RO) water
intake at Scott Base. Future sea level rise or fall is dependent on our
future emissions pathway but any change will affect the RO unit
and associated infrastructure.
Figure 5a – ASPAs (blue circles), National Antarctic Programme
facilities (red triangles), Heritage Sites and Monuments (HSMs)
(green squares); Figure 5b:Penguin rookeries (yellow diamonds). In
both a and b the shapes indicate either a lack of a proximal GNSS
station (located within a radius of 50km - West Antarctica, or 100
km - East Antarctica) or have a nearby GNSS station with a time-
series that is too short to accurately determine vertical land motion.
Note that assessment of quality and fitness of purpose of the
existing GNSS records requires further work through SCAR’s
INSTANT and GIANT programs and the number of sites without
requisite information may change.
References
Barletta, V. R., Bevis, M., Smith, B. E., Wilson, T., Brown, A.,
Bordoni, A., et al. (2018). Observed rapid bedrock uplift in
Amundsen Sea Embayment promotes ice-sheet stability. Science,
360(6395), 1335-1339.
Chown, S.L., Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R., Brooks, C.M., Convey, P.,
Henley, B.J., Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips, L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II &
Grant, S.M. (Eds). 2022. Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action.
SCAR, Cambridge, U.K .https://scar.org/library/scar-publications/
occasional-publications/5758-acce-decadal-synopsis/file.
Church, J. A., Clark, P. U., Cazenave, A., Gregory, J. M., Jevrejeva,
S., Levermann, A., et al. (2013). Sea Level Change. In T. F. Stocker,
D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung , A.
Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, & P. M. Midgley (Eds.), Climate Change
2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (pp. 1137-1216): Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Clark, J. A., & Lingle, C. S. (1977). Future sea-level changes due to
West Antarctic ice sheet fluctuations. Nature, 269(5625), 206-209.
10.1038/269206a0.
Diffenbaugh, N. S., & Barnes, E. A. (2023). Data-driven predictions
of the time remaining until critical global warming thresholds are
reached. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(6),
e2207183120.
Farrell, W., & Clark, J. A. (1976). On postglacial sea level.
Geophysical Journal International, 46(3), 647-667.
Fox-Kemper, B., Hewitt, H. T., Xiao, C., Aðalgeirsdóttir, G.,
Drijfhout, S. S., Edwards, T. L., et al. (2021). Ocean, Cryosphere and
Sea Level Change. In V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L.
Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I.
Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K.
Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (Ed.),
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Frederikse, T., Landerer, F., Caron, L., Adhikari, S., Parkes, D.,
Humphrey, V. W., et al. (2020). The causes of sea-level rise since
1900. Nature, 584(7821), 393-397.
Garner, G. G., T. Hermans, R. E. Kopp, A. B. A. Slangen, T. L.
Edwards, A. Levermann, et al. (2021). IPCC AR6 Sea-Level Rise
Projections. Retrieved from: https://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov/
announcements/2021-08-09-Sea-level-projections-from-the-
IPCC-6th-Assessment-Report.
Haasnoot, M., Winter, G., Brown, S., Dawson, R. J., Ward, P. J., &
Eilander, D. (2021). Long-term sea-level rise necessitates a
commitment to adaptation: A first order assessment. Climate Risk
Management, 34, 100355.
Hay, C. C., Lau, H. C., Gomez, N., Austermann, J., Powell, E.,
Mitrovica, J. X., et al. (2017). Sea level fingerprints in a region of
complex Earth structure: The case of WAIS. Journal of Climate,
30(6), 1881-1892.
Hughes, K. A., Convey, P., & Turner, J. (2021). Developing
resilience to climate change impacts in Antarctica: An evaluation of
Antarctic Treaty System protected area policy. Environmental
Science & Policy, 124, 12-22.
King, M. A., Watson, C. S., & White, D. (2022). GPS rates of vertical
bedrock motion suggest Late Holocene Ice‐Sheet readvance in a
critical sector of East Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters,
49(4), e2021GL097232.
Kopp, R. E., Garner, G. G., Hermans, T. H. J., Jha, S., Kumar, P.,
Slangen, A. B. A., et al. (2023). The Framework for Assessing
Changes To Sea-level (FACTS) v1.0-rc: A platform for characterizing
parametric and structural uncertainty in future global, relative, and
extreme sea-level change. EGUsphere, 2023, 1-34.
Kopp, R. E., Hay, C. C., Little, C. M., & Mitrovica, J. X. (2015).
Geographic Variability of Sea-Level Change. Current Climate
Change Reports, 1(3), 192-204.
Lawrence, J., Bell, R., Blackett, P., Stephens, S., & Allan, S. (2018).
National guidance for adapting to coastal hazards and sea-level rise:
Anticipating change, when and how to change pathway.
Environmental Science & Policy, 82, 100-107. https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1462901117306068
Levy, R., Naish, T., Golledge, N., Bell, R., Stocchi, P., Kopp, R., et al.
(2020). Sea-level projections for New Zealand’s Scott Base rebuild.
GNS Science report, 2020/13, 18.
Liu, B., King, M., & Dai, W. (2018). Common mode error in
Antarctic GPS coordinate time-series on its effect on bedrock-uplift
estimates. Geophysical Journal International, 214(3), 1652-1664.
Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Pirani, A., Connors, S. L., Péan, C.,
Berger, S., et al. (2021). Climate change 2021: the physical science
basis. Contribution of working group I to the sixth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, 2.
Matthews, H. D., & Wynes, S. (2022). Current global efforts are
insufficient to limit warming to 1.5 C. Science, 376(6600),
1404-1409.
Meinshausen, M., Nicholls, Z. R. J., Lewis, J., Gidden, M. J., Vogel,
E., Freund, M., et al. (2020). The shared socio-economic pathway
(SSP) greenhouse gas concentrations and their extensions to 2500.
Geosci. Model Dev., 13(8), 3571-3605.
Nield, G. A., Barletta, V. R., Bordoni, A., King, M. A., Whitehouse,
P. L., Clarke, P. J., et al. (2014). Rapid bedrock uplift in the
Antarctic Peninsula explained by viscoelastic response to recent ice
unloading. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 397, 32-41.
Power, W. L., Gusman, A., Wang, X., Lukovic, B., & Black, J. (2019).
Pilot tsunami hazard study for Scott Base in Antarctica. GNS
Science Consultancy Report 2019/113., 60.
Stammer, D., Cazenave, A., Ponte, R. M., & Tamisiea, M. E. (2013).
Causes for Contemporary Regional Sea Level Changes. Annual
Review of Marine Science, 5(1), 21-46.
Toimil, A., Losada, I. J., Hinkel, J., & Nicholls, R. J. (2021). Using
quantitative dynamic adaptive policy pathways to manage climate
change-induced coastal erosion. Climate Risk Management, 33,
100342.
van Alphen, J., Haasnoot, M., & Diermanse, F. (2022). Uncertain
Accelerated Sea-Level Rise, Potential Consequences, and Adaptive
Strategies in The Netherlands. Water, 14(10), 1527.
