Implementation of the IMO Polar Code: A practical perspective
Implementation of the IMO Polar Code: A practical Perspective
Summary
The IMO Polar Code was the first IMO instrument to use a
combination of goal based and prescriptive requirements. This
paper reviews the challenges IAATO members faced when
implementing the IMO Polar Code, how those challenges were
resolved and which elements continue to create challenges. While
some elements of the Code were straightforward and easy to
implement, particularly in terms of building new vessels, other
aspects were more challenging – not least because there was a lack
of experience on how to interpret requirements across Flag States ,
Classification Societies, ship owners and managers.
Towards Implementation
“Starting from scratch”
In the early days of the Polar Code, the interpretation of how to
implement the goals and requirements was difficult as there were
no previous examples or experiences to refer to. Operators, Flag
States and Classification Societies were faced with developing
standards with which to review the implementation requirements.
This “starting from scratch” challenge manifested itself in several
ways from both the technical and operational basis.
For example, each vessel Operator must complete an operational
risk assessment in order to determine the operating envelope for
their vessel. To try and assist with this, and to ensure some degree
of harmonization in the data underwriting each Operators’
mandatory operational risk assessment, IAATO collaborated with
Polarview (see ATCM XXXIX IP103 Annual Report of the
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators) to create a
baseline database, POLARIS, which operators could access. This
allowed a generic standard to be used when Operators were
working through their risk assessments to determine their operating
envelope and whether their vessel required a Polar Service
Temperature (PST) – the latter being important as it prescribes
whether additional measures and equipment would be required.
Given that regular operation for most cruises to Antarctica during
the Austral summer take place in air temperatures higher than –
10°C Mean Daily Low Temperature (MDLT), it was confirmed that
for most IAATO vessels a PST was not required.
Another example of the challenge of starting from scratch was that
there were no precise standards clarified of the scope, amount, and
characteristics of required equipment, such as Personal Survival
Equipment (PSK) and Group Survival Equipment (GSK) –. As a
result, it was left to the interpretation of the Operator. Additionally,
Classification Societies and Flag States at that time did not have
binding rules in place.
Application to existing versus new vessels – technical considerations
On existing vessels, the minor adjustments, and upgrades to
required navigation and communication equipment (for example,
the GNSS Compass, Iridium phone, ice lights) were rarely an issue
as in most cases, these items were already installed on board.
Equally, the requirements of Part II-A of the Code regarding
pollution prevention measures did not, in most cases, require
changes in procedures and equipment, as it met by either current
legislation and/or best practice for most ships already.
In terms of equipment, the most pressing challenge for existing
vessels was finding suitable storage space for the additional
equipment required, whether that was Thermal Protective Aids
(TPA) required for all souls onboard, or additional ration
requirement in lifeboats and life rafts,
or PSK and GSK where applicable. Some items (e.g., survival suits,
tents, sleeping bags) are bulky and needed suitable protection and
storage space to be readily available in an emergency. Passenger
and crew cabins do not normally offer ample space and adequate
space is not usually available next to survival crafts.
It is perhaps notable, that there was a pause in commissioning of
vessels during the negotiation of the Polar Code as Operators waited
to understand the final requirements before investing in new
vessels. Once finalized, there was a surge in the number of vessels
were commissioned where compliance with the goals and
prescriptive requirements of the Polar Code were addressed by
naval architects and ship builders. There were, however, some
uncertainties with regards to the interpretation of various elements
of the Code, in particular around the scope of survival equipment.
Operational Considerations
Operationally, the requirements for voyage planning did not cause
any undue additional procedures or workload for those already
experienced in operating in these environments. The most notable
operational implementation challenge that persists to this day is
around the certification of Bridge Officers, which requires both
training courses and experience.
Initially, the opportunities to achieve mandatory basic and
advanced polar training at certified training centers were very
restricted, and there was a lack of experience within many of these
institutions. While this situation seems to have eased, there is still a
lack of certified training courses. There does seem to be many non-
certified educational courses, which are helpful in a first instance
but dos not solve the certification problem.
Furthermore, trying to ensure 60 days’ experience in polar or polar
equivalent waters in a 5-year period can be challenging. It can be
difficult to achieve initially and then to maintain that level of polar
water time. To gain experience, various solutions are used such as
doubling up of positions, or higher ranks signing on in lower
positions in order to meet the time requirements.
While this can seem like a good solution, it can also create
problems. For example, there is the potential for a lower rank
officer, with the relevant time in polar waters and completed the
advanced ice course to be promoted prematurely simply to fulfill
the Polar Code requirement. Several Operators are now working
with cadets onboard, in an effort to build the wider skill set, but
this is a multi-year process and will take time to spread through the
system.
To confuse the issue further, there is variable interpretation
regarding what is considered as ‘equivalent approved seagoing
service’. An officer from one country may be able to include a
certain equivalent time in (non-polar) ice, while another officer –
serving on the same vessel but from another country – is unable to
use similar experience as qualifying days.
Conclusions
Without a doubt the Polar Code has forced Operators, particularly
those new to polar water operations to take a close look at their
operating environment and related risks. As such it has successfully
strengthened the safety standards for SOLAS vessels operating in
polar waters.
Perhaps inevitably, as a new instrument that is a combination of
goal based and prescriptive, versus purely prescriptive, will have a
period of challenges during implementation. There remains some
uncertainty around the interpretation regarding some defined
aspects (notably around the characteristics of survival equipment
and Bridge teams’ certificates of competency). Much has been
learned by Operators, Flag States and Classification Societies
throughout the past six years and there would be value in sharing
the experiences in implementation to smooth out some of these
uncertainties and improve harmonisation in the implementation of
the Polar Code.
