IAATO Deep Field and Air Operations Biosecurity Procedures - An
update
IAATO Deep Field and Air Operations Biosecurity Procedures - An
update
Information Paper submitted by IAATO
Summary
This paper reports on recent developments to biosecurity
procedures for IAATO’s deep field and air operators. Aware of the
potential for human activities to introduce non-native species and
microorganisms, and their obligation to the Environment Protocol,
IAATO members developed mandatory biosecurity procedures for
all their operations over twenty years ago. IAATO deep field
operators implemented procedures tailored to their activities,
following tools provided by COMNAP and SCAR. To ensure
consistent application, existing practices were collated into a
procedural document that is specific for IAATO deep field and air
operations. Trialed successfully during the 2022-2023 season, this
document has now been formally adopted by IAATO. 
Background
In recognition of the potential for human activities to introduce
non-native species and microorganisms, and their obligation to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
IAATO implemented mandatory procedures in the year 2000. The
association reported these developments to the ATCM and CEP in
20051 which included methods used by deep field operators.
IAATO’s biosecurity procedures have since developed to become a
recognised cornerstone of the organisation’s work towards fulfilling
its mission for the practice of safe and environmentally responsible
private-sector travel.
IAATO currently has five member operators conducting deep field
activities carrying less than 1% of the total number of Antarctic
visitors annually. IAATO deep field and air operators implement
biosecurity procedures that are tailored to their unique operations,
working closely with their National Competent Authorities (NCAs)
and the National Antarctic Programmes they support. Their
biosecurity procedures are further guided by ATCM, CEP2,3 and
SCAR information4. Additionally, they follow tools developed by
COMNAP/SCAR, such as the Checklists for supply chain managers
for the reduction in risk of transfer of Non-Native Species5 and the
COMNAP Practical Training Module for Non-Native Species. All
relevant documents are included in the IAATO Field Operations
Manual, which is updated annually.
While this approach has worked well over the years, the Association
determined that collating existing biosecurity practices into a
procedural document that is specific for IAATO deep field and air
operators would help ensure consistent application and offer value
to the operators and their NCAs. All IAATO operational procedures
are subject to routine review and development in tandem with
thematic committees and working groups. In this case, the
procedures were developed in consultation with IAATO’s Deep Field
and Air Operators Committee. Following successful field trials
during the 2022-2023 season, they were formally adopted at the
IAATO Annual Meeting in Hamburg, Germany, 24-27 April, 2023
(Attachment 1).
References
ATCM XXVIII – CEP VIII IP097 Update on Boot and Clothing
Decontamination Guidelines and the Introduction and Detection of
Diseases in Antarctic Wildlife: IAATO’s Perceptive.
ATCM XXXIII-CEP XIII WP008 Draft Procedures for vehicle cleaning
to prevent transfer of non-native species into and around
Antarctica.
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Non-Native Species
Manual 2019 Edition.
Dewar, M., Wille, M., Gamble, A., Vanstreels, R., T., Smith,
A., Varsani, A., Ratcliffe, N., Black, J., Lynnes, A., Barbosa, A. &
Hart, T. (2022) The Risk of Avian Influenza in the Southern Ocean:
A practical guide for operators interacting with wildlife. View
preprint: https://ecoevorxiv.org/repository/view/3686/
Inter-continental Checklists For supply chain managers of the
National Antarctic Programmes for the reduction in risk of transfer
of non-native species. COMNAP/SCAR (May 2019) https://
www.comnap.aq/s/Inter-continental-Checklists.pdf. [Also available
in brochure and poster format]
