Gender equality action plan & practices of Tübitak Mam Polar
Research Institute
Gender equality action plan & practices of Tübitak Mam Polar
Research Institute
Information Paper submitted by Türkiye
Summary
This paper presents information on 2022-2025 Gender Equality
Action Plan of the Scientific and Technological Research Council of
Türkiye (TÜBİTAK) and highlights the gender equality practices to
be applied by TÜBİTAK Marmara Research Center (MAM) Polar
Research Institute (PRI) during the national Antarctic expeditions.
Gender Equality Action Plan
Article 10 of the Constitution of Türkiye is a concrete policy that
exists enshrining the will of the country on gender equality into all
areas of social, cultural, and economic life. Furthermore, the 11th
Development Plan of Türkiye clearly emphasizes equality of
opportunity, ease of accessibility, and citizen orientation through
clear and predictable public policies.
The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Türkiye
(TÜBİTAK) is the leading agency in charge of managing, funding,
conducting, and coordinating scientific and technological research
in Türkiye. It is also important to emphasize that TÜBİTAK not only
supports innovation, academic and industrial R&D but also, in line
with national priorities, develops scientific and technological
policies and manages R&D institutes, which carry out research,
technological advancement, and developmental studies.
In this regard, TÜBİTAK pays special attention to establishing
equality of opportunity in all institutions, organizations, and
researchers benefiting from these activities while ensuring scientific
excellence. To achieve equal opportunity, especially gender
equality, one needs to challenge power inequalities and unequal
gender dynamics, and promote equitable access to resources and
opportunities. Gender Equality Plans (GEP) are important policy
and planning instruments that consider both the current challenges
and the commitments to promoting gender equality in an
organization. In light of this statement, TÜBİTAK’s GEP has been
established to ensure equal opportunities for all employees of the
TÜBİTAK as well as for all researchers and students that receive
TÜBİTAK grants and scholarships. For TÜBİTAK funds to be as
beneficial to society as possible, all researchers regardless of gender,
nationality, and age need to participate in conducting research, and
gender factors need to be integrated into research and innovation
content. TÜBİTAK hereby commits itself to comply with the
principles of gender equality in all its activities without
compromising on quality and proficiency.
There is a gender imbalance across academic positions, decision-
making bodies, grant and patent applications, and awarding. Within
its capacity, TÜBİTAK published The Policy Principles for Increasing
the Participation of Women Researchers in its processes in 2019 to
promote gender equality in the research ecosystem of Türkiye. This
GEP will pave the way to establish a framework for promoting
gender equality in employment, research, innovation funding, and
all social interactions of TÜBİTAK. The GEP Committee members
will monitor the implementation of these GEP actions, review and
improve as needed. The GEP is based on eight main objectives:
1. Establishing an institutional structure for systematic gender
disaggregated data collection, monitoring and evaluation
2. Improving gender balance among the employees (including the
leadership), the members of the panels, the committees, and the
external reviewers
3. Improving gender balance among the applicants and recipients of
research grants, scholarships, and awards
4. Raising awareness on gender aspects among the employees and
the members of the panels and committees and among the external
reviewers
5. Enacting formal mechanisms for the integration of gender
perspective in respective research disciplines
6. Implementing a gender-sensitive communication strategy
7. Establishing a work-life balance strategy that can be applied in
all units
8. Improving existing mechanisms for the prevention of sexual
harassment, gender-based violence, and discrimination
Gender Equality Practices
In order to establish the legal infrastructure, the articles on the
protection of gender equality added to the expeditioner’s letter of
commitments prepared for the expedition participants published by
TÜBİTAK MAM PRI form the basis for protection and awareness.
In these documents; Participation in pre-expedition trainings
covering each of the topics of gender-based violence, sexual
harassment and assault is mandatory. Any action related to gender-
based violence and sexual harassment and/or assault by any
participant, including the Expedition Team, Expedition Leader and
Expedition Coordinator, during the Expedition anywhere and
anytime will be reported to the responsible person, one of the
gender equality team members. In order to apply penal sanctions
and all kinds of administrative and judicial sanctions, a document
in the form of evidence will be created.
It does not make restrictive assessments of Expedition Participants'
clothing, hairstyles or other appearances based on gender or gender
stereotypes. Except for the appropriate attire required by the harsh
environment and working conditions, no conditions or expectations
regarding the appearance of the expedition participants are applied
based on any discrimination such as gender and ethnicity.
The Polar Research Institute warns people that those participating
in the expedition will not be exposed to undesirable verbal or
physical behavior based on age, national origin, sexual orientation
and protected genetic information, including harassment or assault
based on race, color, religion, gender, and to raise awareness on
these issues. It reminds the parties of the penal and legal conditions
in case of any problems in these matters.
During the expedition, necessary information is provided to keep
the participants' own level of consciousness at the highest level, by
ensuring safety and equality anywhere and anytime.
Thanks to the gender equality team determined by the Expedition
Coordinator, the expedition participants will feel safe. The leader of
this team will be the chief complaint officer; by working in
coordination with the Expedition Leader during the expedition, they
will ensure confidence in the easy transmission of complaints. The
gender equality team will keep records of any possible sexist or
racist behavior during the expedition and will notify the gender
equality team upon return.
