Report by the CEP Observer to the XXXVII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting
(Report by France)
Report by the CEP Observer
to the XXXVII SCAR Delegates’ Meeting
Summary
The XXXVII Meeting of Delegates of the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) was held 5-7 September 2022, in a
hybrid format; in presential in Goa, India, a visio-hub in Leuven,
Belgium attended by three Parties and the rest of the attendees
online. This paper presents some aspects of the meeting that may be
of relevance to the work of the CEP.
Introduction
At CEP XXIV, the Committee nominated the CEP Representative
from France to act as the CEP Observer at the XXXVII SCAR
Delegates Meeting held 5-7 September 2022, in a hybrid format; in
presential in Goa, India, a visio-hub in Leuven, Belgium attended by
three Parties and the rest of the attendees online. The SCAR
Delegates Meeting was attended by Delegates from 46 members
countries and 9 Union Members, and representatives of the SCAR
Subsidiary Groups. The documents presented and discussed during
the meeting and the final meeting report are available from the
SCAR website (see: https://www.scar.org/general-scar-news/xxxvii-
delegates-report/).
The SCAR Delegates Meeting was chaired by its President, Yeadong
Kim.
During this meeting, no new countries joined SCAR as Full
Members, but one new country joined as Associate Member
(Luxembourg). The SCAR has now 46 member countries. Three
scenarios for an increase in the registration costs of Parties to SCAR
were proposed to the Delegates to account for the inflation that
weighs on SCAR budget.
Marcelo Leppe (Chile) and Burcu Ozsoy (Türkiye) were elected new
vice-presidents for Administration and Capacity Building,
respectively for 4 years. They will accompany Jefferson Cardia
Simões (Brazil) and Deneb Karentz (USA) who currently act as vice-
presidents for Finance and Science, respectively.
Prof Steven L Chown was awarded Honorary SCAR membership in
recognition of the numerous roles he held in SCAR such as being its
President from 2016-2021 and representing SCAR at the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings, providing scientific advice on a broad
range of environmental and science policy matters.
Aspects of the meeting of particular relevance to the CEP
New Scientific Research Programmes
SCAR currently houses three Research Programmes that have been
running since 2020. The potential programmes are all directed
towards overarching issues and areas of concern for policy and
management, and the needs of the CEP and the Antarctic Treaty
system in general has been highlighted as a rational for these
programmes:
Integrated Conservation Planning for Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean (Ant-ICON) which will aim to answer fundamental science
questions (as identified by the SCAR Horizon Scan), relating to the
conservation and management of Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean and focus on research to drive and inform international
decision-making and policy change. The SRP will focus on four
research themes, broadly covering: i) integrated forecasting of
future change to support conservation planning; ii) environmental
sustainability of human activities in Antarctica; iii) Antarctic
conservation in a global context; and iv) socio-ecological
approaches to conservation
planning. The Chief Officers of Ant-ICON are Mercedes Santos
(Argentina) and Daniela Liggett (New Zealand). 
Near-term Variability and Prediction of the Antarctic Climate
System (AntClimnow) which will aim to investigate prediction of
near-term conditions in the Antarctic climate system on timescales
of years to multiple decades. These time scales are highly relevant
across multiple disciplines and to a range of key stakeholders whilst
aligning strongly with scientific priorities identified as part of the
SCAR Horizon Scan. The joint Chief Officers of AntClimnow are
Tom Bracegirdle (UK) and Ilana Wainer (Brazil).
INStabilities & Thresholds in ANTarctica (INSTANT) which will aim
to quantify the Antarctic ice sheet contribution to past and future
global sea-level change, from improved understanding of climate,
ocean and solid Earth interactions and feedbacks with the ice, so
that decision-makers can better anticipate and assess the risk to
manage and adapt to sea-level rise and evaluate mitigation
pathways. The joint Chief Officers of INSTANT are Tim Naish (New
Zealand) and Florence Colleoni (Italy).
A new Proposal Planning Group (PPG) for a new Scientific Research
Programme (SRP) has been presented: Antarctic Geospace and
ATmosphere reseArch (AGATA). The proposed SRP aims at
understanding the coupling of atmospheric layers in polar regions
and its response to increased geomagnetic activity, using radio
signals from the GNSS or other satellites, and from ground-based
radars. The tentative Chief Officers are Lucilla Alfonsi (Italy),
Nicolas Bergeot (Belgium).
New programmes will be considered at the next Delegates meeting.
The meeting discussed potential programmes which will work to
develop full proposals to the 2024 Delegates meeting.
Scientific Groups
The current scientific groups reported progress to the meeting and
highlighted coming efforts worth noting the establishment of
several new Action and Expert groups:
Geosciences Group (GSG: https://www.scar.org/science/gsg/
home/):
The secretary of the Group has changed with Marcelo Leppe (Chile)
stepping down and being replaced by Laura de Santis (Italy).
The Geological Heritage and Geoconservation Action Group has
completed its term and is now closed. It was endorsed to transition
to an Expert Group (GEOCON: Geological Heritage and
Geoconservation).
Two new Action Groups were endorsed: ICEPRO “An International
Collaboration Effort for Improving Paleoclimate Research in the
Southern Ocean”, which aims to improve our understanding of past
ocean-ice-earth interactions by linking modern observations and
paleo-records by facilitating transnational collaborations
on(paleo)environmental studies in the Southern Ocean; and RINGS
“Ice sheet margin” will clarify the current knowledge gaps at the
ice-sheet margin and assess the impacts of new data filling these
knowledge gaps, and will develop a set of protocols to
systematically collect, analyze, and share comprehensive airborne
geophysical data).
The Geosciences Group reiterate the need to collect bathymetric
and other geophysical data on the way to and from Antarctica to
share the data with all nations to improve the Southern Ocean
bathymetry map and geophysical dataset.
Life Sciences Group (LSG: https://www.scar.org/science/lsg/
home/):
Following the departure of Chief Officer Yan Ropert-Coudert
(France) and deputy Chief Officer Marc Shepanek (USA), a new
leadership team was elected during the business meeting and
endorsed by the Delegates: Ian McDonald (Chief Officer - New
Zealand), Natalie Pattyn (Deputy CO - Belgium/JEGHBM) and
Byron Adams (Secretary - USA).
A number of groups have obtained extensions from the Delegates:
Extension for 6 years of the expert group EG-ABI “Antarctic
Biodiversity Informatics”, which aims to foster the application and
development of computationally-
driven biodiversity science and information processing in the SCAR
community; Extension for 2 years of action group PLASTICS “Plastic
in Polar Environments”, which examine the presence, origin and
biological effects of macro-, micro- and nanoplastics, quantify the
scale of the problem and propose solutions for minimising the
environmental risk and impacts on Polar ecosystems; Extension for
1 year of action group ImPACT “Input pathways of persistent
organic pollutants to Antarctica”, which aims to serve both the
Global Monitoring Plan of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants, as well as the Madrid Protocol.
SKAG aims to be the prime conduit between CCAMLR and the
wider krill science community to provide a forum to set research
directions and promote collaboration to improve understanding of
krill biology and ecology, and to assist in providing critical
scientific information that matters the krill fishery management.
The Delegates endorsed its request to become an expert group (now
referred to as SKEG).
Physical Sciences Group (PSG: (https://www.scar.org/science/psg/
home/):
David Bromwich (CO, USA) and Steven Colwell (secretary, UK)
have completed their terms of office and are no longer eligible for
re-election. New CO is Tajiki Nakamura (Japan) and new secretary
is Wojciech Miloch (Norway). Adriana Gulisano (Deputy CO,
Argentina) stays in office.
Covid-19 substantially and negatively impacted the activities of all
Action Groups (AGs) and Expert Groups (EGs) in 2020-2022. Action
groups typically have a lifetime to 2-4 year and can be renewed
once. The impact of the pandemic has meant that fieldwork could
not be carried out but also the switch to remote working has meant
that people have not had much time to commit to the work of the
action groups due to other commitments. Consequently all action
groups were extended for at least 2 years, RINGS, AntArchitecture
and EOAG being extended for 4 years.
SCAR is furthermore undertaking a review of the current structure
of SCAR and its subsidiary bodies, led initially by the Vice-President
for Administration, Gary Wilson. The development of new SCAR
groups and activities will be subject to the outcome of this review,
which may alter aspects of SCAR’s rules for subsidiary bodies.
Discussions are still on-going.
Please note that the presentations from the 10th SCAR Open
Science Conference earlier this year are now available from the
SCAR YouTube channel. You can see an overview of all videos here.
SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (SC-ATS)
Dr. Susie Grants reported on the progress and plans of the SC-ATS,
including interactions with the Treaty and the CEP. Relevant
achievements and plans to note are:
Contribution to SCAR, especially to the updates on current
understanding and future projections of climate change, including
the major Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment Decadal
Synopsis report; advice on special protection and conservation
status of the emperor penguin, establishment of an Environmental
Code of Conduct for Geosciences Field Research Activities,
development of closer links between SC-ATS and the Antarctic
Environments Portal, and a mini- Symposium jointly convened by
Ant-ICON and SC-ATS on “How SCAR informs and guides Antarctic
policy and conservation” during the SCAR Open Science
Conference.
Planned deliveries and commitments relevant to the CEP
SC-ATS will engage with Ant-ICON, AntClimnow and INSTANT on
the strategic development of inputs to the Antarctic Treaty System,
given the focus of these
Scientific Research Programs on policy-relevant science, and high-
priority topics for the Antarctic Treaty System.
SC-ATS will further develop a Fellowship to allow the participation
of early-career researchers in policy meetings (ATCM and
CCAMLR), in collaboration with Ant-ICON and other SCAR groups
as appropriate
Forthcoming Information and advice specifically requested by the
ATCM and CEP on i) climate change, ii) non-native species, iii)
tourism, iv) designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially
Protected Species, v) Environmental Impact Assessment, v)
chemical contamination, vi) Important Bird Areas, vii) seismic
activities.
Invitation to contribute a lecture on scientific issues relevant to
ATCM XLV (2023).
SCAR Delegates approved the further development of the Antarctic
Environments Portal and note that the Antarctic Environments
Portal will require additional funds in 2023 and the subsequent
years to account for the costs of the editor’s salary, as well as for
the maintenance of the website and the translations of articles into
the four languages of the Treaty.
Next meeting
Next SCAR Delegates’ Meetings will all be in a hybrid format, the
next one being held in Pucón, Chile, in 2024.
