Policy-relevant science highlights from the Antarctic CORDEX
project
Policy-relevant science highlights from the Antarctic CORDEX
project
Outline
The Antarctic CORDEX (Coordinated Regional Downscaling
Experiment) project was initiated by the World Climate Research
Programme The World Climate Research Programme is co-
sponsored by WMO, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission of UNESCO, and the International Science Council
(WCRP) to coordinate Regional Climate Modelling (RCM) activities
to better understand climate process, their variability, and influence
on Antarctica’s sea-ice, ice shelves and ice sheet. Antarctic CORDEX
provides a common framework for delivering Regional Climate
Model simulations, which are produced by multiple polar climate
modelling groups throughout the world
Summary
The surface mass balance (SMB) of the Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS),
which is the balance between mass gain from snow and mass loss
from surface melt, and directly influences global sea-level, is
increasingly being investigated using output from RCMs, and
particularly Antarctic CORDEX simulations. [NB. SMB does not
include dynamic ice loss from the AIS.]
Antarctic ice shelves (the floating extensions of the ice sheet where
glaciers flow into the ocean) have undergone unprecedented
thinning and retreat in recent decades, and even collapse in some
cases, resulting in acceleration of glacier flow into the ocean and
increased rates of ice loss and consequent sea level rise. They lose
mass either through basal melt by the warming of the underlying
ocean or from above by atmospheric driven melt. The relative role
of these processes is critical in projecting future ice shelf loss, and
therefore, the dynamic loss of ice into the ocean.
CORDEX model simulations have provided the following insights.
Compared with observations, models tend to underestimate SMB at
the low-elevation coastal regions of Antarctica, as well as some ice
shelf locations (especially over the Ross Ice Shelf). (Mottram et al.,
2021).
SMB over the grounded (terrestrial) ice sheet is projected to
increase over the 21st century as a result of stronger snowfall,
which is strongly correlated with near-surface warming, and only
partially offset by enhanced surface melt / run-off. (Kittel et al.
2021).
This projected increase in SMB is equivalent to a reduction in global
sea level of 5.1 ± 1.9 cm in CMIP5-RCP8.5 (Relative Concentration
Pathway 8.5) and 6.3 ± 2.0 cm in CMIP6-ssp585 (Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways 5-8.5). (Kittel et al. 2021) [NB. In ice
sheet models Antarctic SMB increase over the 21st century could
even out-pace ice dynamic loss under certain climate scenarios
leading to a positive mass balance and reduction in global sea-level
rise].
Melt Potential Index (MPI) is highest for Antarctic Peninsula ice
shelves, while the MPI value for Pine Island, West Antarctica is the
highest outside of the Antarctic Peninsula and suggests that this ice
shelf is vulnerable to extreme surface melt events in addition to the
well-known basal melting. (Orr et al., 2023).
In projections, non-linear growth of surface melt and runoff over ice
shelves occurs with increased warming over the 21st century, which
lowers SMB and potentially leads to melt-induced hydrofracture of
some of the ice shelves, facilitating accelerated glacial
discharge of grounded ice and increased rates of sea level rise.
(Gilbert and Kittel. 2021).
CORDEX makes the following recommendations:
Support of targeted observational campaigns focused on poorly
understood / observed regions with high-precipitation are crucial to
understanding model biases, uncertainties, and improving model
estimates of Antarctic Surface Mass Balance.
Encouragement of national modelling groups to participate in
Antarctic CORDEX (see https://climate-cryosphere.org/antarctic-
cordex/). Contact Dr Andrew Orr (anmcr@bas.ac.uk) in the first
instance.
Background
Antarctic CORDEX provides a common framework for delivering
RCM simulations, which are produced by multiple polar climate
modelling groups throughout the world, consisting of a) evaluation
experiments for the present-day forced by atmospheric reanalysis
data, and b) projection experiments for the 21st century forced by
global climate model output. Coordinating these simulations
encourages cooperation and knowledge exchange between groups
and enables the experiments to be performed with multiple RCMs,
which are required to better understand local climate processes,
model intercomparison studies, and sources of uncertainties. These
simulations are freely available to researchers and regularly used in
studies assessing the impact of climate change on Antarctica, in
particular by the cryosphere community in order to produce
improved understanding of how ice sheets, glaciers, ice shelves, and
sea ice respond to climate change. This update on Antarctic
CORDEX focuses on some of these recent science highlights.
Recent Science Highlights
The AIS is a significant part of the climate system and a crucial
contributor to both present-day and future sea level increases in
response to global warming, as it contains enough ice to cause
almost 60 m rise in global sea level if it all melted. Current
estimates suggest that loss (melting) of ice from the AIS is
responsible for around 10% of observed global sea level rise since
1993, and that mass loss is accelerating. A key to understanding
recent mass loss (and the stability and evolution of the AIS in
general) and improving future mass loss projections is improved
knowledge of the SMB of the AIS, which is increasingly being
investigated using output from RCMs, and particularly Antarctic
CORDEX simulations.
Mottram et al. (2021) used simulations from Antarctic CORDEX
from five different RCMs (COSMO-CLM, HIRHAM5, MAR, MetUM,
and RACMO) to quantify present-day Antarctic SMB. The range of
models in this intercomparison study allowed them to identify
sources of disagreement / uncertainty in the range of SMB over
Antarctica. They found that between 1987 and 2018 that the
ensemble average annual SMB integrated over the whole of the
Antarctic ice sheet is 2329 ± 94 Gt yr-1, which compares well with
observational-based estimates. However, individual model estimates
vary from 1961 ± 70 to 2519 ± 118 Gt yr−1. They found no
obvious trends in SMB over the present-day period, which is
perhaps related to SMB being highly variable on annual timescales.
Evaluating the models against observations of SMB, they found that
in general they all tended to underestimate SMB at the low-
elevation coastal regions of Antarctica, as well as ice shelf locations
(especially over the Ross Ice Shelf). This is likely due to
underestimation of the snowfall rate, which is related to errors in
the cloud microphysics and precipitations schemes used by the
models. They also found that the largest spatial differences between
model estimates of SMB are for regions characterised by relatively
high precipitation and complex topography, such as the Antarctic
Peninsula, West Antarctica, and around the Transantarctic
Mountains. Moreover, that models with similar values of SMB
integrated over the whole of Antarctica often showed substantial
spatial variability at basin scale. By contrast, for high-elevation
regions (e.g., on the Antarctic plateau) the model SMB estimates are
relatively similar. They concluded that targeted observational
campaigns focused on poorly understood / observed regions with
high-precipitation are crucial to understanding model biases and
uncertainties and improving model estimates of Antarctic SMB.
To investigate the dependence / evolution of Antarctic SMB to
future atmospheric warming, Kittel et al. (2021) used Antarctic
CORDEX simulations to investigate the sensitivity of SMB estimates
from the MAR model to different temperature increases. The
simulations involve the MAR model being forced by output from
two CMIP5 (fifth phase of the WCRP Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project) global climate models and two CMIP6
models over 1981-2100, with statistical extrapolation used to
expand the results to the whole CMIP5 and CMIP6 ensembles. The
CMIP6 ensemble mean near-surface Antarctic temperature is 1.3°C
higher than in CMIP5 by the end of the 21st century, thus enabling
the sensitivity to different warmings to be evaluated. Their results
show that the SMB over the grounded ice sheet is projected to
increase in the future as a result of stronger snowfall, which is
strongly correlated with near-surface warming, and only partially
offset by enhanced surface melt / run-off. This increase in SMB is
equivalent to a reduction in global sea level of 5.1 ± 1.9 cm in
CMIP5-RCP8.5 (Relative Concentration Pathway 8.5) and 6.3 ± 2.0 
cm in CMIP6-ssp585 (Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 585). By
contrast, over ice shelves, higher temperatures in the future are
associated with stronger surface melting and run-off, which
decreases the SMB more strongly in CMIP6-ssp585 compared to
CMIP5-RCP8.5. Additionally, the study shows that the CMIP6 low-
emission ssp126 and intermediate-emission ssp245 scenarios project
a stabilized SMB gain over the grounded ice sheet by the end of the
21st century (resulting in a lower mitigation to sea level rise than in
ssp585) and a close-to-present-equilibrium stable SMB for ice
shelves. Future uncertainties in these projections are mainly due to
large sensitivities to in the model response to the same greenhouse
gas scenario.
The floating ice shelves that fringe around 75% of Antarctica’s
coastline play an essential role in controlling Antarctic ice sheet
stability by restraining (buttressing) the flow of inland ice into the
ocean. However, these ice shelves have undergone unprecedented
thinning and shrinking in recent decades, and even collapse in some
cases, resulting in acceleration of glacier flow into the ocean and
increased rates of ice sheet mass loss and consequent sea level rise.
The melting responsible for the thinning of ice shelves can be either
from below due to increased incursions of relatively warm water
and/or above due to warming air temperatures. In relation to the
latter, the presence of substantial surface meltwater ponds is
widespread over many Antarctic ice shelves during austral
summertime in response to intense or prolonged surface melting.
Ensuing vertical fracturing (hydrofracturing) of the ice shelves can
occur if the meltwater enters downward and enlarges fractures in
the ice, potentially triggering their catastrophic collapse, which has
occurred over several ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula in
recent decades. Moreover, increased summertime atmospheric
warming in the coming decades and centuries will likely result in
increased surface melt intensities over many Antarctic ice shelves,
which is expected to cause more ice shelf collapses like those seen
on the Antarctic Peninsula. This could prompt significant dynamic
destabilisation/retreat of the Antarctic ice sheet, accelerating ice
loss and sea level rise. Understanding the response of ice shelves to
air temperatures for both the present-day and future is therefore of
crucial importance, and increasingly being investigated using
output from Antarctic CORDEX simulations.
To determine which ice shelves are vulnerable to melt-induced
hydrofracture, Orr et al. (2023) used near-surface temperature
output from 1979/80 to 2018/19 from two Antarctic CORDEX
simulations (MetUM and HIRHAM5) to calculate a regional surface
“melt potential” index (MPI) over Antarctic ice shelves that
describes the frequency (MPI-freq, %) and intensity (MPI-int, K) of
daily maximum summer temperatures exceeding a melt threshold of
273.15 (0°C), which is the melting point of snow/ice. Results are
based on output from two models to enable model-dependence and
consistency to be assessed. The study found that MPI is highest for
Antarctic Peninsula ice shelves (MPI-freq 23-35%, MPI-int 1.2-2.1
K), lowest (2-3%, < 0 K) for Ronne-Filchner and Ross ice shelves,
and around 10-24% and 0.6-1.7 K for the other West and East
Antarctic ice shelves (Figure 1). Some of the highest values of
MetUM MPI-int are for George VI (2.1 K), Wilkins (1.5 K), and
Larsen C (1.2 K) ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula, while the
value for Pine Island ice shelf (1.7 K) in West Antarctica is the
highest outside of the Antarctic Peninsula and suggests that this ice
shelf is vulnerable to extreme surface melt events in addition to the
well-known basal melting. Hotspots of MPI are apparent over many
ice shelves, which is likely associated with localised warming from
important small-
scale processes such as katabatic outflows and fohn winds. They
also showed that the regional circulation patterns associated with
high MPI values over West and East Antarctic ice shelves are
remarkably consistent for their respective region but tied to
different local and large-scale circulation patterns. In particular, for
West Antarctic ice shelves the circulation shows a strong connection
with tropical sea-surface temperatures (central tropical Pacific/El
Niño activity), while for East Antarctic ice shelves the circulation
shows a strong connection with the circumpolar westerlies around
Antarctica (Southern Annular Mode pattern).
To investigate the dependence of the SMB of Antarctic ice shelves to
future warming (and possible melt-induced hydrofracture), Gilbert
and Kittel (2021) used Antarctic CORDEX simulations using the
MAR model forced by four CMIP models from 1980-2100 to
evaluate the sensitivity of ice shelf SMB to warming of 1.5°C, 2°C,
and 4°C above pre-industrial temperatures. They found that non-
linear growth in melt and runoff occurs with increased warming,
which causes SMB to become less positive with more pronounced
warming. Consequently, they suggest that melt-induced
hydrofracture of ice shelves may be become more likely in the
future with more pronounced warming, which can facilitate
accelerated glacial discharge and consequently increased sea level
rise. Using runoff and melt as indicators of ice shelf stability /
possible melt-induced hydrofracture, they identify Larsen C and
Wilkins ice shelves (Antarctic Peninsula), Pine Island ice shelf (West
Antarctica), and Shackleton ice shelf (East Antarctica) as being most
vulnerable to disintegration at 4°C. However, they find that the ice
shelf area of Antarctica that is susceptible to melt-induced collapse
by the end of the 21st century is reduced by half for warming of 2°C
compared to 4°C.
Further details
Further details are available from the coordinators of Antarctic
CORDEX, Dr Andrew Orr at anmcr@bas.ac.uk and Dr Chris Kittel at
ckittel@uliege.be or by going to: https://climate-cryosphere.org/
antarctic-cordex/.
Selected publications
Gilbert, E., and Kittel, C.: Surface melt and runoff on Antarctic ice
shelves at 1.5°C, 2°C, and 4°C of future warming, Geophysical
Research Letters, 48, https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL091733,
2021.
Kittel, C., Amory, C., Agosta, C., Jourdain, N. C., Hofer, S.,
Delhasse, A., Doutreloup, S., Huot, P.-V., Lang, C., Fichefet, T., and
Fettweis, X.: Diverging future surface mass balance between the
Antarctic ice shelves and grounded ice sheet, The Cryosphere, 15,
1215–1236, https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-15-1215-2021, 2021.
Mottram, R., Hansen, N., Kittel, C., van Wessem, J. M., Agosta, C.,
Amory, C., Boberg, F., van de Berg, W. J., Fettweis, X., Gossart, A.,
van Lipzig, N. P. M., van Meijgaard, E., Orr, A., Phillips, T.,
Webster, S., Simonsen, S. B., and Souverijns, N.: What is the surface
mass balance of Antarctica? An intercomparison of regional climate
model estimates, The Cryosphere, 15, 3751–3784, https://
doi.org/10.5194/tc-15-3751-2021, 2021.
Orr, A., Deb, P., Clem, K., Bromwich, D., Gilbert, E., Boberg, F.,
Colwell, S., Hansen, N., Lazzara, M., Mooney, P., Mottram, R.,
Niwano, N., Phillips, T., Pishniak, D., Riejmer, C., van de Berg, W.
J., Webster, S., and Zou, X.: Characteristics of surface “melt
potential” over Antarctic ice shelves based on regional atmospheric
model simulations of summer air temperature extremes from
1979/80 to 2018/19, Journal of Climate, 36, https://
doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-22-0386.1, 2023.
Figure 1: Maps of the climatological values of the “melt potential”
index (MPI) that describes the frequency (MPI-freq, top) and
intensity (MPI-int, bottom) of daily maximum summer temperatures
exceeding a temperature/melt threshold of 273.15 K (0°C) from
1979/80 to 2018/19 based on output from MetUM (left) and
HIRHAM5 (right) simulations.
