Report on the work carried out at the “Swedish hut” on Snow Hill
Island (HSM Nr. 38)
English version provided by the authors
Report on the work carried out at the “Swedish hut” on Snow Hill
Island (HSM Nr. 38)
Information paper submitted by Argentina and Sweden
Summary
This document describes the activities carried out by the Argentine
Antarctic Program during the last Antarctic campaign to carry out
conservation and upkeep works on the HSM 38 "Swedish hut" on
Snow Hill Island.
Introduction
In 1903 the Swedish Antarctic Expedition of Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld
built the “Swedish shelter” as a winter station. It was used by
Nordenskjöld and four other Swedish expedition members, and also
the then Argentine Navy ensign José María Sobral, until they were
rescued by the Argentine Navy corvette ARA Uruguay.
The “Sweden Shelter” is protected by the Antarctic Treaty System as
Historic Site and Monument No. 38, as well as by Argentine
legislation that designates it as a National Historic Site. It is one of
the few Antarctic shelters of the "heroic era" in which the original
structure still remains, being central to the study and exploration of
Antarctica. Therefore, as administrators of the HSM, ensuring its
preservation for future generations is an important responsibility.
Background
On the fiftieth anniversary of the rescue, in 1953, the Argentine
Republic committed itself to the management of the refuge and in
1980 the National Antarctic Directorate (DNA) and the Argentine
Antarctic Institute (IAA) began the recovery of the refuge, with
archeological and conservation works.
In 2002, the DNA-IAA officially inaugurated it as a museum and the
remains of the geomagnetic and astronomical observatories were
recovered and preserved.
In the last thirty years, Argentine researchers have had to redouble
their efforts to keep the refuge standing, through shoring works in
addition to conservation work, since the permafrost soil (composed
of rock, ice and sediment) on which the house is built has eroded
considerably due to the effects of climate change. Currently, the
Coordination of Social Sciences and Humanities of the Argentine
Antarctic Institute continues to carry out conservation work at the
site, dedicated to saving this unique piece of Antarctic heritage
within the framework of the Historical Heritage Project.
During the summer 2019/20 Swedish scientists from KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, Gothenburg University, and Luleå
University of Technology participated in the DNA-IAA Historical
Heritage Project, surveying the site and installing sensors, 3D laser
scanning at the subliminal level of the shelter, and mapping the
terrain with laser contour lines and drone flights with a 3D model.
This experience resulted in a joint publication on the surviving
Antarctic heritage of the Nordenskjöld expedition.
As one of the few surviving shelters from the heroic era of
Antarctica (1895-1920), the site is also of tourist interest. Last
summer it was visited by thirteen cruise ships during the two
months on which the Argentine camp was set up.
Work carried out during the summer 2022/23
In order to fulfill the objectives set out in the DNA-IAA Historical
Heritage Project, and to protect the value of the heritage from the
"Heroic Era", the HSMS was located, surveyed, studied, conserved,
signaled and disseminated, and a systematic survey of documentary
sources was made.
Measurements were taken with laser level of the inclination of the
house on the outside and in each room to calculate the possible
increase in the inclination of the shelter and the deformation of its
structure. A tensioning system was installed inside the loft to avoid
the increase in the separation of the east and west walls of the
shelter.
Due to the fact that the west wall of the shelter had considerable
cracks, the ruberoid was replaced. The tank (a replica of the toilet
located 50 meters north of the shelter) was leveled and its base was
consolidated, and the mast located north of the house was repaired.
On the other hand, waterproofing sealant was applied to the roof of
the shelter due to leaks detected during rainy days.
As a result of the lowering of the access level to the moraine of the
shelter due to the erosion of the permafrost, the railing that
supports the ascent of the ladder covered only one third of the
ascent, so it was extended downwards by three times its length.
This is necessary to avoid the erosion of the east slope due to traffic
on it, concentrating the circulation of visitors on the stairway. For
its extension, we followed the design of the one installed in the
nineties, using cement, sand and stones from the basalt dykes of the
place.
Historical objects collected on the surface in the north landfill were
added to the technical reserve of the shelter. Also, glass fragments,
remains of batteries, bottles and cans were separated and folded as
duly classified waste.
The data obtained from the permafrost and battery measurement
sensors, the shelter's humidity and temperature sensors, and the
automatic weather station's memory were downloaded.
With regards to outreach, signs were installed on the exterior with
information in English and Spanish about the history of HSM38, the
expedition and the refuge, and the heritage rescue work carried out
by DNA-IAA since 1980. Likewise, signs were put up indicating "no
entry" areas such as the storage area or "no trespassing" areas due to
the presence of archaeological remains and the remains of the
magnetic and astronomical observatories. A new sign was installed
on the first terrace of the ascent route for tourists indicating not to
approach the edge of the terrace because of the danger it poses due
to the constant landslides on its edge.
Inside the refuge, the site's visitors' guidelines were put next to the
visitors' book, laminated and ringed in the four languages of the
Antarctic Treaty, and a laminated bilingual Spanish-English triptych
brochure on the refuge and the conservation work with QR code
and copies of the triptychs were left for tourists to pick up.
In each room historical photos were installed showing the state of
the refuge during the expedition, plus a photo of each of the
wintering people in the refuge in 1902. Also, a general
photographic survey of the refuge was made.
During the visit of various tourist ships, a record of them was kept
and their compliance with the guidelines was checked remotely,
coordinating the activities with their guides by handy.
Future plans
In accordance with the work initiated within the framework of the
Historical Heritage Project of the Coordination of Social Sciences
and Humanities of the Argentine Antarctic Institute,
Argentina plans to incorporate personnel from the National Institute
of Industrial Technology for permafrost soil consolidation works.
Continuing with what was developed in IP 112 Rev1 "Current
situation of the impact of climate change on the Sweden Shelter on
Snow Hill Island (HSM No. 38)", presented at the RCTA XLIV, the
work carried out will be used as input for the conservation plan
under development as, due to the effects of climate change, the
strong erosion of the small plateau on which the house is located
presents a high risk for it. The intervention project is expected to be
carried out in the summer of 2024/2025.
