Indian Polar Education and Outreach Endeavours
Indian Polar Education and Outreach Endeavours
 
Information paper submitted by India
Summary
India is striving to enthuse interest in Antarctic research and to
sensitize students and the general public about Polar Regions with
special reference to changing climate. Its nodal agency to undertake
polar expeditions, National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research
(NCPOR), undertakes extensive outreach activities throughout the
year by organizing interactive events, exhibitions, documentary
movies, participation in national and regional science fairs, popular
science talks, and interactions with the school and college level
students. This information paper highlights some of the major polar
education and outreach activities toward fulfilling the scientific
social responsibility of the Indian polar community. 
Introduction
Climate change is no longer a distant future; it is already impacting
nature, human lives, and infrastructure across the world. The shreds
of evidence of a changing climate can be observed in the present
environment in the form of extreme weather events, melting
glaciers, frequent floods, cyclones, heat waves, shifts in marine
communities, changes in animal behaviors, etc.
India has a coastline of about 7500km, where millions of people
have their settlements. The economies of the coastal states are
largely dependent on oceans. In a climate change scenario, the rise
in sea level, the warming of the oceans, and their associated
consequences may impact economies in the future. Understanding
the climate and cryosphere of the polar regions has huge
implications for sea level rise and regional weather patterns.
Therefore, it becomes a social responsibility of the polar scientific
community to sensitise the general public and students about the
impact of changing climate and how these could ultimately impact
their lives.
India has been active in Antarctica for the past four decades.
However, the importance of the polar regions to global change has
never been more critical than in the current times. Therefore, it is
important to enlighten the general public about the relevance of the
polar regions and their global linkages.
Building success through small steps
The celebration of polar events like Antarctica Day, Mid-Winter
Day, International Polar Week, etc. marks the global importance of
the Polar Regions. On one hand, Antarctica Day provides
opportunity to highlight the importance of the Antarctic Treaty—an
epitome of international collaboration and relevance of the Polar
Regions—while Mid-Winter Day celebration peeks into the life of a
polar scientist and the challenges during austral winters. To imbibe
polar-related information by Indian citizens, India uses various
platforms and methods to enhance their involvement and interest in
learning more about the Polar Regions, especially their importance
in the climate change scenario, such as:
NCPOR organises various activities and competitions like flag-
making competition, essay competition, quiz competition, etc. Flag
making competition is organised on Antarctica Day, and the best
winning flags are sent to Indian Antarctic stations, where Indian
scientists celebrate Antarctica Day with the winning flags. In 2022,
Antarctica Day was celebrated by organising the Polar and Ocean
Exhibition, which was open to all. The participants in all these
activities vary from school students to college or university students
to the general public. Besides the exhibition, which is open to all,
most of the activities have been planned keeping in mind the target
audience.
Mega outreach events: India organises mega outreach events at the
national and state level that provide an umbrella platform from
which awareness about the Polar Regions spreads among thousands
of students from schools, colleges, and the general public. The
display of posters, Antarctic rock samples, models, and screening of
movies on polar expeditions attract many visitors. NCPOR, Goa,
under the Ministry of Earth Sciences, hosted the India International
Science Festival, a national-level festival where NCPOR scientists
interacted with more than 5000 students and the general public.
Since 2017 onwards, NCPOR scientists have interacted with more
than 50,000 students and the general public during national and
state level science fairs and exhibitions.
Popular science lectures and student-scientist interactions: NPCOR
organises popular science lectures (online and offline) for the
students and general public to make them aware of Antarctica (and
all three poles) and sensitise them about the current scenario of
climate change. Student-scientist interactions and panel discussions
are potential platforms where polar scientists interact with students
(in schools, colleges, and universities) and enlighten them about
Antarctica and career opportunities in polar research. Thereby
encouraging them to join the polar community. NCPOR, being the
nodal agency for polar expeditions, attracts students to its campus
all through the year. Every year, NCPOR receives more than 5000
students from schools, colleges, universities, and government offices
across India. Lectures on Antarctica and related topics by NCPOR
scientists enlighten them about the importance of Antarctic
research. Lab visits add more value for the young students who
learn about the new techniques and advancements in Antarctic
research.
Use of technology to enhance value for the Polar Regions: Video
conferencing and live interaction with the Indian scientists at
Bharati, the third Indian station, always excite audiences of all ages.
India also conducts Virtual Reality (VR) shows at colleges and
universities across India and also during exhibitions to showcase the
mesmerising beauty of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and
highlight the relevance of understanding its processes and its
linkages with India. VR shows specially designed by NCPOR give an
immersive experience about Antarctica and the Southern Ocean that
compels the audience to appreciate the region and realise its
worldwide importance, especially with respect to wilderness,
environment, and changing climate.
Use of Publication and Media: India utilises print and social media
to highlight its endeavours in the Polar Regions. Coverage of
various polar research studies by daily newspapers or magazines in
English, Hindi, and Marathi gave impetus to the reader’s interest in
polar research. India also recently released a Polar Science comic in
English, Hindi, and Konkani for school students and youngsters. The
comic book aims to create awareness to children about the Polar
Regions and
highlights the different types of research activities being conducted
by Indian scientists in the Polar Regions.
The Indian polar community has also been associated with APECS
(Association of Polar Early Career Scientists) through the Indian
Polar Research Network (IPRN). Indian scientists involved in
mentoring and early-career researchers and scientists are involved
in various polar outreach activities at the national and international
level. Indian polar researchers play an active role in outreach
activities through IPRN, the Indian chapter of APECS.
India, as a part of their scientific social responsibility, emphasize
the need to educate and connect the polar regions to people and
engage them to create a scientific aptitude to understand the
present climate change scenario and how they can contribute to
mitigate the impact of changing climates in their surroundings.
Such small yet significant changes may turn over a new leaf and
lead to a better and more sustainable world for the future
generations.
