The Ice Memory Programme
The Ice Memory Programme
Information Paper submitted by France and Italy
Summary
The purpose of this paper is to provide a brief update about the Ice
Memory Programme and address the different questions raised by
Parties during the CEP XXIV.
The first phase of the Programme is currently underway, and
involves collecting ice cores from the deep layers of key endangered
glaciers along the world before they lose their ability to preserve
environmental history in optimal conditions. The second phase of
the Programme will develop the long-term storage of these ice cores
for future generations of scientists. The purpose of this paper is to
provide an update about the Ice Memory Programme within the
framework of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM),
following its initial presentation during the 42nd ATCM meeting in
Prague in 2019 and to address the different questions raised by
Parties during the CEP XXIV in Germany.
Collaboration and endorsement by Parties would be beneficial as
the goal of the Programme is of global importance to humanity.
This means launching a process that complies with the Antarctic
Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection (Madrid
Protocol), especially Annex I on Environmental Impact Assessment.
Background and update of the IM Programme
The Ice Memory (IM) Programme was launched by France and Italy
in 2015. The worldwide importance of the Ice Memory (IM)
Programme was acknowledged by UNESCO (through the
solicitation of its French and Italian National Commissions), calling
on its Member States to support the initiative. The IM Programme
features international scientific collaboration between national
Antarctic programmes. Its international dimension has grown since
2015 following contributions by Russia, Switzerland and Norway.
The international scientific community is working to make it an as
global an initiative as possible, in the coming years.
The overall goal of the IM Programme is to:
1- Collect an ice core archive from the deep layers of key
endangered glaciers before they lose their ability to preserve
environmental history in optimal conditions;
2- Store these ice cores on a long-term basis (possibly hundreds to
thousands of years) for future generations of scientists and
humanity in general.
At a later stage of the IM Programme, a governance framework will
need to be defined with involvement of the ATCM Parties which
plan to contribute to the long-term storage of ice cores in
Antarctica, particularly to ensure this complies with the Antarctic
Treaty and the Madrid Protocol. The IM Programme has recently
launched a “Law and Governance” Chair to address this important
topic.
CEP Members may want to refer to IP 108 submitted at CEP XXIV
for a comprehensive description of the IM Programme.
Since 2022, new drilling operations took place with a view to
collect new ice cores from mountain glaciers and achieve the IM
Programme’s goals. In June 2022, the southernmost glacier of
Europe, Calderone located in the Italian Apennine Mountains, was
drilled down to bedrock (25 metres of thickness), giving success to
the seventh IM drilling operation. An IM drilling project was
expected to take place on Mount Kilimanjaro (Tanzania) in
September 2022, but unfortunately it had to be abandoned for
administrative reasons. In April 2023, an IM team composed of
Italian, Norwegian, US and French scientists drills three ice cores
down to bedrock at 74 m of depth on
the Holtedahlfonna glacier in north-west Svalbard at 79°N, one of
the fastest warming area in the world.
These ice cores are (or will be for Holtedahlfonna) all stored in
commercial freezers in France, or in Italy, or in Switzerland, or in
Russia (for logistic convenience and depending where is located the
Principal Investigator of the corresponding drilling operation),
pending the construction of the long-term storage repository in
Antarctica.
Answers to questions raised by CEP members during CEP XXIV
Link between the IM Programme and legal aspects of the Madrid
Protocol and notably the Non-Native Species Manual
The principles of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty include the protection of Antarctic biodiversity and
intrinsic values by preventing the unintended introduction to the
Antarctic region of species not native to that region, and the
movement of species within Antarctica from one biogeographic
zone to another. As stated by the Non-Native Species Manual,
measures should be put in place to minimise the risk of impacts
from non-native species in the Antarctic, taking all possible steps
towards prevention.
Bacteria, pollen and other microorganisms are already naturally
present in Antarctica, transported long distances by atmospheric
aerosols from places such as South America, or introduced by
existing human activities. For instance, the few available estimates
concerning pollens indicate values of around 20 to 30 pollen
particles per kilogramme of surface snow. Cao et al. (2020)
measured the airborne bacterial community diversity and sources
along the Antarctic coast and demonstrated that they were largely
immigrated to Antarctica through long-range transport and sea-air
exchange pathways. Regarding anthropogenic factors and human
introduction of microorganisms in Antarctica, as highlighted in the
review of Pearce et al. (2009), even materials left in camps erected
by early Antarctic expeditions led by Scott and Shackleton still
included imported viable microorganisms even after decades in the
Antarctic environment.
Italy and France take in deep consideration this issue as ice cores
drilled from glaciers outside Antarctica contains microorganisms
(bacteria, virus, fungae), as well as pollens and spores – although in
very small quantities – that are present in the atmosphere over
mountain glaciers in remote regions and then incorporated in the
ice, and which could possibly be introduced in the Antarctic
environment whenever the ice cores would melt by accident. That is
why all the logistic chain will be carefully evaluated and the Non-
Native Species Manual, will be followed. The Non-Native Species
Manuel provides key guiding principles to minimize the risk of
unintentional introduction of non-native species in Antarctica. They
concern both prevention and monitoring.
In the case of the IM Programme, the risk of introduction or
redistribution of microorganisms being trapped in ice cores clearly
concerns two main aspects:
Partial or total melting of ice core samples, followed by dispersal of
the meltwater in the surrounding environment,
Occurrence of the melting accident during logistic transfer at the
Antarctic coast, where endemic animals are located.
The prevention guidelines that will be drafted by France and Italy
will express operational recommendations and will imply to handle
the risk at its origin. Storage at negative temperature provide the
best guarantee to prevent any release of the microbial content of ice
cores in the surrounding environment, as microorganisms cannot
escape the ice as long as it is frozen. These conditions are naturally
met on the East Antarctic plateau (Concordia) where ambient
temperature never goes above 0°C, but not on the coast where
positive temperature exists. As such, we will especially ensure that
the IM ice cores are maintained at temperatures below 0°C during
transfer
of ice core boxes from the L’Astrolabe supply vessel to the logistic
traverse, between Dumont d’Urville and Robert Guillard stations on
the coast.
In the improbable case where the cold chain would accidentally
break down, dispersion in the environment will be avoided by the
containment of ice cores in different layers of sealings. Each
individual ice core is stored in polyethylene bags hermetically
sealed at the time of drilling or during the intermediate storage in
commercial freezers. Before transferring the IM ice cores to
Antarctica, additional layers of polyethylene insulation will be set
inside the ice core boxes, as well as around the boxes themselves,
avoiding any meltwater spilling in the surrounding environment in
case of accidental melting. If such accident would happen, the
resulting melted ice cores will transported back to the Antarctic
gateway city, for water evacuation in the local water sewage
system.
Once at Concordia station and notably inside the storage cave, the
risk of accidental melting of IM ice cores is inexistent due to the
permanently negative temperatures on site. Still, as a precautionary
measure, bacterial monitoring could be set on site, going beyond
the simple survey of temperature inside the IM storage caves.
Monitoring of bacterial content in the atmosphere and in surface
snow is already in place at Concordia station through various
research projects. It thus provides the reference horizon for existing
contamination by microorganism on this site. For instance, Van
Houdt et al. (2009) evaluated the environmental airborne bacterial
population inside the station for a period of one year. They
identified the predominant microflora associated with human
activity and environmental species, revealing 346 morphologically
different isolates including pathogens, which could be spread in the
immediate environment of the station through the ventilation
system and opening / closing of access doors. Michaud et al. (2014)
investigated the microbial diversity in surface snow surrounding
Concordia station, at a clean site located about 2 km from the
station. Bacterial densities of 200 to 5000 cells per ml of snow were
observed. The bacterial community composition revealed more than
300 phylotypes. They appeared similar to that reported in glaciers,
snow, lake ice, sea ice and atmospheric clouds. A strong influence
from the marine environment seemed to exist as well. They could
not exclude that a minor part of observed microorganisms could
come from human activity around the station as well. Lastly, their
study did not provide direct evidence for possibly activity of the
depicted bacterial community in snow, although it could not be
excluded.
Hughes et al. (2003) studied faecal coliform bacteria being airborne
transferred around Rothera station in the Antarctic Peninsula. They
showed that after surface deposition away from the station,
moderate doses of solar UV radiation (~20 W.m-2) were capable of
reducing the number of viable bacteria by up to 99.9%, within 1
hour of deposition. Airborne transfer of faecal coliform bacteria
around Concordia station is plausible as well. The mean summer UV
radiation observed at Concordia station during summer time being
24 ± 15 W.m-2, it thus provides challenging conditions for
microorganisms to survive and possibly replicate within the surface
snow layers.
In conclusion, as long as the IM ice cores will remain frozen during
transportation and in the repository, they will not risk releasing
non-native living organisms into the Antarctic environment and
they will not increase the existing contamination due to already
existing human activities in Antarctica. In addition, specific
procedures concerning packaging, transportation and handling will
be applied to limit as much as possible the risk of dispersion in the
environment in case of sample melting. The cold logistic chain from
the coast to Concordia has been successfully tested since the
beginning of the European deep drilling operation “European
Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica” (EPICA) and is well in place.
The experience of the personnel from the French Polar Institute
IPEV and the National Italian Antarctic Program PNRA lowers the
probability of accidents.
What will be the carbon footprint of the transfer of IM ice cores to
repositories in Antarctica?
We calculated the carbon footprint using the scenario of IM ice core
transfer from Europe to Concordia station. The following logistical
steps need to be taken into account:
The IM ice cores will be transferred in 20-foot reefers on container
ships making the various trips between Le Havre (France),
Singapore, Melbourne and Hobart in Tasmania.
The reefers will then be transhipped to the Hobart docks and loaded
aboard the French supply ship L'Astrolabe to reach the French
Dumont d'Urville Antarctic coastal station.
The isothermal boxes containing the ice cores will then be taken out
of the reefers to be heliported from the ship to the Franco-Italian
Robert Guillard coastal station located at Cap Prud'homme, the
departure point of the heavy land logistic convoy (called "traverse").
They will then be loaded into other reefers positioned on sledges
pulled by the traverse's Challenger MT65 tractors. These tractors
will then travel the 1100 km separating the Robert Guillard station
from the Franco-Italian Concordia station, in 11 to 12 days of
driving.
Once arrived at Concordia, the reefers will be emptied from their
isothermal boxes, which will be placed on racks installed on
sledges, themselves positioned inside the IM storage caves.
We anticipate that each 20-foot reefer will contain about 720 m of
IM ice cores. Assuming that the IM Programme will produce 20
heritage ice cores, a total of six 20-foot reefers will be needed.
Using CO2-equivalent metrics for each step of the logistical transfer
(details available to Parties at request) and applying them to six 20-
foot reefers, we obtain the following footprint:
Transfer from Europe to Hobart with container ships: 11.2 tons of
CO2.
Transfer from Hobart to Dumont d’Urville with L’Astrolabe: 53.6
tons of CO2.
Transfer from Dumont d’Urville to Robert Guillard: 3.6 tons of CO2.
Transfer from Robert Guillard to Concordia: 27.6 tons of CO2.
Construction of the storage cave at Concordia: 4.6 tons of CO2.
Therefore, the carbon footprint of the transfer operation of IM ice
cores from Europe to Concordia, including the construction of the
storage cave, is ~100 tons of CO2, the most important
contributions coming from the transfer between Hobart and
Dumont d'Urville with the L’Astrolabe vessel as well as the transfer
by land with the traverse to Concordia station
For comparison, this represents the average annual carbon footprint
of 15 European citizens. ~100 tons of CO2 also correspond to ~1.5
days of emissions from a typical supply vessel supporting logistical
operations in Antarctica.
The carbon footprint of the IM Programme logistics in Antarctica
would in any case be much lower than the one of a storage solution
of the IM ice cores in commercial freezers. A recent study
conducted by Cascini et al. (2016) estimates the carbon footprint of
a 5 m3 cold room (volume of 1.6 x 1.6 x 2 m) and operating at
-25°C, over its entire life cycle and assuming the use of two
different refrigerants (R404A and R407F). The energy consumption
as well as the CO2 equivalent associated with the leakage of these
refrigerants with a very high greenhouse effect potential have been
taken into account. Considering a 10-year life span of the
installation, the authors conclude that the carbon footprint of such
a small cold room is around 9 tons of CO2.equivalent. For all the IM
cores, 38 cold rooms with these volume characteristics would be
needed. We therefore conclude that over 10 years of storage (life of
the installation), the carbon footprint of storage in Europe would be
342 tons of CO2.equivalent, without taking into account the carbon
footprint associated with the need to restore the equipment at the
end of its expected life time.
The carbon footprint of a transfer from Europe to Antarctica, added
to that of the creation of the storage cave at Concordia, would
correspond to only ~3 years of CO2 emissions from a commercial
walk-in freezer plant at -25°C in Europe. The IM Programme
projects itself over a
much longer period of time, i.e. decades to centuries. It can
therefore be concluded that its carbon footprint based on long-term
storage in Antarctica will be a major improvement in terms of
carbon footprint compared to a commercial solution on the
mainland, in addition to the inherent safety brought by storing the
ice in the cold East Antarctic plateau.
What are the impacts of the project on the environment and
Antarctic protected assets?
The IM Programme will not conduct any activity in Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas.
What will a permit look like? What conditions are envisaged?
An Environmental Impact Assessment will be submitted to the
French National Competent Authority (TAAF), before the planned
start of the IM ice core transfer toward Concordia station. The EIA
will be submitted to the French Polar Environment Committee, a
scientific committee advising the NCA. It will cover the construction
of the storage cave and the IM ice core transfer. The EIA will meet
the requirement of Annex I of the Madrid Protocol and will serve as
a basis for the grant of the permit.
How will the IM ice cores be transported to Antarctica from all over
the world?
In the case of transportation from Europe, details of the operations
are provided in the answer to the question above about the carbon
footprint of the IM Programme.
In other cases where IM ice cores would be temporarily stored
outside Europe, three scenarios are envisaged:
IM partners outside Europe and having a National Antarctic
Programme (NAP) could use the NAP logistic support to carry their
IM ice cores from their home country to Hobart, where they would
be taken in charge by the logistics of IPEV and PNRA toward
Concordia station,
If the NAP envisions to build an additional IM repository at a
research station located on the East Antarctic plateau, it could
handle the corresponding logistics from the home country to the
Antarctic research station,
If the IM partner outside Europe has no NAP, the French and Italian
partners of the IM Programme would organize the IM ice core
transfer from the home country to Hobart and then to Concordia
station with financial support for transport coming directly from the
IM partner and/or the IM Programme.
Regarding possible transportation of IM ice core sub-samples back
from the Antarctic repository to a research laboratory at a later
stage, NAP leaders who are in charge of the research station where
the ice core repository is located, will be responsible for securing it
and granting access to future research projects.
Any sub-sampling operation will be decided on/accredited by a
suitable international research committee on the model of the
current International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS), an
international group composed of all ice core scientists from around
the world. It would be carried out in accordance with Article VII of
the Antarctic Treaty (on informing the ATCM of activities taking
place in the Antarctic) and Article 3 of the Madrid Protocol (on
conducting activities in Antarctica).
Can safe storage be guaranteed in the long term? Is it really
necessary to realize the project in Antarctica?
It could appear easier to store the Ice Memory ice cores in cold
chambers nearby a research facility of one or several of the ATCM
Parties, as this is the case for most of the currently drilled and
analysed ice cores in the world. However, experience has shown
that accidents unfortunately happen, usually because of a major
breakdown of the cooling or energy supply, leading to the loss of
extremely precious samples. We know of such accidents that took
place in Canada in 2017, leading to the loss of part of the world’s
largest collection of ice cores from the Canadian Arctic (The
Guardian, 2017). Other commercial freezer failures have been
experienced for instance in Russia (at Moscow, loss of precious ice
core samples from the Elbrous glacier) or in France (loss of samples
for the Vostok ice core), usually due to human error. The IM ice
cores are expected to be stored untouched for decades to centuries.
The high altitude of the East Antarctic plateau is the natural place
to consider for guaranteeing safe storage on the long term. At
Concordia station, the mean annual temperature today is close to
-55°C. In winter time, the temperature goes down to -70°C and the
coldest temperature recorded so far is -84°C. In summer time,
usually the temperature never gets above -20°C. The warmest
temperature ever recorded at Concordia station is -14°C. Although it
is expected that global warming will also affect the East Antarctic
plateau in the coming decades, there is no risk that surface
temperature becomes positive even at the scale of the next century.
Under a high emission scenario, the climate simulations for the end
of the 21st century lead to an average surface temperature increase
in Antarctica of 3.6°C (Chown et al., 2022). Moreover, the IM ice
cores will be stored at about 10 m of depth below the snow surface.
At this depth, the summer “heat” has no impact, due to thermal
inertia generated by heat diffusion. The temperature inside the IM
repository will be close to the mean annual temperature, i.e. less
than -50°C.
Transfer of IM ice cores to Concordia station will rely on a reliable
logistical chain already in place and active nearly each Antarctic
field season to transfer ice core samples in the opposite way, from
Concordia station to Europe. As a reminder, about 40% of the ice
cores resulting from EPICA are still stored in a cave at Concordia.
Nearly each year, one or two scientists are present at Concordia
station to sub-sample the EPICA ice core archive at the request of
the EPICA consortium. IPEV / PNRA then ensure the safe cold
transfer of the sub-samples back to Europe.
References
Cao Y., Yu X., Ju F., Zhan H., Jiang B., Kang H. and Xie Z.
Airborne bacterial community diversity, source and function along
the Antarctic coast
Science of the Total Environment, 765, 142700, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142700, 2021.
Chown, S.L., Leihy, R.I., Naish, T.R., Brooks, C.M., Convey, P.,
Henley, B.J., Mackintosh, A.N., Phillips, L.M., Kennicutt, M.C. II &
Grant, S.M. (Eds.)
Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis
and Recommendations for Action
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, United
Kingdom, 2022. www.scar.org
Hughes K.A.
Aerial dispersal and survival of sewage-derived faecal coliforms in
Antarctica
Atmospheric Environment, 37, 3147-3155, 2003.
Michaud L, Lo Giudice A, Mysara M, Monsieurs P, Raffa C, Leys N,
et al.
Snow Surface Microbiome on the High Antarctic Plateau (DOME C)
PLoS ONE 9(8): e104505. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0104505, 2014.
Pearce D.A., Bridge P.D., Hughes K.A., Sattler B., Psenner R. and
Russell N.J.
Microorganisms in the atmosphere over Antarctica
FEMS Microbiology and Ecology, 69, 143-157, 2009.
The Guardian
22,000 years of history evaporates after freezer failure melts Arctic
ice cores
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/apr/16/arctic-
ice-cores-melt-university-alberta-canada
Van Houdt R., De Boever P., Coninx I., Le Calvez C., Dicasillati R.,
Mahillon J., Mergeay M. and Leys N.
Evaluation of the airborne bacterial population in the periodically
confined Antarctic base Concordia
Microbial Ecology, 57, 640-648, 200
