Renovation of the Deception Island Volcanic Surveillance Network
English version provided by the author
Renovation of the Deception Island volcanic surveillance network
Summary
Since the 2021-2022 campaign, Spain has been updating and
completing the volcanic surveillance network that it has been
deploying on Deception Island during the Antarctic summer
operating months of the Gabriel de Castilla Spanish Antarctic
Station. Recording more data and parameters enables better
observation and assessment of volcanic activity on the island,
increasing the safety of operations. We invite the Parties to share
similar information on their surveillance networks, and to work
together to forge regional networks.
Introduction and background
Deception Island is one of the most active volcanoes in the
Antarctic, and one of the most interesting areas from a tectonic
standpoint, owing to its location within a complex geodynamic
context consisting in the confluence of different tectonic units: the
South American Plate, Antarctic Plate, and the Scotia, Phoenix and
South Shetland Microplates.
Over the past two centuries, 20 volcanic eruptions have been
recorded that generated lava flows, lahars, ejections of pyroclastic
material, pyroclastic flows, and phreatic explosions. The first
eruption on which data is available occurred in 1842, and the most
recent between 1967 and 1970. The latter events changed and
expanded the island’s morphology, destroying two Antarctic
stations: the Pedro Aguirre Cerda Station (Chile) and Station B
(United Kingdom). Since 1970, no eruptions have been recorded on
Deception Island, although there have been three seismic crises: in
1992, 1999, and 2014-2015. It is, therefore, an active volcanic
island, with major periods of activity.
Since 1986, the surveillance and study of this seismic activity and
of the deformation of the island have been conducted mainly as
part of Spanish campaigns during the Antarctic summer. To carry
out comprehensive volcanic surveillance, and to open the Gabriel
de Castilla Station under safe conditions, it is necessary to observe
and analyse volcanic activity before the summer campaign.
Therefore, since 2020 the Spanish National Geographic Institute
(IGN) has monitored, assessed, and generated alerts for volcanic
activity on Deception Island.
During the 2021-2022 campaign, IGN (the agency responsible for
the surveillance in Spain of seismic and volcanic activity, as well as
other geophysical phenomena) launched a renovation of its volcanic
surveillance network by installing permanent seismic and geodetic
stations, which send signals in real time to IGN’s headquarters in
Madrid. This network will be expanded until it is able to maintain
sufficient and ongoing monitoring.
Composition and renovation of the volcanic surveillance network
The Deception Island volcanic surveillance network comprises a
seismic network and a geodetic network.
The seismic network currently has five broadband stations (installed
during the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 campaigns) distributed across
the island, as shown in Figure 1 of the Appendix. Real-time seismic
data are sent via Wi-Fi to Gabriel de Castilla Station, from which
they are transmitted via satellite to the data reception centre of the
Spanish National Seismic Network in Madrid.
To improve seismic surveillance on the island, a number of actions
were taken during the 2022-2023 campaign to improve the initial
configuration of the network following its 2021-2022 installation.
This renovation work focused on the following:
Improving sensor sites
The seismic stations are heavily impacted by meteorological
conditions on the island. The strong winds there seriously disrupt
seismic surveys. To mitigate these issues, sensors were sunk
approximately 180 cm underground. This resulted in a substantial
improvement to data registration.
Improving the hypocentral location
To achieve better hypocentral location for earthquakes in the
region, a seismic station was installed on Livingston Island (LVN),
near Juan Carlos I Station (see Figure 2).
Analysing seismic activity
The procedure employed to analyse seismicity is similar to that
used in recent years. First, an automatic picking system, using a
short-time average over long-time average (STA/LTA) algorithm,
was installed, which operates for each station independently. Once
the P and/or S phases have been detected and automatically picked,
the system looks for a possible association for the formation of a
seismic event. For this second purpose, the difference in arrival
times between the S and P phases observed is calculated, and if it is
lower than a set limit, they are associated with the same event
(Figure 7). Once the event is declared, it is hypocentrally located
with the routine automatic and manual processes established for
24/7 continuous monitoring by the National Seismic Network.
Geodetic volcanic surveillance network on Deception Island
Deployment has begun for an IGN geodetic network, which to date
has comprised the four permanent global navigation satellite system
(GNSS) stations installed (Figure 3).
In the immediate surroundings of these four permanent GNSS
stations, levelling pins have been installed to serve as reference and
control points in case movements are observed at the stations that
could be due to the movement of the mounting cases themselves,
especially the newly installed ones.
Lastly, survey points have been established to be observed using a
real-time kinematic (RTK) system, which surrounds the entirety of
Port Foster Bay. This itinerary comprises 13 points, some of which
formed part of the pre-existing geodetic network and others of
which were installed during the present campaign. The addition of
these survey points to the permanent stations means that the
network now has observation points of no more than 1 km apart all
around the inner ring of Deception Island. Their distribution,
together with that of the permanent stations, can be seen in Figure
4.
Analysis of ground deformation
The analysis of ground deformation is conducted based on data
obtained from GNSS observations and the use of interferometric
synthetic aperture radar (InSAR).
The strategy proposed for analysing the data obtained through
GNSS observation involves three different processes for the entire
network: processing daily data to generate daily coordinate
solutions; processing hourly data to generate sub-daily coordinate
solutions; and calculating baselines between the different network
stations.
In addition to GNSS observation, ground surface deformation
analysis is conducted for the entire island using InSAR. At present,
work is being conducted using Sentinel-1 satellite images, as part of
the Copernicus European Earth Observation Programme. With each
new satellite acquisition, three outputs are generated: an
interferometric coherence map, a phase interferogram, and a
displacement map.
Conclusions
Through these IGN efforts, Spain has continued to strengthen the
volcanic surveillance network on Deception Island, installing new
stations and improving their locations. A 24/7 year-round seismic
analysis protocol has been established by the Spanish National
Seismic Network.
The deployment of a geodetic network has begun, with the
installation of GNSS instruments featuring newly built mounting
cases. The transmission of GNSS data to Spain has begun, and
different processing flows have been developed for these data, both
at IGN headquarters and at Gabriel de Castilla Station.
The more comprehensive the surveillance network, the better the
observation of seismic activity will be. These local networks should
be incorporated into regional networks to enable more precise
interpretation of the data observed. The Parties are urged to share
information about their surveillance networks, and to work together
to create regional networks.
Appendix
Figure I. Sites of the five real-time broadband seismic stations
installed by IGN on Deception Island
Figure 2. Site of the seismic station installed on Livingston Island to
improve signal discrimination and the location of regional seismic
activity
Figure 3. Location of the GNSS stations on Deception Island
Figure 4. Location of survey points in the RTK system
