Presence of SARS-CoV-2 in waste water in Antarctica and risk
assessment.
Presence of SARS-CoV-2 in waste water in Antarctica and risk
assessment.
Summary
The first outbreak of Covid-19 was reported at a Chilean base
during the December 2020 Antarctic expedition. This season, the
Antarctic continent reported some positive cases of Covid-19 and
the measures taken to prevent the entry of this virus with the
National Antarctic Programmes (NAP) seem to be working, in
addition to the successful vaccination programmes and quarantine
measures. The main concern of this global pandemic is limited to
the health facilities available in the Antarctic bases to manage the
disease, but the impact that the presence of the virus could have on
the Antarctic fauna must be considered. The monitoring carried out
by our programme on samples obtained from the Frei, Escudero and
O’Higgins Base waste management plants indicated the presence of
genetic material of the SARS-CoV2 virus, subsequent environmental
monitoring shows the non-presence of the virus in the Antarctic
fauna.
Context
Following the Covid-19 outbreaks detected at the Chilean station,
our programme immediately implemented surveillance for the
presence of the virus in the waste management plants. The presence
of SARS-CoV-2 in waste water is predictable because it can infect
the gastrointestinal tract and is shed through the faeces of patients
(Kitajima et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020). For the most part,
research on the destination of viruses in the aquatic environment
has focused on enteric viruses, as these viruses are characterised by
high resistance under various environmental conditions. The
number of studies on the destination of enveloped viruses in aquatic
compartments, such as SARS-CoV-2, is quite limited, because
enveloped viruses are predisposed to inactivation in water. Virus
persistence can be affected by environmental conditions (eg,
surface, water, sewage) and by physical and chemical factors (eg,
temperature, pH, humidity, exposure to sunlight and the type of
surface). Coronaviruses are not quantitatively significant
components of marine virioplankton. Members of the Nidovirales
infect marine mammals, fish, and possibly invertebrates, and
human coronaviruses can persist in marine plankton receiving
sewage effluents. However, virions are likely to experience a
significant decrease in particle number and infectivity rate in
seawater, similar to other enveloped RNA viruses.
As suggested by Barbosa et al. (2020), the lack of information on
susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 is a significant knowledge gap for a
risk assessment of the potential impacts of this virus on Antarctic
fauna. On the other hand, Damas et al. (2020) report that in six
species of pinnipeds the binding affinity of the ACE2 receptor is
“very low”, suggesting that Antarctic pinnipeds might also have low
susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, it is important to
note that the surviving virions can potentially infect cetaceans such
as the Antarctic whale (Balaenoptera bonaerensis) and orca
(Orcinus orca) because they share receptor-binding domains similar
to the ACE2 protein, which in humans is the receptor that interacts
with the virus and allows entry into tissues.
Response and monitoring
For this reason, our programme began monitoring the presence of
SARS-CoV-2 in the waste water of the research stations (Escudero,
Frei and O’Higgins) that had the Covid 19 outbreak event. Waste
water samples were taken from both the influent (inlet) and effluent
(outlet). To concentrate the virus from the waste water samples, the
sample was flocculated using skimmed milk and NaCl. After
flocculation, RNA extractions were performed. Viral RNA was
detected by RT-qPCR, targeting the N1 and N2 genomic regions
(nucleocapsid protein), E protein, and RdRP. In addition, reaction
inhibition tests were performed and the presence of a positive
control corresponding to the human RNaseP gene was detected,
which is an indicator of the presence of faecal material.
The presence of the virus was detected in all waste water samples,
which was consistent with the presence of positive cases for
Covid-19, confirmed by PCR. At the Escudero and O’Higgins
stations, a viral material signal for SARS-Cov2 was detected in the
outlet pipe. In contrast, this release was not detected at the Frei
Base, perhaps due to the type of management, which is based on
worms that act as biofilters. In addition, the environmental
sampling carried out during this Antarctic summer, from different
environmental sources in the vicinity of the O’Higgins station, did
not detect the presence of the SARS-Cov-2 virus.
During this season, environmental samples were collected in the
vicinity of the O’Higgins base, the samples analysed did not detect
the presence of SARS-Cov 2; on the contrary generic coronaviruses
were detected.
Recommendations
Based on the various literature reviews and scientific evidence
obtained to date, it is important to try to optimise water treatment
plant systems to make them more efficient and incorporate state-of-
the-art technologies. Consideration may be given to adding a final
disinfection step to further reduce the risk posed by viral pathogens,
such as SARS-CoV-2, prior to discharge into the sea, such as a water
ozoniser.
Continue surveillance for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in waste
water from cruise ships, research stations and research ships.
It is also recommended to continue monitoring the presence of
SARS-CoV-2 in the ecosystem at different levels of the Antarctic
food web.
References
Barbosa, A., A. Varsani, V. Morandini, et al., (2020) Risk assessment
of SARS-CoV-2 in Antarctic wildlife, Science of the Total
Environment, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143352
Damas, J., Hughes, G.M., Keough, K.C., Painter, C.A., Persky, N.S.,
Corbo, M., Hiller, M., Koepfli, K.-P., Pfenning, A.R., Zhao, H.,
Genereux, D.P., Swofford, R., Pollard, K.S., Ryder, O.A., Nweeia,
M.T., Lindblad-Toh, K., Teeling, E.C., Karlsson, E.K., Lewin, H.A.
(2020). Broad host range of SARS-CoV-2 predicted by comparative
and structural analysis of ACE2 in vertebrates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 8 (117(36)), 22311–22322. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2010146117.
Kitajima, M., Ahmed, W., Bibby, K., Carducci, A., Gerba, C.P.,
Hamilton, K.A., Haramoto, E., & Rose, J.B. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 in
waste water: State of the knowledge and research needs. The
Science of the total environment, 739, 139076. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139076
Kumar, M., Alamin, M., Kuroda, K., Dhangar, K., Hata, A.,
Yamaguchi, H., et al. (2021). Potential discharge, attenuation and
exposure risk of SARS-CoV-2 in natural water bodies receiving
treated waste water. NPJ Clean Water 4:8. doi: 10.1038/
s41545-021-00098-2
