The First Operational Year of the New Bulgarian Research Vessel
Sv. Sv. Kiril i Metodii (RSV 421)
The First Operational Year of the New Bulgarian Research Vessel
Sv. Sv. Kiril i Metodii (RSV 421)
Background:
For the last 30 Austral summer seasons on Antarctica Bulgaria has
not owned its own mean of transportation for personnel and cargo
to Livingston Island. This has meant that the organisation of the
expeditions has been extremely complicated and difficult, and
heavily dependent on collaborations with the national programs of
many friendly countries – Spain, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil,
Portugal, Columbia, Turkiye and many more. With the acquisition
the first Research/survey vessel, the organisation of the Bulgarian
Antarctic expeditions become more flexible and adaptive not only
to the needs of the Bulgarian Antarctic program, but also to the
ones of our collaborative partners.
Timeline:
NAVAL RSV 421 (IMO: 8112586) is a Research/Survey Vessel, built
in 1984 in Norway. Her carrying capacity is 1103 t DWT and her
current draught is reported to be 5 meters. Her length overall (LOA)
is 67.48 meters and her width is 16.82 meters. The capacity is 67
births – 40 for scientists and 27 for crew.
RSV 421 in front of the Bulgarian Antarctic Base St. Kliment
Ohridski, photograph by Aleksandar Nedyalkov
The ship is owed by a Consortium signed by the Sofia University St.
Kliment Ohridski, the Bulgarian Antarctic Institute and the Navel
Academy in Varna and was purchased at the end of 2021 with
funds provided by the Ministry of Education and
Science of Republic of Bulgaria. During 2022 it undertook a full
renovation of engines, mechanics and interior, where needed,
overseen by the Consortium.
After obtaining the necessary certifications for sailing, it officially
left for its first journey to Antarctica at the end of December 2022.
On its board it carried 26 crew of the Naval Academy in Varna.
After 49 days of sailing, the RSV 421 (Sv. sv Kiril i Metodii) reached
the Bulgarian Shore on Livingston Island in support of the ongoing
scientific work and providing much needed supplies to the
Bulgarian Antarctic program, as well as to the Spanish bases on
Livingston and Deception Islands. In addition to delivering cargo
and providing logistic support for the Bulgarian, Spanish and
Turkish programs, the vessel provided work for the 4 scientists and
their projects on the subjects of marine biology, microbiology,
marine geology and medicine. The ship spent almost a month
around the South Shetland Islands, manoeuvring researches,
delivering cargo and providing logistic support.
Nighttime unloading of cargo at the Bulgarian Antarctic Base,
photograph by Petko Ginev
The vessel also accomplished а rescue operation of Spanish and
Canadian scientists near Hannah Point.
An important task was accomplished thanks to the availability of
own transport – all the accumulated in the past years recycling
waste (glass, wood and metal) was uploaded on RSV 421 and
transported back to Bulgaria.
RSV 421 arrived back in Bulgaria on 2nd May 2023 at Port Varna.
In the next summer season, the vessel is due to be around the South
Shetland Islands again and will be available for requests for
scientific research and logistic support to our Antarctic partners,
when agreed.
