Comprehensive approach to the study of the Emperor Penguin
colony in Snow Hill Island
English version provided by the author
Comprehensive approach to the study of the Emperor Penguin
colony in Snow Hill Island
Information paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
This document informs the Parties about the work that Argentina is
currently carrying out to study and protect the Emperor penguin
colony in Snow Hill Island, following WP44 of ATCM XL.
During the 2022/2023 season, the Argentine Antarctic Program
installed a multipurpose module intended to improve conditions for
on-site development of scientific activities. Also, a visitor guideline
for the colony will be drafted and submitted for consideration of the
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) next year.
Introduction
The Snow Hill Island colony was discovered in the mid-1990s
(Coria and Montalti, 2000) and is the northernmost Emperor
penguin colony in Antarctica. It is located right above the ice pack
(64° 30' S and 57° 26' W) (Libertelli et al., 2014), about 40-50
meters from the southern coast of the island, northeast of the
Antarctic Peninsula.
The Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) is one of the Antarctic
penguins with the greatest affinity for ice, adapted to survive
temperatures below -50 °C, common in the Antarctic winter. Its
reproductive cycle is also one of the longest, beginning in April and
ending in December. Current climate models predict a decline in
the population of this species, as a result of reduced sea ice
distribution and altered food availability, as Antarctic krill depend
directly on ice for their larval stage of development (Forcada and
Trathan, 2009).
Background
This colony of Emperor penguins is under various pressures. On the
one hand, it is located in one of the regions of the world where the
effects of global climate change are most evident (Vaughan et al.
2003). Population numbers, measured through aerial photographs,
indicate that the colony is growing, with counts of more than
10,000 adult individuals in recent years, although climate
conditions have a strong incidence on reproductive success from
one season to another.
Likewise, it is one of the only colonies of Emperor penguins that is
visited by tourists, thus increasing the anthropic pressure on the
colony’s area of influence, especially considering that most visits
are made by helicopter. Scientific evidence indicates that helicopter
flights modify the behaviour of nestlings (Giese and Riddle, 1999),
even when carried out at altitudes much higher than those
suggested in the “Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near
concentrations of birds” (Resolution 2, 2004).
With more than 10 years in the field, the Life Sciences’
Coordination of the Argentine Antarctic Institute, under its Predator
Biology Working Group, regularly carries out monitoring of the
colony’s population and its reproductive phases, analyzing the
variations of several population parameters under a comprehensive
study. This particular
penguin population is exposed to different local conditions and also
to changes registered in one of the areas of the Antarctic Peninsula
where the clearest signs of global warming were recorded.
Setting up of the Multipurpose Module
In mid-summer 2023, in the southwest of Snow Hill Island, in the
Dingle nunatak, at 64°31'16.89¨ Latitude South and 57°24'56.33¨
Longitude West, a multipurpose module was installed with the
objective of providing accommodation for scientists of the
Argentine Antarctic Institute that work in the Important Bird Area
(IBA) 069 - the northernmost known colony of Emperor Penguin
(Aptenodytes forsteri)-.
The module was set up on the Dingle nunatak as this is the closest
and safest ice-free area in the surroundings of the colony, 3km
away. Said module will allow the development of scientific activity
during the late winter and early spring, period on which the
reproductive cycle of this species takes place.
In accordance with Decision 5 (2022), Argentina presented the
Initial Environmental Evaluation "Construction of a refuge in the
Nunatak Dingle, Snow Hill Island, Antarctica" which will be shared
via the Electronic Information Exchange System of the Antarctic
Treaty.
Guidelines for Visitors to the Snow Hill Island Emperor Penguin
Colony
In WP 44 of ATCM XL, Argentina proposed different protection
mechanisms for the Emperor penguin colony on Snow Hill Island,
taking into account the current context of climate change and
anthropogenic pressures.
The Committee agreed to recommend the application of the
“Guidelines for behavior in the vicinity of the Emperor penguin
colony in Snow Hill Island”, attached to said WP, as a provisional
measure, until the need to develop more restrictive protection
mechanisms was assessed (p. 221 of the Final Report of ATCM XL).
In order to advance the conservation measures recommended by the
Committee, Argentina decided to step up field work. Therefore, it
was imperative to have more support on the ground that would
allow personnel to work in better conditions. On top of that, given
the increase in visits to the colony, this research will make headway
in the development of the Guidelines for visitors to Snow Hill’s
Emperor penguin colony, bringing about an additional protection
measure for this species.
Although this colony is not among the sites most visited by tourists,
and considering that in ATCM XLIV the Emperor penguin was not
designated a Specially Protected Species, its particular
characteristics merit specific Guidelines.
Argentina kindly requests the CEP to recognize the need to have a
better management tool and raise awareness among visitors and
Antarctic tour operators so as to avoid adding stress vectors to the
colony. These Guidelines will contribute to having better science
and to mitigating the impact of climate change on fauna. Interested
Parties are invited to provide comments for the development of said
Guidelines during the intersessional period.
