Improving safety and environmental protection of shipping in the
Antarctic Treaty Area
Improving safety and environmental protection of shipping in the
Antarctic Treaty Area
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
There have been a number of developments at the IMO that are
relevant to the safety and environmental protection of shipping in
the Antarctic Treaty Area. ASOC recommends that the ATCM take
the following actions in response to these developments:
consider adopting a resolution making the application of the IMO
Guidance a condition of permits for pleasure yachts of 300 GT and
above;
encourage CCAMLR to apply the IMO’s Guidelines for fishing
vessels over 24m in length overall operating in polar waters to all
CCAMLR licensed vessels;
require application of the compulsory navigation and voyage
planning requirements for non-SOLAS vessels by ATCPs when
issuing permits;
urge ATCPs to bring forward experience of the successes and
challenges in the implementation of the Polar Code and
identification of gaps in implementation;
require ATCPs to make application of the IMO’s revised underwater
radiated noise guidelines a permit requirement for ships; and
support work at the IMO to address abandoned, lost and discarded
fishing gear.
Introduction
In this paper, ASOC provides information on some of the latest
international developments of relevance to vessels operating in the
Antarctic Treaty Area.
Guidelines for Safety Measures for Pleasure Yachts of 300 gross
tonnage and above
In ATCM XLIV IP 92, ASOC provided information on the latest
developments pertinent to the safety and operation of vessels,
particularly pleasure yachts and fishing vessels in the Antarctic
Treaty area. This IP called on the ATCPs to require the
implementation of the new guidelines Guidelines for Safety
Measures for Pleasure Yachts of 300 Gross Tonnage and above not
engaged in trade Operating in Polar Waters. MSC.1/Circ. 1642.
Issued 14 May 2021. developed to ensure the safety of pleasure
yachts over 300 gross tonnage and above not engaged in trade
when issuing permits for these vessels to operate in the Antarctic
Treaty area. The Commission on the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) should similarly act to ensure
the application of guidance aimed at fishing vessels. The Guidelines
address a broad range of safety areas including the construction,
watertight integrity and stability of vessels; fire protection,
detection, extinction and fire-fighting; life-saving appliances and
emergency procedures; radiocommunications and navigational
equipment; and voyage planning (see ATCM XLIV IP 92 Annex for a
full list of areas addressed by the guidelines).
ASOC proposed that over the coming years, it will be important to
monitor the use and application of the IMO Guidelines to ensure
rigorous application. It will also be valuable to confirm that the
guidance is “fit for purpose” for the environments in which the
guidance is to be applied, and for lessons to be shared in order to
learn from experience. Identification of challenges in the
application of the guidelines and gaps that need to be addressed
will also be a priority, including further consideration of the need to
make any aspects of the guidelines mandatory. To ensure rigorous
application of the guidelines, which have been designed to ensure
the safety of vessel operations and of human lives as well as
environmental protection,
ASOC proposes that the ATCPs adopt a Resolution requiring
application of the guidelines when permitting pleasure yachts for
Antarctic operation.
Mandatory requirements for navigation and voyage planning
In addition to recently approving the guidance for pleasure yachts
and fishing vessels, it is anticipated that the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) will adopt new regulations addressing
navigation and voyage planning for non-SOLAS ships in June 2023.
These requirements, which are likely to take effect from January
2026, will be an important development of relevance to a
considerable number of vessels operating in the Southern Ocean,
including fishing vessels of 24 metres length overall and above,
pleasure yachts of 300 gross tonnage and upwards not engaged in
trade and cargo ships of 300 gross tonnage and upwards but below
500 gross tonnage. These compulsory requirements will include
vessels having the ability to receive up to date information
including ice information for safe navigation, and visually detect ice
when operating in darkness. The company, master and crew of each
vessel should ensure that voyage plans consider the potential
hazards of any intended voyage. ASOC suggests that the application
of these requirements, which will increase the safety of operating in
the Southern Ocean and improve environmental protection, should
be encouraged ahead of the measures becoming mandatory in 2026.
Reviewing experience in the application of the Polar Code
The IMO’s Mission Statement emphasizes that IMO should promote
safe, secure, environmentally sound, efficient, and sustainable
shipping through cooperation to deliver the highest practicable
standards of maritime safety and security, efficiency of navigation
and prevention and control of pollution from ships. The
International Code for Ships Operation in Polar Waters or Polar
Code is the means by which this mission should be achieved in the
polar regions. Negotiation and development of the Polar Code –
which addresses both safety in Part I and pollution prevention in
Part II - commenced over a decade ago. The Code came into effect
in January 2017, and has now been in operation for over six years.
ASOC believes that it is appropriate to evaluate the Polar Code’s
effectiveness and consider if it is delivering the highest practical
standards of maritime safety and security, efficiency of navigation
and prevention and control of pollution from ships envisaged in the
polar regions. It is timely to assess the implementation of the Polar
Code.
A paper submitted to the IMO’s Maritime Safety Committee 106th
session in November 2022 MSC 106/18/4 Implementation of the
Polar Code. Submitted by WWF. 30 August 2022., provided details
of a recent review published by ASOC member WWF, which
analysed the gaps and challenges in the implementation of the Polar
Code Improving the Polar Code to better protect Arctic waters -
WWF Arctic (arcticwwf.org)Review of Perceived Gaps and
Challenges in the Implementation of the Polar Code - WWF Arctic
(arcticwwf.org)Briefing about the Polar Code: Gaps and challenges -
WWF Arctic (arcticwwf.org). During the discussion at MSC 106, the
work was welcomed and the need for further discussion was
acknowledged. Interested Member States and international
organisations were invited to submit proposals for further work on
the implementation of the Polar Code to be considered.
In parallel with the ATCM meeting in Helsinki, the IMO’s 107th
session of the Maritime Safety Committee will consider a further
paper from WWF and the Inuit Circumpolar Council (MSC
107/17/23) which sets out the elements and information needed for
consideration of a new “output” for the IMO’s programme of work
focused on the successes, challenges, and gaps in the
implementation of the Polar Code. A full proposal for new work on
the Polar Code is still required before a decision can be made on the
undertaking of new work, however it is worth noting that the
suggested output could cover:
reviewing the current guidance provided alongside the Polar Code
which aids the determination of ice conditions for different classes
of ships MSC.1/Circ.1519 Guidance on Methodologies for Assessing
Operational Capabilities and Limitations in Ice. 6 June 2016.,
evaluating the successes, gaps and challenges in the implementation
of the Polar Code,
assessing progress on measures for non-SOLAS vessels and
identification of any further requirements, and
development of a proposal for a plan of action to ensure that the
highest practicable standards are being implemented.
ASOC supports the calls for an assessment of the successes, gaps and
challenges in the implementation of the Polar Code and urges
ATCPs to bring forward experience and lessons with the
implementation of the Polar Code in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Underwater Radiated Noise
In addition to the work relevant to the implementation of the Polar
Code and safety measures for non-SOLAS ships, other areas of the
IMO’s work are relevant to ships operating in the polar regions,
including work to revise the IMO’s Guidelines on underwater noise.
The original Guidelines for the reduction of underwater noise from
commercial shipping to address adverse impacts on marine life
were adopted nearly a decade ago in 2014. However, over time it
was recognised that uptake of the Guidelines was poor, and in 2021
IMO Member States agreed to review and update the guidelines
with a view to improving their uptake, structure, effectiveness, and
clarity. The purpose of the revised guidelines is to provide an
overview of approaches to reduce the underwater radiated noise of
any ship and to assist relevant stakeholders in establishing
mechanisms and programmes though which noise reduction efforts
can be realised. The new Guidelines, which are due to be approved
in July 2023, recognise underwater radiated noise reduction
management planning as a tool that may be applied to the
operation, design, construction and modification of ships as far as
reasonable and practical. ASOC calls on ATCPs to require all ships
operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area to apply the revised
guidelines.
Marine Plastic Litter
Over five years following the adoption of an action plan to address
the global problem of marine plastic litter from ships, IMO’s work
on abandoned, lost and discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) and spills of
marine plastic pellets continues. At the 80th session of Marine
Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) in July 2023, a working
group is anticipated to consider measures to regulate marking of
fishing gear and reporting of lost fishing gear. ASOC continues to
believe that both the marking of fishing gear and recording of lost
gear is essential to combat the problem of ghost fishing gear in the
Southern Ocean and urges ATCPs to support efforts at the IMO to
introduce mandatory requirements through the International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL).
Recommendations
ASOC recommends that the ATCM should:
consider adopting a resolution making the application of the IMO
Guidance a condition of permits for pleasure yachts of 300 GT and
above operating in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and include a
requirement for monitoring the use and application of the guidance,
with a view to building experience and identifying lessons to be
learnt;
encourage the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources to apply the IMO’s Guidelines for fishing vessels
over 24m in length overall operating in polar waters to all CCAMLR
licensed vessels;
require application of the compulsory navigation and voyage
planning requirements for non-SOLAS vessels by ATCPs when
issuing permits ahead of the IMO regulations taking effect;
urge ATCPs to bring forward experience of the successes and
challenges in the implementation of the Polar Code and
identification of gaps which are preventing the delivery of the
highest practical standards of maritime safety and security,
efficiency of navigation and prevention and control of pollution
from ships in polar regions;
require ATCPs, when issuing permits for ships to operate in the
Antarctic Treaty Area, to make application of the IMO’s revised
underwater radiated noise guidelines a permit requirement; and
support work at the IMO to introduce mandatory requirements to
address abandoned, lost and discarded fishing gear.
