Draft Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the Emperor
Penguin: complementary actions by Australia
Draft Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the Emperor
Penguin: complementary actions by Australia
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
At CEP XXIV (2022) many Members and Observers expressed intent
to use the draft Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the
Emperor Penguin Aptenodytes forsteri (the Action Plan), provided
in ATCM XLIV/WP34, as guidance to support their actions on the
management of this species. Australia supports the goal and
objectives of the draft Action Plan, and approval of the Action Plan
at the earliest opportunity. This paper outlines complementary
actions by Australia concerning the protection of emperor penguins.
Background
At CEP XXIII (2021), the Committee considered ATCM XLIII/
WP037, which presented SCAR’s assessment that the emperor
penguin is vulnerable to ongoing and projected climate change,
warranting protection as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species.
The Committee established an open-ended intersessional contact
group (ICG) to prepare a draft action plan for the emperor penguin
to be presented to ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV, together with SCAR’s
assessment of the emperor penguin’s conservation status, in
accordance with the Guidelines for CEP Consideration of Proposals
for New and Revised Designations of Antarctic Specially Protected
Species under Annex II to the Protocol.
At CEP XXIV (2022), the Committee considered ATCM XLIV/WP34,
which presented the results of the ICG, including a draft Specially
Protected Species Action Plan for the Emperor Penguin,
Aptenodytes forsteri, Gray, 1844 (the Action Plan). The ICG
recommended designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially
Protected Species under Annex II to the Protocol, and approval and
timely implementation of the Action Plan. The Committee did not
reach consensus on the proposal to list the emperor penguin as a
Specially Protected Species. However, many Members and
Observers expressed intent to use the draft Action Plan as guidance
to support their actions on the management of the species,
including conducting further monitoring of emperor penguin
populations.
Complementary actions by Australia
Australia strongly supports the goal of the draft Action Plan ‘To
reduce and, where practicable, prevent threats to emperor penguins
and their habitat at all stages of their life cycle, taking into account
observed and potential impacts of climate change on emperor
penguins, in order to improve the threat status and degree of
endangerment of the species’ and associated objectives.
Australia has a long history of activities to understand and protect
emperor penguins, with a focus on breeding populations that occur
in East Antarctica. While these colonies predominately occur on
Antarctic fast ice, ice shelves, and icebergs, there are two colonies
on land. Australian scientists have also contributed to recent
research to assess the global population of emperor penguins over
the past 10 years. When published, this research will provide
additional
information of relevance to designation of the emperor penguin as a
Specially Protected Species and approval of the Action Plan.
There are four Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) in East
Antarctica designated to protect emperor penguins: ASPA No 101
(Taylor Rookery, Mac.Robertson Land), ASPA No 120 (Pointe-
Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie), ASPA No 127 (Haswell Island),
and ASPA No 169 (Amanda Bay, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess
Elizabeth Land). Australia manages ASPA No 101 and jointly
manages ASPA No 169 with China, while France and the Russian
Federation manage ASPA No 120 and ASPA No 127, respectively.
Australia has commenced preliminary work to consider a
nomination for listing of the emperor penguin as a threatened
species under its national environmental legislation, the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth). The nomination will consider the taxonomy, distribution,
biology and ecology, threats, threat abatement, and eligibility for
listing the species under the legislation. Australia applies a common
assessment method to listings under its national environmental
legislation. This approach is complementary with that used by the
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) for including
species on the Red List of Threatened Species, with necessary
changes to ensure consistency with the legislation.
Australia supports the earliest designation of the emperor penguin
as a Specially Protected Species, and the formal approval and
implementation of the Action Plan. Approval of the Action Plan will
initiate several processes to be led by the CEP and SCAR, such as
regularly reviewing the conservation status and population trends
for the emperor penguin, developing guidelines for visits to
emperor penguin colonies, developing guidance on what constitutes
a ‘compelling’ scientific purpose, and improving community support
for the conservation of the emperor penguin. Australia looks
forward to engaging in those processes along with other Members.
The table at Annex A identifies selected complementary actions
currently undertaken by Australia.
Annex A. Complementary actions by Australia
Action in draft Action Plan
Complementary actions by Australia
Objective A1: Identify priorities for compelling research and
monitoring activities in order to promote conservation, minimise
unnecessary pressure on the species and avoid duplication of
research effort.
A1.1
Undertake a comprehensive review of emperor penguin research
and monitoring activities and identify gaps relevant to the
protection and management of the species
Australia conducts research and monitoring activities in East
Antarctica, and is undertaking a review to inform the potential
listing of the emperor penguin under Australia’s national
environmental legislation.
A.1.2
Identify compelling research and monitoring priorities that directly
contribute to the conservation of emperor penguins.
Australian emperor penguin research and monitoring is directed
towards informing and supporting conservation actions.
Consistent with the relevant management plans, Australia limits the
research and monitoring that may be undertaken by its scientists in
ASPAs to:
compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken
elsewhere and which will not jeopardise the avifauna or the
ecosystem of the Area
sampling which should be the minimum for the approved research
programs.
A.1.3
Develop a coordinated international research and monitoring
programme for the emperor penguin to advance compelling
research and monitoring priorities and to minimise unnecessary
pressure due to overlapping research programmes.
Australia contributes to international emperor penguin research and
monitoring activities, including through the SCAR Expert Group on
Birds and Marine Mammals. There are synergies in ensuring these
activities are coordinated. While there is also value in avoiding
duplication of research effort, Australia recognises that each colony
has its own characteristics that may require individual
investigation.
Objective A2: Monitor Emperor Penguin population size and trends,
and identify environmental factors that may affect the species over
time and at different scales (particularly the effects of climate
change on sea ice extent/duration).
Population size and trends
A.2.1
Undertake population assessment studies to monitor emperor
penguin population size and trends at the colony scale, the regional
scale and the circumpolar scale.
Australia undertakes emperor penguin population assessments in
East Antarctica. There are logistical constraints that limit access to
many of
the emperor penguin colonies in East Antarctica.
In East Antarctica, Australia undertakes ongoing ground and/or
aerial surveys of emperor penguin populations in ASPA No 101, and
ASPA No 169, as well as more remote colonies when logistically
feasible. Australia also accesses satellite imagery to monitor all
colonies of interest in East Antarctica.
A.2.3
Undertake research to provide more information on the distribution
of juveniles, breeding birds and non-breeding birds, which
sometimes forage far from the Antarctic continent.
Australia recognises there are difficulties in using remote sensing
approaches to determine the distribution of different life stages of
emperor penguins away from their breeding colonies, as well as
interchange between colonies. Tracking studies by researchers from
Australia and other nations show that juveniles will travel
considerable distances from their natal colony.
Environmental factors
A.2.6
Undertake further modelling of climate change impacts on emperor
penguin populations over different spatial and temporal scales,
taking into consideration Antarctic environmental factors (e.g., sea
ice extent) and global responses to climate change (e.g., changes in
greenhouse gas emissions).
As outlined in ATCM XLV/IP072 Australia’s Antarctic climate
science, Australia undertakes complementary collaborative research
into climate change effects in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean,
including effects on sea ice extent and duration.
Objective A3: Identify and prioritise the threats to Emperor Penguin
populations, including through research on agents of decline,
population dynamics, distribution and management techniques and
their effectiveness.
A.3.1
Identify and prioritise threats to breeding populations of emperor
penguins by direct and indirect activities.
Australia considers that the threats to the emperor penguin are well
outlined in Section 2.9 of the draft Action Plan.
If the emperor penguin is listed under Australia's national
environmental legislation, then a Conservation Advice will be
developed that would outline the threats to the species, as well as
potential mitigation actions.
A.3.2
Work with CCAMLR, COMNAP, IAATO and other relevant
organisations to identify and prioritise threats to emperor penguins
within the marine environment.
As for A.3.1.
Objective B1: Ensure the protection and management of Emperor
Penguin populations within their habitats in the Antarctic region
through the application of management tools that regulate
interaction with human activities.
Area management and protection
B.1.1
Use existing management tools to regulate human activity in the
vicinity of each emperor penguin colony (e.g., through development
of Site Guidelines for Visitors or designation of the location as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)), as appropriate.
Australia manages two ASPAs designated primarily to protect
emperor penguins: ASPA No 101 and ASPA No 169 (with China).
Measures within the management plans for the ASPAs prescribe
access to the colonies. These include prescriptions designed:
to minimise human disturbance
to minimise the possibility of the introduction of pathogens that
may cause disease in populations of birds, such as avian influenza
(H1N1)
to minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals
and microbes to the colonies.
B.1.2
Establish and implement measures that restrict access to some
colonies only for specified purposes.
Australia has developed guidelines that seek to prevent or minimise
human disturbance to the Auster Colony near Mawson station while
allowing appropriate access for Australian Antarctic Program
expeditioners.
Australian Antarctic expeditioners are subject to an Environmental
Code for Participants in the Australian Antarctic Program that,
among other things, seeks to minimise disturbance to wildlife
including emperor penguins, except where activities are authorised
under a permit.
The potential for disturbance by Australian Antarctic Program
vehicles and aircraft (fixed wing, rotating wing and remotely
piloted aircraft systems) is minimised through prescribing vehicle
entry to ASPAs, and guidelines for avoiding disturbance of emperor
penguin and wildlife colonies. Such avoidance is regulated though,
for example, precautionary distances between aircraft and wildlife
concentrations set out in Australia’s authorisation for Australian
Antarctic Program aviation operations,
and its effectiveness is subject to ongoing monitoring.
B.1.3
Where a colony is already afforded protection through designation
of an ASPA, evaluate the effectiveness of the protected areas in
providing heightened protection. Parties managing ASPAs that
protect emperor penguin colonies shall provide regular updates to
the CEP on the status of the emperor penguin population within the
Area.
Australia reports to the CEP on the five-yearly review of the
management arrangements for ASPA No 101 and ASPA No 169
(with China). The next reviews of these ASPA are due to commence
in 2026 and 2024, respectively.
B.1.4
Consider the designation of further protected areas to afford
additional protection to emperor penguin colonies that are
representative of: (i) climate change refugia populations, and (ii)
genetically distinct meta-populations, which may be important for
future resilience to environmental change.
As reported in ATCM XLIV/IP047, Australian researchers are
undertaking work to inform ongoing CEP discussions on further
developing the Antarctic protected area system.
Objective B2. Reduce threats to breeding and foraging populations
of emperor penguins, including due to taking or harmful
interference by human activities, taking into consideration life cycle
stages when birds are most sensitive to threats.
Guidelines
B.2.1
Review existing guidelines concerning direct human behaviour and
activities in the vicinity of Antarctic wildlife, taking into
consideration their effectiveness concerning emperor penguins at
different stages of their breeding cycle. Update the guidelines as
necessary to provide additional protection mechanisms. Examples of
such guidelines are, the ‘General guidelines for visitors to the
Antarctic' contained in Resolution 4 (2021), the ‘Guidelines for the
operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds' contained in
Resolution 2 (2004) and the ‘Environmental guidelines for
operation of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in
Antarctica’ contained in Resolution 4 (2018).
Australia keeps under review the Environmental Code for
Participants in the Australian Antarctic Program, the Auster
Emperor Penguin Colony Australian Antarctic Program Visitation
Policy, and management measures for ASPA No 101 and ASPA No
169 (with China). Australia maintains an Environmental Policy on
Remotely Piloted Aircraft (Drones) in Antarctica, which is being
reviewed in 2023. Potential impacts of Australian Antarctic
Program aviation activities on wildlife are subject to ongoing
monitoring, and the outcomes of this monitoring informs relevant
polices and guidance, such as Australia’s annual review of flight
path guidelines for avoiding wildlife in East Antarctica.
B.2.2
Using the best available science, and working with SCAR, COMNAP,
IAATO and other relevant organisations, develop species specific
guidelines for visits to emperor penguin colonies. To ensure the
minimization of disturbance
to emperor penguin colonies, establish specific guidelines on, for
example, (i) emperor penguin approach distances by visitors, (ii)
the use of small boats and overland vehicles, (iii) the establishment
of camps, refuges or hides; (iv) biosecurity measures; (v) limits on
the frequency of visits; (vi) limits on the number of visitors, (vi)
visitor behaviour; and (viii) effects of the presence of vessels on
local sea-ice margins.
As noted above, Australia maintains various guidelines and
regulatory requirements for avoiding disturbance to emperor
penguins and other wildlife in Antarctica. These are applied, for
example, through authorisations and
permits for all Australian activities in Antarctica that may involve
proximity to wildlife.
Management of logistical activities
B.2.4
Consider how planned activities in the vicinity of emperor penguin
colonies (including on ground and aerial activities) could be better
communicated in advance of any planned activity (including
between national Antarctic programmes and tourism operators, for
example) so that disturbance is limited over time and in duration
(e.g., by working with CCAMLR, COMNAP and/or IAATO).
Emperor penguin populations in East Antarctica are remote and
infrequently visited, and generally not visited by multiple operators.
Emperor penguins may be present at breeding colonies in most
months, and birds are particularly sensitive from May to mid-July,
when they are incubating eggs, and from mid-July to mid-
September, when adults are brooding chicks. Australia’s
management of planned activities includes measures that expressly
address these sensitive periods.
Objective B3: Develop effective management measure that avoid or
minimise identified marine threats.
B.3.1
Promote action by all operators to address potential threats to the
conservation of emperor penguins while at sea (e.g., by working
with CCAMLR, COMNAP, IAATO and other relevant organisations).
All Australian-flagged vessels operating in Antarctic waters are
required to adopt measures to avoid and minimise marine pollution
and wildlife impacts. As required by CCAMLR, Australian-flagged
fishing vessels operating in Antarctic waters carry scientific
observers, and there have not been reports of bycatch of emperor
penguins during fishing operations.
Objective C1. Improve community awareness, understanding and
support for the conservation of the emperor penguin, including
through education of the general public and continuing education
of national Antarctic programme personnel, non-governmental
operators including tour and fishing agencies and other relevant
human agencies/institutions that would visit or be present in the
Antarctic Treaty area.
National Antarctic programme personnel, tour operators, fishing
operators and other relevant agencies
C.1.5
Liaise with the personnel of national Antarctic programmes and
other relevant agencies, and with organisations carrying out
commercial activities, (e.g., tour operators/tourists and fishing
industry companies) to continue to develop and use tailored
education and outreach opportunities to raise awareness about (i)
the direct and indirect threats to emperor penguin populations, and
(ii) practical measures to avoid direct impact/disturbance to the
species across all of its life stages.
All Australian Antarctic Program expeditioners are given
environmental training, including on avoiding wildlife disturbance.
Expeditioners proposing to undertake activities in proximity to any
emperor penguin colony receive a comprehensive, site-specific,
environmental briefing prior to any activity. Post-activity reporting
is also required, to help improve the management measures
applying to future activities. Mawson station expeditioners receive
additional awareness training, as they are most likely to encounter
emperor penguins.
Objective C2: Improve global community awareness, understanding
and support for the conservation of the Emperor Penguin by Parties
working collaboratively to encourage action on addressing climate
change, including through collaborative advocacy in other relevant
forums (e.g. IPCC, UNFCCC).
C.2.1
When engaging in climate change forums, Antarctic Treaty Parties
should work collaboratively to inform those forums and
participating nations and other stakeholders, as relevant, of the
implications of climate change on the protection of the emperor
penguin, and to encourage prompt and effective action on global
climate change (consistent with Resolution 8 (2021) on ‘Antarctica
in a Changing Climate’).
Consistent with ATCM Resolution 8 (2021) and ATCM Resolution 4
(2022), Australia is acting to ensure that its delegations to climate
change forums receive briefing about the implications of climate
change, including on the protection of the emperor penguin.
Australia continues to advocate in climate change forums for
prompt and effective action on global climate change.
