Environmental Field Reviews: Supporting Monitoring Obligations
and the Environmental Impact Assessment Feedback Process
Environmental Field Reviews: Supporting Monitoring Obligations
and the Environmental Impact Assessment Feedback Process
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
This paper describes an environmental field review program that
evaluates active projects and field camps to identify potential
issues, areas for improvement, and mitigation alternatives. The
environmental field reviews also support follow-up evaluation of
the environmental impact assessment (EIA) conducted prior to
implementing a project or field camp to ensure predicted impacts
were accurately identified and if mitigations are effective. The
objective of this paper is to illustrate the complete process for
conducting environmental field reviews – from initial planning to
implementation of follow-up actions.
Introduction
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) routinely conducts
field reviews of active projects and field camps to identify potential
issues, areas for improvement, and mitigation alternatives. A key
benefit of these reviews is the opportunity to assess if the EIA
document prepared prior to implementing a project has adequately
identified potential impacts and if mitigations are effective in
reducing environmental impacts.
Routine environmental field reviews support the monitoring
obligations identified in Article 3 of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty: “regular and effective monitoring
shall take place to allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing
activities, including the verification of predicted impacts” (Article
3.2[d]) and “to facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen
effects” (Article 3.2[e]). Additionally, field reviews support the “EIA
feedback process” identified in Resolution 1 (2016): Guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica to address “a need
to verify the predicted impacts of the activity and assess the
effectiveness of mitigation measures, including to consider whether
it is necessary to make any changes to the activity or prepare a new
EIA” (Section 5).
The objective of this paper is to illustrate the complete process
currently implemented by USAP for conducting environmental field
reviews. This paper describes how projects and field camps are
selected for review, how field reviews are performed, and what
types of key findings and follow-up actions are typically identified.
Over the past five Antarctic summers, a total of 34 environmental
field reviews were completed by USAP personnel.
Selection and Prioritization of Projects and Field Camps for Review
Prior to the field season, selection criteria are used to identify
which projects and field camps would be considered for
environmental field reviews. If an active project or field camp has
aspects that match one or more of the following selection criteria,
the project or field camp is further considered as a candidate for an
environmental field review:
A project or field camp is new;
New construction or operations are planned to occur as part of an
existing project or field camp;
New technology is being implemented as part of an existing project
or field camp;
A principal investigator (PI) is new to USAP;
A field camp manager is new to the position;
A project or field camp has a history of challenges, particularly
those related to environmental requirements;
A project or field camp includes activities that are located within or
near a sensitive area such as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area
(ASMA) or Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA);
The scope of a project includes planned releases to the
environment;
The project or field camp involves storage and use of large
quantities of hazardous materials such as fuel, drilling fluid, or
laboratory chemicals;
A project or field camp has not been reviewed in the past three
years; and
A project or field camp has been reviewed the previous season and
issues, such as improper storage of hazardous materials, were
identified that require follow-up
After the candidates are identified using the selection criteria,
potential constraints associated with performing a field review for
each are then identified to assess the feasibility of completing a
review. Potential constraints that could affect the feasibility of a
field review include:
Limited availability of air, land, and/or sea transportation resources
to access a field location;
Limited availability of project or field camp personnel to support
additional personnel at field location conducting the review;
Remoteness or challenging accessibility of field location;
Safety risks present at field location that would require significant
training or field safety support;
Availability of personnel to conduct the reviews;
Scheduling conflicts;
Weather conditions; and
Other factors that would significantly impact resources otherwise
available to support science
A project or field camp is selected for an environmental field review
if the magnitude of the potential environmental risk or impact
associated with the selection criteria is appropriately matched to
the limitations imposed by the constraints. For example, a field
camp that presents low environmental risk or impact but is difficult
to travel to would not be prioritized for a field review.
Each project or field camp selected for an environmental field
review is assigned a priority for the upcoming season. Table 1
summarizes the rationale for each priority level and the planning
outcome based on prioritization. Effective planning is necessary to
ensure that the resources allocated to conduct a particular review
reflect the priority of the review and do not significantly affect
resources that would otherwise be available to support science.
When possible, environmental field reviews are performed
concurrently with other science support activities to mitigate the
impact on resource availability. The USAP personnel that complete
the reviews coordinate with PIs, field camp managers, and other
science implementation personnel to develop the appropriate field
review schedule.
Table 1 – Description of prioritization levels
Priority
Rationale for Prioritization
Planning Outcome
High
One or more aspects of planned activities for the field season
present
significant environmental risk or impact and/or a recent field
review identified issues that require follow-up.
An environmental field review would be performed and dedicated
resources,
if required, would be requested to complete the review.
Moderate
One or more aspects of planned activities for the field season
present less than high environmental risk or impact.
An environmental field review would be performed if the impact to
the availability of requested resources is minimal.
Low
Minimal aspects of planned activities for the field season present no
more than low environmental risk or impact and/or a satisfactory
field review was recently conducted.
An environmental field review would be performed if there is an
opportunity to conduct the review concurrently with other science
support activities.
Environmental Field Review Methods
Once the projects and field camps selected for review are identified
and the logistics of accomplishing the reviews have been planned,
the process for conducting each environmental field review is
typically as follows:
Documentation associated with a project or field camp is reviewed
prior to visiting the site. Any EIA documents associated with the
project or field camp are reviewed with a focus on understanding
the predicted impacts and mitigation alternatives identified. Other
documentation, such as records of previous environmental field
reviews, are reviewed as well to understand the history of any
previously identified challenges or opportunities for improvement.
The project or field camp is visited by the personnel performing the
environmental field review and current site activities and conditions
are observed. The personnel performing the review utilize a
standardized checklist to ensure all appropriate facets of the review
are addressed. Additionally, photographs are taken throughout the
review to document the activities and conditions. A PI or camp
manager with knowledge of the project will often accompany
personnel.
Potential challenges and opportunities for improvement are
discussed with project participants and/or camp personnel. If
feasible, time is dedicated during the on-site portion of the field
review to meet with project participants and/or camp personnel
and solicit feedback relevant to environmental impact and
mitigation alternatives. The information obtained during these
discussions is essential for identifying any aspects that might not
otherwise be apparent to personnel conducting the review. If time
does not permit a discussion during the on-site portion of the
review, the project participants and/or camp personnel are
contacted afterwards to solicit this feedback.
A summary of observations and recommendations is prepared and
distributed to relevant stakeholders. The summary of each
environmental field review typically includes a general description
of activities and conditions observed, the topics discussed with
project participants and/or camp personnel, key findings, and
recommendations for potential improvements.
Follow-up actions are identified and will be implemented as
appropriate and practicable. The timeline for implementing
recommended follow-up actions is dependent on the complexity and
feasibility. For instance, a finding that fuel was stored in drums
outside of secondary containment can typically be remedied quickly
by supplying the project or field camp with appropriate secondary
containment and instructing project participants or camp personnel
on its use. On the other hand, a recommendation that would
involve construction or the use of new technology likely
requires capital investment, planning, and execution that may or
may not be feasible. For the latter scenario, the personnel that
conducted the environmental field review will make the
recommendation to the appropriate stakeholders and further
assessment of feasibility and possible implementation of the
recommendation will be completed by others.
Key Findings and Implementation of Recommended Follow-up
Actions
Possible key findings identified as the result of an environmental
field review might include general observations, noteworthy
practices, and/or opportunities for improvement. General
observations typically document the overall conditions and
activities observed during the review which may be useful for
comparison against the predicted impacts and proposed activities
described in the associated EIA document. Noteworthy practices
often include mitigations that have been demonstrated to be
effective and may have beneficial outcomes for wider
implementation. Opportunities for improvement might range from
simple changes, such as adjustments to operational procedures, to
more complex improvements, such as implementing new
technology or construction. The implementation of any
recommended follow-up actions resulting from identified key
findings always begins with notifying relevant stakeholders.
Discussion with stakeholders allows the appropriate parties to begin
assessing the feasibility of implementing the recommended follow-
up actions. Some follow-up actions may be determined to be
impracticable; however, practicable follow-up actions are managed
by the relevant stakeholders from planning to implementation.
Subsequent environmental field reviews are valuable to assess the
outcome of the implementation of any follow-up actions.
