Polar STEAM: An Emerging National Science Foundation Education
and Outreach Initiative
Polar STEAM: An Emerging National Science Foundation Education
and Outreach Initiative
Information Paper submitted by the United States
Summary
Polar STEAM is an educational project that combines the principles
of STEAM education (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and
Math) with the study of polar regions and the science conducted
there which encompasses a wide range of disciplines, such as ocean
and atmospheric science to economics, anthropology, glaciology,
organisms and ecosystems, and glaciology. It combines and expands
previous programs, including the Antarctic Artists and Writers
(AAW) program and various Polar Educators programs. In 2022,
Oregon State University (OSU) was awarded a Cooperative
Agreement to manage Polar STEAM. The goal of the new project is
to offer both in-person and virtual experiences, open participation
to faculty from Minority Serving Institutions, foster collaborations
between artists, writers, educators, and researchers, and make the
programs more diverse, equitable and inclusive. The first
collaborations will be virtual and mainly focused on the Arctic, but
the program leaders expect that field deployments to the Arctic and
Antarctic will resume in 2024.
Background
Polar STEAM is a new project that is supported by a collaboration
between the U.S. National Science Foundation’s Office of Polar
Programs (OPP) and its Directorate for STEM Education. It
encompasses and builds off two longstanding NSF efforts to support
an AAW program and a program to engage informal and formal
educators in polar sciences with the aim to increase the public’s
understanding and appreciation of the Polar regions.
Between 1950 and 2020, NSF funded AAW to help U.S. citizens
better understand the work being conducted in Antarctica.
Participating artists and writers deployed to Antarctica and
collaborated with polar researchers to work on projects that focused
on interpreting and representing the scientific activities being
conducted in the Antarctic region. AAW has supported a broad
range of work, including novels, books for children, digital media,
film, graphic art, history, history of science, humanities scholarship,
illustration, literature, musical composition, painting, photography,
poetry, and science fiction. The online exhibition, Adequate Earth,
produced by participants of AAW is an example of one of the
collaborations achieved through the program. The previous AAW
was managed directly by NSF, and the NSF website provides a
complete list of all past AAW participants.
The most recent Polar Educators program, also known as PolarTREC
(Teachers and Researchers Exploring and Collaborating), was
established in 2007 and provided elementary and secondary-school
teachers the opportunity to travel to Antarctica to improve their
ability to teach STEM subjects. PolarTREC was funded through
awards from the National Science Foundation and administered by
the Arctic Research Consortium of the United States (ARCUS).
During its operation, teachers and informal educators participated
in PolarTREC to collaborate in Arctic and Antarctic field settings
with polar researchers and to bring their experiences back to
classrooms and museums to inspire the next generation of scientists
and researchers.
The STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and Math)
movement gained momentum in the early 2010s as educators and
policy makers recognized the value of incorporating creative and
artistic thinking into STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math) education. The concept is to connect to a broader group of
learners by combining the importance of creativity
and curiosity along with academic engagement and critical
thinking. Incorporating art into STEM learning experiences allows
students of all ages to access science concepts from different
vantage points which in turn enhances creative thinking,
engagement, and understanding.
To broaden access to polar research experiences and to integrate the
AAW and the Polar Educators programs, NSF awarded an
interdisciplinary team at OSU a Cooperative Agreement to run the
project, Polar STEAM in September 2022. The collaboration
includes a partnership of several OSU entities including: the STEM
Research Center, the Patricia Valian Reser Center for the Creative
Arts, Pre College Programs, the Colleges of Earth, Ocean, and
Atmospheric Sciences and the College of Liberal Arts. OSU and its
partners will facilitate virtual collaborations and field deployments
annually beginning in 2023. The 2023 deployments will be virtual
and will focus on the Arctic. The first anticipated Antarctic season
will be in 2024/2025.
Polar STEAM Goals
OSU is managing the components of Polar STEAM, including the
AAW and Polar Educator programs, as parallel but synergistic
programs while also expanding their reach and promoting diversity,
equity, and inclusion by allowing a broader range of educators and
students to participate. As the facilitator of Polar STEAM, OSU has
five goals:
Expand the reach of the Polar Educator’s program by including
middle and high school science educators, informal educators, and
faculty from community colleges and Minority Serving Institutions;
Initiate institutional management of the AAW program;
Make participation more accessible by providing virtual
collaboration options;
Integrate both the AAW and the Polar Educators Program while also
fostering collaboration between all participants (artists, writers, and
educators); and
Broaden the public impact of Polar STEAM
Polar STEAM will provide a unique opportunity that benefits not
only the individual artists, writers, and educators but also the
diverse communities that they serve. NSF-funded researchers will
also have an opportunity to enhance the Broader Impact of their
work. Researchers across a wide spectrum of disciplines working in
both in the field and conducting polar research remotely will have
the opportunity to collaborate with artists, writers, and educators.
Participants that are selected will be designated as “Polar STEAM
Fellows”, and they will work together in a collaborative
environment where the educators, scientist and artists are all equal
participants. Creating a space where these collaborations are
cultivated will allow the Polar STEAM Fellows to work together on
interdisciplinary projects and produce new insights and
perspectives. Professional development curriculum will also be
integrated into the Polar STEAM program for all participants and
funding will be available for educators who successfully complete
the program to attend conferences to present their work. Polar
STEAM will promote broader public understanding of polar
sciences, and seeks to develop long-term relationships between
educators, scientists, artists, and writers. Prospective applicants can
stay up to date by joining the Polar STEAM newsletter.
Virtual Collaborations
In an effort to make collaborations more accessible, Polar STEAM
has created a virtual participation option. Individual educators will
be partnered with researchers and all collaborators and interactions
will take place virtually. Polar STEAM will facilitate initial virtual
meetings between participants and researchers to collaboratively
develop a new STEAM-focused educational resource. Virtual
collaborations serve to decrease barriers and increase access to
polar research projects. Although the exact mechanisms are still
being developed, educators who have previously been unable to
deploy for multi-week field seasons can now apply to participate as
a virtual collaborator during their school year. Each virtual
collaboration will be unique, and the time commitment and project
outcome will depend on the nature of the collaboration between the
researcher and educator. Virtual collaborations are anticipated to
begin as early as May 2023 and will be completed within nine
months.
Field Collaborations
The AAW program will send participants to the Antarctic who are
creative professionals within the arts and humanities, whereas the
Polar Educators program will facilitate both virtual and field
deployments to the Arctic and Antarctic for both informal and
formal educators working in the United States. Field locations may
vary as some participants may stay in remote field locations that
have harsh environmental conditions, while others may live in a
dormitory setting. Participants will be able to indicate their comfort
level for a potential field deployment. The length of the
deployments will be dependent on various factors; however, the
typical deployment will range between two and six weeks. Arctic
deployments will generally be between May and September, and
Antarctic deployments will be between October and February.
Conclusions
While Polar STEAM is still in the development stage and logistical
constraints and programming are in progress, its initiative creates
new opportunities to connect the perspectives and work of
creatives, educators, and researchers in some of the most
interesting, vulnerable, and critical ecosystems on the planet.
Virtual and field opportunities will be available to educators, artists,
and writers, so they can personally experience the impacts of these
important polar science programs and, in turn, communicate the
meaningful scientific work to a broader public audience.
