Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the CEP
Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the CEP
Summary
We report on the activities undertaken by CCAMLR in the
2022/2023 period relevant to the work of the CEP, including
science capacity building, strategic planning, climate change,
biodiversity, Antarctic species requiring special protection, spatial
management, ecosystem monitoring and marine debris. Of
particular note is recent progress to develop a five-year strategic
plan for SC-CAMLR, updated terms of reference for SC-CAMLR
working groups, including explicit consideration of climate change,
and more detailed reporting of marine debris data as discussed at
CEP XLIV.
SC-CAMLR-41 meeting
The 41st meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR)
was held in person 24 to 28 October 2022 in Hobart, Australia.
Video and audio of the meeting was also streamed live to increase
participation. The full report of the meeting, including the SC-
CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-
CAMLR-41, is available from the CCAMLR website:
https://meetings.ccamlr.org/meetings/sc-camlr.
The Chair of the Scientific Committee, Dr D. Welsford, noted that
CCAMLR celebrated its 40th anniversary and highlighted the
significant achievements towards ecosystem-based management.
Reports of the current information on CCAMLR fisheries are
available in CCAMLR fishery reports.
SC-CAMLR capacity building
At its October 2022 meeting the Scientific Committee further
developed its science capacity by
awarding a new science scholarship, which along with the
extensions of scholarships due to covid constraints, resulted in
seven active scholarships progressing during the 2023 calendar
year. The Scientific Committee also agreed to continue supporting
research on CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP)
indicator species and monitoring sites, and to fund participation by
scientists in a number of workshops in 2023 through the General
Science Capacity Fund. The Secretariat has also implemented a new
international internship to build CCAMLR capacity through funding
provided by China.
Strategic planning
The Scientific Committee held a special two-session informal
symposium in February 2022 to review and develop a five-year
strategic plan. The Chair’s report from this workshop was reviewed
by all SC-CAMLR working groups and SC-CAMLR and adopted a
new workplan and updated terms of reference for all the working
groups.
The Scientific Committee identified eight high priority issues
relating to how advice is provided to the Commission on conserving
AMLR, and five cross-cutting scientific topics (Table 1).
Table 1: High-priority scientific issues for the Scientific Committee
to progress 2023–2027.
Providing the scientific advice that underpins an integrated,
ecosystem-based approach to fisheries
1. Develop the new krill management approach for all subareas in
Area 48
2. Review krill and finfish management approaches and decision
rules to ensure they are consistent with Article II
3. Develop data collection plans to inform and support refined
management approaches
4. Develop research to inform and support more robust assessment
approaches for lower information fisheries
5. Develop methods to detect ecosystem changes and provide advice
on adaptive management (e.g. through CEMP and WG-IMAF)
6. Develop scientific approaches for conservation of Antarctic
marine ecosystems, including spatial management
7. Ensure the effects of fishing on by-catch, dependent, or related
species are consistent with Article II
8. Provide scientific advice on CCAMLR’s regulatory framework for
fisheries.
Addressing cross-cutting scientific topics
1. Develop a process to objectively address differences in scientific
interpretation
2. Improve integrated approaches to fund and build science
capacity within CCAMLR, including linkages with external
organisations
3. Develop policies to communicate the science generated by
CCAMLR to the wider scientific community
4. Review performance of CEMP and SISO data collection programs
relative to the strategic plan
5. Collaborate with other organisations (e.g. CEP, SCAR) to provide
a synthesis of the state and trajectory of Antarctic marine living
resources.
SC-CAMLR has reported on five issues of common interest to the
CEP and SC-CAMLR since 2010, following the endorsement by both
the CEP and SC-CAMLR of the recommendations of the Joint SC-
CAMLR/CEP Workshop held in Baltimore in 2009. In 2022, CEP
and SC-CAMLR agreed to include a summary of CCAMLR’s marine
debris monitoring programme into the report (ATCM44_rp12
paragraph 227, SC-CAMLR-41 paragraph 5.48), creating a sixth
category.
Noting the progress both CEP and SC-CAMLR has made since the
last joint workshop, it is timely to establish a process to review
issues of common interest between the two bodies in the near
future.
a. Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
The Scientific Committee noted that a proposal for a joint CEP-
CCAMLR climate change workshop was being developed and
considered that given the evidence of how climate change is
currently impacting Antarctic marine ecosystems, a more immediate
Scientific Committee workshop on climate change in 2023 could
provide its outcomes to the joint workshop. This hybrid workshop is
currently being planned for September 2023 (CCAMLR-41
paragraph, 6.8).
SCAR presented the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
report to the Commission, reinforcing that climate change is already
having effects in the Convention Area, and highlighting that these
effects will have global implications as also recognised by COP26
and the ATCM. The Commission noted that the Scientific
Committee has incorporated climate change into its advice (SC-
CAMLR-41, paragraph 7.8) and through discussions at the SC-
Symposium (SC-CAMLR-41, Annex 11) has also added climate
change to the work plans and terms of reference of its working
groups (SC-CAMLR-41, paragraph 7.14)
The Commission discussed a proposal to establish time-limited
special areas for scientific study in newly exposed areas following
ice-shelf retreat or collapse, but some Members considered that a
more comprehensive plan for addressing ice-shelf collapse in other
areas should be
developed which may include developing research and monitoring
plans, as well as reporting requirements for each of the areas of
concern.
The Commission adopted Resolution 36/41 on climate change,
adding to its earlier resolution on climate change Resolution 30/
XXVII.
b. Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine
environment
The Scientific Committee considered a range of issues pertaining to
biodiversity within the spatial marine management and protected
areas agenda item. The CEP remains the lead body on the issue of
non-native species.
c. Antarctic species requiring special protection
The Scientific Committee and the Commission did not discuss
Antarctic species requiring special protection at CCAMLR-41.
d. Spatial marine management and protected areas
The Commission celebrated the five-year anniversary of the Ross
Sea region MPA and completion of the five-year reports on the
research and monitoring. Reported research to date comprised 460
projects related to all 11 MPA objectives, carried out collaboratively
(20 CCAMLR Members, 2 Acceding States and 7 Cooperating
Parties), with information accessible through the CCAMLR MPA
Information Repository (CMIR) (SC-CAMLR-41/BG/36, WG-
EMM-2022/37).
The Commission discussed the proposal to merge the management
plans for Antarctic Specially Protected 31 Area (ASPA) No. 152
Western Bransfield Strait and ASPA No. 153 Eastern Dallmann Bay
(SC-CAMLR-41, paragraphs 6.30 to 6.39), but did not reach
consensus as some Members considered that the proposal was a
major change and was not able to be evaluated with the
information provided (CAMLR-41 Paragraphs 5.1–5.5). However,
the Commission did endorse the revised management plan proposal
for ASPA No. 145 (CAMLR-41, paragraph 5.9).
The Scientific Committee and the Commission discussed progress
with the Domain 1 MPA (D1MPA) proposal (Antarctic Peninsula),
the Weddell Sea Phase 1 and 2 proposals, and monitoring activities
within the Ross Sea region MPA. No agreements on MPA proposals
were reached at CCAMLR-41. An extraordinary meeting of the
Commission was agreed to develop a roadmap to progress
discussions on MPA design, designation, implementation, and the
establishment of research and monitoring plans consistent with the
Convention and based on the best scientific evidence available
(CCAMLR-41, paragraphs 5.54 to 5.59). The meeting will be held in
Santiago, Chile from 19 to 23 June 2023.
e. Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
The Scientific Committee welcomed significant progress in
developing a risk-based management framework for the krill
fishery. The Scientific Committee agreed on updated biomass
estimates for a number of survey strata in Subarea 48.1, as well as
an updated model-based precautionary exploitation rate for krill.
These resulted in proposed precautionary catch limits by area in
Subarea 48.1 (SC-CAMLR-41, paragraphs 3.43 to 3.47). However,
the Scientific Committee also noted the high degree of uncertainty
in the estimates and potential impacts of new catch limits on krill-
dependent predators, especially given the impacts of climate change
and did not provide consensus advice on the use of these new catch
limits.
The Commission noted that further consideration was needed
regarding:
(i) the monitoring of catch limits at smaller spatial scales (SC-
CAMLR-41, paragraph 3.51)
(ii) the harmonisation and/or integration of different spatial
management initiatives within Subarea 48.1, including the ARK
voluntary restricted zones and the D1MPA proposal (SC-CAMLR-41,
paragraph 3.65)
(iii) future monitoring of krill biomass and other components of the
ecosystem, including fish by-catch, krill dependent predator species,
especially in data-limited areas such as the Gerlache Strait, and the
assessment of the potential impacts of the increased fishery on the
ecosystem (SC-CAMLR-41, paragraph 3.49).
The Scientific Committee endorsed a proposal to enhance the
CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) to provide
monitoring information needed to implement the spatial overlap
analysis for the krill fishery and suggested a staged approach, with
a focus day discussion to be held during WG-EMM-2023, followed
by a number of virtual workshops for 2024.
The Commission developed a workplan to progress a holistic
approach to management in Subarea 48.1, including with the
D1MPA proposal and the organisation of a collaborative CCAMLR
symposium integrating science, policy and industry (CCAMLR-41,
paragraph 4.18). In the meantime, the Commission agreed to carry
CM 51-04 and CM 51-07 forward to 2022/23.
CCAMLR has increased bycatch and ecosystem monitoring in the
Ross Sea through a new medium-term research plan. Information
from this data collection effort on fishing vessels will also inform
the Research and Monitoring Plan for the Ross Sea region Marine
Protected Area.
Several topics were progressed related to monitoring the ecosystem
effects of fishing:
The extrapolated number of seabird mortalities from provisional
data resulting from CCAMLR longline fishing in 2022 was the
lowest total on record.
The trial of mitigation devices for krill fishing vessels who use a net
monitoring cable was extended for an additional year.
CCAMLR and the International Whaling Commission established an
intersessional group on whale entanglement in the krill fishery, for
developing a data collection template and accompanying
instructions for vessels to report standardised data in the event of a
whale by-catch event and encouraged the further development of
technologies and mitigation measures to minimise the risk of
entanglement and by-catch of marine mammals.
The Commission endorsed the addition of eight new vulnerable
marine ecosystems (VMEs) in Subarea 48.1 to be included in the
CCAMLR VME registry.
The Scientific Committee and Commission welcomed the discovery
of an extensive nesting area of notothenioid icefish and
recommended two mechanisms that could be established to protect
fish nesting areas, however, consensus was not reached pending
additional work to develop the mechanism (CCAMLR-41,
paragraphs 4.89 and 9.14).
f. Marine debris
CCAMLR established the Marine Debris Monitoring Program in
1986, with the aim of monitoring the potential impacts of fishing
debris on the marine environment. In addition, CCAMLR holds data
on gear lost from fishing vessels, and marine debris noted by
CCAMLR Scheme of International Scientific Observation (SISO)
observers in logbooks and cruise reports.
The CCAMLR program uses three sources of data on marine debris
from several sources:
Data reported Member national research programs as well as
through Antarctic tour operators such as the International
Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO);
Debris reported by observers onboard longline and trawl vessels
within the Convention Area; and,
Lost fishing gear reported by vessels from longline fishing activities
in the Convention Area.
The data reported as part of the CCAMLR Marine Debris Program
should be independent of data reported via other mechanisms
associated with national programmes or via SCAR, however
CCAMLR would welcome efforts to coordinate, verify and integrate
data collected across programs to ensure a comprehensive view of
marine debris in the Convention Area can be developed.
Monitoring by national programs
Marine debris from beach surveys and from bird colonies have been
reported by eight CCAMLR Members from 15 different sites (many
of which align with CEMP sites also monitored by national
programs, WG-EMM-2022/38 Rev.2) since 1989 (Figure 1). Of the
surveys reporting debris, the most common debris items include
fishing line/hooks, pieces of netting, string, rope and various
plastics including bags and wrappers. Opportunistic reports
included observations of plastics, fishing gear, wood, glass and
other (or unspecified) items. There were two entanglements of sub-
adult Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) reported at Bird
Island in 2022, with both caused by fishing nets and with only one
of these able to be removed.
At some monitoring sites, levels of debris have been increasing
through time, with researchers reporting that a single annual or
monthly beach survey, and subsequent beach clean-up, is
insufficient. Various reports have also described fragments of plastic
(likely matching micro-plastic criteria), with some noting a high
degree of degradation.
Figure 1. Map of CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP)
site locations (orange circles) across the CAMLR Convention Area.
More detailed spatial information can be accessed here: https://
gis.ccamlr.org/.
Miscellaneous debris reported by CCAMLR scientific observers
Observers onboard both longline and trawl vessels complete an
observer cruise report, which includes three separate sections to
record debris lost at-sea while fishing or sighted/collected while
onboard. During the 2022 season, observers onboard longline
vessels predominantly reported line and hooks lost, while those on
trawl vessels generally reported loss of floats, ropes, plastic buoys,
and small pieces of nets (including gillnets), and in some cases
packaging materials.
Lost gear reported by longline vessels
A total of 330 975 hooks were reported lost attached to sections of
longline in 2022, equating to 512 km of line, the lowest in the time
series to date (Figure 2). The spatial distribution of total length of
line lost varied due to fishing effort (which is influenced by the
catch limits in those areas), and the different areas or habitats (e.g.,
effects of sea ice and bottom roughness, ignoring any differences in
longline gear-configuration related loss rates; Figure 3).
Figure 2. Total line lost (km) and proportion of bottom longline
gear deployed that was subsequently lost (%) between 2008 and
2022.
While the reasons for higher levels of gear loss are not always clear,
it can be a consequence of fishing floats being trapped and dragged
away by moving sea ice, or a result of strong currents over steep
and rocky habitats. Therefore, both spatial and temporal patterns
may reflect variation in seasonal ice conditions in some locations.
On a global scale, this level of gear loss appears to be very low
(<10%), with a study by Richardson et al. (2019) estimating that
29% of lines set around the world are lost every year. Continued
monitoring and mitigation of gear loss resulting from CCAMLR
fishery operations is an important part of ecosystem-based fishery
management, particularly in relation to quantifying levels and
sources of marine debris and impacts on the ecosystem.
Figure 3. The spatial distribution of lost gear reported by longline
fishing vessels in the Convention Area summarised as the total
kilometres of line lost per 5 000 km2 cell, 2008 – 2022.
