Contributions to the promotion and awareness of the care of
palaeontological heritage in the Antarctic region
Contributions to the promotion and awareness of the care of
palaeontological heritage in the Antarctic region
Information paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
This document reports on an Argentine initiative to promote visitor
awareness regarding Antarctic palaeontological heritage. Given the
growing increase in Antarctic tourism, the diversification of
activities and the landing in areas rich in fossil content, Argentina
considered the need to establish an appropriate awareness
mechanism to avoid the impact and preserve this scientific heritage
and natural resource, as well as contribute with the educational
contents of the visitors.
Introduction
Palaeontological studies constitute an important axis in the research
carried out in the Antarctic continent and the fossils obtained from
there allow carrying out significant studies to determine significant
data on issues related to climate change, palaeobiogeography,
palaeographic reconstruction and evolutionary analysis, among
others. In this discipline, field work is essential and must be carried
out with great rigour in order to obtain data that allows validating
scientific conclusions. Palaeontological heritage is unrepeatable
and, as such, each specimen is unique. However, not only is the
fossil piece itself important, but it is essential to maintain the
environment and the position in which this piece is found in the
stratum without alterations, so that improper manipulation can
cause loss of information or modify completely the information to
which the researcher accesses.
Given the growing increase and diversification of Antarctic tourism
activities with landings in areas rich in fossil content, where
curiosity about the unknown can lead to wanting to manipulate
these pieces, it is proposed to increase visitor awareness on issues
related to palaeontological heritage to avoid their disturbance at the
discovery sites and to minimise the impact on data collection by
scientists working in different areas. The importance of valuing and
protecting the fossil content even beyond the specially protected
areas (ASPA) or scientific sites of special interest, has a double
purpose: on the one hand, it promotes the conservation of
palaeontological resources and, on the other, it contributes to the
educational content of the shore excursions that visitors take.
By promoting a responsible visit to the Antarctic continent, through
raising awareness about the care and respect for palaeontological
heritage, it will be possible to minimise the cumulative impact,
unnecessary human disturbance and inappropriate collection of
fossil material, which is ultimately part of history of the continent
and of our planet. 
Background
As related background, it is important to note the Working Papers
(WP 57 and WP 50) presented by Argentina in CEP XVII (ATCM
XXXVII, 2014) and CEP XVIII (RCTA XXXVIII, 2015), respectively,
expressing its concern about the protection of fossils in Antarctica
as well as WP 9 presented by New Zealand, at the CEP IV (ATCM
XXIV, 2001). In the latter case, the importance of the protection of
Antarctic meteorites is raised, the debate on which gave rise to
Recommendation 3/2001.
For its part, the SCAR Environmental Code of Conduct on
geoscience research activities in the field in Antarctica (Resolution
1, 2021, Annex) describes fossils as finite scientific resources and
highlights the importance of their safeguarding.
Generally speaking, the CEP and the ATCM have exposed their
concern about the possible impact that tourism can generate in
Antarctica, mentioning the importance of education for the
dissemination of the values of Antarctica through different
provisions, particularly related to tourism. In this regard, it should
be noted that in the final report of ATCM XXXVIII (2015) “(t)he
Committee expressed concern about the commercial collection of
Antarctic fossils and other geological materials. The Committee
urged all Parties, national programmes and IAATO to take
appropriate measures to ensure that the collection of fossils and
other geological materials is carried out for scientific purposes only
and that such materials are properly archived for research
purposes” (# 212, p. 161).
In general terms, the Antarctic Programmes have a protocol and an
established methodology for the collection of fossils based on their
regulatory frameworks, but there are other ways of accessing
Antarctica, which involve personnel who may not have sufficient
information and whose activities may ultimately affect the ongoing
scientific studies. In particular, tourism in its various modalities
shows a growing trend, halted during the seasons affected by the
pandemic, but which has been reactivated during the last southern
summer season 2022-2023, where a significant increase was
observed in tourist flows in Antarctica.
Resolution 7 (2009), on the general principles of Antarctic tourism,
urges operators and Parties to cooperate “to disseminate best
practices in environmental management…” as well as to focus on
“activities aimed at enriching and educating visitors about the
Antarctic environment and its protection.” 
Proposal for protection through education for visitors
As the Antarctic Treaty provisions relating to visitor behaviour on
land are generally focused primarily on the protection of wildlife
and the guidelines for visitor sites have site-specific content, it is
considered appropriate and advisable to use an educational tool
that contributes to the generation of a positive behaviour towards
fossils as part of the Antarctic heritage. In this way, in accordance
with Resolution 7 (2009) on the general principles of Antarctic
tourism, it contributes to the generation of an instrument for
tourism and non-governmental activities in Antarctica in a
proactive way.
It is for this reason that Argentina has taken the initiative to
develop educational material for Antarctic visitors. This material,
within the framework of a collaboration between the University of
Tierra del Fuego and the National Directorate of the Antarctic-
Argentine Antarctic Institute, consists of a poster and a brochure, as
tools to raise awareness about a little-known heritage but which
represents significant aspects of the history of the Antarctic
continent.
This awareness will be carried out at the points where visitors are
in Ushuaia as the gateway city to Antarctica, as well as in the most
visited Argentine scientific stations in Antarctica. The posters will
be available in printed format in the boarding area of the port of
Ushuaia, at the Secretariat of Tourism Reports and at the National
University of Tierra del Fuego, together with a QR code that will
allow access to download a brochure with educational information.
It should be noted that the poster will also be available at the
Argentine bases, recalling the importance of not disturbing the state
of the fossil remains, since their environment is highly significant
information in scientific studies.
Argentina makes the attached brochure available and requests the
CEP to recognise its value and usefulness in raising awareness
among Antarctic visitors about the importance of protecting the
Antarctic palaeontological heritage through the promotion of
responsible tourism, and invites the Parties to make comments for
the improvement of this material during the intersessional period,
to share similar experiences at the next meeting and, if they
consider it pertinent, to use the brochure as a basis for the
preparation of their own dissemination material.
