The 4th Basic Plan for the Promotion of Research Activities in
Antarctica of the Republic of Korea (2022-2026)
The 4th Basic Plan for the Promotion of Research Activities in
Antarctica of the Republic of Korea (2022-2026)
Background
The government of the Republic of Korea has established the “Basic
Plan for the Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica”
(hereinafter referred to as the “Antarctic Plan”) every five years
since 2007. The Antarctic Plan was established pursuant to the “Act
on Antarctic Activities and Antarctic Environmental Protection”
(hereinafter referred to as the “Antarctic Act”) enacted in 2004. The
aim of the Antarctic Plan is to promote research activities in the
Antarctic and the Southern Ocean to contribute to the development
of science and technology that would help our understanding of
Earth systems.
The Antarctic Plan is a comprehensive and detailed five-year action
plan expressing the Korean government’s vision and strategy to
foster research activities in Antarctica, including setting goals for
scientific research, contributing to environmental protection, and
nurturing experts in Antarctic research. The 4th Basic Plan for the
Promotion of Research Activities in Antarctica is in effect from
2022 to 2026.
Vision and Goals
Vision
To become one of the leading countries in Antarctic research
Goals
Carrying out critical and emerging Antarctic research
Building competencies to respond to emerging global issues
Laying the groundwork for practicing leadership in Antarctic
governance
Strategy 1
Developing core competencies for critical Antarctic research
(a) Promoting inland Antarctic research
(b) Facilitating the development and application of technologies for
practical usage
(c) Developing convergence technologies for exploration
Strategy 2
Enhancing contribution to respond to global issues
(a) Building competencies to respond to climate change
(b) Expanding comprehensive research on the environment and
ecology for the protection of the Antarctic region
Strategy 3
Strengthening Korea’s role in Antarctic governance
(a) Leading international cooperation efforts
(b) Establishing a joint research platform for the industry,
academia, and research institutions
(c) Nurturing future researchers by implementing education and
outreach programs
Table 1 – Visions and Goals of the 4th Basic Plan for the Promotion
of Research Activities in Antarctica
The 4th Antarctic Plan lays out the Korean government’s core
Antarctic goals; carrying out future-driven Antarctic research,
building competencies to respond to emerging global issues, and
laying the groundwork for expanding contributions in Antarctic
governance. To achieve these vision and goals, the government
formulated three strategies to enhance scientific research activities
in Antarctica; developing core competencies for research, enhancing
contributions to respond to pressing issues, and strengthening
Korea’s role in Antarctic governance.
For the purpose of enhancing the Korean contribution to scientific
research activities in the inland Antarctica, the government has
identified the following priority areas; (1) expanding research in
Antarctic inland, (2) developing exploration technology to support
research, (3) observing and predicting climate and environmental
change, and (4) conserving the Antarctic and Southern Ocean
environment and ecosystem.
In addition, the government considers the following two issues
essential for building competencies in Antarctic research:
international cooperation for the purpose of enhancing scientific
research and the establishment of a platform for joint research
between industry, academia, and research institutions.
Strategy 1: Developing core competencies for critical Antarctic
research
For the purpose of increasing Korea’s contribution to scientific
research in Antarctica, the government has formulated a strategy to
reconstruct past climate conditions and predict future changes
through deep ice core and blue ice, and to establish a research
camp with mobile research facilities, ultimately aiming to establish
the third research station in inland Antarctica to enable improved
astronomical and space observation and glacial research.
Another research goal under this strategy is to analyse flora and
fauna which have adapted to extreme conditions, in order to
develop cold-resistant crops, new bio-materials, and
pharmaceuticals that can contribute to solving the problems faced
by humanity. An additional research goal is to make use of
Antarctic environmental conditions characterized by low
temperatures and ice for chemical studies in order to develop eco-
friendly purification technology and methods to synthesize new
materials.
The government plans to draw the subglacial topography of
Antarctica (BEDMAP) and use Korean satellites to acquire spatial
data to support inland research. Managing observation equipment
and collecting data are currently done manually, but unmanned
vehicles and communication technologies are being developed to
automate the process. These technologies minimize human
activities and the associated human footprint and reduce risk to
researchers.
Strategy 2: Enhancing contributions to respond to global issues
The Korean scientific community plans to stimulate research in
Antarctica that aims to enhance Korea’s contribution to responding
to global challenges such as climate change and environmental
conservation. Reconstructing past climate changes through research
on deep ice coring and glacial seabed coring in the Southern Ocean
will increase the accuracy of future climate predictions. These
predictions, coupled together with observation efforts, will help us
understand the extent to which global environmental change
impacts the Southern Ocean and its atmosphere, and the role of the
Antarctic climate in the global climate system, including sea level
rise caused by melting of Antarctic glaciers and ice sheets.
The Korean government plans to expand scientific research that
contributes to the protection of the Antarctic environment and
ecosystem, expand research on
pollution and human impact monitoring in the Antarctic Specially
Protected Areas (ASPA), and increase research in the Ross Sea
Marine Protected Area (MPA), so that the Republic of Korea can
fulfil its obligation to the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS). In
addition, the government will develop a long-term observation
system in order to enable prediction of future ecosystem changes in
Antarctic flora and fauna, including terrestrial and marine
organisms.
Strategy 3: Strengthening Korea’s role in Antarctic governance
The Korean government plans to expand its agenda-setting
competencies based on its scientific research achievements in order
to strengthen its responsibility and increase its contribution as a
Consultative Party of the Antarctic Treaty. For this purpose, Korea
will strengthen its activities in the Antarctic Treaty system, and
enhance international cooperation to develop international joint
research projects in the Southern Ocean.
Domestically, the government intends to further promote the shared
use of polar research infrastructure and establish a platform that
would reproduce Antarctic environment for research purposes to
enhance collaboration across research institutions, universities, and
industry. In addition, the government plans to establish and operate
an integrated polar information system to collect and manage the
data obtained through observation in the polar regions and create a
unified repository to enhance data accessibility and utilization.
The government plans to create Antarctic Forum to encourage
domestic and international discussion concerning the Antarctic. The
forum will encompass a conference where experts of the Antarctic
environment can discuss policy recommendations, an international
symposium where researchers will present their latest results, and
an outreach event that will connect the scientific community and
members of the public who are interested in Antarctica. There will
be continued efforts towards a postgraduate program specializing in
polar sciences, and an outreach campaign for the conservation of
the Antarctic environment.
Future of the Korean Antarctic Research Activities
The Republic of Korea plans to initiate full-scale research activities
on the Antarctic continent centered on its research infrastructure;
two year-round research stations (King Sejong and Jang Bogo), the
icebreaking research vessel Araon, and the construction of another
icebreaking vessel that will soon begin the first stage of design and
its scheduled to be deployed in 2027, and the Korean Antarctic
traverse (K-Route). Though the Korean Antarctic program currently
does not operate research station on the Antarctic inland, the
government is developing policy to utilize mobile research facilities
for research in the region. The Korean program also plans to
increase its contribution to research on the atmosphere, oceans, and
glaciers in order to respond to climate and environmental changes,
which are considered key issues under the Antarctic Treaty system.
In addition, Korea will increase its contribution to the protection of
the Antarctic environment by expanding research on the Marine
Protected Areas (MPAs) in the Southern Ocean and the Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). Through these activities, the
ROK will diligently fulfill its role as a Consultative Party to the ATS
and will contribute to addressing global challenges, including
climate change.
