Initiatives to Increase Accessibility and Inclusion in Antarctic
Research
Initiatives to Increase Accessibility and Inclusion in Antarctic
Research
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
Antarctic fieldwork, conducted within the United State Antarctic
Program, is carried out by researchers who can commit the time
and resources and are physically qualified to deploy to Antarctica.
Over decades, this strategy has created collections of samples, data,
and knowledge, while inadvertently excluding many researchers
from conducting Antarctic research. Recent initiatives in the United
States take a more holistic approach and specifically encourages
work in the less traditional (i.e., non-fieldwork) entry points into
Antarctic research. The intention of these initiatives is to open new
opportunities to include researchers that have historically been
excluded from participating in Antarctic research and to approach
Antarctic research in new ways. A beneficial consequence of these
strategies is a reduction in the environmental human impact,
including the carbon footprint inherent in Antarctic field research.
These new initiatives, while nascent, are strategies that all Parties
could consider for increasing inclusivity and accessibility in
Antarctic research. The United States encourages all nations to
share initiatives and successful practices aimed at increasing
accessibility and inclusion in Antarctic research.
Background
Within the United States, the National Science Foundation is the
manager of the United States Antarctic Program (USAP), which in
turn sets the expectations for conducting research in Antarctica for
U.S. researchers. Traditionally, the National Science Foundation has
focused its field research program on research that can best be done
in, on, or around Antarctica. Decades of investments in Antarctic
field research have developed generations of Antarctic experts and
created collections of information, data, samples, and results. From
the data and samples, the U.S. Antarctic scientific community have
developed foundational knowledge and understanding of
Antarctica, our world, and the universe.
In compliance with the Antarctic Treaty, all the samples and data
and results of the research efforts in Antarctica are required to be
stored, curated, and shared openly so that they may be used again
for secondary research. Physical sample collections reside in the
NSF-supported Oregon State University Marine and Geological
Repository, the National Science Foundation Ice Core Facility, the
Ohio State Polar Rock Repository, Bigelow National Center for
Marine Algae and Microbiota, and the Smithsonian Collections
(meteorites and invertebrates) and with open access data primarily
served through the USAP Data Center, University of Minnesota
Polar Geospatial Center, and the EarthScope Seismic and Geodetic
Archives, as well as other discipline-specific repositories. Historical
Antarctic data and samples archived in these repositories hold the
opportunity to unlock new insights and discoveries about the
Earth’s history.
Figure 1 – National Science Foundation Ice Core Facility curator
Curt La Bombard returns a core tube containing a section of the
GISP2D ice core back to main storage after fulfilling a recent sample
request. Photo Credit: Theo Carr
The time and resource burden required to collect samples and data
in the field are also hurdles that exclude many researchers from
accessing and participating in Antarctic research. This could be due
to competing workloads, care-giving responsibilities, health, or
various other priorities. The National Science Foundation has
developed and continues to develop strategies to break-down
barriers to accessibility and inclusivity. Over the past two years,
five new initiatives have been implemented to increase the
opportunities and accessibility for new researchers to engage with
Antarctic research in both traditional ways as well as new
pathways.
New Initiatives
The first of the five initiatives is intentional support for new
Antarctic research not requiring fieldwork. The new research grants
program for non-fieldwork proposals arose during the global
COVID-19 pandemic, a time that forced everyone, everywhere to re-
think strategies and priorities. This new research grants program
(NSF 23-508) is more responsive to and supportive of the research
community by providing funding opportunities when, for whatever
reason, travel may be restricted to Antarctica. Looking to the future,
when competing priorities could prevent a scientist from going to
Antarctica, this program offers a path to engage in Antarctic
research remotely.
The second is developing cohorts of early career researchers
through the Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF 22-635), the
AGU LANDInG Postdoctoral Fellowship Training Program, and the
Polar Science Early Career Community Office. Both the fellowship
and the community support programs encourage nonpolar
researchers to engage, offering opportunities to gain experience in
or connecting with polar research and providing professional
development and training specifically on diversity, equity, and
inclusion. This initiative aims to develop inclusive and diverse
leaders within the Polar research community and open pathways for
new partnerships in polar research.
A third initiative is encouraging reuse of existing data, rescuing
inaccessible data, and leveraging both physical and non-physical
samples (e.g., data, films, recordings, etc.) to
advance Antarctic research (NSF 21-041). The rich repositories of
Antarctic data and samples are significantly more accessible than
the Antarctic continent and sea floor. Capitalizing on existing work
is incredibly cost effective and can build a wider network of
researchers working on complicated Antarctic research topics.
The fourth initiative is encouraging the development and use of
open-source software, tools, libraries, and frameworks that are
critical for achieving polar scientific objectives (NSF 23-053). These
goals leverage the existing open data discussed above; by
supporting the cyber-infrastructure needed to reuse Antarctic data,
the United States aims to encourage broader participation in
Antarctic research. This is part of a larger effort by the United
States government to focus on 2023 as a Federal Year of Open
Science, which also aligns with the Antarctic Treaty’s intention of
“Freedom of scientific investigations in Antarctica and cooperation
toward that end...” Software tools, libraries, and frameworks are
playing increasingly prominent and impactful roles in Antarctic
research and the United States wants to elevate the importance of
the expertise required for this work.
The fifth initiative is supporting the development of engineering
and technological solutions uniquely suited for working in the icy
and underwater Antarctic environments (NSF 22-617). This
initiative highlights the importance of creating multidisciplinary
teams that bring together experts across science disciplines and
engineering fields. Increasingly, these emerging technologies are
being integrated into smart, autonomous platforms that can
remotely collect and transmit data year-round to open data
repositories. An additional element for this initiative has been to
bring members from engineering, technology, and Antarctic
disciplinary sciences research communities together to consider
how engineered and technological solutions, as well as enhanced
connectivity, might be used to increase the accessibility as well as
broaden participation in Antarctic research (Antarctic Subsea Cable
Workshop).
Conclusions and Next Steps
Together, these initiatives aim to increase the opportunities and
accessibility of Antarctic research to a greater population of U.S.
researchers. In addition, the focus on inclusion and accessibility via
reuse of previously collected data housed in open access
repositories and non-field research, will also reduce the human
impact inherent in Antarctic field research. Many of these strategies
can be employed by National Antarctic Programs in their current
and future support of Antarctic science. The United States will
continue to refine and improve initiatives and expectations for
Antarctic research to increase inclusivity and accessibility.
