Report on the Deaths of Four U.S. Citizen Tourists in Three
Incidents
Report on the Deaths of Four U.S. Citizen Tourists in Three
Incidents
Summary
Four U.S. citizens died in three separate incidents on tour
expeditions authorized by the United States, the Netherlands, and
Norway during the 2022-2023 season. Relevant agencies in those
governments are investigating the incidents. Other interested
parties, such as Portugal and Argentina, are closely monitoring the
incidents and investigations. The governments act under domestic
authority for all investigative activity. The governments may bring
recommendations to the ATCM if they identify reasonable actions to
increase tourism safety.
Brief Summary of the Preliminary Reports from the Incidents
On November 15, two deaths occurred when the inflatable boat
flipped in the shallow waters at 61°11.010’ S, 055°03.299’ W near
Elephant Island. The inflatable boat was operated from the World
Explorer by an experienced guide of Quark Expeditions and the
general weather conditions were sunny and calm. Passengers were
wearing cold-weather clothing but not clothing appropriate for
immersion in cold water.
The United States gave notice according to the Treaty Article VII (5)
through the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) for
Quark’s operations and Portugal is the country of registry for the
World Explorer. Its maximum passenger capacity is 172 and
maximum crew capacity is 135. The World Explorer was
commissioned in 2019.
On November 29, one death occurred when a rogue wave struck the
Viking Polaris operated by Viking Cruises at 56°31.229’ S, 066°08.2’
W as it crossed the Drake Passage outside of the Antarctic Treaty
area. The wave broke seven windows causing major damage to
some of the passenger cabins on the lower level.
Norway gave notice according to the Treaty Article VII (5) through
the EIES for Viking Polaris’s operations and is the country of
registry for the Viking Polaris. Its maximum passenger capacity is
378 and maximum crew capacity is 256. The Viking Polaris was
commissioned in 2022; the incident occurred on its fourth
commercial voyage while the ship was sailing toward Ushuaia,
Argentina.
On December 2, one death occurred after severe weather struck the
M/V Plancius operated by Oceanwide Expeditions. The tourist hit
his head on December 1 when the vessel was in stormy weather at
55°32.09’ S, 036°46.75’ W between South Georgia and the Antarctic
Peninsula outside of the Antarctic Treaty area and died the next
day. The vessel was too far from emergency medical support for
evacuation once ship staff learned of the severity of the passenger’s
injury.
The Netherlands gave notice according to the Treaty Article VII (5)
through the EIES for Oceanwide’s operations and the Netherlands is
its country of registry for the M/V Plancius. Its maximum passenger
capacity is 108 and maximum crew capacity is 40. The M/V
Plancius, formerly known as the HNLMS Tydeman, was
commissioned in 1976.
Next Steps
The countries will continue to rely on their domestic legal
authorities and follow their domestic procedures on the
investigations and anticipate sharing the final results with the
ATCM.
For the United States, the U.S. Coast Guard is investigating the
November 15 and November 29 incidents, supported by the U.S.
National Transportation Safety Board. The U.S. Coast Guard is
investigating the December 1 incident. They have briefed the U.S.
Department of State,
Environmental Protection Agency, and National Science Foundation
on the ongoing investigations. The U.S. Department of State has
updated its Travel Advisory for travel to the Antarctic Region
(https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/traveladvisories/
traveladvisories/antarctica-travel-advisory.html) to further
emphasize marine risks and limited emergency services available in
the region.
For Norway, the Norwegian Safety Investigation Authority has
launched a safety investigation into the November 29 incident. The
incident occurred outside the Antarctic Treaty Area, so the
Norwegian Polar Institute, which is the National Competent
Authority for the Environmental Protocol to the Treaty, is not
involved in this investigation. However, the Norwegian Polar
Institute does follow up on potential concerns regarding safety in
Antarctica.
For the Netherlands, Rijkswaterstaat, which is the National
Competent Authority of the Netherlands, will discuss the
circumstances regarding the December 2 incident with Oceanwide.
They will discuss the safety instructions and whether there is a need
to pay more specific attention to these safety instructions in the
licensing process.
