Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2022-23
Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators
2022-23
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty
Introduction
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
is pleased to report its activities to ATCM XLV.
IAATO focuses activities in support of its mission to advocate and
promote the practice of safe and environmentally responsible
private sector travel to Antarctica. Further information on IAATO,
its mission, primary activities and recent developments can be
found at: www.iaato.org.
Overview
Over the last three decades, IAATO has been committed to the
promotion of safe and environmentally responsible private sector
travel. This commitment has been unwavering through periods of
major growth and, recently, the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic.
IAATO’s membership totals 109 Members, comprised of 57
Operators and Provisional Operators and 52 Associates. IAATO’s
strength has been and continues to be its membership’s ability to
draw upon their own experience and the advice from other
stakeholders to address emerging challenges and evolve its
procedures and management when necessary.
After experiencing minimal activity in the 2020-21 season, the
2021-22 season saw a moderate resumption of operations though
COVID-19 challenges persisted. This modest restart did allow
Operators to deploy some new vessels; however, most Operators did
not run at full capacity. For the 2022-23 season however, Operators
did see a significant recovery in operations, though the passenger
numbers were not as high as initial estimates.
Through feedback from the Operators throughout the season, as
well as the National Competent Authorities and results from
IAATO’s Mandatory Observer Scheme (ATCM XLII - IP138), new
measures were agreed to at IAATO’s 2023 Annual Meeting in
Hamburg, Germany (24-27 April 2023). Additionally, a five-year
strategic plan was approved. These steps are important to fulfill
IAATO’s mission, and to ensure Operators’ activities have no more
than a minor or transitory environmental impact.
Further information on IAATO Operators’ activities can be found in
ATCM XLV IP056 IAATO Vessel Overview of Antarctic Tourism:
2022-23 Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2023-24 Season.
Internal communication between IAATO and its Operators
continued to be strong during the season. Feedback from the
Operators, especially around the implementation of special
biosecurity protocols to address concerns relating to highly
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), was also received. Utilizing
communications from Operators, feedback from the National
Competent Authorities and trends identified during the 25
observations conducted under IAATO’s Observer Program,
enhancements to existing operational procedures were presented to
IAATO’s members at the Annual Meeting and were approved.
The total number of visitors in the 2022-23 season was 104,897
which was less than the preliminary estimates provided at ATCM
XLIV. This was mainly the result of lower occupancy on the vessels
travelling to Antarctica.
Further information on IAATO tourism statistics, including activities
and nationalities, can be found in ATCM XLV IP053 A Five-Year
Overview and 2022–23 Season Report on IAATO Operator Use of
Antarctic Peninsula Landing Sites and ATCM Visitor Site Guidelines
and IP057 Deep Field and Air Overview of Antarctic Tourism:
2022-23 Season and Preliminary Estimates for 2023-24 Season. The
Membership Directory can be found at www.iaato.org.
IAATO Annual Meeting
IAATO’s 2023 Annual Meeting was held in Hamburg, Germany,
24-27 April 2023. Certain portions of this meeting were also live
streamed for members. After the pause due to the COVID-19
pandemic, IAATO was also pleased to have National Competent
Authority representatives attend the open sessions.
Actions at the Annual Meeting included:
Approval of IAATO’s five-year strategy, Embracing Our Role as
Stewards of Antarctica. This strategy is focused on four goals:
Operators as Stewards
Purposeful support of research
Deliberate resource management plan
Persistent proactive measures focused on sustainability
Additionally, seven short term actions for the upcoming year were
approved, including members further investing in IAATO and the
development of a site reporting program.
Adoption of Deep Field & Air Operator biosecurity procedures. See
ATCM XLV – IP052 IAATO Deep Field and Air Biosecurity
Procedures – An update.
Strengthening of various operational procedures for viewing
wildlife based upon feedback from the field and a National
Competent Authority. See ATCM XLV – IP051 IAATO Operational
Procedures for responsible wildlife watching – An update.
Development of two new geofenced areas around the South
Shetland Islands and the increased duration of the Gerlache Strait
geofenced zone for IAATO’s whale slow down program based upon
feedback received from the scientific community and IAATO
Operators’ monitoring during the 2022-23 season.
Approval of two new IAATO Visitor Site Guidelines - Red Rock
Ridge and President Head.
Approval of the engagement of a third-party vendor to assist in
supporting our commitment to our Climate Change pledge
(approved at the IAATO 2022 Annual Meeting) and evaluating our
carbon footprint.
Elevation of the Education and Outreach Working Group to a
committee – Antarctic Ambassador Committee; and creation of the
Scientific Support and Air/Cruise Working Groups. IAATO now has
12 committees and 9 working groups.
As always, Treaty Party Representatives are cordially invited to join
any of the open sessions during IAATO’s future Annual Meetings.
IAATO Support of Research & Conservation
IAATO encourages collaborative opportunities with scientific
organizations particularly where these enhance the Antarctic
community’s understanding of human activities in the region.
Projects include(d):
Avian Influenza (HPAI) Response – Prior to the start of the 2022-23
season, IAATO collaborated with COMNAP and SCAR to develop
biosecurity protocols to address the
concerns related to HPAI. These were communicated to IAATO
Operators in August 2022 and materials were developed to assist
with the education of field staff and guests related to these
protocols. See also ATCM XLV – IP101 Heightened Risk of Avian
Influenza in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
IAATO/COMNAP Fellowships – IAATO, in collaboration with
COMNAP, will continue to invest in the development of early-career
researchers by awarding its fifth US$15,000 Fellowship in 2023.
Suitable candidates are encouraged to apply. IAATO recognized two
fellows in 2022: Eduardo Pizzaro Gonzalez from the Pontifical
Catholic University of Chile and, jointly with COMNAP, Antonio
Polo Sanchez from Universidad de Salamanca in Spain.
IAATO/SCAR Systematic Conservation Plan – SCAR and IAATO
undertook a collaborative project to develop a systematic
conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula, aimed at facilitating
the concurrent management of biodiversity, science and tourism
(ATCM XLII – IP024; ATCM XL - IP166). See also ATCM XLV –
IP048 Systematic Conservation Plan for Antarctic Peninsula Project
Updates and Next Steps.
Support in Antarctica – IAATO Operator expeditions during the
2022-23 season were able to provide support for various scientific
projects, such as the Antarctic Site Inventory - Oceanites and
Penguin Watch. Many IAATO Operators also provided logistic field
support by air or vessel support to National Antarctic Programs.
Other Work and Activities
IAATO also continues to prioritise activities that strengthen its
institutional structure and help position it as a reputable, valued
partner in the wider polar community. In addition to the work
described above, over the past year, IAATO has:
Hosted 12 webinars for Field Staff at the beginning and end of the
2022-23 season to discuss best practices and lessons learned. These
webinars were recorded and made available for field staff who
weren’t able to attend the live session or wanted a refresher during
the season. They will become part of an education library available
for field staff and Operators. This practice will continue for the
2023-24 season.
Continued development of tools to support field staff when
delivering the Antarctic Ambassadors message to clients and further
executed on the Antarctic Ambassadors strategy through public
engagement in events such as the annual Antarctic Ambassadorship
Day.
Facilitated over 4,000 online assessments for field staff, crew and
office personnel which were successfully completed for the 2022-23
season.
In addition, IAATO Secretariat staff and Operator representatives
participated in internal and external meetings, liaising with Treaty
Party representatives, National Antarctic Program personnel, and
governmental, scientific, environmental, and industry organizations,
including but not limited to:
COMNAP Annual Meeting, online, June 2022, and participation in
COMNAP Expert Groups
Association of Arctic Expedition Cruise Operators (AECO)
Conference & Annual Meeting, October 2022
IMO Polar Maritime Seminar, November 2022
Workshop “The future of Antarctic tourism: towards a strategic
vision and policy program”, 8-10 March 2023, Paris, France
Tourism Incidents 2022-23
IAATO’s policy is to disclose major incidents to ensure risks are
understood and appropriate lessons are learned for all Antarctic
Operators. There were three incidents during the 2022-23 season
which resulted in the death of four individuals who were travelling
with IAATO Operators. This was felt not only by IAATO and its
Operators but also by many of our fellow Antarctic stakeholders
and IAATO appreciates their support during this time. These
incidents remain under active investigation and final reports will be
released in due course. Additionally, there was an incident with a
submersible trapped at the surface in brash ice for several hours.
Finally, directed by the Chilean MRCC, an IAATO Operator assisted
a fishing vessel in the Amundsen Sea, by providing lifesaving
medical assistance and evacuation services for an individual injured
during fishing operations.
IAATO is committed to reviewing all incidents, and taking
appropriate actions for updating operational procedures as needed.
With Thanks
IAATO appreciates the opportunity to work cooperatively with
Antarctic Treaty Parties, COMNAP, SCAR, CCAMLR, IHO/HCA,
WMO, ASOC and others toward the long-term protection of
Antarctica.
