Report on the 25th edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol
between Chile and Argentina - 2022/2023
English version provided by the authors
Report on the 25th edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol
between Chile and Argentina (PANC) – 2022/2023
Information Paper submitted by Chile and Argentina
Summary
This Information Paper, drafted jointly by Chile and Argentina,
provides information on the activities carried out during the 25th
edition of the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol in the 2022/23 Antarctic
Campaign.
Background
The Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol (PANC) began in 1998, when Chile
and Argentina recognised the need to coordinate their efforts in the
Antarctic SAR areas of responsibility of both Parties, established in
the “International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue” of
1979 (SAR Convention), which also requires cooperation and
coordination among neighbouring States.
Since its creation, the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol has performed its
activities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System
(ATS). For this reason, both countries have included the
participating vessels in their respective pre-season information,
notifying other Parties of its configuration.
Likewise, both Parties have permanently informed the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meetings about the PANC’s activities through
Information Papers (IP), providing details on support and rescues
carried out each season.
Mission, organization and assignments
The Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol is performed between November
15th and March 31st of each year, to conduct activities and
exercises of search, rescue, salvaging, pollution monitoring and
remediation, with the objective to safeguard navigation, human life
at sea and to contribute in keeping waters free from pollution, in
the Antarctic Treaty area, south of 60°S, between the meridians of
010°W and 131°W.
In order to execute the SAR missions in the area of the PANC
deployment, the SAR Coordination Centers (MRCC) in Ushuaia and
Punta Arenas have both Service and Antarctic support vessels and
other means at their disposal, so as to handle the emergencies that
might arise. Likewise, the secondary SAR Coordination Center
(MRSC) in Puerto Williams also provides support for ongoing
operations.
Aside from the fundamental purpose of the PANC, the Antarctic
Service Vessel performs the following complementary activities,
which are carried out insofar as they do not interfere with the
purpose of the patrol:
Aid to navigation: Meteorological support to the vessels and ships
navigating in the patrol area. As a mobile weather station, it
contributes with data for the elaboration of the area´s forecast
through the meteorological services of both countries.
Maintenance of maritime signaling for both countries within the
PANC area.
Medical assistance at sea: the units that integrate PANC have the
capacity to provide sanitary support of low level complexity, and
have a physician on board to take care of medical emergencies.
Support to the Antarctic scientific community through the transport
of personnel and/or scientific equipment between facilities or
stations.
Logistics: through the resupplying of facilities and stations of both
countries or from third Parties.
The “Southern Naval Area Command” (Comando del Área Naval
Austral), based in the city of Ushuaia, and the “Third Naval Zone
Chief Command" (Comandancia en Jefe de la Tercera Zona Naval),
located in the city of Punta Arenas, have the responsibility of
managing the Antarctic Joint Patrol in stages of approximately 34
and 35 days.
The efforts of the PANC during the 2022-2023 period were oriented
towards the following aspects:
Maritime safety:
Safety of navigation.
Observations on Antarctic cartography.
Maintenance, installation and updates for navigation aids.
Updates on radio communications and capabilities of the GMDSS.
Signals and false alarms COSPAS – SARSAT.
SAR cases and maritime assistance.
Presentation of maritime safety information (MSI), including
weather forecasts and meteorological and glaciological conditions
in real time.
Pollution
Observations on special prescriptions for the use or transportation
of fuels in the Antarctic area (MARPOL rule 43).
Pollution resulting from normal operations or from a collision,
stranding or sinking of vessels and platforms:
Pollution from hazardous bulk liquid substances.
Pollution from waste waters.
Pollution from solid wastes from vessels.
Atmospheric pollution generated by vessels.
Monitoring of pollution in shipwreck areas.
Exercises in pollution countermeasures.
Use of dispersants, absorbant materials, skimmers and containment
barriers.
Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol 2022/2023
The 25th edition of the PANC took place between 15 November
2022 and 31 March 2023. During the aforementioned period, the
MRCC of both navies permanently maintained an “Antarctic Service
Vessel” with Search and Rescue capabilities and the necessary
elements to control and combat pollution, in addition to another
vessel with similar characteristics as back-up. These ships where the
“Aviso A.R.A Puerto Argentino” and “Aviso A.R.A Estrecho de San
Carlos” of the Argentine Navy and the vessels “ATF Galvarino”, “AP
Aquiles”, and “ATF Janequeo” of the Chilean Navy.
The stages of the 25th PANC where as follows:
A. ALPHA (between November 15th and December 18th 2022)
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “Galvarino” - November 15th to
December 18th
Antarctic support vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino”-
November 15th to December 18th
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Support to Antarctic stations and operators, including transport of
personnel and general logistics.
Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility.
Season opening of Chilean stations in the Antarctic Peninsula
Technical meeting between the “Galvarino” and “Puerto Argentino”
crews
B. BRAVO (between December 19th 2022 and January 22nd 2023)
Antarctic service vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” -
December 19th 2022 to January 22nd 2023
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Galvarino” - December 19th 2022 to
January 22nd 2023
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility
Inspection of the F/V KAI XIN, F/V EXPLORER and Polar Vessel
A.R.A “Bahia Paraiso”
Medevac at sea: Yacht “Selma Expeditions”. 5 people were
evacuated from South Orkney Islands to Ushuaia.
C. CHARLIE (between January 23rd and February 26th 2023)
Antarctic service vessel: ATF “Galvarino” - January 23rd to
February 26th 2023
Antarctic support vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” -
January 23rd to February 26th 2023
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Support given to Antarctic stations and operators, including
transport of personnel and general logistics.
Maintenance work conducted on the existing maritime signalling in
the area of responsibility
D. DELTA (between February 27th and March 31st 2023)
Antarctic service vessel: AVISO A.R.A. “Estrecho de San Carlos” –
Feb.25 to March 5
AVISO A.R.A. “Puerto Argentino” – March 6 to March 31
Antarctic support vessel: ATF “Galvarino” – Feb 27 to March 7
AP “Aquiles” – March 8 to March 14
ATF “Janequeo” – March 15 to March 31
Highlighted activities:
Patrol and monitoring within the area of responsibility.
Hydrographic work and maintenance work conducted on the
existing maritime signalling in the area of responsibility
Support given to Antarctic stations and operators, including
transport of personnel and general logistics.
Inspection of wreckage of Polar Vessel A.R.A “Bahia Paraiso”
Final comments
The tasks carried out during the 25th PANC have once again shed
light on the importance of the joint efforts of Argentina and Chile in
support of the international Antarctic community that operates in
the aforementioned area of responsibility. In that sense, the results
of said joint efforts are supported by these figures:
Total nautical miles navigated: 17.123 NM
Time at sea: 111 days.
Total assistances: 28
Maritime traffic: Radio contact was established with 21 vessels in
SAR area, providing support to navigation and meteorological
information.
This joint effort by Chile and Argentina allows for the completion of
PANC and at the same time, contributes to a rational use of both
countries’ resources.
The intention of both countries is to continue conducting PANC
annually, thus contributing to the safeguarding of life at sea, safety
of navigation and the preservation of the Antarctic environment.
