Update on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
Update on the Southern Ocean contribution to the United Nations
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
Information Paper submitted by SCAR, Belgium, Netherlands and
WMO
on behalf of the Southern Ocean Task Force (www.sodecade.org/
about/) (coordinated by SCAR, and including the SCAR Antarctic
Biodiversity Portal, SOOS, EPB, ICED, SCOR, IODE, IAATO, WCRP,
CLIVAR, SORP, NIOZ, Pew Bertarelli, WWF, RBINS and BELSPO)
Summary
Following the publication of the Southern Ocean Action Plan in
April 2022, the Southern Ocean Task Force has both promoted the
Action Plan and worked to ensure the Southern Ocean has
appropriate representation within the UN Decade of Ocean Science
for Sustainable Development Framework. Having consulted with the
Decade Coordination Unit and other stakeholders, the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Task Force are
working to develop a Decade Collaborative Centre for the Southern
Ocean as it provides the best opportunity to facilitate collaboration
and coordination. These efforts represent an opportunity to connect
Southern Ocean science with global ocean science, reinforcing
cooperation and collaborations by Parties and NGO stakeholders
between the Antarctic region and adjacent regions, and
complementing Article III of the Antarctic Treaty.
The Southern Ocean in the UN Ocean Decade
The 2017 United Nations proclamation of the Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development 2021-2030 (hereafter referred
to as the UN Ocean Decade) called for international scientific
cooperation to improve and sustain global ocean health. In response
to the call, the SCAR-coordinated Southern Ocean Task Force (refer
to ATCM XLIII IP136 ATCM XLIII IP136 The Southern Ocean
contribution to the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development), comprising key members of the
international Southern Ocean stakeholder community developed the
Southern Ocean Action Plan (SO-AP) which was published in April
2022 (refer to ATCM XLIV IP107 ATCM XLIV IP107 The Southern
Ocean contribution to the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science
for Sustainable Development). This work built on contributions
from a wide range of Parties, Experts, and Observers participating
in series of Southern Ocean Decade Workshops, Open Surveys and
Working Groups, and UN Ocean Decade Laboratories, focussed on
the key Societal Outcomes for the UN Ocean Decade (see The
Southern Ocean Process).
Better understanding, management and protection of the Southern
Ocean is a key contribution to achieving the UN Ocean Decade
goals and addressing its challenges. The SO-AP guides Southern
Ocean and wider stakeholders in identifying and developing
tangible actions and deliverables to achieve the UN Ocean Decade
vision.
Facilitating international collaboration to deliver on the SO-AP
The launch of the SO-AP was followed by the hosting of a webinar
as a kick-off event, which was open to the entire community (see
recording here). This webinar presented the content of
the Action Plan and the future of the Southern Ocean community’s
engagement in the UN Ocean Decade.
The webinar was followed by two dedicated sessions at the UN
Ocean Conference (27 June – 1 July 2022) in Lisbon, Portugal (see
conclusions in IP035 Conclusions of the UN Ocean Conference 2022
in Lisbon, Portugal):
“From the Southern Ocean to the Arctic – a Call to Action via the
UN Ocean Decade” (organised by: European Polar Board (EPB) with
Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (RBINS); Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR); Southern Ocean
Observing System (SOOS); Scientific Committee on Oceanic
Research (SCOR); World Climate Research Programme (WCRP);
Climate and Ocean - Variability, Predictability, and Change
(CLIVAR); Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the
Southern Ocean (ICED); Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation
(FPA2)). See recording here.
“Polar Oceans: Engine to the Global Ocean - Messages and
Messengers” (organised by Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation,
Oceanographic Institute - Prince Albert I of Monaco Foundation,
Oceano Azul Foundation, SCAR, International Arctic Science
Committee (IASC), International Cryosphere Climate Initiative
(ICCI), EPB). Dr Sian Henley, representing both SOOS and the Task
Force, presented on the “Southern Ocean Action Plan and Arctic
Action Plan in support of the UN Decade of Ocean Science”. See
recording here.
The SO-AP was also presented at the All-Atlantic Ocean Research
Alliance Ministerial Meeting in Washington, DC in July 2022, at a
Side Event (“Research Cooperation from Pole to Pole”) that was co-
chaired by Renuka Badhe (EPB). The recording is accessible here.
Applying to become a Decade Collaborative Centre (DCC)
The main driver behind the decision to become a DCC is that, at the
time of writing, there were four UN Ocean Decade endorsed
projects that pertain to the Southern Ocean, along with further
relevant projects that the Task Force is aware of but which are not
yet formalised within the UN Ocean Decade context. More widely,
at least 29 endorsed actions of the UN Ocean Decade have some
connection to the Southern Ocean. However, an overall
coordination of these activities is lacking. The Decade Coordination
Unit (DCU) advised SCAR that, in seeking to coordinate a Southern
Ocean regional node in the UN Ocean Decade context, the most
suitable structure would be a DCC. Through the DCC, SCAR will be
able to create an international network for these groups to
communicate and collaborate and to integrate with future large-
scale projects such as “Antarctica InSync” (see below).
Furthermore, the Southern Ocean DCC (SO-DCC) will enhance
collaboration, promote the effective co-design of science, and
optimize the use of resources among the diverse stakeholders. It
will ensure the creation of synergies and links between existing
Southern Ocean Decade Actions, catalyse new actions, and enhance
technical and scientific capacity related to the Southern Ocean.
Following thorough feedback and communication with the DCU,
the SO-DCC application process was approved in principle by the
UN Decade Advisory Board in early 2023. This will allow SCAR and
the DCU to expedite the process of developing a mandate and
budget for the SO-DCC following extensive stakeholder engagement.
Activities that will fall under the SO-DCC umbrella will include
some already underway and others in active stages of planning. An
example of the projects that a SO-DCC would help coordinate is the
“Antarctica InSync” proposal (ATCMXLV IP059 International
Science & Infrastructure for Synchronous Observation (Antarctica
InSync)). This major international collaboration cites the SO-AP as
outlining the need for pan-Antarctic studies across a number of
scientific disciplines and envisages realisation through close
collaboration with the SO-DCC.
An important consideration for the process is the current Call for
Decade Actions (No. 05/2023), open until the end of August 2023,
and focussing on marine ecosystems and marine pollution. The aim
would be to work with those suitable Actions and Programmes
aligned with the SO-AP, with a strong emphasis on mobilizing
international collaboration.
Outlook
The next steps for the SO-DCC will be determined by its
stakeholders over the coming months while a full plan is being
collectively developed. As part of this, in collaboration with the
DCU, an explanatory webinar will allow stakeholders, including any
Southern Ocean Actions not currently represented on the Task
Force, to provide feedback and shape the SO-DCC mandate and
budget. As with the establishment of the Task Force and the
development of the SO-AP, considerations of equality, diversity and
inclusion will be of key importance for both the development of the
SO-DCC and the activities that follow. This reflects priority 13 of
the Strategic Working Plan calling for Parties to “Address equality,
diversity and inclusion issues, by promoting full participation of
underrepresented groups in Antarctic science in operations and
activities across all Antarctic issues, including science, operations,
policy and law".
The upcoming SOOS Symposium in Hobart, 14-18 August 2023,
includes activities that are being planned to support the UN Ocean
Decade effort, build on the SO-AP, and move from plan to action.
Specific elements include a Plenary session titled “Southern Ocean
in the global UN Ocean Decade” and two parallel sessions titled
“Observations to improve predictions of Southern Ocean ecosystems
in the global context” and “Taking the pulse of the Southern Ocean:
an internationally coordinated, circumpolar, and year-round
mission”.
The SO-DCC is expected to be operational in the course of 2023.
Part of its goals for its first year will be to identify sources of
financial and in-kind support to ensure that the SO-DCC can deliver
an effective service for the community.
In 2022, SCAR and its sister body in the Arctic, the International
Arctic Science Committee (IASC), announced their intent to
collaborate and participate in the proposed International Polar Year
(IPY) 2032-2033 (see also ATCMXLV IP050 Plans for a fifth
International Polar Year 2032-33). As the IPY is envisioned to be
the culmination of many years of dedicated activities, it will have
partially-overlapping timelines with the UN Ocean Decade.
Expanding the SO-DCC’s operational reach will include thematic
collaboration with the IPY, with the goal of amplifying science
outcomes and public awareness about the importance and impact of
this science. The IPY will provide an opportunity to ensure that the
progress achieved by the UN Ocean Decade is maintained and
enhanced further.
In the longer term, it is hoped that the SO-DCC will support future
endorsed Decade Actions relating to the Southern Ocean with
capacity development, communications, tracking of progress and
resource mobilisation. The SO-DCC will also act as a hub for
catalysing new partnerships and initiatives as part of the Decade
and build on the existing solid foundation of the SO community.
