Report of the management group for Antarctic Specially Managed
Area (ASMA) No. 4 Deception Island for the period 2022/23
Report of the management group for Antarctic Specially Managed
Area (ASMA) No. 4 Deception Island for the period 2022/23
Summary
This paper highlights the discussions held during the informal
meeting of the Deception Island Management Group (DIMG) that
occurred in the margins of the XLIV ATCM (2022). The aim of these
informal meetings is to exchange information, try to improve the
management of Antarctic Specially Managed Area Nº 4, Deception
Island, and share information on actions that have occurred during
the intersessional period.
Background
Deception Island (latitude 62°57’S, longitude 60°38’W), South
Shetland Islands, is a unique Antarctic island with important
natural, scientific, historic, educational and aesthetic values. An
area of 98.5 km2 encompassing Deception Island, Port Foster, and
several small outlying islands was formally adopted as Antarctic
Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). The
Management Plan has been revised by Measure 10 (2012) and
Measure 10 (2019). The next review of the current ASMA No. 4
Management Plan shall commence by 2024.
The Management Group is formed by representatives from the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties of Argentina, Chile, Norway,
Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States. The Antarctic and
Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) and the International Association
of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) act as advisors to the group.
Spain is currently chairing the group and Norway will take over this
role for two years commencing at the close of XLIV ATCM.
Topics discussed during the 2022 meeting in Berlin included:
the planned ASMA Management Plan review by 2024;
the status of the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) Nº 140
and Nº 145 Management Plan reviews submitted to XXIV CEP
(2022);
an update on the works done at Gabriel de Castilla Station to
stabilise the coast erosion; and
the status of the Deception Island website and the current situation
and seismic-volcanic surveillance network of the Deception Island
volcano.
Review of the ASMA Management Plan and Management Plans of
ASPAs Nº 140 and Nº 145
The revised Management Plan of ASPA No 140 ‘Parts of Deception
Island, South Shetland Islands’ was considered by the CEP who
recommended its adoption. The revised Management Plan for ASPA
No 140 was approved through Measure 15 (2022).
The revised Management Plan for ASPA No 145 ‘Port Foster,
Deception Island, South Shetland Islands’ was reviewed by the CEP
Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) that recommended
its adoption. After differing understandings of the requirements of
Decision 9 (2005), the CEP concluded that the revised Management
Plan should be submitted to CCAMLR for approval before
forwarding to the ATCM for adoption. The revised Management
Plan for ASPA No 145 was presented to CCAMLR-41(2022) and was
approved by the Commission. The revised Management Plan for
ASPA 145 will be resubmitted for potential adoption at ATCM XLV.
Situation of coast erosion at Gabriel de Castilla Station
Since the 2019-2020 campaign, certain works at the Gabriel de
Castilla Station have been carried out to stabilise and mitigate coast
erosion. Apparently, the actions have been successful, and it seems
that the erosion has been restrained. There was a general agreement
within the management group that this circumstance could be
considered one of the effects of climate change and may be
occurring in other Antarctic locations. It was suggested that this
stabilising action could be usefully applied at other stations where
similar erosion processes are taking place.
Deception Island web page
The webpage has not been updated in many years and much of the
information is now out of date. During the 2023/24 intersessional
period we plan to undertake a review of the website, including
making an assessment of the utility of the content and to get an
understanding of how much it is used and discuss the possibility of
the Treaty Secretariat hosting the web page that includes all
documentation and regulations approved for the island in a simple
and accessible way, before making a recommendation on the most
appropriate way forward to the DIMG in 2024.
Situation and surveillance network of Deception volcano.
The volcanic surveillance network of Deception Island has been
expanded, old equipment has been renewed and the seismic
network has been completed. The new sensors are transmitting data
in real time and it is hoped that this date reporting will continue
during wintertime when the Spanish Antarctic Station Gabriel de
Castilla is closed. IP99 explains in detail the updates of the
surveillance system. There is a proposal from COMNAP to open a
technical working group in the Peninsula region (IP85), with the
aim of exploring the situation in larger scale.
Apart from that, Argentina, through the Servicio Geológico Minero
Argentino, started a Volcanic Monitoring Project whose main
objective is the deployment, operation and maintenance of a
permanent instrumental network for real-time monitoring of
volcanic activity on Deception Island, in order to provide relevant
information that can help mitigate the volcanic risk on the island.
In the short term, a seismological, geodetic and visual monitoring
network will be installed with real-time data transmission to the
mainland. The medium-term objective is the implementation of
automatic supervised monitoring, evaluation of activity status and
issuance of activity reports. Based on this work, Spain and
Argentina created the Seismological Network for Surveillance of the
Deception Volcano, which improves the monitoring networks of
both countries. IP XX explains in detail the work carried out.
Other topics
The DIMG has concern about the potential for oil spills to occur in
the caldera far from the stations’ area of influence. Argentina and
Spain are working jointly to review their oil spill preparedness and
will prepare a joint contingency plan if necessary, providing
recommendations to non-governmental operators.
During the austral summer 2022-2023 IAATO reported three
incidents involving IAATO Operators that occurred within the
ASMA No. 4 Deception Island. These three incidents have been
reported to the relevant National Competent Authority (NCA). Two
involved lost anchors or anchor chains. The third incident resulted
when a passenger did not follow the Site Guidelines for Visitors No.
17 (Whaler’s Bay) and climbed atop a water boat in area 14 of the
SGV.
