Summary of SCAR’s Strategic Plan 2023-2028
Summary of SCAR’s Strategic Plan 2023-2028, “Urgent Messages
from the South: Antarctic and Southern Ocean Science and Policy”
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)'s new
Strategic Plan 2023-28, “Urgent Messages from the South: Antarctic
and Southern Ocean Science and Policy”, focuses on the climate
crisis and the role of SCAR as the leading scientific organization on
Antarctica.
Summary of SCAR’s Strategic Plan 2023-2028
SCAR’s vision is to create a lasting legacy of Antarctic science and
knowledge to provide a sustainable future for our planet. For more
than six decades, SCAR has sought to establish a more complete and
detailed understanding of the most critical elements of the Antarctic
and Southern Ocean's physical, chemical and biological systems,
and how they are interconnected.
Every five years, SCAR updates its Strategic Plan. While the mission
of SCAR has remained largely unchanged, the context within which
SCAR strives to realize its mission and vision has significantly
changed, and changes are accelerating. SCAR must adapt to the
environment within which it operates and as such renews its
strategic approach on a five-year cycle. The new plan for
2023-2028, “Urgent Messages from the South: Antarctic and
Southern Ocean Science and Policy”, along with SCAR’s climate-
focused Scientific Research Programmes (SRPs) launched in 2021,
and the “Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment: A Decadal
Synopsis and Recommendations for Action” (ACCE Update)
published in 2022, will serve as the three main pillars of SCAR's
climate research for the next five years.
The urgency of the climate crisis is summarized in the SCAR’s ACCE
update presented to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties at the
XLIV Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in May 2022 ATCM
XLIV IP072 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment - A
Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for Action, attachment
ATT111, and its policy and research recommendations serve as a
framework for SCAR’s new plan.
SCAR will focus on seven main objectives over the next five years:
Objective 1 - Promote SCAR’s leadership in science by strengthening
and expanding high-quality collaborative, visionary and societally-
relevant research through international partnerships; address the
globally urgent priority to reduce uncertainty in the projections of
the contribution of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to global mean sea-level
rise; continue to explore how processes in lower latitudes influence
and feedback to the southern polar regions and vice versa; and
encourage national Antarctic programmes to support research in
such topics as well as in terrestrial and marine biodiversity at the
population, species, and community levels.
Objective 2 - Provide independent scientific advice to the Antarctic
Treaty System and other international bodies in response to science
and knowledge needs identified by policy- and decision-makers.
Continue to bring to the attention of policy-makers expected
changes in the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean and communicate
the urgency of the
need for additional research to narrow uncertainties about
cryospheric change, its rate, and the implications for society.
Objective 3 - Encourage and facilitate unrestricted and free access
to Antarctic research data and samples in support of all the above
objectives.
Objective 4 - Enhance and expand research capacity in SCAR
member countries, recruit new members, and encourage the
support of research that addresses the above imperative.
Objective 5 - Increase and improve public awareness and
understanding of Antarctic issues and the essential role of
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean in the Earth’s climate system
through communication of the outcomes of Antarctic and Southern
Ocean climate change-related research and why this research is
essential for policy-makers and informed environmental
conservation, protection, and management.
Objective 6 - Ensure equality, diversity, and inclusion (EDI)
principles to all SCAR activities and actions, including SCAR
management, structure, and realisation of SCAR’s missions and
vision.
Objective 7 - Encourage carbon footprint reduction in SCAR
research activities and SCAR meetings, and continuously monitor
conformity to ISC’s International Science Council - https://
council.science/publications/sustainability-principles/
Sustainability Principles.
SCAR will accomplish the above objectives by taking the following
actions (non-exhaustive):
Support the Scientific Research Programmes (SRPs) and disseminate
their key scientific and policy outcomes.
Advance recommendations from the “Antarctic Climate Change and
the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for
Action (ACCE)” and update the SCAR Horizon Scan to identify
research-focus areas.
Foster interdisciplinary and cross-cutting research, especially
integrating social sciences and humanities.
Engage the international Antarctic science community through new
initiatives, grassroots actions, and multinational, multidisciplinary
Scientific Research Programmes.
Liaise with national Antarctic programmes, international
organizations, and programmes to identify common research
priorities, promote SCAR science products, and foster
collaborations.
Enhance the biennial SCAR Open Science Conference and expand
the diversity of themes for SCAR symposia to highlight Antarctica's
role in the global system.
Encourage the use of remote technologies to enhance data
collection, reduce costs, broaden participation, and reduce
environmental impact.
Address human impacts on Antarctica by translating knowledge
into policy-ready formats and clear messaging.
Publicize and reward excellence in SCAR research through medals,
fellowships, and scholarships.
Provide scientific advice and strengthen relationships with
international agreements, organizations, and initiatives.
Respond to information requests and provide policy and research
recommendations to policy bodies and national Antarctic
programmes.
Manage the Antarctic Environments Portal to deliver concise
science summaries for policy-makers.
Establish a mentoring programme and partner with organizations to
promote involvement of early-career researchers in SCAR.
Engage with SCAR subsidiary groups to enhance the community's
understanding and awareness of EDI issues.
SCAR rededicates itself to its founding values and will undertake its
role as a trusted provider of scientific advice in and about
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. SCAR will facilitate
international collaboration and cooperation in research and
promote capacity development, and the resources that enable such
development, while optimizing engagement and synergy with
partners in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean community and
beyond.
The full version of SCAR’s Strategic Plan 2023-2028 is available
online: (https://www.scar.org/strategic-plans/5912-scar-strategic-
plan-2023-2028/file/)
