Addressing critical knowledge gaps identified by the IPCC in
Antarctica’s future contribution to sea level rise by international
collaboration
In support of WP39
Addressing critical knowledge gaps identified by the IPCC in
Antarctica’s future contribution to sea level rise by international
collaboration
Summary
ATCM XXL WP0039 DML-RINGS and Enderby Land RINGS –
opening extensive international collaboration to close critical data
gaps for sea-level projections (Norway, Germany, Australia,
Belgium, China, Finland, India, Japan, Sweden, United States)
suggests that Parties lend their support to the pan-Antarctic RINGS
initiative and encourage coordinated regional efforts to close data
gaps, using the DML and Enderby Land effort as a useful example
and test case for the broader Antarctic needs. This Information
Paper provides further information about the societal and scientific
rationale of the RINGS initiative, as well as information about the
regional efforts initiated to contribute to RINGS and points to
further published information related to this.
The bed topography at the Antarctic margins and its link to sea
level rise
The Antarctic Ice Sheet is the largest freshwater mass on Earth,
holding a volume of water equivalent to 58 meters of global sea
level rise. Accurate projections of the future evolution of the ice
sheet are essential for mitigating potential risks to people and
infrastructure along continental coastlines and on low-lying islands.
The bed topography around Antarctica’s margins fundamentally
affects the dynamics of ice flow and the vulnerability of glaciers and
ice shelves. Warm ocean water is routed under the ice shelves and
melts the base of the ice shelf near the grounding line (see the
illustration). It may trigger the retreat of the grounding line and
acceleration of the ice discharge. These processes largely depend on
the bed topography under the ice. For example, seabed valleys
under the ice shelves may act as a highway to deliver warm ocean
water to the grounding line. Small bed bumps near the grounding
line may act as a stopper of initial retreat. Mapping such features is
fundamentally important to predict the future of the Antarctic Ice
Sheet in the coming centuries. Despite its importance, the bed
topography around Antarctica’s margins remains poorly known.
Nearly three quarters of the ice-sheet margin comprises floating ice
shelves. When ice is discharged across the grounding line to the ice
shelf, it contributes directly to sea level rise. Quantifying the ice
discharge from the ice sheet to the ice shelf therefore requires
accurate measurements of ice thickness and flow speed at the
grounding line.
Whereas ice thickness can change relatively rapidly, the elevation
of the bed does not change significantly over decadal timescales. So
once the bed topography is measured, future thickness changes of
the grounded ice as well as flow speed can be monitored with ice
sheet surface elevations measured by satellites.
The emerging SCAR initiative RINGS aims to measure bed
topography using airborne radar and gravimeter and to collect
other key data to characterize the coastal regions all around
Antarctica. It is multi-disciplinary science that can be made as an
integrated effort of science and logistics and has a direct and
immediate impact for the society.
Fig. 1. The grounding line, where ice on land meets the ocean and
begins to float, is retreating or will retreat in many regions of
Antarctic Ice Sheet, primarily because of ocean-induced melting
under floating ice shelves. Grounding line retreat is governed by the
interplay among ocean circulation, ice dynamics, and bed
topography; areas where ice recedes over a retrograde slope, as
depicted here, may be especially vulnerable. Credit: National Snow
and Ice Data Center, NASA
Collecting bed topography data from airplane
We are not yet capable of measuring ice thickness and bed
topography with satellite-based instruments, so large-scale bed
topography under the ice is still measured by airborne radar. Local
features are also measured by ground-based radar surveys.
However, radar does not always detect the bed clearly in
challenging cases, such as when the ice surface is highly crevassed
or when the ice lies in deep and steep valleys. In such cases, gravity
data measured from airplanes can be inverted to estimate bed
elevation and ice thickness.
Analysis done in context of the RINGS initiative has revealed poor
data coverage in coastal regions. Only 12% of the grounding line is
within 1 kilometer of a radar data point; nearly 50% of the
grounding line is not within 6 kilometers of a data point, and about
28% of the grounding line is not within 20 kilometers of a data
point. Data coverage is better for fast-flowing glaciers than for slow-
moving ice in many regions, but even for glaciers that are well
studied, data are not always available continuously along the
margin. The reason is that radar data are often collected along ice
flow lines, rather than across the glacier, for ice flow modeling
purposes.
Fig. 2. Plotting proportions of the Antarctic Ice Sheet margin (i.e.,
at the grounding line) according to the proximity of the nearest
radar-measured bed elevation data point shows that
only 12% of the margin currently has at least one data point within
1 kilometer and nearly 28% of the margin has no data points within
20 kilometers (left). Data availability varies considerably by region
(right), with some East Antarctic regions standing out for their
sparsity of data (e.g., at one o’clock and two o’clock in the
diagram). Even in the region including the relatively data rich
Amundsen Embayment (eight o’clock), nearly a quarter of the
margin has no data within 5 kilometers. Source: Matsuoka et al.
(2022)
Closing the gap through RINGS
SCAR RINGS is an international initiative that aims to collect a
comprehensive airborne data set from the Antarctic Ice Sheet
margin to better estimate ice discharge and sea level contributions
today and in the future. RINGS aims to organize individual efforts
to carry out three vital rings of pan-Antarctic surveying. The
primary survey will follow the grounding line around the perimeter
of Antarctica, and the other two will cover the seaward and
landward sides of the grounding line. Completing the RINGS
surveys will require an international, pan-Antarctic collaboration
that integrates existing and novel technical and logistical
capabilities of numerous countries.
There is an ongoing effort to carry out regional surveys in Dronning
Maud Land and Enderby Land. These two regions are adjacent to
each other but serve as distinct examples from which lessons can be
taken to plan RINGS surveys in other regions. Many nations actively
work in Dronning Maud Land and already have strong collaborative
relationships. Also, there is ample of data in this region, which can
be used to guide our further study to develop a comprehensive
dataset. On the other hand, Endebry Land is the largest data gap in
the context of RINGS (see the histogram and map above), and there
has been very little survey efforts historically speaking. It requires
to develop new collaboration between nations and starts the RINGS
effort with reconnaissance surveys that lead to more comprehensive
surveys in later seasons. These efforts are coordinated between
scientists and logistics specialists based on lessons from previous
regional surveys.
Further information
For further information about the societal and scientific rationale of
the RINGS initiative, as well as information about regional efforts
initiated to contribute to RINGS see:
Matsuoka, K., R. Forsberg, F. Ferraccioli, G. Moholdt, and M.
Morlighem (2022), Circling Antarctica to unveil the bed below its
icy edge, Eos, 103, https://doi.org/10.1029/2022EO220276.
Published on 15 June 2022.
RINGS whitepaper RINGS: Collaborative international effort to map
all Antarctic ice-sheet margins: https://www.scar.org/library/
science-4/physical-sciences/rings/5768-white-paper-2022or
https://zenodo.org/record/6638327#.ZBwf43bMK70
Enderby Land RINGS whitepaper International collaboration is
urgently needed for airborne surveys in Enderby Land to fill the
largest RINGS data gap: https://www.scar.org/library/science-4/
physical-sciences/rings/5919-white-paper-2023/ or /https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7818281
