State of conservation of the Casa Moneta Museum (HSM N°42)
English version provided by the author
State of conservation of the Casa Moneta Museum (HSM N°42)
Information paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
The Casa Moneta Museum is located at the Argentine Orcadas
Station, in an Antarctic Specially Protected Area on Laurie Island. It
is the first Argentine installation in Antarctica and receives its name
in homage to the Captain of the National Meteorological Service
Manuel Moneta, who was part of the Argentine expeditions to the
Antarctic continent in 1923, 1925, 1927 and 1929.
Currently, each element of the house is affected by different types
of deterioration that may cause significant damage to its structure.
This document summarizes what was observed in the last Antarctic
campaign by the researchers of the Argentine Antarctic Program.
Introduction
Casa Moneta is located in the Argentine Station “Orcadas”, on
Laurie Island, between Bahía Uruguay and Bahía Scotia. It was built
in 1905 and for 34 consecutive years served as a house for the staff
of different expeditions, being the first permanent Argentine
establishment in Antarctica.
After its recognition as a building of patrimonial value, the House
underwent important modifications that began in 1992 through the
MUSEOANTAR 1991 project to rehabilitate it as a museum house.
The current diagnosis and conservation work at the Moneta
Museum and the Omond house are part of a series of actions carried
out by personnel from the Naval Museum of the Argentine Navy
from the beginning of the 21st century, and since 2019, also the
staff from the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA).
The Casa Moneta Museum is protected by the Antarctic Treaty
System as Historic Site and Monument N° 42, as well as by
Argentine legislation that designates it as a National Historic Site. It
is an Antarctic construction of the "heroic age", being essential for
the study and exploration of Antarctica. Therefore, as
administrators of the HSM, ensuring its preservation for future
generations is an important responsibility.
State of conservation - Diagnosis
Within the framework of the Historical Heritage Project of the
Argentine Antarctic Program, under the leadership of the
Coordination of Social Sciences, Communication and Outreach of
the Antarctic Institute (IAA), and in cooperation with the Naval
Museum of the Argentine Navy, a diagnosis of the state of
conservation of the Casa Moneta Museum was carried out during
the Summer Antarctic Campaign 2022-2023, which consisted of a
visual examination and a photographic survey of the building. In
addition, archive files with historical photographs and reports of the
house were analysed in order to identify different building
interventions and to develop a chronology of the problems that
affected it over time
In addition, a survey was carried out to determine the structural
changes of the house, which consisted of a description of the
construction profile, image-taking with a thermographic camera
and the collection of internal and external humidity and
temperature data of the house, plus a graphic and 3D survey. Both
survey works are essential for the development of research and the
preservation of Antarctic heritage architecture.
During said interventions researchers studied the biological attack
suffered by the building, its various constructive problems and the
diverse risks and damages affecting materials and structures.
In the photographs taken with the thermographic camera they
could identify areas that were colder than others, mainly located in
the upper and lower sectors of the house and associated with water
leaks from the roofs and non-drained water around the floor of the
exterior area.
The direct observation of the structure carried out in 2023 rendered
the conclusion that the parts of the house intervened in 1927/1928
had construction panels different from those used in 1905, due to
differences observed in the materials used in ceilings, floors and
walls.
Added to the variety of materials mentioned above is the use -in
different sectors and at different times not always specified- of raw
materials such as wood, metal, textiles, concrete and different
covering materials. Currently, construction elements are affected by
specific biophysical deterioration that could presumably worsen due
to the extreme climatic conditions associated with the Antarctic
environment and cause significant losses. Said losses could be
prevented with the development of conservation and restoration
actions that would improve long term conservation of the house-
museum and contribute to keeping its integrity and patrimonial
value.
Future plans
In the coming months, the IAA microbiology laboratory will
collaborate with the project by processing micro-samples of wood to
analyse wood deterioration. Later, action proposals will be put
forward depending on the biodeterioration identified. Also,
desirable humidity and temperature parameters will be established.
Likewise, data collection of humidity and temperature in the house
throughout the year will be used as a comparison and enhance the
feasibility of the project.
Based on the surveys and the results of the analyses described
above, a preventive conservation plan will be designed according to
the current diagnosis. This plan will be in charge of the
Coordination of Social Sciences, Communication and Outreach of
the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA) in coordination with the
Naval Museum of the Argentine Navy. This plan will probably
include standards for control and adequacy of electrical installations
and the measurement of humidity and temperature parameters for
the conservation of architecture and internal objects, among other
measures such as non-aggressive cleaning techniques and placement
of UV filters on windows. The guidelines on visitor management
will also be reviewed, in coordination with the Environmental
Management and Tourism Program of the National Antarctic
Directorate (DNA).
Conclusion
As can be derived from the initial diagnosis, various biophysical
risks were noted on the Casa Moneta heritage site, which are
somehow reinforced by the effect of climate change. In this sense, it
would be beneficial to establish synergies with the Committee’s
Climate Change Response Work Program (CCRWP). Most likely,
information gathered can constitute a strategic input for decision-
making in this specific case, as well as for progress in terms of good
practices related to policies to counteract the affectation of cultural
assets by change. climate change, which will be reflected in the
Preventive Conservation Plan.
References
• Aldazabal, V. y Pereyra, P. (2001). Proyecto Centenario de la
instalación argentina en la
Antártida (1904- 2004). Recuperación y puesta en valor de las
instalaciones de Omond House -1003- y Casa Moneta -1905-.
Informe de tareas realizadas.
• Barr, S. (2021). Como hablamos del patrimonio cultural antártico.
Antarctic Affairs, 8,
33-52.
• Cronyn, J. M. (2003). Elements of archaeological conservation.
Routledge.
• Gaiser, R. F., Robles, C. A., Kobashigawa, J. M., Pereira, S y
Skronski, N. (2021). Mycobiota associated to Casa Moneta Museum
wood, South Orkney Islands, Antarctica. Polar Biology, 44 (9),
1817-1831.
• IRAM Instituto Argentino de Racionalización de Materiales. Norma
sobre
acondicionamiento térmico de edificios, 1996. IRAM 11603:
“Acondicionamiento térmico de edificios. Clasificación
bioambiental de la República Argentina”.
• IRAM Instituto Argentino de Racionalización de Materiales. Norma
sobre acondicionamiento térmico de edificios, 2000. IRAM 11625:
“Aislamiento térmico de edificios. Verificación de sus condiciones
higrotérmicas. Verificación del riesgo de condensación de vapor de
agua superficial e Intersticial en los paños centrales de muros
exteriores, pisos y techos de edificios en general”.
• Martínez, C. (2017). Informe sobre tareas de mantenimiento en la
base Orcadas. DNA.
• Moneta, J. M. (1949). Cuatro años en las Orcadas del Sur. Peuser.
• Roucco, M. I. y Del Valle, R. A. (2003) Tsunami tectónico en las
islas Orcadas del Sur
de la Antártida Argentina.
• Sinner, C. E (2023). Riesgo de condensación superficial e
intersticial. Recomendaciones
para la conservación estructural y constructiva. IAA-DNA
• Skronski, N. (2016). Reporte de condición casa Moneta. Armada
Argentina.
• Zarankin, A., Salerno, M., y Perosino, M. C. (2012). Arqueología y
violencia política. Historias desaparecidas: arqueología, memoria y
violencia política. Brujas.
