Antarctic Environments Portal
Antarctic Environments Portal
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The Antarctic Environments Portal is a web-based resource whose
primary aim is to support the work of the decision-making bodies of
the Antarctic Treaty System, and in particular the Committee on
Environmental Protection, by providing impartial and up-to-date,
peer-reviewed briefings based on the best-available science. In
January 2020, SCAR took over the management of the Portal from
the University of Canterbury (New Zealand), including the
operation of the portal website that has been designed to provide
easy access to the Portal’s briefings (known as Information
Summaries).
The Antarctic Environments Portal is recognised as an important
contribution to the delivery of strategic science support in the SCAR
Strategic Plan (2023-2028).
The Portal Management Board is developing a business plan that
will set out options for a flexible and diverse funding structure for
the future delivery of the Antarctic Environments Portal.
This Information Paper provides an update on the management and
operation of the Portal, including examples of how Portal articles
are linked to issues of priority interest for the CEP.
SCAR invites the CEP and Parties to continue to support the
Antarctic Environments Portal and engage with its ongoing
provision of impartial science advice to the Antarctic Treaty System.
Background
The Antarctic Environments Portal (the Portal; environments.aq)
was launched in 2015 and endorsed by the ATCM by means of
Resolution 3 (2015).
The Portal ensures that the current state of knowledge on key issues
is easily available to all CEP Members, Antarctic Treaty Parties and
the public. The Portal aims to:
Meet urgent and increasing need for information on scientific issues
of relevance to Antarctic policy.
Provide reliable, non-technical summaries on priority issues.
Raise awareness of emerging issues in Antarctic research and policy.
Support informed discussions and informed decision-making.
Make information available to all Parties irrespective of the stage of
development of their Antarctic programme.
Prior to 2020, the Portal was based at the University of Canterbury,
New Zealand, and supported with funding generously provided by
the Tinker Foundation. In January 2020, the Portal was formally
transferred into the management of SCAR. The Portal Editor, Dr
Keith Reid, reports to the SCAR Portal Management Board
comprised of the SCAR Executive Director, Dr Chandrika Nath;
SCAR Vice President for Science, Prof Deneb Karentz; Chief Officer
of SCAR’s Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (SC-
ATS), Dr Susie Grant; and Assoc. Prof. Daniela Liggett. The Board
meets periodically to discuss ongoing business and priorities for the
Portal. The SCAR Executive Director acts as the Portal Manager,
and SCAR’s Project Officer, Johanna Grabow, acts as Assistant
Editor.
The Portal Editor works with a Portal Editorial Group that
comprises: Prof Carlota Escutia, University of Grenada, Spain; Dr
Polly Penhale, National Science Foundation, USA; Assoc. Prof
Akinori Takahashi, National Institute of Polar Research, Japan; and
the Chief Officer of
SC-ATS, Dr Susie Grant. The Portal Editorial Group was pleased to
welcome Amanda Lynnes, IAATO’s Director of Environment and
Science Coordination, in 2022, and continues to explore
opportunities to ensure that its membership includes members with
scientific, management and policy roles.
Portal update
Website and communications
The Portal website (environments.aq) provides a structured
approach for presenting and accessing the Information Summaries,
which are grouped under six categories: Marine, Terrestrial, Human
Activities, Inland Aquatic Environments, Atmosphere, and
Cryosphere. The site receives around 850 unique users per month
from across 74 different countries, with 40% of users being from
Australia, the US, the UK and Russia. The number of visitors rises to
around 1,350 users per month in the lead up to and during the
ATCM as well as the CCAMLR meetings.
Additionally, content and news are shared through a mailing list
(188 subscribers), the Portal Facebook page (1,125 followers) and
through SCAR’s Twitter account (9,500 followers) and Facebook
page (3,100 followers). Popular Information Summaries on the
website include three new articles on Antarctic Sea Ice, published in
August 2022, and an article on Ten Scientific Messages on Risks and
Opportunities for Life in the Antarctic, published in February 2022.
In order to make the Information Summaries as useful as possible,
the articles are accompanied by infographics that have been very
positively received and are shared widely. SCAR is continuing to
examine innovative and diverse ways to display information on the
Portal.
New and updated information summaries (see https://
environments.aq/publications/)
Six new Information Summaries have been published since the last
ATCM. In August 2022, three new Information Summaries on sea-
ice were published, covering physical processes, biological
consequences and potential future changes in Antarctic sea ice. The
infographics for these summaries were used in presentations at side
events of the UNFCCC COP27 in 2022. Together with a new
Information Summary on ocean temperature changes published in
October 2022, these infographics provide a sound foundation for
understanding the important physical changes taking place in the
ocean environment around the Antarctic. In 2023, new Information
Summaries on Antarctic krill and the krill fishery, led by SCAR’s
newly formed Krill Expert Group, and an update on the recovery of
the great whales that feed on krill, provide important and up-to-
date overviews of these two important and interacting topics.
In 2022, the Portal Management Board agreed to implement an
annual review process to determine if the published Information
Summaries cover topics that remain relevant, and to determine
whether or not there is a need for an updated summary (Figure 1).
This review is intended to reflect the need to balance the addition
of new Information Summaries and ensure that existing material
remains relevant and contemporary.
Figure 1 – Annual review and update process for information
summaries on the SCAR Environments Portal.
The 2022 Editorial Group review found that all current Information
Summaries addressed important topics and that the vast majority
were up-to-date. For two topics, there was agreement that new
information is available that could change the conclusions of
existing Information Summaries:
Non-native species: There are currently four Information Summaries
on the Portal related to non-native species in the Antarctic and
there is some duplication of material and information that is
superseded by more recently-published material. The Editorial
Group agreed that the topic remains relevant to the work of the CEP
and that three of the existing summaries could be consolidated and
updated into a single summary. This updated Information Summary
is now in preparation.
Emperor penguins: The Editorial Group also agreed that the current
Information Summary on emperor penguins does not reflect the
most up-to-date information, especially when considering the recent
SCAR Expert Group on Birds and Mammals review of the threats to
this species. The Editorial Group agreed that the topic remains
relevant to the work of the CEP and an updated information
summary is now in preparation.
New Information Summaries are also being prepared on Antarctic
tourism, led by researchers from SCAR’s Tourism Action Group
(Ant-TAG), and on the role of Antarctic science in public
perceptions of the region, led by researchers from SCAR’s Action
Group on Public Engagement with Antarctic Research (AG-PEAR).
All Information Summaries published on the Portal are currently
available in the official languages of the ATS, and SCAR expresses
its gratitude for the in-kind support for translations that has been
generously provided by France and Spain. SCAR also expresses its
gratitude to the authors of Information Summaries for generously
contributing their time, and recognises the importance of
maintaining diversity in the authorship of information provided in
the Portal.
Business plan and future funding
SCAR’s commitment to the delivery of the Portal is recognised in
the SCAR Strategic Plan 2023-2028, specifically in relation to the
following sections:
To improve and enhance provision of scientific advice to policy-
makers, SCAR will:
Manage and expand the content of the Antarctic Environments
Portal and continue to deliver concise science summaries for policy-
makers.
To improve communications with wide and diverse audiences,
SCAR will:
Manage and update the Antarctic Environments Portal aiming to
provide impartial ‘state-of-knowledge’ reports that address specific
issues catered not only towards policy-makers but also SCAR
researchers and the general public.
To date, funding has generously been provided by Australia, the
UK, New Zealand and the Netherlands to support SCAR’s
management of the Portal. It is anticipated that these funds will
support the Portal until the end of 2023. The Portal Management
Board is currently developing a business plan for the Portal, aligned
with the SCAR Strategic Plan 2023-2028, with the aim of
identifying further funding for the Portal for that 5-year period.
Noting different funding horizons and budgetary cycles, it will set
out proposals for a flexible funding model comprised of diverse
funding streams, including a combination of funding provided by
Parties, as well as possible funding from SCAR and other sources
such as philanthropic organisations. At the recent SCAR Delegates’
Meeting in September 2022, Delegates supported SCAR’s continued
efforts to find sustainable options for hosting the Portal over the
longer term.
Support to the work of the CEP
Information Summaries published on the Portal website aim to
provide impartial state-of-knowledge reports that address specific
issues that the CEP has on its agenda and work programmes, with
an emphasis on the science knowledge and information needs that
are included in the CEP’s five-year work plan. In delivering on this
aim, the Portal contributes to fulfilling one of the CEP’s core
functions of advising the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the state of the
Antarctic environment (Article 12(1)(j) of the Protocol).
The preparation of Information Summaries continues to be guided
by the issues and environmental pressures identified in the CEP
Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XXIV Report Appendix 1). The outcomes
of the informal workshop on CEP strategic priorities and the Five-
Year Work Plan and subsequent discussion by CEP XXV will also be
central to the Editorial Group’s 2023 review.
It is important that CEP Members (as a key user community)
continue to have input to identifying specific needs for content on
the Portal. Comments and suggestions on the status of current
content and proposals for new Information Summaries are
welcomed and can be provided during discussions at the CEP
meeting, or at any time to the Portal Editor
(editor@environments.aq).
Next steps and recommendations
SCAR will continue to support the Antarctic Treaty System by
providing independent and scientifically-rigorous Information
Summaries through the Antarctic Environments Portal.
SCAR invites the CEP and CEP Members to:
Continue to support the publication of Information Summaries on
the Antarctic Environments Portal, recognising its value in
contributing to the work of the Committee,
Communicate with SCAR on suggestions for new or updated
Information Summaries.
