Informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and 5-year work plan
– convener’s preliminary report
This document is presented in support of the Working Paper CEP
strategic priorities and the 5-year work plan: Outcomes and
recommendations from the intersessional discussions and workshop
(WP 62)
Informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and 5-year work plan
– convener’s preliminary report
Informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and 5-year work plan
Helsinki, 25-26 May 2023
Convener’s preliminary report
Background
At CEP XXIV in Berlin the Committee discussed WP 27 Revisiting
CEP strategic priorities and the CEP Five-Year Work Plan.
The Committee, while emphasizing that the CEP had functioned
very well within the current Five-year Work Plan and had been
successfully delivering on its mandate as outlined in Article 12 of
the Environmental Protocol, nevertheless recognised the timeliness
of reviewing its strategic priorities. The Committee considered this
particularly relevant in light of changing circumstances and
emerging issues.
The Committee agreed that it would revisit its priorities, the
functioning of the Committee, and its Five-year Work Plan at CEP
XXV.
The Committee agreed that this should be taken forward in the
following manner:
The Chair/CEP Bureau would be tasked with facilitating
intersessional discussions to prepare for a workshop in Helsinki
prior to CEP XXV, in collaboration with the host country, Finland.
Discussions before and during the workshop would be open and
inclusive of all Members and Observers.
Members and Observers would be encouraged to facilitate
participation in the intersessional discussions and workshop by
early career researchers and policy makers/managers, as
appropriate, and ensure diversity and inclusivity; and
At CEP XXV in Helsinki, the Committee would consider the
outcomes of the workshop and earlier intersessional discussions.
The Committee noted that during these considerations of CEP
strategic priorities, efforts would be made to identify existing and
new challenges. The Committee further noted that participants
should be guided by the principles of the Environmental Protocol,
drawing on best available science.
The timeliness of revisiting priorities
A revisit of the priorities and strategies was considered timely
considering the amount of time that has passed since the original
Five-Year Work Plan was adopted, and in light of new available
knowledge and understanding of the Antarctic environment and
challenges facing Antarctica.
In the fifteen years having passed since the adoption of the Five-
Year Work Plan, the plan has guided the CEP well, and has been
instrumental in further maturing the work of the Committee.
The current five-year work plan is based on the environmental
challenges that in 2006 were considered to be the challenges most
likely to face Antarctica over the next 15 years and beyond, and
through this be a basis for devising policies, recommendations, and
strategies to meet those challenges.
Many of the challenges faced in managing the Antarctic
environment have remained the same as they were 15 years ago,
such as climate change and non-native species. Nevertheless, there
are new aspects and nuances to the challenges (rate of change,
areas of risk, etc.) that were considered relevant to consider in
context of future prioritisation of efforts. Furthermore, new
challenges are emerging, such as use of and impacts caused by new
technologies, plastic pollution, etc. Consequently, there was good
cause to pause and consider whether these changes should and
could impact the way the Committee prioritises its work.
In addition, the Committee itself has evolved over these 15 years,
both in membership, approach to its work, interaction with ATCM,
etc. This also provided cause for the Committee to consider whether
it is and how it can most efficiently utilise the 5YWP as a tool to
support its extensive and continuously expanding workload in a
systematic and strategic manner.
A fuller historic review of the development of the first CEP 5YWP
and its function over the last 15 years is held in CEP XXIV WP 27.
Intersessional discussions
Through three rounds of discussions on the CEP Discussion Forum
Members and Observers provided input on the following issues that
contributed to shape the background material for the informal CEP
Workshop on CEP strategic priorities and 5-year work plan:
Theme 1: Identifying the main environmental challenges that
should frame the CEP strategic priorities in the next 15-year period,
and consider strategies/actions relevant/necessary for meeting
these challenges (relevant for the CEP in fulfilling its mandate in
accordance with Article 12 of the Protocol)
Theme 2: Consider and identify pathways for tackling the priority
issues in an efficient, structured and goal-oriented manner.
Theme 3: Consider and suggest any required actions related to the
format of the 5YWP and/or updating procedures.
Eleven Members and one Observer contributed to the informal
intersessional discussions on the CEP Discussion Forum. During the
discussions participants also provided valuable input to the framing
of the CEP workshop itself.
The informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and the 5-year
work plan
Where, when and who
The informal CEP Workshop on strategic priorities and the 5-year
work plan took place in Little Finlandia, Helsinki on 25 and 26
May. 32 participants attended the workshop: from 16 Member
countries, from 4 Observer organisations and the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat. The list of participants is provided in Appendix 1.
The workshop was generously supported by the Finnish Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and the Finnish Ministry of the Environment.
Workshop aim
The aim of the workshop was threefold:
Using the outcomes of the intersessional informal discussions that
had taken place since CEP XXIV – discuss, identify, and agree to
those elements that could be the core in a revisited and revised 5-
year work plan - specifically:
issues and topics that the Committee should focus efforts on in the
coming period;
objectives for the Committee’s work on identified priority topics;
and
priority actions with concrete outcomes to pursue under each of the
priority topics.
Discuss and identify mechanisms and procedures that can assist the
Committee in moving priority action items forward and monitor
progress on these actions.
Initiate discussions aiming to assist the Committee in formulating
its information and knowledge needs in an efficient and functional
manner.
The workshop program was developed to reflect these overarching
aims. The program is found in Appendix 2.
At the beginning of the workshop former CEP Chair Dr. Neil Gilbert
set the scene for the discussions by giving a reflection presentation
over the topic Fulfilling Environmental Protection Objectives in
Antarctica, highlighting the crucial role of the CEP work plan is in
ensuring Protocol objectives continue to be met.
Draft revised 5-year workplan
Through pre-workshop informal intersessional exchange on the CEP
Discussion Forum and through two dedicated sessions at the
workshop the following key elements for a draft revised 5-year
workplan have been identified and developed.
Priority Topics: The discussions indicated that the current
environmental challenges identified as priority areas in the CEP 5-
year work plan (5YWP) were mostly still valid for the next 15-year
period, although noting that there could be some room for
restructuring and tidying up the plan (including merging of topics,
etc.). There was also a clear call for adding Pollution as a new
priority topic, noting the growing evidence that Antarctica is
increasingly exposed to chemical stressors, and the many recent
studies indicating that plastic pollution also is also found
throughout the Antarctic environment. On basis of these
discussions, one of the key outcomes of the workshop
was an agreed set of 12 draft Priority Topics which could frame the
Committee’s strategic work in the coming years.
Priority: The workshop participants briefly considered the level of
priority for each of the Priority Topics, in line with the set-up in the
current 5YWP. The initial consideration showed that while there is
general agreement on priority level for some of the priority topics,
there is a larger spread in views for many of them. During the
workshop the question was raised whether the priority level has a
practical function, noting that all items on the priority list have a
high priority simply by being listed. It was suggested that further
consideration is given to the issue of whether priority level is a
necessary attribute to the priority topics before conducting any
further discussion on specific priorities.
Objectives: Through discussions it became clear that it would be
useful – for each Priority Topics - to set clear objectives against
which planned CEP actions respond directly to and can be
measured against. The workshop, through discussions, has
developed proposed objectives for each of the Priority Topics,
focusing on the content of the objectives thus far, rather than on
their wording.
Contextualizing the priority topics: The pre-workshop discussions
on the CEP Discussion Forum indicated that it may be useful to
frame/contextualize the Priority Topics somewhat, to provide a
clearer understanding of why the area is of importance (description
of the issue) – assisting CEP Members (particularly new delegates)
in pursuing the objectives associated with each Priority Topics.
Through the informal discussions such context text has been
proposed for all Priority Topics.
Interlinkages between Priority Topics: The pre-workshop
discussions indicated that there is complexity in the interlinkages
between most of the Priority Topics and that it would be useful to
visualize these interlinkages in the 5-year work plan. A manner to
visualise these interlinkages has been proposed as an outcome of
the intersessional discussions.
Priority actions: Priority actions: The workshop revisited the actions
currently listed in the 5-year work plan and discussed these in
context of the proposed new Priority Topics and associated
objectives. For each proposed Priority Topic, the workshop aimed to
identify 3-5 priority actions that: were relevant to the objectives for
that Priority Topic and to the CEP’s roles; made it clear what the
CEP should do; were achievable with the resources and time
available; and measurable with regard to progress. The workshop
also considered the value of identifying ‘regular actions’, for
visibility of the Committee’s must-do tasks (e.g. arising from the
Protocol, CEP procedures or ATCM Decisions / Resolutions).
Through the discussion proposed themes for priority actions were
developed and included in the draft revised work plan. Further
work will be required to develop these themes into specific priority
actions that are relevant, clear, achievable and measurable.
An at-a-glance overview of proposed Priority Topics, Objectives is
provided in Appendix 3.
A draft revised 5-year workplan including all elements described in
the above is found in Appendix 4.
How to action the actions
The CEP has an agreed procedure for keeping its 5-year work plan
updated with new actions, through ensuring that actions that are
identified and agreed to during the discussions of the
Committee at its meeting are recorded in the plan. The CEP does
not, however, have many procedures or mechanisms that ensure
that actions are set in motion. Most actions are set in motion by
Members (one or a group) who have specific interest or feel a
specific responsibility to move a specific action forward. This
approach makes progress unpredictable, both as to whether the
action is being taken forward at all and by who and as to the
timeline of progress. However, the CEP does have a few
mechanisms at its disposal that provide a clearer path for
progressing actions, such as the establishment of intersessional
contact groups to pursue an action or the holding of a workshop on
specific issues.
Pre-meeting discussions on the CEP Discussion forum indicated
that:
there is room and need for more clarity around and focus on the
actual implementation of action points;
there is a need to have a better overview of which Members are
working on which actions;
that CEP delegates have numerous ideas and suggestions as to how
to have a more robust approach to the implementation of actions;
and
that we need mechanisms that engage and include more Members
in implementing the actions.
On this basis a full session at the informal CEP workshop was
dedicated to pursuing these discussions, focusing in particular on 5
specific questions. The discussions during the workshop were wide
and engaged. Some key components of the discussions are captured
in the below. Fuller notes from the discussions will be made
available on the CEP Discussion Forum for reference.
What practical mechanisms are available to the Committee to
actively address actions?
The following mechanisms are actively being used today:
The meeting itself
Formal ICGs and Informal ICG, noting that it is not always clear
what the difference is between this, and that further clarity could be
needed. 
Workshops. 
Papers presented by one Members, or a group of Members working
in collaboration.
Setting up Subsidiary Groups to deliver longer-term issues. 
Secretariat Summary Papers of previous discussions on individual
topics
Requests to SCAR/COMNAP/etc.
Bringing in external experts to talk about some topics (e.g. SCAR/
CEP Protected Area workshop 2019).
The following mechanisms could be considered for future use:
Virtual workshops
Virtual meetings as part of ICG process and/or stimulate discussions
on other action items.
During CEP meetings: Seminar to discuss particular topic, longer
sessions or creating time on the margins to have short workshops or
meetings. This has not been done in the CEP before but has
happened in the ATCM, e.g. climate day.
Ask for volunteers to lead on topics/issues/actions, but need to
consider how to get broader participation
Mechanisms to create broader participation:
Create a CEP 101 guide (live, video, or other options) – to help new
representatives find decisions and agreements appended to meeting
reports; how things work, what we have, how an ICG functions, etc.
Mentor – encourage a less-active member to join the leader of an
action to improve collaboration and provide learning and
engagement.
Produce a state of knowledge summary when starting work on a
new topic.
Engage experts outside of the CEP to increase communication with
technical experts/scientist to share understanding of needs and
interest – note that this is difficult as the meeting is relatively
closed.
Allow remote access via zoom for community to experience the
meeting to understand how it works
Have champions for priority topics or priority actions. Champion
does not necessarily need to do the work but can contribute to
drawing connections and linking people together to progress a
particular action. Champion could encourage and connect with new
CEP Members.
Consider how we can carve out more time in the meeting – current
approach to pre-meeting management plan reviews provide a useful
example. However, note that it might not be realistic to do this in
between meetings as there is not always enough time for people to
participate.
What types of actions require what type of approach?
Consider for each action, what is the nature of the work required to
take forward an action? A small niche group might be appropriate
for some actions whereas a broader policy stage of an action would
need a more inclusive mechanism, like a workshop format or an
ICG. Actions that are requests may require a unique approach.
The table below provides an indication of what type of approach
might be appropriate for what type of action, but flexibility must be
maintained to consider on case-by-case basis.
Table of types of action and mechanisms for working.
 
 
Actions
Provision of information
Development of guidelines
Progress in a major topic
Major long-term issue, climate change, protected area
Mechanism
Paper by single Party
X
 
 
 
Paper by Group of Parties
X
X
 
 
Informal ICG
 
X
 
 
Formal ICG
 
X
X
X
In person Workshop
 
X
X
X
Subsidiary Group
 
 
 
X
 
How/when do we make decisions about approach?
Most decisions are made in the meetings themselves, often on the
basis of a Member or group bringing forward a suggested path
forward. 
However, it could be useful to adopt a more strategic approach at
the meeting and consider the full range of mechanisms available
before making a decision, ie.  consider the advantages and
disadvantages of each mechanism available, to help us pick the
most appropriate one. In this context, important to also understand
what else is going on in the CEP. Are there already 3 ICGs going
on?  Do we have the capacity to do a new one? What alternative
approaches do we have? 
Informal/formal and the stage of development: If it is a new topic
then more informal mechanism, if well-developed then formal.
Could be useful to list how an action should be addressed in the
work plan.
Review the workplan during the meeting and/or consider
and decide the approach during a specific agenda session.
Need to maintain flexibility.
How should the Committee:
monitor and ensure progress against the work plan?
Papers are identified by agenda item but don’t address the work
plan item. It is mentioned in the text but this is hard to locate. So
there could be merit in considering if the template of the paper
could be changed to ask authors to identify what work plan item
they address if relevant. 
Review where we are at in the implementation of the work plan.
Consider the burden of doing this administrative work and how it
can be done in an efficient manner. One option would be that the
Chair with the support of the Secretariat could log progress after
each meeting. This could be done in combination with the listing of
actions arising from the meeting, which is normally circulated after
the meeting. Consider opportunities that build on the existing
process to monitor progress. Another option would be that the
Chair, with the support of the Secretariat does this in advance of
meetings.
Regularly – eg. every (three) years -  allocate time to monitor
progress in the work plan and discuss under agenda item 3 on the
CEP agenda. Then identify next steps of an action and put them into
the plan.
To what degree could Members report on where they are in the
plan without this becoming a burden? If a Champion system is
developed, there could be a role for the Champion to provide
regular updates. Another option would be that Vice-chairs supervise
topics and report on progress.
Consider a dashboard system to visualize progress or other ways of
adding information (in a new column) about progress status.
adjust its agenda consistent with the work plan?
Change agenda to have ‘focus topics’ to promote progress. 
Members would be encouraged to provide papers on these
topics. Pollution is an example where a new agenda item is to be
created. However, important that the work plan should not dictate
the agenda as flexibility is required for items of discussion. 
engage the ATCM in its work plan?
May be utility to look at solving mismatch in timing of getting
request for action from ATCM which is then delayed by a year
before the CEP can receive that request and start to respond.
Consider whether there is a way to ensure that the CEP is ‘in the
room’ to respond to requests of the ATCM. CEP may say something
is not possible, or may take X years to deliver, etc.
Consider connect between 5YWP and ATCM multi-year strategic
plan.
Consider whether there would be utility in having the ATCM
consider the CEP 5YWP and provide feedback. In particular maybe
the importance of highlighting changes to the 5YWP when the CEP
report is presented to the ATCM.
How should the work plan be reviewed and updated?
Potential approach: annual revisions to reflect CEP meeting
outcomes, three yearly time allocation to evaluate process and five
(to ten) yearly review. Maintain sight on and reflect on progress
throughout.
Do a review of what has been achieved during the previous period
as a starting point for large-scale reviews.
Five yearly review could take place through workshop or ICG.
Workshop attached to meeting helps with participation, or consider
longer sessions during the annual meeting (e.g. go on later into the
evening).
How to formulate information and knowledge needs
Session 4 concerned (i) the communication by the Committee of
knowledge needs to relevant bodies and (ii) the mechanisms for
receipt of knowledge from those bodies. The aims of the session
were to:
Consider current knowledge needs in light of identified priority
actions and how we might formulate these needs so they are fit for
purpose.
Consider whether there are other science, knowledge and
information needs needed to move actions forward.
Note the difference between (i) wider knowledge needs and (ii)
specific knowledge needs for identified actions.
Workshop participants were provided with a copy of the CEP’s ‘List
of science, knowledge and information needs identified in the CEP
5-Year Work Plan, CEP Climate Change Response Work Programme,
CEP Final Reports and other CEP Manuals (2021)’ (available at:
https://documents.ats.aq/cephandbook/ATCM43_att054_e
%20(1).docx)
As way of an introduction and to help inform the thinking of the
workshop participants on this issue, a presentation was delivered by
Dr. Susie Grant (Chief Officer of the SCAR Standing Committee on
the Antarctic Treaty System; SC-ATS) entitled ‘What does the
science community/SCAR need from the CEP to enable action?’.
The workshop participants were presented with the following set of
questions. The collated responses are provided below.
How can the CEP articulate its information needs? Who is the CEP
articulating them to? How best do they receive information?
Communication of information needs is complex, with many
different researchers and science bodies needing to be informed at
both an international and national level. This makes two-way
communication between policymakers and scientists regarding
policy-relevant science needs a challenge.
CEP could be more strategic and highlight which knowledge needs
are most important. Not all information needs are equally urgent
and we have to distinguish between (i) information coming from
knowledge that already exists or (ii) the need for new research.
The SCAR Standing Committee on the Antarctic Treaty System (SC-
ATS) makes best efforts to understand CEP science needs and
communicate them to researchers within SCAR. However, there
may be opportunities for SC-ATS to improve communication and
provide more guidance to researchers.
It might be useful to have a regular specific session at the SCAR
conference to discuss CEP science needs. The session would
facilitate the communication of new and existing science needs, as
well as allowing some feedback on how provision of earlier science
progressed the work of the Committee.
In general, scientists work on issues for which they have received
funding. CEP’s policy needs have to be articulated to national
science funding bodies so that appropriate resources can be
allocated to relevant researchers.
Is there a case for developing a structured approach to how the CEP
articulates its information needs? If so, what would it look like?
Currently it is not always clear where existing knowledge requests
came from or what action the CEP is meant to take once the
information is received. Also, existing knowledge needs articulated
by the CEP often lack context and are unclear about what is
specifically required and when the information is needed by.
Consequently, a revision of the list of science needs to remove
duplication and tie the knowledge needs to a specific Action (or set
or Actions) would greatly help in the communication of more
focused science needs to relevant individuals and organizations,
thereby ultimately helping the delivery of the Committee’s work.
It might be useful to make a clear link between: Priority Topics →
Actions → associated knowledge need. It may also be useful to note
when knowledge needs are relevant to more than one Action.
For each or a sub-set of Priority Topics, the Committee could
identify a Priority Topic ‘champion’ to keep track of progress on the
relevant Actions and the delivery of associated science needs. The
role of the ‘champions’ would need to be defined clearly, in order to
balance the need for someone to lead but yet not overload them
with work.
Careful consideration should be given to the best mechanisms for
defining/stating the knowledge needs in a manner that is useful to
researchers and other knowledge holders. The CEP may not be well-
placed to undertake this step, but might require input from
researchers or individuals with expertise in both science and policy
within a given topic area. The CEP Chair, or Priority Topic
champions could work with SCAR SC-ATS to develop relevant
questions. To help explain the science needs, would it be useful for
a
CEP representative to be a standing member on SCATS? It may be
possible for a nominated CEP representative to work with SCAR to
discuss science questions and help with their formulation in a
manner appropriate for researchers.
Relationships need to be developed between CEP and other relevant
knowledge bodies that can provide information relevant to the
Topic Priorities. We note that this is already encouraged through
Rule 7: CEP shall consult with SCAR, COMNAP, CCAMLR, and other
relevant scientific, environmental, and technical organizations. CEP
should consult with other bodies to ask how best it can
communicate its information needs in the most appropriate manner.
As a basis for continuous improvement, the Committee should seek
feedback from SC-ATS/SCAR, or other bodies, on whether, or not,
its existing science requests have had enough information or were
formulated effectively.
Some Priority Topics may require provision of information from
bodies that operate outside of the Antarctic and work on global
issues, e.g., long-range contaminants/pollution, or in regions facing
similar, if not necessarily identical, issues, e.g., the Arctic. There
may be opportunities for communication with these bodies by the
CEP or, alternatively, by the Parties, who could then report back to
CEP.
The regular updating of the CEP Five-Year Work Plan and list of
science needs, plus their effective communication to knowledge
providers would be a good starting point.
How does the CEP (i) keep track of and (ii) review progress against
its information requirements? How could this be improved?
Consideration could be given to how information relating to science
needs is communicated and received, e.g., the Committee could use
a checklist, timeline or milestones to keep track of the status of a
request and record amongst other things:
What did the Committee ask for?
To whom was the request made?
When was the request made?
Did the Committee/knowledge provider specify a deadline/target
for provision of information?
Has the information been received?
Has the Committee considered the information and made any
recommendations as a result of the provided information?
The provision of an extra column on the Five-Year Work Plan or
‘List of science, knowledge and information needs’ might help track
the status of information provision relevant to the topic in question.
Keeping track of progress would be partly administrative and could
be delivered through the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. Securing
funding for this would need further consideration, although use of
assigned CEP funds might be a possibility. Alternatively, Priority
Topic ‘champions’ may be well-placed to keep track of the receipt of
information (see earlier).
Should a paper be submitted to the CEP that contains information
relevant to a Priority Topic, it would be useful if the paper noted
which Priority Topic and Action it is relevant to, and this could be
used to track progress on information delivery.
For some questions, it may be hard to define progress regarding the
provision of information if they are very general in nature. It may
be useful to rephrase the questions or divide them into sub-
questions.
Are there new working mechanisms that could be established to
help facilitate information flow back to the CEP?
The most appropriate mechanism for provision of information to
the Committee may depend upon the nature of the question and the
quantity, complexity and specificity of the associated information.
Also, Parties may vary in how they communicate the knowledge
needs of the CEP to their researchers and further thought on this
issue at a national level my improve information flow.
Several information bodies report regularly to the CEP (SCAR,
COMNAP, WMO, IAATO, etc.). It would be useful to understand
which information requests these bodies can respond to and
potentially ask that information relevant to specific Actions be
provided in their annual reports to CEP. It might be useful to map
out which organizations can potentially provide information on
different Priority Topics and target them specifically with
information requests.
The SCAR Antarctic Environments Portal provides useful
information summaries on many topics but does not provide
detailed information. Can the Portal be expanded in scope to help
manage or act as repository for knowledge across both the specific
and more general knowledge needs of the Committee? Also, could
SCAR provide WP and IPs that relate to specific Actions within the
CEP Five-Year Work Plan? Could SCAR run seminars on topics of
direct relevance to the CEP Priority Topics?
It is emphasized that decision-making should not be delayed until
‘all’ the relevant information becomes available. Rather,
management practices should be based upon best available science
and practices could change should better science become available.
Knowledge should be provided to the Committee in a policy-ready
format and be effective in informing subsequent policy responses.
Use of maps, graphs, GIS systems, etc., may help to convey
information to the Committee in a digestible way.
If time permits: Look at current knowledge needs (i.e., in the Table
‘List of science, knowledge and information needs identified in the
CEP 5-Year Work Plan, CEP Climate Change Response Work
Programme, CEP Final Reports and other CEP Manuals (2021)’) and
consider how they could be reframing to fit new action points
(clear, relevant, etc…). Can you provide examples of how science
questions could be better formulated?
The Table should indicate where information needs are relevant to
multiple work plan priorities.
The list could be colour coded to indicate priorities and/or progress
in delivery.
Many of the current science needs are very broad and lack context,
making them difficult (impossible?) to answer.
Some of the ‘needs’ are not actually information requests, but
statements.
There should be a clear linkage to the context so that it is obvious
why an information request has been made.
There could be more detailed information on short-term vs. long-
term needs, where possible.
Scientists and relevant experts should review the information needs
in order to translate the CEP need into actionable requests.
An additional column could be added to track progress on delivery
of the requested science.
Note that ideally the Table should not become too complicated, so
as to stay user-friendly.
Appendix 1: List of participants
Argentina
Ortuzar, Patricia
ASOC
Roura, Ricardo
ATS
Wainschenker, Pablo
Australia
McIvor, Ewan
Belgium
Langerock, Stephanie
Vanstappen, Nils
Canada
Keast, Stephanie
China
Chen, Yitong
Yang, Lei
Zheng, Yingqin
COMNAP
Colombo, Andrea
Ecuador
Suárez Miño, Francisco José
Finland
Mähönen, Outi
France
Jolly, Maude
Ritz, Catherine
Germany
Duennwald, Sonja
Herata, Heike
Lindemann, Christian
India
Tiwari, Anoop Kumar
IAATO
Lynnes, Amanda
Monaco
Le Bohec, Celine
New Zealand
Poirot, Ceisha
White, Sophia
Norway
Høgestøl, Astrid Charlotte
Njåstad, Birgit
Storvik, Kristin
SCAR
Grant, Susie
Spain
Quesada Del Corral, Antonio
United Kingdom
Clarke, Rachel
Hughes, Kevin
United States
Penhale, Polly A.
Titmus, Andrew
Appendix 2: Workshop program
THURSDAY 25 May 2023
Time
Topic
09:00
Opening Session (Chair: Birgit Njåstad)
Setting the Scene
Key note reflections: Neil Gilbert
Workshop Session 1: Priority Areas and their objectives (Chair:
Birgit Njåstad)
10:30
COFFEE BREAK
10:50
Workshop Session 1: Cont.
12:30
LUNCH
13:30
Workshop Session 2: Priority Actions for the Priority Areas (Chair:
Ewan McIvor)
15:00
COFFEE BREAK
15:20
Workshop Session 2: Cont.
~17:00/17:30
End Day 1 & Departure to WORKSHOP GET-TOGETHER DINNER
hosted by the Ministry of the Environment, Finland. Bus
transportation and guided tour on the way.
~20:30/21:00
Return to hotels
FRIDAY 26 May 2023
Time
Topic
9:00
Workshop Session 3: How to action the actions (Chair: Polly
Penhale)
10:30
COFFEE BREAK
10:50
Workshop Session 3: Cont.
12:30
LUNCH
13.30
Workshop Session 4: Knowledge needed to underpin actions (Chair:
Kevin Hughes)
15:00
COFFEE BREAK
15:20
Workshop Session 4: Cont.
Summarizing workshop outcomes and preparing for CEP XXV
reporting
Concluding Session
~17:00
End Day 2
Appendix 3: Priority Topics and objectives Gist of objectives
discussed and provided through informal workshop. Wording will
be finetuned through further process.
1.
Environmental Pressure Priorities
1a.
Management of non-native species & wildlife disease
Draft Objective: Facilitate monitoring of and surveillance for NNS
and wildlife disease, particularly in high risk areas, and ensure that
operators have enough tools to prevent and mitigate NNS and
wildlife disease.
1b.
Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities
Draft Objective: Ensure a robust knowledge base, including
monitoring, to understand the impacts of tourism and non-
governmental activities, seen also in light of other environmental
impacts and ongoing activities. Through CEP actions provide tools
and guidance that limit environmental impacts.
1c.
Climate Change Implications for the Environment
Draft Objective: To support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty
system to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental
impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for
the governance and management of Antarctica through the
implementation of the CCRWP.
1d.
Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage
Draft Objective: Through CEP actions facilitate actions to identify,
respond to, repair and remediate environmental damage in
Antarctica. Furthermore assess whether all actions that should have
been taken with respect to repair and remediation have been taken
and promote actions where it still may be required.
1e.
Response to Long-range and local Pollution
Draft Objective: Through CEP actions facilitate initiatives to track
long-range pollution and enable Parties to respond appropriately,
including communication to/with relevant global organizations.
Furthermore, provide guidance and tools to monitor, reduce and
respond to local pollution (primarely chemical and plastic
pollution).
2.
Management Response Priorities
2a.
Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Draft Objective: Encourage coordinated and systematic monitoring
efforts. Enable reporting on state and trends for key environmental
values in Antarctica.
2b.
Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
Draft Objective: Support monitoring, protection and management of
[key] marine species and processes and areas within the framework
of the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.
2c.
Systematic approach to the protected areas system
Draft Objective: Assess the effectiveness of the current series of
ASPAs with regard to the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V and
provide a framework for a systematic further development of the
protected area system.
2d.
Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Draft Objective: Ensure clear guidance to all those responsible for
activities in Antarctica on conducting appropriate assessments of
the activities. Assist through guidance material Parties in assessing,
authorizing and permitting activities on basis of EIAs. Allow for a
continuous improvement of EIA process, including EIA follow-up.
2e.
Understanding and protecting Antarctic Biodiversity
Draft Objective: Keep up to date and take into account trends in
biodiversity and threats and implement relevant management
actions with respect to [unique] Antarctic Biodiversity [and/or
biodiversity at risk].
2f.
Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
Draft Objective: Provide Parties with guidance and support in
assessing and managing heritage.
3.
Operational Priorities
3a.
Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Draft Objective: Ensure that the CEP systematically, works to
provide advice in implementing the objectives of the Protocol to the
ATCM prioritized, strategic and efficient manner. Facilitate for a
broader participation by Members in the work of the Committee.
Appendix 4: Draft Revised Five-Year Work Plan Note: The gist of
the objectives listed here were discussed and provided through
informal workshop. Wording will be finetuned through further
process. The actions held in in this draft have been identified by the
CEP informal workshop as relevant actions to develop further to
make them relevant, clear, achievable and measurable.
1. Environmental Pressure Priorities
1a. Management of non-native species & wildlife disease
Priority:
Context: Antarctica’s biodiversity and its intrinsic values are
potentially at risk from the introduction of non-native species,
derived from a range of sources including human activities. Whilst
controls on introducing plants and invertebrates are now in place,
limited attention has so far been given to microorganisms that
comprise the majority of the Antarctic terrestrial biomass and are
highly dispersive. Because of steadily growing human activities on
the continent and climate change trends, the risk of non-native
organisms arriving and establishing is likely to increase.
Regionality: This issue is particularly important in the Antarctic
Peninsula region, ie. those areas of Antarctica where human activity
is high and climate is changing rapidly.
Interlinks with: Climate change implications, Tourism and NGO
activities, Monitoring and state of the environment reporting,
Biodiversity knowledge
Objectives: Facilitate monitoring of and surveillance for NNS and
wildlife disease, particularly in high risk areas, and ensure that
operators have enough tools to prevent and mitigate NNS and
wildlife disease.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions
Reporting on implementation of biosecurity measures and the NNS
manual
Development of a rapid response mechanism for use in the instance
of a wildlife disease outbreak
Development of surveillance strategy for areas at high risk of
wildlife disease
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Review the progress and contents of the CEP Non-native Species
Manual
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
1b. Impacts of Tourism and NGO activities
Priority:
Context: Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic
have grown steadily since they began in the 1950s. The numbers of
tourists and tour operators have increased as has the number and
geographic spread of sites being visited. The range of activities
being undertaken has also diversified. It is recognised that tourism
has the potential to result in impacts on the environmental,
intrinsic, wilderness, aesthetic, and scientific values of Antarctica.
Unforeseen cumulative impacts may also arise. Future development
of Antarctic tourism and the associated environmental implications
and potential management responses need to be considered, also in
the context of other pressures being faced in the region, such as
climate change. Regionality: This issue is particularly important in
the Antarctic Peninsula region, ie. that area of Antarctica where
tourism is most intense and growing/expanding. It is nevertheless
also important to keep an eye on land-based tourism, which seems
to be increasing.
Interlinks with: Non-native species & wildlife disease, Climate
change implications, Environmental Damage, Pollution, Monitoring
and state of the environment reporting, EIA provisions, Biodiversity
knowledge
Objectives: Ensure a robust knowledge base, including monitoring,
to understand the impacts of tourism and non-governmental
activities, seen also in light of other environmental impacts and
ongoing activities. Through CEP actions provide tools and guidance
that limit environmental impacts.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Develop mechanism for rapid considerations of changes to existing
Visitor Site Guidelines
Discuss, and prepare as appropriate a framework for an
environmental monitoring programme to assess the impacts of
tourism (with a future aim of looking at sensitivity and carrying
capacity)
Develop framework for pre-assessment relating to new, novel or
particularly concerning activities [NOTE – could be an action under
EIA]
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Regular review of all existing Visitor Site Guidelines to ensure that
they are accurate and up to date, including precautionary updates
where appropriate.
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
1c. Climate Change Implications for the Environment
Priority:
Context: Observations, modelling and global assessments describe
significant changes in Antarctic physical and living systems, both
marine and terrestrial. Changes in Antarctic and Southern Ocean
environments are linked to and influence climate impact drivers
globally. While climate change has global impacts and will
contribute to ecosystem disruption and loss of biodiversity beyond
the Antarctic region, the impacts on the Antarctic environment
itself are also of immeasurable concern. Although climate change
may benefit some Antarctic species in the short-term, by expanding
the size of ice-free areas available for breeding, or with warmer
waters increasing biological productivity in the ocean, the loss of
habitat for some species, the threat of non-native species
establishing and outcompeting native species, and the loss of
natural heritage values are some of the potential negative
implications of climate change. Regionality: This issue is of
continent-wide importance, although there are substantial
variations in the degree of change and therefore implications as a
consequence of change.
Interlinks with: Non-native species & wildlife disease; Monitoring
and state of the environment reporting; Biodiversity knowledge
Objectives: To support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty system to
prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a
changing climate and the associated implications for the
governance and management of Antarctica through the
implementation of the CCRWP.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Implement the Climate Change Response Work Programme and
keep it updated.
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Consider subsidiary group report, including CCRWP updates
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
1d. Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage
Priority:
Context: Environmental damage in Antarctica might occur as the
result of chemical, physical or biological processes resulting from
human activities in the region and might occur as a result of one-off
or irregular activities, emergency situations as well as situations in
which the environment has been impacted or degraded over longer
periods of time. For example, chemical impacts might arise from
pollution events, such as the critical failure of a fuel tank; a coastal
shipping disaster, or the slow degradation of abandoned bases;
leaking fuel tanks, or waste dumps. Physical impacts might arise
from regular foot and vehicle traffic causing tracking, or damage to
vegetation, as well as from the establishment and ongoing operation
of Antarctic stations and bases. Biological impacts might arise
through the introduction and establishment of non-native species.
The environmental and geographic characteristics of Antarctica
means that response actions and approaches used elsewhere may
need to be adapted, while taking into account the high standards of
environmental protection in Antarctica relative to many other parts
of the world. Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide
importance, wherever there has been or is human activities
ongoing.
Interlinks with: Pollution; Climate change implications
Objectives: Through CEP actions facilitate actions to identify,
respond to, repair and remediate environmental damage in
Antarctica. Furthermore assess whether all actions that should have
been taken with respect to repair and remediation have been taken
and promote actions where it still may be required.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Develop guidance for the establishment of an Antarctic wide
inventory of sites of past activity.
Develop guidance for remediation of past sites of activity.
Implement a process for assessments of and reporting on sites
relevant for remediation.
Develop framework for reporting on actions taken and experiences
gained with respect to remediation activity.
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Continuous review of the Manual. Parties to work on the
development of new techniques or guidelines
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
1e. Response to Long-range and Local Pollution
Priority:
Context: Antarctica is one of the cleanest, least polluted places on
Earth. However, there is growing evidence that Antarctica is
increasingly exposed to chemical stressors, both long-range
transport of chemical contaminants and pollutants and local
discharges. Some of these chemicals can become concentrated in
the Antarctic biota. Microplastic pollution has also been found in
Antarctica, but the presence and effects of microplastics within food
webs are still little understood. Regionality: This issue is of
continent-wide importance,
Interlinks with: Climate change implications; Environmental
damage
Objectives: Through CEP actions facilitate initiatives to track long-
range pollution and enable Parties to respond appropriately,
including communication to/with relevant global organizations.
Furthermore, provide guidance and tools to monitor, reduce and
respond to local pollution (primarily chemical and plastic
pollution).
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Framework for systematic sampling and data collection of chemical
contamination in the Antarctic
Develop mechanism for updates on status and trends of pollutants
in Antarctica.
Assess the need for guidance /regional plan on avoiding pollution.
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
2. Management Response Priorities
2a. Facilitating monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Priority:
Context: In order to develop relevant management actions to meet
the overarching objectives of the Environmental Protocol to protect
the Antarctic environment it is helpful and necessary to understand
and report on if and how the Antarctic environment, on continental,
regional and local scale is changing, including understanding how
human activities contribute to those changes. Environmental
monitoring is fundamental to assessing and understanding change
on all scales. Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide
importance.
Interlinks with: Climate change implications; Biodiversity
knowledge; Tourism and NGO activities; Environmental Damage;
Pollution
Objectives: Encourage coordinated and systematic monitoring
efforts. Enable reporting on state and trends for key environmental
values in Antarctica.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Actions
Develop objectives for enviro monitoring; operational (i.e. human
activities) vs environmental indicators of change vs. success of
implementation of measures, etc.
Undertake a gap-analysis on what monitoring is already being
conducted.
Consider and facilitate the development of possible mechanisms to
facilitate access to monitoring data
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
2b. Contributing to marine spatial protection and management
Priority:
Context: The marine environment and the terrestrial environment in
Antarctica are closely intertwined, where numerous biological and
physical processes are connected to both realms in one way or the
other. Protection and management activities in the one realm,
therefore need to be seen in the context of the other. The
Environmental Protocol aims to protect the Antarctic environment
and associated and dependent ecosystems, which clearly links the
continent and the surrounding ocean. While CCAMLR is the key
engine for marine spatial protection and management in Antarctica,
the ATCM can make complementary decisions within its
competence to support robust marine spatial management.
Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with: The protected areas system; Climate change
implications; Biodiversity knowledge; Monitoring and state of the
environment reporting
Objectives: Support monitoring, protection and management of
[key] marine species and processes and areas within the framework
of the provisions of the Environmental Protocol.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Identify needs for additional measures for spatial marine protection
and management measures.
Use tools to work with SC-CAMLR to progress spatial protection and
management..
Consider connectivity between land and ocean
Advice on complementary actions that could be taken by Parties
with respect to MPAs, incl. advice relating to Resolution 5 (2017).
Initiate action on managing threats to the near shore marine
environment (e.g. pollution, microplastics, etc.)
Gather information on non-CCAMLR activities and their impact
within MPAs and marine ASPAs
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
2c. Implementing a systeamtic approach to the protected areas
system
Priority:
Context: Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) establishes a framework for
designating Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). These areas are
intended to support the objective of protecting comprehensively the
Antarctic environment. Important work has been done to underpin
the development of a representative series of ASPAs, including
spatial analyses to identify distinct ‘Environmental Domains’ and
‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’. The Antarctic
Treaty Parties have agreed that these spatial frameworks are useful
references to guide the designation of ASPAs within a systematic
environmental-geographic framework, and the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP) has recognised the need for a more
systematic approach to the development of the protected area
system. Regionality: This issue is of continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with: Climate change implications, Tourism and NGO
activities, Biodiversity knowledge
Objectives: Assess the effectiveness of the current series of ASPAs
with regard to the provisions of Article 3.2 of Annex V and provide
a framework for a systematic further development of the protected
area system.
DRAFT POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Assess the extent to which Antarctic IBAs are or should be
represented within the series of ASPAs.
Undertake work to advance actions agreed by the Committee from
discussions on the protected areas workshop (2019) [consider
copying or linking to recommendations]
Consider further mechanisms for protection of outstanding
geological values [and wilderness].
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Maintain and develop Protected Area database.
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
2d. Implementing and improving the EIA provisions of Annex I
Priority:
Context: The Protocol requires an EIA to be undertaken prior to an
activity occurring in Antarctica, and applies to almost all scientific,
logistical and non-governmental activities that occur in the region.
The EIA process is a key tool in helping to meet the Parties’
ambitions of protecting the Antarctic environment. The real benefit
is the contribution it can make to planning an activity. Building EIA
concepts into the processes and procedures for organising an
activity from the very beginning, helps to increase the rigour of the
planning process and greatly improves the identification of
alternative, more environmentally friendly options. Increasing
pressures on the Antarctic environment (through for example
climate change and expanding human activity) means that the
management benefits of the EIA tool will be more and more
important. It is therefore important to continue to review and,
where appropriate, improve the effectiveness of the Antarctic EIA
system.
Interlinks with: Climate change implications, Tourism and NGO
activities, Biodiversity knowledge
Objectives: Ensure clear guidance to all those responsible for
activities in Antarctica on conducting appropriate assessments of
the activities. Assist through guidance material Parties in assessing,
authorizing and permitting activities on basis of EIAs. Allow for a
continuous improvement of EIA process, including EIA follow-up.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
[Refine the process for considering CEEs and advising the ATCM
accordingly].
Develop guidelines for assessing cumulative impacts.
Review EIA guidelines and consider wider policy advising ATCM on
updating, stengthening or otherwise improving existing rules and
measures.
Consider application of strategic environmental assessment in
Antarctica.
Develop guidance on how to do an environmental baseline
condition survey
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Review draft CEEs as required
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
2e. Understanding and protecting Antarctic Biodiversity
Priority:
Context: Fundamental knowledge about the environment is required
in order to understand changes, impacts, risks, which species are
found where, what are their dynamics, etc. While significant
advances have been made in recent years, Antarctica’s biological
and ecological domains remain, to a large extent, unexplored. This
hampers efficient management actions. Regionality: This issue is of
continent-wide importance.
Interlinks with: Climate change implications; Monitoring and state
of the environment reporting, protected areas system; EIA
provisions
Objectives: Keep up to date and take into account trends in
biodiversity and threats and implement relevant management
actions with respect to [unique] Antarctic Biodiversity [and/or
biodiversity at risk].
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Consider status and threats to Antarctic biodiversity to inform
management/protection of Antarctic biodiversity.
CEP to consider further scientific advice on wildlife disturbance
[define wildlife disturbance].
Assess the protection of Antarctic seals
Continue informal discussions on the recommendations in CEP XXIV
- WP 34.
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Consider the conservation status of Antarctic species threatened by
climate change (link to CCRWP).
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
2f. Designating and managing Historic Sites and Monuments
Priority:
Context: Humans’ presence in Antarctica is, seen in the global
context, extremely short. Since the first sighting of the continent in
1820, the extent to which humans have left their mark here is
relatively limited. In such a context, the limited historical evidence
of a connection between man and land becomes extremely visible
and special. Parties therefore have given full recognition to the
historic sites, structures and objects as part of humankind’s cultural
heritage. The Environment Protocol makes the Historic Sites and
Monuments (HSM) list the key mechanism for the protection of
historic values in Antarctica.
Interlinks with: Tourism and NGO activities; Climate Change
Implications; The protected areas system
Objectives: Provide Parties with guidance and support in assessing
and managing heritage.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Develop criteria for maintenance and management of HSMs,
especially in the context of changing climate change and the impact
on the environment and therefore the needs of the site.
Implement a regular review process (within 15 years cycles) of
HSMs for effectiveness of management/conservation plans (if
relevant) with regards to climate change and it's impacts on the
special values and potential clean up.
Further develop criteria for the Conservation Management Plan for
a site.
THE WORKPLAN WILL BE INSERTED HERE
Science knowledge and information needs:
3. Operational Priorities
3a. Effective Operation of the CEP and Strategic Planning
Priority:
Context: The CEP was established under the Protocol to the
Antarctic Treaty to advise the ATCM on matters relating to the
protection of the Antarctic environment. After more than 25 years
of work, the Committee has consolidated itself as a highly relevant
and important component of the Antarctic Treaty system. The CEP
agenda is normally full and broad and the Committee is many ways
“the workhorse of the ATCM”. Focus on strategic planning provides
for CEP activities focused on the environmental issues requiring the
greatest attention.
Interlinks with:
Objectives: Ensure that the CEP systematically, works to provide
advice in implementing the objectives of the Protocol to the ATCM
prioritized, strategic and efficient manner. Facilitate for a broader
participation by Members in the work of the Committee.
THEMES FOR POTENTIAL Priority Actions:
Use the 5YWP more actively to frame the CEP meetings.
Consider long-term objectives for Antarctica (50-100 years’ time).
Consider opportunities for enhancing the working relationship
between the CEP and the ATCM.
[Consider opportunities for enhancing broader participation by
Members in the work of the Committee]
Implement a regular review of priorities based on ATCM
requirements and changing circumstances.
REGULAR ACTIONS:
Keep the five-year work plan updated.
WORKPLAN TO BE DEVELOPED
Science knowledge and information needs:
