Competent authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Competent Authorities discussion forum on tourism regulatory
activities: report by the convener
Summary
ATCM XLII in 2019 established a permanent web-based forum for
competent authorities to discuss tourism regulatory activities and
exchange knowledge and experience. The forum is convened by the
working group co-chair with responsibility for the ATCM tourism
agenda item. This paper reports on discussion in the intersessional
period of issues identified as a priority for initial focus, in
accordance with the agreed scope and purpose of the forum. Parties
are encouraged to have their competent authorities participate in
the work of the group as appropriate.
Background
The convened competent authorities discussion forum is intended to
discuss tourism-related issues of general relevance to the competent
authorities, and enhance cooperation across a range of issues. The
group has established a scope and purpose under the mandate
provided by ATCM XLII (below), identified and shared views on five
priority issues for initial discussion, and discussed opportunities for
enhanced cooperation.
Priority issues for discussion
In the 2022-23 intersessional period, in continuation of work
commenced in the previous intersessional period, the Convener
invited further views from participants on the five priority issues
identified for initial focus:
Harmonisation of standards;
Nested permits / permits where multiple activities are authorised
by different Parties on the same expedition;
Compliance and enforcement issues of common interest to the
competent authorities (excluding arrangements under national
legislation);
Issues arising from new activities or those seldom conducted, and
potentially risky activities;
Scientific activities associated with tourism activities.
Participants were invited to share views and information for each
topic on:
general points or observations including new views or aspects, new
developments, points of particular concern, priorities, or other
perspectives
particular tools, practices or procedures that may be of interest to
other competent authorities
additional tools that would be of assistance in dealing with this
topic
suggestions for taking forward discussion of the topic or key
elements
whether the topic might be particularly suited to an online
videoconference discussion, workshop, webinar, or ‘best-practice’
session.
Discussions were supported by topic summaries for each of the
issues, prepared by the Convener, which were intended to provide
ready reference to previous discussion of each topic in the ATCM,
and existing ATCM tools or arrangements. Each of the topic
summaries included: an introduction and summary of the issue;
review of existing ATCM tools, instruments or arrangements of
relevance to the topic; and previous discussions or proposals
relating to the topic.
In addition, participants were invited to raise any new or emerging
issues facing competent authorities, and provide views on further
cooperation and discussion among competent authorities.
Outcomes of discussions
The competent authorities from four Parties provided input to
discussions. Views and perspectives were provided on aspects of the
priority issues.
Suggestions were also received on additional topics of possible
common interest, and on options for advancing discussions,
including online meetings and email contact groups. Some
participants noted challenges in advancing issues though online
forum written discussions, and suggested that online meetings
would provide additional opportunities to make progress. Some
participants suggested a meeting during the ATCM between
competent authorities or their representatives. Accordingly, the
Convener will coordinate with participants on an informal margins
meeting of competent authorities or their representatives during
ATCM XLV.
In the coming intersessional period, input provided to date by the
participating competent authorities will be summarised and shared.
Additional input would be welcomed. The Convener will also
discuss opportunities, topics, format, hosting and timing of a
possible online meeting with interested participants, and stands
ready to support ongoing discussions.
These discussions are open to all national competent authorities,
and wide participation is encouraged.
Scope and purpose:
The competent authorities will consider issues related to
authorisation of tourism and non-governmental activities that have
general relevance for most competent authorities, with a view to:
identifying specific challenges and opportunities for enhanced
cooperation in the implementation of the Protocol, ATCM Measures
and Resolutions;
identifying for ATCM consideration emerging issues related to
tourism regulation; and
formulating advice to the ATCM, via delegations, on specific
relevant issues related to the evaluation and authorisation of tourist
and non-governmental activities.
The forum will be convened by the ATCM working group chair
responsible for the tourism agenda item. Discussion will be guided
by a work plan, and will address issues as agreed by participants,
including new and emerging issues as necessary. The convened
forum is open to participation by all national competent authorities
and wide participation is encouraged. The convened forum is not
intended to replace the other web-based forums for discussion and
consultation on specific tourism and non-government activity
proposals.
