Implementing the Polar Code: Gaps and Challenges
English version provided by the author
Implementing the Polar Code: Gaps and Challenges
Summary
Since the entry into force of the International Code for Ships
Operating in Polar Waters (the Polar Code) on 1 January 2017, the
Spanish Maritime Administration has only certified one ship,
Research Vessel (RV) Sarmiento de Gamboa. This document
describes the major gaps and challenges encountered during the
certification process.
Background
The RV Sarmiento de Gamboa was delivered in 2008 by the Freire
Shipyard in Vigo, Spain. It is owned and operated by the Spanish
National Research Council, under the aegis of the Ministry of
Science and Innovation.
Following the entry into force of the Polar Code, and to expand
Spain's research activities in the Arctic and the Antarctic, it was
decided to certify the vessel, taking advantage of the flexibility
offered by the Code's goal-based standards. This certification was
carried out in 2018.
Due to its design and structure, the vessel meets the necessary Polar
Code requirements to work in the areas covered by the Code, with
certain limitations. Its Polar Certificate authorizes the Sarmiento de
Gamboa to conduct operations in both the Arctic and the Antarctic
provided that it limits its activities to ice-free waters in areas where
the air temperature is not low. In addition, it may only operate in
the summer season, whether in the Southern or the Northern
hemisphere.
Gaps and challenges during the certification process
Most controversial aspects of the certification of the Sarmiento de
Gamboa
Goal-based standards:
The Polar Code includes four chapters (Ship Structure, Machinery
Installations, Fire Safety/Protection, and Life-Saving Appliances and
Arrangements) which may be applied not by complying with their
associated regulations but rather with their functional requirements
through an alternative design. This is the main difference between
the application of the Polar Code compared with other standards
with which we are more familiar.
In the case of the Sarmiento de Gamboa, rather than substantiating
compliance with functional requirements, operational limits were
established, which facilitated the process.
Determining the Polar Service Temperature:
The polar service temperature (PST) is a determining factor due to
its crucial importance to the application of the Polar Code, and is
calculated using the temperature data set from the past 10 years in
the area of operation during the months of operation.
The navigable routes necessarily run through areas in which there is
no data available from direct temperature measurement. Therefore,
it is necessary to extrapolate from the data collected
at research stations, based on the applicable environmental
conditions, to draw up a temperature map in order to select the
relevant temperatures. The standard should be implemented in this
manner, making clear which extrapolation models are considered
acceptable.
Operational assessment. Development of risk assessment models:
The operational assessment defined in section 1.5 of Part 1-A,
Chapter 1 is considered a core aspect of the Polar Code.
The Sarmiento de Gamboa was not initially designed or built for
polar navigation. As mentioned previously, its certification
necessarily involved imposing a number of operational limitations
to eliminate risks inherent to the hazards of polar navigation (e.g.
ice, low temperature, high latitude). Therefore, it was not necessary
to conduct the risk assessments for which the lack of models has
been commented on.
The problem is that to date, and based on Spain's experience, of the
hazards listed in section 3 of the Introduction to the Polar Code that
require assessment, the only risk assessment model that has been
implemented is that relating to ice conditions (Polar Operational
Limit Assessment Risk Indexing System, or POLARIS, in MSC.1/
Circ.1519).
Without a standard assessment model for the other hazards (e.g.
low temperature, high latitude), it can be very difficult for
operators to carry out risk assessments and for the relevant
administrations to analyse them, considering that the second
greatest hazard would be that of navigating in areas with low air
temperatures, due to their implications for the ship’s structure.
By way of example, in 2023 the vessel's operator requested that the
Spanish Maritime Administration expand its Polar Certificate to
enable the Sarmiento de Gamboa to conduct oceanographic
campaigns in Arctic waters, provided these waters were ice free,
and in areas without low air temperatures and not at a high
latitude. To expand this certification, evidence had to be provided
regarding such aspects as the vessel's suitability and its equipment,
the climate characteristics of the planned navigation areas, and
amendments to the Polar Water Operational Manual (PWOM).
Ultimately, it was a question of carrying out the aforesaid risk
assessment in order to enable the elimination of the prevailing
restrictions and to determine the restrictive measures that would be
appropriate going forward.
Certification of life-saving appliances and arrangements for polar
conditions:
The Code requires that survival systems and equipment be fully
operational at PST during the maximum expected rescue time
(never less than 5 days).
The problem encountered with regards to this equipment is that
there is no testing standard for these conditions, nor are there
certificates for conventional equipment indicating the extreme
temperatures applicable to the product, meaning that very few
current standards are able to guarantee such times under PST
conditions.
It would be desirable to link the Polar Code to testing standards
that could serve as a benchmark so that it would be possible to find
equipment on the market with a clear range of applicability, based
on a specific temperature and time duration.
In the case of the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, the ship does not
operate at low temperatures and therefore its PST is never below
the temperature limit for conventional equipment testing.
Comparison of requirements for category C ships, which are subject
to much lower requirements and have very different times and
needs than category A ships
Category C vessels may essentially have variable requirements
based on the eight different types of polar waters included in their
category (risk of ice impact), PST, and latitude of operations.
Certification may, therefore, range from a document review—when
the establishment of operational limits mitigates all hazards
inherent to polar navigation (which could extend to practically
every steel-hulled ship with an average construction standard)—to
much higher certification levels entailing the verification of the hull
scantling, ice strengthening, suction design, materials and
operational temperature limit of motor fluids in essential systems
depending on the PST, the installation of appliances to prevent
essential systems and equipment from freezing, as well as the
carrying of the PWOM and other related documents.
Necessary modifications, life-saving equipment acquired, and how
operations for the Antarctic campaign are reflected in the PWOM
The Sarmiento de Gamboa is an example of a conventional vessel
certified for polar navigation in which the mitigation of risk is
absolute due to the operational limits established. Therefore, the
vessel may only sail in the Antarctic to the north of 63ºS, during the
Antarctic summer, in ice-free waters; i.e. restricted to lower
latitudes, outside of low-temperature areas, and where there is no
possibility of encountering ice. The additional equipment that had
to be brought on board included life rafts that were especially
designed to ensure that launch mechanisms would not freeze,
personal survival kits, and equipment for communications with
aircraft. Moreover, a PWOM had to be drafted, and the
International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
(MARPOL) procedures already adopted by the ship had to be
adapted to a polar environment.
Training of onboard personnel
In the case of the RV Sarmiento de Gamboa, pursuant to Section 3
of Part I-A1, Chapter 12 of the Polar Code, and taking into account
the type of ship, its category C classification, and its operational
limits in polar waters, it was not necessary for the ship’s masters,
chief mates, and officers in charge of a navigational watch to be
certified under the provisions of Regulation V/4 of the amended
STCW-78 Convention and Section A-V/4 of the Training Code.
Nevertheless, an agreement was reached and it was considered
prudent for masters and officers in charge of a navigational watch
to obtain the basic training certificates provided for in Regulation
V/4 of STCW as amended by the Polar Code.
Conclusions and Recommendations
Encourage all relevant stakeholders to conduct meetings,
workshops, seminars, or other means of sharing concerns and
resolving doubts regarding application of the Polar Code,
establishing an active dialogue with the International Maritime
Organization.
Further develop standard assessment models for the main hazards
faced by ships sailing in polar waters, along with guidelines for
their proper assessment.
Highlight and promote the use, by all stakeholders involved in
international maritime operations in polar waters, of tools such as
the Arctic Shipping Best Practice Information Forum established by
the Working Group on the Protection of the Arctic Marine
Environment (PAME), and the group of navigation experts of the
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), to
harmonize the interpretation and improve the implementation of
the Polar Code.
