Systematic Conservation Plan for the Antarctic Peninsula Project
Updates and Next Steps
Systematic Conservation Plan for the Antarctic Peninsula Project
Updates and Next Steps
Information Paper submitted by SCAR and IAATO
Summary
The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
undertook a collaborative project to develop the first systematic
conservation plan for the Antarctic Peninsula. Primarily finished in
2021, correction of some input data and additional requested
analyses resulted in the project concluding in 2022. The large
amount of data generated by the project and the creation of a
conservation planning decision-support tool tailored to the
Antarctic Peninsula is likely to be of interest to a broad audience.
The decision-support tool has been created in the form of R code,
an open-source programming language and software environment
for statistical analysis and graphics representation. This R code,
together with the majority of input data used in the project, will be
made available for public access and use prior to the next ATCM.
Outcomes from the project will also be made available in a peer-
reviewed scientific publication.
Background
The Antarctic Peninsula is the most accessible part of the continent,
and the region most subject to current and future environmental
changes. It is also home to an abundance of Antarctic terrestrial
biodiversity, including species not found in the rest of the
continent, such as bank-forming mosses, the only two Antarctic
vascular plant species, and chinstrap and gentoo penguins. As the
most-visited part of Antarctica, Peninsula ecosystems are already
under pressure, and human activity in the form of science and
tourism continues to grow. Improving the management of human
activity in the region is a key priority for IAATO, as well as for the
Antarctic Treaty Parties. Clear that an integrated approach was
required that accounted for multiple values and stakeholders, SCAR
and IAATO undertook a collaborative project to develop an
evidence-based approach to site management (ATCM XL IP166
ATCM XL IP166 Systematic Conservation Plan for the Antarctic
Peninsula, ATCM XLII IP24 ATCM XLII IP24 Systematic
Conservation Plan for the Antarctic Peninsula Project Updates). The
primary aims of the project were to inform the Antarctic
community on concurrent management of science, tourism and
biodiversity in the region, using a spatially-explicit approach. To
achieve these aims, the research team employed a Systematic
Conservation Planning (SCP) approach, which is routinely used by
conservation scientists to aid decision-makers in managing whole
landscapes involving multiple stakeholders and objectives.
Project Updates
The SCP process generally consists of a planning phase, data
collection, stakeholder engagement, analyses, refinement and
conclusion. The research team, based at Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia, was supported by a Coordination Group
consisting of SCAR and IAATO representatives.
Data consisted of two types – primary data, and qualitative survey
data. The primary data were incorporated from mostly-published
sources, representing high quality and generally comprehensive
data (e.g. the SCAR biodiversity database, the IAATO visitor site
data). Qualitative survey data, with survey ethics clearance
provided by and adjudicated through
Monash University, were gathered from a series of stakeholder
engagement workshops, representing the values identified by
different stakeholders.
A half day in-person workshop was held in Miami, Florida in
February 2020 at which IAATO operators identified values
important to the tourism industry (e.g., penguin colonies,
continental landings). They also estimated how many of these
values they rely on, which helped to inform the targets used in the
analyses. Due to COVID-19, the planned workshop with
biodiversity, science and policymaking experts was transitioned to
an online format. Replicated for two different time zones, the online
workshops followed a similar process to the tourism workshop and
identified values for science and biodiversity. Over 100 science,
biodiversity and tourism values were identified in total, many of
which were incorporated into the SCP process.
The input data were converted to 1 km2 raster cells, recognising
presence or absence of each value, for use in the analyses. The
contemporary and flexible SCP software, Prioritizr, was determined
to be the most appropriate software to undertake the analyses.
Prioritizr is available as a package in the open-source, statistical
computing environment R https://www.r-project.org. The analyses
generated a range of scenarios where various objectives were met to
assign science, tourism and biodiversity to multiple zones. Feedback
generated during the stakeholder engagement process was used to
inform and refine the analyses and inputs over multiple iterations.
Upon conclusion of the project, a draft final report was provided to
SCAR and IAATO in April 2021. Problems with the resolution of
some of the tourism site data were identified by IAATO (i.e. some
landing sites were identified as two sites when they should be
combined to one) and IAATO further requested that ship numbers
be considered in the analysis alongside visitor numbers. The
updated final report was received in late 2022 and next steps for
making the tool available are now in progress.
The standardised input data and the R code developed for the
process forms the core part of the decision-support tool. New data
can be incorporated into the SCP process as it becomes available.
Whilst anyone with basic coding experience will be able to use the
R code decision-support tool, including the incorporation of new
data, it is recommended that users understand clearly what
scenarios they wish to test so as to understand what inputs and
outputs represent. Advice from those experienced in conservation
planning will facilitate understanding of how changing data, input
in the form of targets, costs and constraints, influences the
scenarios.
Next Steps
The SCAR-IAATO SCP project is the first development of a broad-
scale conservation planning process for multiple stakeholders in the
terrestrial Antarctic. It represents a significant advancement on
previously-available decision-support tools and data, and initial
outcomes demonstrate the potential usefulness for informing
concurrent management of biodiversity and human activities in the
Antarctic Peninsula region.
The decision-support tool (R code) and the majority of input data
used in the project will be made available for public access and use
prior to the next ATCM. Outcomes from the project will also be
made available in a peer-reviewed scientific publication.
