Renewal of the Norwegian Troll Research Station, Dronning Maud
Land
Renewal of the Norwegian Troll Research Station, Dronning Maud
Land
Summary
This information paper updates Parties on the future development
of the Norwegian Troll Research Station, which in its current state
is running toward the end of its lifetime. In April 2023, the
Norwegian Government decided to plan for a complete renewal of
the station. The detailed planning of this renewal process is now
being initiated, and it is expected that the new Troll Research
Station will be operational around 2030 at the earliest.
Renewal of Troll Research Station
In Information Paper 61 submitted to ATCM XLIII Norway informed
the Parties that it was in the process of completing a concept study
for Troll Research Station to identify future upgrade needs.
The concept study was completed in June 2022. It described and
assessed four different concepts for a future version of Troll
Research Station, reflecting four different ambition and investment
levels. The concept study concluded that a total renewal of the
station buildings, either building for a future capacity of 65 or 100
people would be the best solution from a long-term benefit and
feasibility perspective. After its release, the concept study went
through a quality assurance control, which confirmed the
robustness of the assessment and conclusions contained in the
concept study. It should be noted that all the concepts considered in
the study include a substantial upgrade of the energy system at
Troll – increasing use of renewable energy sources substantially.
In January 2023 a government delegation, led by the Norwegian
Minister of Climate and Environment visited Troll for an on-site
understanding of current status of Troll Research Station, thus
contextualizing the concept study’s assessment and conclusions for
the decision makers. Four key ministries participated in this site
visit.
In April 2023, the Norwegian Government decided to go ahead with
the planning phase based on a concept entailing a total renewal of
the Troll Research Station, in line with the conclusions of the
concept study. Key aspects of chosen concept are:
A new station building complex covering approx. 6 500 m2 situated
in the same area as the current station;
A station dimensioned for up to 65 people during summer,
providing robust research facilities and support for at least 20
scientists;
A station dimensioned for an overwintering staff of 10;
A station that includes standard facilities for operation,
accommodation, social interaction, contingency facilities, etc.;
A station that includes functional research and laboratory facilities,
including field deployment areas;
A total renewal of the energy system – upgrading to green energy
solutions; and
A separate emergency unit
Although the planning and construction phase will be detailed in
the next phase of the project, it is assumed that construction will be
ongoing for several seasons, and that the new Troll Research Station
will be operational from 2030 at the earliest.
Norway will provide further information and details on the plans at
future ATCMs.
Norway will prepare a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
for the renewal of the Troll Research Station, currently expected to
be submitted for consideration by the Parties through the given
consultation provisions of the Environmental Protocol at CEP 28 /
ATCM 58 in 2026.
