Carbon Footprints of Antarctic Activities
Carbon Footprints of Antarctic Activities
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
Almost every human activity in Antarctica carries a carbon
footprint. At present, there are no requirements for fishing and
tourist vessels, logistics vessels and aircraft for stations or station
operations to calculate their carbon emissions. Without that data, it
will be impossible to reduce and/or offset those carbon loads in a
timely and effective way. ASOC suggests that the ATCM, CCAMLR
and COMNAP, and their membership consider how they could
monitor the carbon footprint of Antarctic activities (including black
carbon). This could eventually lead to a systematic approach to
reducing carbon emissions and local black carbon pollution from all
activities in the Antarctic.
Introduction
In February 2023, NGOs associated with Ocean Geographic and
Mission Blue worked with Aurora Expeditions to take a group of 94
people to Antarctica on the new Sylvia Earle vessel. The organizers
calculated the carbon footprints of all passengers involved,
including their roundtrip flights to Buenos Aires, feeder flights to
Ushuaia, the vessel’s fuel use, and the flights from King George
Island to Punta Arenas and on to Santiago. The totals for the ship
(119 metric tonnes of Low Sulphur Marine Gas Oil producing 378
tonnes of CO2) and the flights (over 400 tonnes of CO2) were
allocated to each person based on their air itineraries. Combined,
that is equivalent to approximately 800 economy round-trip flights
between New York and London or 2 million miles by car. The
calculation did not include crew flights to and from the ship, or the
carbon implications of the food and other supplies used during the
voyage. The black carbon emissions from this one voyage were
between 30 – 46 kg.
Additionally, passengers on the vessel engaged in a citizen science
program that conducted analyses at each landing site. A final report
on their findings will be released on June 8. Similar science
activities are carried out on some IAATO expeditions. These
programs yield two benefits: informing the passengers of the
implications and impacts of their activities, thus allowing them to
choose fully vetted offset investments; and building a database that
can be updated through time.
Accounting for current emissions from Antarctic activities
Calculations of carbon footprint or emissions are not standard for
Antarctic activities, whether tourism, fishing and associated
activities, or research. As well as a growing number of ships, the
number and variety of aircraft continues to expand for tourism,
logistics and science.
The two main vectors of Antarctic tourism are traditional shipborne
tourism, primarily focused in the Antarctic Peninsula area; and
tourism in the Antarctic interior, which is air-supported, land-based,
and spread out over a large area. There are a number of fly-sail
operations using King George Island as either a gateway to or
departure from a ship. It is unclear to what extent Antarctic tourism
operators track their carbon footprints or fuel usage, although
several tour companies claim to be ‘carbon neutral’ and a few
companies have experimented with carbon offsets for their
passengers.
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)
has taken some proactive steps to reduce emissions from its
members’ vessels. In October 2021 it agreed to an ambitious plan to
track the International Maritime Organization (IMO) Greenhouse
Gas (GHG) Strategy target of at least 50% emissions reductions by
2050 compared with 2008, and a global goal of
net zero before 2050. For the first time each member will submit
seasonal fuel consumption data to the Association’s secretariat as
part of its climate change strategy for Antarctic tourism. This is a
welcome development, and a possible model for Antarctic Treaty
and CCAMLR Parties
At present, CCAMLR does not have a measure in place to require
fishing or transhipment vessels to account for the quantities of fuel
used while in the Antarctic or in transiting to and from the
Southern Ocean, nor does it have any regulations on limiting fuel
use or emissions.
COMNAP maintains a database of ships involved in supplying
Antarctic science stations and exchanging expedition members.
Many new vessels have been commissioned in recent years or are
currently on order that provide safer and more environmentally
friendly operations. COMNAP published a paper in 2021 describing
new research vessels with technologies that improve fuel efficiency,
but which still burn substantial amounts of marine diesel fuel.
In 2017, COMNAP produced a catalogue of all stations, which
contains information about each facility including fuel usage. Since
then, the information for some but not all stations has been
updated. UNLESS, an NGO active on Antarctic issues, canvassed 77
Antarctic stations in its landmark publication Antarctic Resolution.
Only Princess Elisabeth is reported close to being a carbon zero
station, and it operates only in the summer. Neither the COMNAP
nor UNLESS databases contain detailed information on (1) how
energy is generated or (2) total annual fuel use by category.
The IMO has taken some steps that could supply more information
on Antarctic activities. In 2016, the IMO adopted the Ship Fuel Oil
Consumption System, requiring reporting for all vessels 5000 GT or
larger. In 2022 it published Guidelines for Ship Energy Efficiency
Management Plans, Administration Verification of Ship Oil
Consumption Data, the Ship Fuel Oil Consumption Database, and
Submission of Data to the IMO Data Collection System. Starting in
2023, this data is being used to calculate each ship’s Operational
Carbon Intensity. If this approach were applied to fishing vessels, it
would make a big difference both in Antarctica and the global
ocean. The IMO has yet to require particulate filters or other
technology to prevent black carbon from being emitted in the
Antarctic Special Area. Although there has been active discussion of
measures to be applied to reduce the impact of black carbon on the
Arctic for over a decade nothing mandatory has been agreed as yet.
Climate change has been a significant focus of the Antarctic Treaty
System for many years, including numerous workshops, resolutions
and papers introduced by Parties, Observers and SCAR. There will
be a special focus on the issue at this year’s Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. The IPCC’s 6th Assessment Report concludes
that there is now high confidence that abrupt and/or irreversible
change will occur in the climate system when tipping points are
reached, which will lead to further global warming. At sustained
levels of warming between 2-3ºC the West Antarctic ice sheet could
be lost completely and irreversibly.
At the same time, over the last three decades, the pace and extent of
all Antarctic activities has increased substantially. In 2022, IAATO
anticipated that 2022-23 activity levels will rise as forecasted to
pre-pandemic rates. Tourism was estimated to have reached a total
of around 104,000 people this past season (2022-23), involving
more air support and many different types and sizes of vessels.
Helicopters and submersibles are increasingly being used as well. In
the 1992-93 season a year after IAATO was founded, there were
6,700 tourists. More than 56,000 visited in the 2018-19 season.
Fishing and research activities are also on the rise. CCAMLR has
licensed 36 fishing vessels from 12 countries fishing in the Southern
Ocean, with other vessels used to support fishing activities operate
in the Southern Ocean, but their numbers are not well known.
Likewise, the number and sizes of science stations have increased in
the past decade, as have the logistics vessels and planes needed to
supply them and exchange personnel. COMNAP’s database lists 72
vessels involved in logistics.
Although there has been a global focus on reducing CO2 emissions
to combat climate change, Antarctic Treaty System bodies have not
extensively discussed emissions from activities in the Antarctic.
There are no ATCP Measures or recommendations specifically about
reducing fuel use in the building and operation of stations, for the
logistics involved in supplying them, or for the scientific activities
carried out. Even if these activities are only a small part of global
emissions, there is evidence that black carbon from local activities
directly exacerbates Antarctic melting. Moreover, as the scale of the
human footprint increases in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean,
now is the time for the Antarctic Treaty System to show global
leadership by contributing to efforts to reduce the emissions impact
of Antarctic activities.
The IMO has taken some steps designed to reduce the impact of
shipping, including designating the Antarctic Treaty Area as a
Special Area under the International Convention for the Prevention
of Pollution from ships (MARPOL) Annexes I (oil), II (chemicals)
and V (garbage). Additionally, the use and carriage of heavy fuel oil
in the Southern Ocean was banned in 2011 given the Antarctic’s
Special Area status. Although the IMO has not set fuel efficiency or
emissions standards for vessels operating in the Southern Ocean, in
2011 it adopted amendments to MARPOL Annex VI to mandate
technical and operational energy efficiency measures to reduce the
amount of CO2 emissions from international shipping. That
initiative is driving innovation in the shipping sector. The Antarctic
Treaty System should draw on the IMO's climate change and air
pollution measures aimed at shipping globally and identify what
additional measures are required to better protect the Antarctic
region.
Next steps
ASOC believes that a better understanding of the carbon footprint of
Antarctic activities would be a useful foundation for developing
future ATCM instruments designed to reduce the environmental
impact of those activities. To achieve this, ASOC proposes to
produce an analysis and estimate of the emissions generated by
fishing, tourism, and scientific research that is as thorough and
accurate as possible, aiming to present it at the 2024 ATCM. We
look forward to working with ATCPs, IAATO, NAPs, COMNAP, and
other ATCM and CCAMLR Observers and Experts to obtain accurate
information that could be used to complete this analysis.
ASOC suggests that the ATCM, CCAMLR and COMNAP, and their
membership consider how they could monitor the carbon footprint
of Antarctic activities (including black carbon). This could
eventually lead to a systematic approach to reducing carbon
emissions and local black carbon pollution from all activities in the
Antarctic.
