Logistical Challenges due to Changing Environmental Conditions:
Experiences from the Korean Antarctic Program 2022-23
Logistical Challenges due to Changing Environmental Conditions:
Experiences from the Korean Antarctic Program 2022-23
Information Paper submitted by Korea (ROK)
Summary
As the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean continues to
experience the effects of climate change, the operation of research
stations are directly affected by the uncertainties of the changing
environment. This past 2022-23 Austral summer season, the Korean
Antarctic Program has observed accelerated melting of early-
summer sea ice off the shore of Jang Bogo Station. The premature
thinning of sea ice has posed severe difficulty in logistics and supply
mission for the station. This information paper presents the
difficulties the Korean Antarctic Program has faced this season, and
highlights the cooperation measures that contributed to addressing
these challenges. As station operations are anticipated to be
increasingly affected by climate change, we would like to encourage
closer cooperation between the Antarctic Treaty Parties as a starting
point for informed management actions in the future.
Background
The Antarctic Jang Bogo Station is a year-round research station
located in Terra Nova Bay, and is operated by the Korean Antarctic
Program ever since its establishment in 2014. The station supports
up to 100 researchers during the summer season, while only a
skeleton crew of 18 remains to support research and maintain the
station facilities during the overwintering season.
The station receives limited quantities of supplies during the
summer months, which includes materials for facility maintenance,
equipment for research activities and food supply for the summer
research and overwintering teams. Taking into account the volume
of the cargo, including its weight and size, the Korean Antarctic
Program mainy utilizes its icebreaking research vessel Araon. An
additional cargo ship may be leased when there is a request for
additional station supply, or when there is conflict in Araon’s cruise
schedule. In the case of arrival and departure of summer field
research personnel, and urgent supplies such as medical equipment,
intercontinental flights are used in cooperation with the Italian
program.
Sea ice is crucial in these logistic efforts, as it serves as the dock and
runway for the supply missions. The sea ice is thick enough to
withstand units of shipping container up until December, during
which can be transported on ice via land vehicle. During the high
summer season when there is no sea ice, barges may be used for
unloading the cargo, although with limited capacity compared to
unloading on ice. The landing of intercontinental flights from the
gateway cities to Antarctica also use sea ice as runway, thus the sea
ice thickness is a pivotal piece of information in the safe operation
of the station.
Logistical Challenges in 2022-23
During the 2022-2023 Austral summer season, sea ice along the
coastline in front of the Antarctic Jang Bogo Station were free of ice
earlier than in previous seasons due to the katabatic winds in Terra
Nova Bay. Original plan was to unload and transport cargo via land
vehicles over the sea ice, but the plan was no longer feasible as sea
ice was lost entirely. The usage of barges was reviewed as an
alternative, but there were very high risk of collision with the drift
ice and was determined the cargo will have to be transported next
season. This has affected the field research activities this year, and
adjustments were made to the overall field schedule.
In addition, the thinning of the sea ice was faster than in other
years. Intercontinental aircraft requires at least 1.5 meters thick sea
ice for the landing, but the thickness of sea ice was already at 1.1 to
1.4 meter in October, which the start of the Austral summer season.
The Korean Antarctic program, in close cooperation with the United
States and the Italian program, transported research personnels and
equipment via their respective stations. Over-wintering personnels
were transported using Araon. We express our gratitude to the
United States and Italy for their kind cooperation.
Recommendations
This season, the Korean Antarctic Program experienced an
unprecedented situation ever since Jang Bogo’s establishement in
2014. As the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment
(ACCE) report that was published by the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR) last year clearly states, the Antarctic
environmental system is significantly affected by the climate change
and will present significant risks to society in and beyond the
Antarctic region. Antarctic stations and research camps may be the
first to witness the impact of climate change on the Antarctic
environment.
Keeping in mind the increased importance of scientific research in
Antarctica, securing flexibility and expanding international
cooperation in operation to respond to unexpected changes is
required. Korea will continue to work closely with the station
operators in the Ross Sea region, and as other countries may also
face difficulties due to climate change, we would like to share our
experience and encourage further information sharing among
Antarctic Treaty Parties, to plan ahead and manage the impacts of
climate change in Antarctica in scientific operation.
