Republic of Belarus in the System
of the Antarctic Treaty.
Justification of the status of the Consultative Party of the Antarctic
Treaty
English version provided by the author
Republic of Belarus in the System of the Antarctic Treaty.
Justification of the status of the Consultative Party of the Antarctic
Treaty
Information paper presented by the Republic of Belarus
Summary
In 2019, the Government of the Republic of Belarus sent an
application to the United States, the depositary country of the 1959
Antarctic Treaty, for the status of a Consultative Party to the
Antarctic Treaty. This Information Paper contains information on
the rationale for the compliance of the activities of the Republic of
Belarus in the Antarctic Treaty System with the requirements for
this status with an additional information for the period from 2020
to early 2023.
The status of an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party and the
requirements for its submission are defined by Article IX of the
1959 Antarctic Treaty and Decision 2 (2017) XL of the ATCM
(Beijing, China). The activities of the Republic of Belarus in the
Antarctic Treaty system fully comply with the existing legal
provisions of this status.
Participation in the bodies of the Antarctic Treaty System
The Republic of Belarus joined the Antarctic Treaty on 27 December
2006 and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty on 15 August 2008. From 2006 (ATCM XXIX) to 2022
(ATCM XLIV), the Government Delegation of the Republic of
Belarus participated in the work of 13 ATCM and CEP meetings as
an observer (in 2021 and 2022 - in distant format), where it
submitted 27 information documents for discussion.
The Republic of Belarus has been a permanent member of the
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)
since 2015 and an associate member of the Scientific Committee for
Antarctic Research (SCAR) since 2018. The delegation of the
Republic of Belarus took part in eleven meetings of the Council of
Managers of National Antarctic Programs, at which 9 working
papers and 8 presentations were presented, as well as in four SCAR
sessions, at which our country presented 2 reports, 4 messages and
3 presentations.
National legislation regulating activities in Antarctica
Starting from 2006 till 2022, 17 normative legal acts were adopted
in the Republic of Belarus in relation to Antarctica: 1 Republican
Law “On Joining the Republic of Belarus to the Antarctic Treaty”
dated July 19, 2006 No 157-З, 1 Decree of the President of the
Republic of Belarus “On Joining the Republic of Belarus to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” No
200 dated 10 April 2008, 7 Decisions of the Government of the
Republic of Belarus, including the Decisions of the Government of
the Republic of Belarus “On Review and Granting Permits to Legal
Entities and Individual Entrepreneurs within the Antarctic Treaty
Area” adopted in 2020 and “On approval of Measure 16
“Amendments to Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Conservation of Antarctic Fauna
and Flora”” and also 4 Decisions of Ministries and 4 bilateral
international agreements on cooperation in the Antarctic. In
addition, the draft Decree of the Government of the Republic of
Belarus “On approval of Measure 1 (2005) “Annex VI to the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty “Material Liability arising from environmental
emergencies” is under consideration by Ministries and Departments
of the Republic of Belarus.
Expedition activity and creation of the Belarusian scientific station
in Antarctica
From 2007 to 2023 with the transport and logistical support of the
Russian Federation, 15 Belarusian seasonal Antarctic expeditions
were organized and conducted, in which more than 90 Belarusian
and 6 foreign scientists and specialists took part.
Since 2015, in East Antarctica, Enderby Land near Vechernyaya
Mount, a Belarusian research station has been built based on
domestic design developments. The start of construction was carried
out after agreement with the CEP in 2015 (ATCM XXXVIII) of the
Final Comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment of this
project. For the 2020-2021 season the creation of its first stage was
completed. At present, the formation of its second stage is being
carried out with a possible transition of the station’s operation to a
year-round mode in the coming years. Separate plant facilities are
shown in Annex A (Figures A.1 - A.9).
In January 2020, the Australian Government conducted an
inspection of the Belarusian seasonal Antarctic station “Mountain
Evening/Vechernyaya” in accordance with the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection.
The final inspection report noted that the members of the inspection
team were impressed by the high level of design and construction of
the plant, its minimal impact on the landscape, the efficient use of
solar energy and water, and the commitment to scientific research.
The inspection team found the modular and efficient design of the
plant to be a good example of a modern facility and noted that all
existing new facilities were fully commissioned and operating
efficiently. The inspection group of Australia highly assessed the
rational use of available buildings and the work on clearing the
territory at the site of the former field base of the Soviet Antarctic
Expedition “Vechernyaya Mount” in cooperation with the Russian
Federation, and also noted that construction and operation of the
station was carried out in accordance with the final EIA prepared by
Belarus. The inspection group noted that the plans of the Republic
of Belarus for transition of operation of the station to year-round
mode are at a high level.
In 2021 - 2023 in accordance with the Final EIA submitted by the
Republic of Belarus to ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII in Sofia
(Bulgaria) under No. IP39 Construction and operation of the
Belarusian Antarctic Station on Vechernyaya Mount, Enderby Land -
Final Comprehensive Environmental Assessment, and taking into
account the recommendations of the Australian inspection team the
Belarusian Antarctic station was equipped with a new
environmental and technological equipment - a press for the
disposal of barrels and metal waste, an incinerator and a stationary
oil storage facility with environmentally friendly double-shell
isotainers (Annex A, Figures A.10 - A.12).
The plans of environmental protection activities of the Republic of
Belarus in Antarctica for the period up to 2025 provide for
equipping the station with domestic wastewater treatment system
and other, environmental and technological equipment.
Transport operations for the delivery and removal of personnel and
cargo of the Belarusian Antarctic Expedition to the seasonal station
“Mountain Evening/Vechernyaya” are carried out by sea vessels
and helicopters of the Russian Antarctic Expedition, as well as by
aircraft of the DROMLAN International Corporate Aviation
Program, of which the Republic of Belarus has become a member
since 2020.
Scientific activity and participation in the development of
international scientific cooperation in Antarctica
Currently, the research of the Republic of Belarus in the Antarctic is
carried out in accordance with the subprogram “Development of the
Belarusian Antarctic Station” of the State Program
“Scientific and Innovative Activities of the National Academy of
Sciences of Belarus” for 2021–2025. The responsible customer of
the program is the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus (NAS of
Belarus), the customer is the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection of the Republic of Belarus.
Scientific programs in the Antarctic are carried out with the
participation of research institutes of the National Academy of
Sciences of Belarus (Institute of Physics, Institute of Nature
Management, Scientific and Practical Center for Bioresources,
Institute of Physiology, Institute of Microbiology, etc.) and the
Belarusian State University. Scientific organizations, scientists and
specialists from other countries participating in the Antarctic Treaty
also take part in the research.
Long-term goals and plans for research work include the following
set of research and monitoring of the state of the Antarctic
environment:
- studies of atmospheric aerosol parameters and reflection spectra of
the underlying surface;
- aerospace research of natural objects;
- studies of the state of the ozonosphere and the components of the
radiation balance;
- production of standard meteorological observations and climate
research;
- geological, geophysical research;
- seismological monitoring;
- glaciological and paleogeographic studies;
- integrated field studies of biological diversity and monitoring of
natural ecosystems, as well as microbiological studies;
- carrying out ecological and microbiological monitoring of key
environmental parameters in the area of work of the Belarusian
Antarctic Expedition;
- biomedical research and problems of prevention of diseases of
polar explorers.
Research in all areas is provided with modern scientific equipment
and instruments. Their photographs and a partial list are shown in
Annex B (Figures B.1 - B.15). There are separate specialized
laboratories (biological, atmospheric physics, meteorological
bureau, etc.). Photos of scientific laboratories and premises of
individual services are shown in Annex C (Figures C.1 - C.8).
The Republic of Belarus and Belarusian research organizations have
14 agreements on scientific and technical cooperation in Antarctica
with the Governments and organizations from 9 countries
participating in the Antarctic Treaty (Russia, Bulgaria, Republic of
Turkey, New Zealand, Great Britain, France, Finland, Germany,
Ukraine).
The results of the Belarusian Antarctic research were summed up at
four international scientific conferences “The natural environment
of the Antarctic: interdisciplinary approaches to the study”.
The results of the scientific activity of Belarusian scientists in the
Antarctic for the period from 2007 to 2022 published in 4 separate
monographs (books), 35 articles in high-ranking scientific journals
(impact factor over 1.3), 107 articles and abstracts published in
proceedings of international scientific conferences held in different
countries, of which 84 publications were published in English. The
number of publications co-authored with specialists from other
countries is 62. Eight data sets have been created and are available
to the scientific community. More than 70 public lectures on
Antarctic topics have been read. Six national exhibitions about the
activities of the Republic of Belarus in the Antarctic have been held.
Eight documentaries have been created covering the activities of
the Republic of Belarus and international scientific cooperation in
Antarctica.
Final provisions
The Republic of Belarus fully supports all the provisions of the
Antarctic Treaty dated December 1, 1959, the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty dated October 4,
1991 with five Annexes, and the Recommendations and Measures of
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings that have come into
force and expresses willingness, as before, to follow such basic
principles of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of 1991 as the
preservation of Antarctica as a region of the world, the
development of international cooperation based on freedom of
scientific research and the comprehensive protection of the
Antarctic environment.
Based on the above, we believe that the current activities of our
government in Antarctica meet the necessary criteria for the
Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.
We express confidence that in assessing the activity of our country
in the Antarctic, the Consultative Parties will demonstrate a
constructive approach and objectivity in accordance with the spirit
and principles of the Antarctic Treaty.
Annex A
Separate objects of the Belarusian Antarctic station Mountain
Evening/Vechernyaya
Figure A.1 – General view of the station
Figure A.2 – Laboratory-residential module
Figure A.3 – Control, communication and navigation module
Figure A.4 – VSAT satellite dish
Figure A.5 – UPONOR heated water supply system
Figure A.6 – Motor vehicles
Figure A.7 – Garage box for snowmobiles
Figure A.8 – Complex of diesel power plants
Figure A.9 – Refrigerated container
Figure A.10 – Double-shell isotainer fuel storage
Figure A.11 – IU-32 incinerator
Figure A.12 –
Barrel press
HSM FP 3000
Annex B
Instruments and equipment for scientific research at the Belarusian
Antarctic station Mountain Evening/Vechernyaya
Figure B.2 – Automatic weather station Vaisala AWS 310
Figure B.3 – Automatic scanning photometer CIMEL CE 318N-EBM9
Figure B.1 – Multivolume polarizing lidar “Pole”
Figure B.4 – Two-channel photometer PION-FN
Figure B.5 – PION-PO ground level ozone meter
Figure B.6 – Automatic actinometric station СF-16
Figure B.7 – GNOM unmanned underwater vehicle
Figure B.8 – DJI mini quadcopter
Figure B.9 – A20-X unmanned aircraft complex
Figure B.10 – SIMBA hydrological thermal mower
Figure B.11 – Soil temperature monitoring system LCD-1
Figure B.12 – Digital temperature monitoring loggers
Figure B.13 – Mobile SRP radiometer
Figure B.14 – MMPOS-1
geophysical monitoring station
Figure B.15 – Seismological monitoring station
Annex C
Scientific laboratories and separate premises of the Belarusian
Antarctic Station
Mountain Evening/Vechernyaya
Figure C.1 – Meteorological bureau
Figure C.2 – Atmospheric Physics Laboratory
Figure C.3 – Biological laboratory
Figure C.4 – Control, communication and
navigation point
Figure C.5 – Operational-surgical unit
Figure C.6 – Cabin-campaign
Figure C.7 – Living cabin
Figure C.8 – Sanitary section
