Hosting of the 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)
at Kochi, India, 2024
Hosting of the 46th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)
at Kochi, India, 2024
Information paper submitted by India
The present Information Paper submitted by India is as per the
requirement of Para 119 of the Final Report of XLII -ATCM 2019
held in Prague, which states:
"(119)...The Meeting encouraged all upcoming ATCM Host
Countries to submit a progress report to the ATCM in the form of an
IP a year in advance and for upcoming Host Countries to provide
regular progress reports to the Secretariat. It also agreed that this
suggestion should be included in the Organisational Manual that
the Secretariat routinely provided to upcoming Host Countries..."
India wishes to inform about preparations for the 46th ATCM to be
held in Kochi, India, in 2024.
India thanks XLIV ATCM, which under Item 18 (a) para 342, stated
"For future planning, the Meeting took note of the following likely
timetable of upcoming ATCMs: • 2024 India …"
India takes pride in having the honour of hosting the ATCM after a
gap of sixteen years and recalls with gratitude the excellent
cooperation and support it received for hosting and conducting of
XXX ATCM at Delhi in 2007 from several quarters, including the
ATS, which came into existence at that time and the UK, the host
country for XXIX ATCM. We are already in touch with ATS and the
Host Country Secretariat of Finland and will benefit from their
expertise and preparations for the current Meeting.
Considering the climatic conditions in Delhi during late May and
June, the normal period of ATCM, India has decided to convene the
Meeting at Kochi, a coastal city of Kerala, the southernmost state of
India, which enjoys a moderate climate. Kerala, known as "God's
own country", is one of India's top-rated tourist destinations and is
the world's spice hotspot since ancient times. The Meeting is
scheduled tentatively between 20th May and 30 May, 2024. The
venue, Lulu Bolgatty International Convention Centre, is located on
the picturesque Bolgatty Island. The venue is well-connected with
all important national and state highways. It is a 45-minute drive
from Cochin International Airport, the world's first-ever fully solar-
powered airport. Once home to ancient civilisations and multiple
kingdoms, Kochi has been a key ancient port city of the sub-
continent and a key Centre of maritime trade and cultural
exchange. It is a fascinating city of diverse cultures, traditions,
architecture, art and cuisine. Steeped in history and uncommon
beauty with palm-fringed islands and backwaters, Kochi is the
perfect destination for an international convention such as the
ATCM. Apart from having some of the most reputed wellness
centres under the well-known ancient Indian medical science of
Ayurveda, Kerala State
also hosts rich tropical forests in the Western Ghats and many
protected areas, including the Periyar Tiger Reserve.
Direct International flight connections to Kochi can be availed from
Dubai, Doha or Singapore. It also has excellent connectivity with
major airports in India.
Apart from the world-class facilities for an international convention,
the venue has attached starred accommodation facility of the well-
known Grand Hyatt Hotel for around 200 delegates at the venue
itself. Additional accommodation facilities are available within
close proximity of the venue. Along with this IP India proposes to
screen a short film/video under Item 18 of the Agenda, highlighting
more than four decades of sustained scientific activities of India in
Antarctica and introducing the venue and its facilities. The video/
film will subsequently be available on the website of ATS and the
webpage of the 46th ATCM.
The National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research Centre (NCPOR),
an autonomous institution under the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(MoES) of the Government of India, which is the nodal agency to
implement the entire activities of the Indian Polar Program, has
been declared as the nodal agency for organising the 46th ATCM by
the Government of India.
NCPOR has already constituted a National Advisory Committee and
a Local Organising Committee with well-defined responsibilities.
The experienced pool of scientists and logistics personnel available
with the NCPOR will be used to host the Meeting successfully. The
local organisational structure of the Meeting, as outlined in the ATS
Organisational Manual, such as the ATCM Chair, ATCM Deputy
Secretary/Head of Host Country Secretariat, and Head of
Delegation, will be adopted by India.
The Government of India is committed to the cause of preserving
the pristine Antarctic environment, as evidenced by its recent
enactment of the 'Indian Antarctic Act 2022', in line with the
Madrid Protocol. The funding and financial assistance are already
committed, and additional resources will be forthcoming soon.
Apart from the Ministry of Earth Sciences, the Ministry of External
Affairs and the State Government of Kerala will be actively involved
in the organisation of the 46th ATCM.
The year 2024 marks twenty years of active cooperation among
Asian countries in furthering science and logistic cooperation in
Polar Regions under the aegis of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences
(AFoPS). It is proposed to commemorate the event with AFoPS
Chair addressing the delegates on achievements made under this
Forum. We would undoubtedly be privileged to listen to the usual
high-impact lectures from the experts from SCAR and others.
While all the Contracting Parties to the ATCM, Consultative and
Non-consultative Parties will be attending the ATCM, the invitations
will be sent by the ATS to the Observers from the Commission for
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR),
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and the
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) in
accordance with Rules 2 and 31 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure.
Invitations to experts from international organisations and non-
governmental organisations will also be sent for attending the
Meeting, such as the International Hydrographic Organization
(IHO), the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN),
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the Antarctic and
Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), and the International Association
of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO). Invitations will also be sent
to all the usual NGOs and other participants such as in accordance
with Rule 39 and Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure, by ATS.
India is looking forward to the 46th ATCM in Kochi and would like
to take this opportunity to invite you to the Meeting cordially.
