Topic Summary: CEP Discussions on Ship Biofouling and Ballast
Water Management
Topic Summary: CEP Discussions on Ship Biofouling and Ballast
Water Management
Information Paper presented by Australia, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom
Summary
The potential for ships to transport species to Antarctic waters has
been the subject of CEP discussions since the first meeting in 1998,
as a component of broader efforts to understand and address the
environmental risks associated with the introduction of non-native
species to the Antarctic region. To support the CEP’s work on
related actions in the Five-Year Work Plan and Climate Change
Response Work Program (CCRWP), this paper presents a summary
of CEP discussions on ship biofouling and ballast water
management, with references to meeting reports and papers. It
supports Working Paper 14 Review of International Maritime
Organization (IMO) and Antarctic Treaty system (ATS) guidelines
and agreements concerning ship biofouling and ballast water
management.
Summary of CEP discussions related to ship biofouling and ballast
water management
CEP I / ATCM XXII (Tromsø, 1998)
See CEP Report paragraph 34.
In discussion of non-native species issues, the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) informed the Committee about its
work regarding proposed international restrictions on the discharge
of ballast water at sea to prevent the accidental introduction of non-
native species.
CEP VII / ATCM XXVII (Cape Town, 2004)
See CEP Report paragraphs 126-128.
COMNAP submitted ATCM XXVII/WP009.Rev A on Applicability to
the Antarctic of the IMO “Guidelines for ships Operating in Arctic
Ice-Covered Waters to CEP VII and ATCM XXVII.
Norway suggested environmental issues related to ballast water
management may be of concern to the Committee, especially with
respect to the potential to introduce non-native species of marine
life.
See ATCM Report paragraph 134.
ATCM XXVII also discussed the possible introduction of non-native
organisms into Antarctic water through the discharge of ballast
water, and noted the use of the same ships operating in both the
Arctic and Antarctic and therefore encountering the organisms that
could potentially thrive in both areas, could be a particular reason
to look further into this issue. It was noted that the International
Convention for the Control and Management of Ship’s Ballast Water
and Sediment (Ballast Water Management Convention) agreed to in
February 2004, should be considered in this regard. The ATCM
agreed the issue warranted further consideration and requested
SCAR, with the support of other appropriate organisations, to
investigate the environmental and technical issues associated with
the question of ballast water and to report to the ATCM.
CEP VIII / ATCM XXVIII (Stockholm, 2005)
See CEP Report paragraphs 133-144.
COMNAP and IAATO submitted ATCM XXVIII/IP121 The use of
Ballast Water in Antarctica, which noted that 35 of the 70 vessels
operated or chartered by COMNAP and IAATO members did not
discharge any ballast water in the Antarctic Treaty area, 3 vessels
did not discharge any ballast water brought from outside the Treaty
area, and 2 vessels only exchanged ballast water in the open ocean.
The paper also provided background on the risk of introducing non-
native marine species through ballast water, and the development
by IMO of related guidelines and the Ballast Water Management
Convention.
In CEP discussion, there was general agreement among Members to
a proposal from Norway that consideration should be given to
voluntary application of the Ballast Water Management Convention
within the Antarctic Treaty area, because the implementation of the
Convention in general may take some time. The United Kingdom
noted the Convention provided for additional measures for certain
areas and offered to develop practical guidelines for ballast water
exchange in the Antarctic Treaty area, in consultation with other
interested Parties and appropriate experts, for consideration at the
next meeting. New Zealand noted that hull fouling may also be a
significant factor in the transfer of foreign organisms to Antarctica.
Members agreed there were several matters of concern with regard
to the broad issues of quarantine and the introduction of non-native
species, which warranted further detailed consideration by the
Committee, based on expert scientific advice, such as from SCAR.
SCAR advised that it had programs studying relevant questions,
such as the potential pathways for alien arrivals, and that it had
new information indicating that hull fouling is probably a bigger
problem than ballast water in Antarctic waters. SCAR offered to
provide further expert advice on the issue and indicated that it
would bring a paper to the next meeting
CEP IX / ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh, 2006)
See CEP Report paragraphs 125-133.
The Committee considered ATCM XXIX/WP005(rev.1) Practical
Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area,
submitted by the United Kingdom, which set out practical
guidelines that aimed to support early implementation of the IMO
Ballast Water Management Convention, and reduce the risk of
introducing non-native marine species into Antarctica through
ballast water. The draft guidelines had been circulated to COMNAP
members, and all comments were taken on board, and had also
received significant support at the 54th session of the IMO Marine
Environment Protection Committee (MEPC).
In developing practical guidelines for ballast water exchange, the
United Kingdom had considered the following key principles of the
IMO Ballast Water Management Convention:
ballast water exchange is to be used as an interim measure, until
such a time as ballast water treatment technologies have been
developed, as set out in the Convention;
Parties with common interests bordering enclosed and semi-
enclosed seas shall endeavour to seek co-operation with
neighbouring Parties through regional agreements to develop
harmonised procedures (Article 13(3) of IMO Convention); and,
a Party or Parties can put in place additional measures to those in
Section B of the Convention, such as regional management
strategies based on ballast water exchange, which will require ships
to meet a specified standard or requirement (Regulation C-1).
The Committee agreed to submit the guidelines to the ATCM for
adoption, and subsequent submission to the 55th session of the
MEPC to consider extending them to all shipping activities.
CEP IX also considered ATCM XXIX/WP013 Non-native Species in
the Antarctic. Report of a Workshop and ATCM XXIX/IP046 “Non-
native Species in the Antarctic” A Workshop, which reported on a
workshop held in New Zealand from 10 to 12 April 2006. Among
other things, the workshop had concluded that while hull fouling
was considered to be the most significant pathway for marine
introductions to the Antarctic, ballast water, debris, and waste
water (ships or facilities) also have to be considered. In addition, it
is likely there are significant risks of introduction associated with
IUU fishing activities. None of the marine pathways were
adequately addressed, with the state of knowledge on marine native
as well as non-native
biodiversity, as well as management options, several decades
‘behind’ the terrestrial environments.
Other related papers submitted to CEP VIII included:
ATCM XXVIII/IP082 The use of Anti-fouling Biocide Paints by
National Antarctic Program Vessels (COMNAP). COMNAP noted
that the IMO International Convention on the Control of Harmful
Anti-fouling Systems on Ships would prohibit the use of harmful
organotins (such as tributlyltin (TBT)) in anti-fouling paints and
establish a mechanism to prevent the potential future use of other
harmful substances in anti-fouling systems. The paper reported on a
survey of the anti-fouling practices of 25 National Antarctic
Program vessels, none of which used TBT-based paint and all
already complied with the Convention. The majority of vessels used
anti-fouling paints with the majority of biocides used being copper-
based. Controlled Depletion Polymer (CDP) was the most common
technology used for the control of biocide release by the paint. A
number of vessels did not use anti-fouling paint with some of these
equipped with electric cathodic methods of protection. These results
were considered representative of the anti-fouling practices for the
fleet of 39 ships operated by COMNAP members in the Antarctic
Treaty area.
ATCM XXVIII/IP083 The Use of Ballast Water in Antarctica
(COMNAP), which provided an update to the earlier results
presented in ATCM XXVII/IP121. A more detailed survey conducted
in 2005-2006, which captured 25 National Antarctic Program
vessels, found that no vessels discharged ballast water in the Area:
16% had isolated (sealed) ballast water tanks so never take on or
discharge ballast water, 60% did not take on or discharge ballast
water at all while in the Treaty Area, and the remaining 24% took
on but did not discharge ballast water in the Treaty Area. COMNAP
noted the surveys indicate the potential for environmental damage
from ballast water discharge is already low as few, if not none, of
the ships operating in the Antarctic Treaty area have an operational
requirement for discharging ballast water in the Area under normal
circumstances, that compliance with the IMO Ballast Water
Management Convention should not pose any significant problem,
and that COMNAP supported efforts to put the principles of the
Convention into practice within the Antarctic Treaty area,
whenever practicable, before the Convention comes into force.
See ATCM Report paragraph 83.
The ATCM adopted Resolution 3 (2006) on Ballast Water Exchange
in the Antarctic Treaty Area, which recommended that The
Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water Exchange in the Antarctic
Treaty area be used by all ships in the Antarctic Treaty area, except
those referred to in Article 3, paragraph 2, of the IMO Ballast Water
Management Convention. The Resolution stated the Parties’
recognition that the IMO Ballast Water Management Convention
had yet to enter into force, their awareness of the key principles
including that ballast water exchange be used as an interim
measure until such time as ballast water treatment technologies
have been developed, and their desire to put in place a Ballast
Water Regional Management Plan for Antarctica.
The ATCM also adopted Decision 2 (2006), stating the Parties’
desire to promote the implementation of an interim Ballast Water
Regional Management Plan for Antarctica by all vessels entering the
Antarctic Treaty area, and requesting the Host Government of
ATCM XXIX to forward the Practical Guidelines for Ballast Water
Exchange in the Antarctic Treaty Area to the 55th session of the
Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of the
International Maritime Organisation, with a request that they be
considered for appropriate action by the IMO.
CEP X / ATCM XXX (New Delhi, 2007)
See CEP Report paragraph 223-234.
SCAR submitted ATCM XXX/IP037 Hull fouling as a source of
marine invasion in the Antarctic, which indicated that hull fouling
is an important route for the transport of marine non-native species
to the Antarctic region. The paper summarised information about
risks
associated with fouling communities that have been reported from
vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area. It noted that:
fouling is much reduced by anti-fouling treatments, but those areas
of the hull resting on supports in dry dock, that typically go
untreated, have much denser fouling assemblages than treated areas
recorded fouling assemblages can be large and diverse, including as
many as 18 species, at least some of which are known invasive
species elsewhere in the world
although hull fouling assemblages are reduced during transit at sea,
the speed of many vessels entering the Antarctic is thought to be
too slow to remove much of the assemblage
ice-scouring is known to remove hull fouling assemblages and anti-
fouling treatments, however the relationship between ice thickness,
extent, encounter rate, and the extent of removal of fouling is
unknown and ice-scour is unable to remove fouling from sea chests
smaller vessels and craft, typically transported on board larger
research vessels and deployed for use on arrival at a given
destination, may also harbour considerable fouling assemblages.
SCAR drew attention to research required to fully understand the
sources of and species contributing to hull fouling and the extent to
which hull fouling could be reduced as a risk of introducing non-
native species. This included research on: the extent to which hull
fouling assemblages are found on all vessels entering the Antarctic
Treaty area; the relationships between ice characteristics and cover,
and removal of hull fouling assemblages and anti-fouling
treatments; the significance of hull fouling assemblages in sea
chests; the extent of fouling and organisms found on smaller vessels
and craft used for operations; the physiology of typical fouling
organisms from various parts of the world to identify species that
can tolerate the conditions of the Antarctic marine environment;
and Antarctic marine diversity.
Sweden also encouraged all Parties to ratify the IMO’s Ballast Water
Convention at the earliest opportunity, and the United Kingdom
noted that the Ballast Water Guidelines adopted by the ATCM under
Resolution 3 (2006) would be considered by the IMO in July 2008.
Related papers to ATCM XXX included:
ATCM XXX/IP001 Report by the CCAMLR Observer at the Thirtieth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (CCAMLR), which noted that
a number of points from ATCM XXIX were directly relevant to
CCAMLR’s work, including ATCM Decision 2 (2006) and Resolution
3 (2006) regarding ballast water exchange in the Treaty Area as
relating to fishing vessels.
ATCM XXX/IP134 Report of the International Association of
Antarctica Tour Operators 2006-2007 (IAATO), which noted that
the agenda of the IAATO 2006 General Meeting had included
discussions on ballast water.
ATCM XXX/IP125 Report Submitted to the XXX ATCM by IUCN The
World Conservation Union (IUCN), which noted that with the
increase in the number of ships visiting Antarctica, and the
predicted impact of climate change which may increase the chance
of survival and reproduction of non-native species in the Southern
Ocean, it was urgent for Parties to take effective measures to reduce
such risks by effectively managing the main introduction vectors
and pathways including fouling of vessel hulls, and ballast water,
including from fishing activities. It noted that smaller vessels may
pose a greater threat of introduction of non-native species through
biofouling due to less stringent hull maintenance regimes, and that
Parties may wish to support work within the IMO MEPC to develop
measures for minimising the translocation of invasive aquatic
species through biofouling of ships, including investigation of
measures with respect to niche areas on vessels.
The CEP Provisional Five-Year Work Plan (CEP X Report, Appendix
1) included an issue related to ‘Ballast Water Guidelines’, and a
related action ‘Review status of guidelines within IMO’.
CEP XI / ATCM XXXI (Kyiv, 2008)
Related papers included:
ATCM XXXI/IP033 Preventive measures to avoid the introduction of
alien species in Antarctica, in compliance with Annex II of the
Protocol (Uruguay), which described operational procedures
implemented to minimise the unintentional introduction of alien
species prior to departure for Antarctica, including cleaning the
ship's hull every 2 years during maintenance repairs.
ATCM XXXI/IP089 Report Submitted to the XXXI ATCM by IUCN
The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), which
noted that several recent studies had documented species
introductions into Antarctic and Southern Ocean waters, with
marine debris and shipping (mainly through hull fouling)
representing the two major vectors for marine species introductions.
It suggested that a thorough consideration of the issue is urgently
needed within the framework of the Treaty to prevent species
introductions, particularly in the marine environment, and that to
conserve the integrity of the unique Antarctic system Parties needed
to take effective measures to reduce such risks by effectively
managing the main introduction vectors and pathways: fouling of
vessel hulls, and ballast water, including from fishing activities. It
noted that the IMO MEPC had adopted guidelines providing
common guidance for vessels undertaking ballast water exchange in
Antarctic waters, suggested Parties apply the guidelines as soon as
possible as an interim measure for all ships entering the Antarctic
Treaty area before the Ballast Water Management Convention
comes into force, and encouraged Parties to exchange information
on introduced and invasive marine species and consider
undertaking risk assessment of species introductions through ballast
water and hull fouling into the Treaty area.
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XI Report, Appendix 1) included
a task to review the status of IMO Ballast Water Guidelines.
CEP XII / ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009)
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XII Report, Appendix 1)
included a task to review the status of IMO Ballast Water
Guidelines.
CEP XIII / ATCM XXXIII (Punta del Este, 2010)
CEP Report paragraph 306.
In discussion of ongoing intersessional work to update the CEP Non-
Native Species Manual, the United Kingdom reminded the
Committee of existing guidelines applicable to the issue of non-
native species that the ICG could draw on to include in a manual
including, for example, the Ballast Water Guidelines.
CEP XIX / ATCM XXXIX (Santiago, 2016)
CEP Report paragraph 239-240.
The United Kingdom presented ATCM XXXIX/IP27 Introduction of
biofouling organisms to Antarctica on vessel hulls, which provided
a summary of recent research on the levels of hull fouling on the
British Antarctic Survey’s RRS James Clark Ross between 2007 and
2014 at Rothera Research Station. It noted that better quantification
of the risk of marine non-native species introductions posed by
vessel hulls to Antarctic environments may inform the development
of appropriate management responses. Further hull surveys, on a
wider variety of vessels, throughout Antarctica may yield valuable
information on the likelihood of marine species introductions. The
Committee noted the information presented would be relevant to
work scheduled in its updated Five-Year Work Plan to address the
risk of marine non-native species introductions.
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XIX Report, Appendix 1)
included a task to review a report on IMO biofouling guidelines.
The CEP adopted the Climate Change Response Work Programme
(CEP XIX Report, Appendix 2), including the action ‘Review of IMO
biofouling guidelines to check adequacy for Southern Ocean and
vessels moving from region to region’.
CEP XX / ATCM XL (Beijing, 2017)
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XX Report, Appendix 1)
included a task to review a report on IMO biofouling guidelines.
CEP XXI / ATCM XLI (Buenos Aires, 2018)
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XXI Report, Appendix 1)
included a task to review a report on IMO biofouling guidelines.
CEP XXII / ATCM XLII (Prague, 2019)
Related papers included:
ATCM XLII/IP027 Marine non-native species in the Antarctic Treaty
area (United Kingdom). This paper presented recent knowledge
regarding the introduction pathways/vectors, risk, known status
and potential impacts of marine non-native species in the Antarctic
Treaty area. It noted that quantitative research on the vectors and
pathways that transport non-native marine species and hot-spots of
invasion in Antarctica is scarce. Nonetheless, current estimates
suggested there may be 180 vessels and 500+ voyages in Antarctic
waters each year across tourism, fishing and research, representing
a 5 to 10-fold increase since the 1960s. Different types of activity
appear to vary temporally and spatially, representing a different
kind of introduction risk. The Antarctic Peninsula may be
particularly at risk as it receives most ship-based traffic and is
showing rapid climate change. Due to a combination of vessel
activity and recent international agreements (e.g. IMO Polar Code
and Ballast Water Convention), biofouling on ships is likely to be a
greater concern than ballast water and other vectors.
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XXII Report, Appendix 1)
included a task to review a report on IMO biofouling guidelines.
CEP XXIV / ATCM XLIV (Berlin, 2022)
Related papers included:
ATCM XLIV/IP024 Ship traffic connects Antarctica to worldwide
locations, with implications for non-native marine species
introduction risk (United Kingdom). This paper presented the
results of a quantitative analysis of ship movements into Antarctic
waters, and a spatially-explicit assessment of introduction risk for
non-native marine species in all Antarctic waters by fishing, tourism
and national Antarctic operator vessels. It concluded that increasing
ship activities in the region increase the opportunities for non-
native species introductions, while climate change makes non-
native species establishment more likely. Development and
implementation of methods to reduce species transfer on vessels
may go some way to reducing this risk marine non-native species
present to Antarctic marine habitats.
ATCM XLIV/IP049 Work to review International Maritime
Organization and Antarctic Treaty system guidelines and
agreements concerning ship biofouling and ballast water
management (Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom). This paper
set out progress with ongoing work initiated by the CEP Subsidiary
Group on Climate Change Response (SGCCR) to review IMO and
ATS agreements of the concerning ship biofouling and ballast water
management, to check adequacy for the Southern Ocean and vessels
moving from region to region.
The CEP Five-Year Work Plan (CEP XXIV Report, Appendix 1)
included a task to review a report on IMO biofouling guidelines.
