ASOC Report to the ATCM
ASOC report to the ATCM
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be attending the XLIV Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work
over the last year.
ASOC’s Secretariat is located in Washington, DC, USA, and its
website is https://www.asoc.org. ASOC has 21 member
organizations active in a wide range of Antarctic Treaty countries
who are committed to the preservation of Antarctica as a place for
peace and science. We are pleased to report that the organizations
Animal Welfare Institute (AWI) and SeaLegacy have recently joined
ASOC.
During the intersessional period, there were a number of important
developments in global environmental protection. New targets for
protecting 30% of the land and ocean were agreed at the
Conference of the Parties of the Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD) in December 2022. This landmark achievement was followed
by the adoption of a draft text for a new international legally-
binding instrument under the U.N. Convention on the Law of the
Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ treaty). However, these
important milestones must be viewed in the context of the
accelerating climate crisis. The latest AR6 report from the IPCC
provides sobering details on the serious impact that climate change
is having on our planet, reinforcing the need for immediate action
to reduce climate impacts.
This year, the ATCM celebrates the 25th anniversary of the entry
into force of the Madrid Protocol. The Protocol continues to serve as
a reminder of the tremendous accomplishments that can occur
when nations set aside their short-term interests in the service of
long-term environmental preservation. The Protocol remains
relevant today, but ATCPs must continue to implement its tools
effectively, including through designating new protected areas to
meet global 30% protection targets and through protecting
vulnerable species such as the emperor penguin.
Intersessional Activities
ASOC and its member organizations have been involved in a wide
range of activities relevant to Antarctic governance and science
during the intersessional period.
WWF held a workshop on Antarctic governance and China’s
participation in Qingdao, China in September 2022. The workshop
enabled researchers and government officials to engage on key
Antarctic issues.
Pew Bertarelli supported the SCAR Krill Expert Group in hosting its
March 2023 virtual workshop on the development of a stock
hypothesis for Antarctic krill. Furthermore, Pew Bertarelli worked
with ASOC and other partners to launch the first ever World Krill
Day on August 11, 2022. Pew activities included a question-and-
answer feature with krill scientist Dr. Kim Bernard, a quiz about
krill, 8 facts about krill, and ample social and traditional media
coverage. Pew and ASOC worked together with Citizens Institute for
Environmental Studies (CIES) in Korea to hold an education
webinar for the first World Krill Day featuring a variety of krill
experts. Plans are underway for the next World Krill Day on August
11, 2023.
ASOC and several of its members attended the 27th Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. ASOC member the International Cryosphere
Climate Initiative coordinated the Cryosphere Pavilion, which
hosted nearly 20 side events focused on Antarctica and/or the
Southern Ocean in relation to climate change; with exhibits for
negotiators on ice sheets and sea-level rise as well as impacts on
polar ocean fisheries.
ASOC and its members also participated actively in relevant
international meetings during the intersessional period, including
the United Nations Ocean Conference, the intergovernmental
conferences to develop the BBNJ treaty, and Our Ocean in Panama.
ASOC also participated in numerous meetings of the International
Maritime Organization, including the Marine Environment
Protection and Maritime Safety Committees and a number of sub-
committees to progress work to improve the implementation of the
Polar Code in the polar regions, and to address the loss of plastic
fishing gear and update guidance on reducing underwater noise.
 
ASOC participates as stakeholder/partner in SCAR’s AntICON
(Integrated Science to Inform Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Conservation), in several international tourism research projects
coordinated by the Netherlands Polar Program (ATCM XLV/BG 02),
and in various educational activities, including the 2023 edition of
the Appel des Pôles/Call of the Poles in France.
Throughout the past twelve months, ASOC contributed to
intersessional discussions at the online ATCM and CEP fora
including discussions on climate change, protected areas, and
tourism, and attended the recent workshop on tourism in Paris.
Additionally, ASOC appreciates working with other observers and
experts including SCAR, IAATO, and COMNAP.
Support for policy-relevant science and science communications
ASOC and its members continue to support a wide range of
Antarctic research.
WWF supported research to further our understanding of Antarctic
krill’s role in the Southern Ocean ecosystem and global carbon
cycle. This research was published in a WWF Report, Antarctic krill:
Powerhouse of the Southern Ocean, which was launched in October
2022. WWF has also provided support to the Wildlife from Space
initiative, led by the British Antarctic Survey, which recently
discovered a previously unknown emperor penguin colony at
Verleger Point using satellite technology.
In February 2023, WWF and University of California Santa Cruz
(USA) partnered with Intrepid Travel to conduct research on baleen
whales around the Antarctic Peninsula that will help to further our
understanding of their distribution, movement and critical foraging
habitats.
A new Pew funded study led by Dr. Victoria Warwick-Evans at the
British Antarctic Survey provided the first up to date estimate of the
amount of Antarctic krill eaten by a variety of predators in the
region, including an estimate that two species of baleen whales
consume an estimated 2.1 million tonnes (likely an underestimate)
of krill during a single Antarctic summer whereas the fishery that
operates in the same area catches 155,000 tonnes of krill per year.
New Pew Bertarelli funded research led by Vasco Chávez-Molina
dives into Southern Ocean applications of managing for climate
resilient fisheries and finds that the following tools could be
employed for the Southern Ocean: climate models, marine protected
areas and dynamic stock assessments.
Research conducted by Greenpeace on its Antarctic expedition in
2021-2022 led to the identification and subsequent designation of
seven new vulnerable marine ecosystem areas (VMEs) by CCAMLR
in 2022.
In partnership with the Blue Nature Alliance, ASOC supported a
number of Antarctic research projects, which included projects on
synthesizing existing MPA design using recently acquired
data; identifying ecologically and biologically significant areas in
the Southern Ocean, and developing an ecoregionalization of the
eastern Sub-Antarctic region.
ICCI released its 2022 State of the Cryosphere Report in November
at COP27, including chapters and research updates on the Antarctic
ice sheet as well as Southern Ocean acidification, warming and
freshening.
Concluding remarks
ASOC and its member organizations are proud to support the
Antarctic Treaty System, which prioritizes peace and environmental
protection. However, the ATS must not be complacent. Human
activities are increasing in the Antarctic, and ATCPs have both the
authority and the responsibility to ensure that those activities do
not exacerbate the effects of climate change. There is an urgent
need to establish new protected areas, regulate shipping and
tourism, reduce the footprint of science and tourism, and protect
vulnerable species. We are encouraged by recent activities such as
the Paris informal workshop on Antarctic tourism, and hope that
Parties will move beyond discussion to action.
