International Science & Infrastruc-ture for Synchronous Observation
(Antarctica InSync)
International Science & Infrastructure for Synchronous Observation
(Antarctica InSync) Working title of the Mission
Information Paper submitted by Germany, Australia, France, Italy,
Norway, UK, USA.
Summary
This information paper brings to the attention of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM-45) and the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CEP-25) a proposal for a synchronous
scientific observation mission, to allow for a circumpolar
assessment of the connections between ice, ocean, climate,
environment and life, including human pressures, and their
solutions such as marine protection. The SCAR Southern Ocean
Action Plan (https://www.scar.org/general-scar-news/so-decade-
action-plan) has outlined the need for pan-Antarctic studies across a
number of scientific disciplines. It builds on a Horizon Scan across
the scientific communities including those of SOOS, GOOS, ACCE
and others. This proposal for a coordinated synchronous mission
will be realized in close collaboration with SCAR, which will
initiate a UN Decade Collaborative Centre (DCC) for the Southern
Ocean. We intend to seek the logistic contribution of all National
Antarctic Programs via COMNAP, for a planning phase in
2024-2026, and realization in 2027-2030. This mission is thus
planned as a contribution to SCAR and to the regional and thematic
programs of the UN Decade for Ocean Science for Sustainable
Development, which calls for innovative science solutions and a
shared, global effort that builds on decades of achievement. ATCM
and CEP are the key hubs to consult both policy- and research-
driven needs for such an international mission. In the future, side-
events offering dialogue about the planned mission shall be offered
at ATCM, with a first lunch-seminar at the ATCM-45 Meeting in
Helsinki on Friday, 2 June 2023.
Background
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are among the least studied
places on Earth, despite their importance for global climate,
biodiversity and humanity. Global challenges associated with
climate change, declines in biodiversity and increasing pollution
require synchronous, concerted science efforts to assess the intricate
links between atmosphere, ocean, ice and life, and to protect and
sustainably manage this region.
Remoteness and extreme climate conditions remain a challenge to
international research and especially coordinated synergistic
observation in Antarctica and the surrounding Southern Ocean.
Solving these challenges is beyond the skills and infrastructure of
any single science programme or nation. It will require a targeted,
collaborative and globally coordinated approach, consistent with
the goals of SCAR. It is important to do this now, at the onset of
Antarctica’s predicted sea-ice decline, to achieve a much-needed
pan-Antarctic ecological baseline knowledge. The joint ambition is
thus to deliver a coordinated mission in the Southern Ocean and
Antarctica meeting the key challenges denominated by the UN
Ocean Decade. ATCM and CEP could play central roles in
supporting this mission, as it brings together the Consultative
Parties to exchange information on scientific and policy knowledge
and all matters of common interest pertaining to Antarctica.
What we want to achieve
The proposed Antarctica InSync research programme aims to unite
national Antarctic programs to achieve collaborative and synergetic
actions, dedicated to synchronous observation in the
years 2027-2030, which are likely to conclude the first decade of
consecutive sea-ice minima since the onset of satellite observation.
Simultaneous research carried out by all disciplines around
Antarctica with similar approaches, common methods and shared
goals has not been carried out in this region at the level proposed
here. Key knowledge gaps will be addressed, including circumpolar
assessments of fluxes and dynamics, heat transport, ice behaviour,
primary production, CO2 budgets, and the distribution of key
species in Antarctica and the surrounding waters. Data will be
shared by FAIR Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Re-usable
principles, and next-generation scientific capacity will be developed
by involving Early Career scientists and policy makers of all ATCM
/ CEP Parties and Observers.
With this ambition, the programme will contribute to a number of
policy processes and frameworks with the Antarctic Treaty system
(e.g., ATCM, CEP, CCAMLR, SCAR). It builds directly on a vast
community effort in defining challenges and objectives for future
science. The proposed Antarctica InSync research programme aims
to enhance collaboration, knowledge, data sharing (between science
and other societal agents) and outreach to raise awareness of the
role of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean for our lives and
humanity’s future. Its goal is to provide a framework for
international collaboration to implement a number of actions
addressing different UN Decade challenges for sustainable ocean
science.
A pan-Antarctic mission bringing together national programs and
other partners
Many leaders of Antarctic scientific research institutions and
agencies, including AAD (Australia), AWI (Germany), BAS (UK),
IPEV (France), ISP (Italy), NPI (Norway) and NSF (USA), already
support the idea of such a pan-Antarctic mission and are ready to
engage. Many more have expressed their interest.
Similar positive and encouraging feedback was received from the
Antarctic and Southern Ocean science community and their
working groups, represented by SCAR, SCOR and other
international science frameworks, including their respective
programmes and bodies, such as SOOS. For the larger UN Decade
framework to which this proposed mission program will contribute,
SCAR will act as a Decade Collaborative Centre (DCC) for the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica.
National Antarctic programs represented by COMNAP intend to
engage from the beginning in the development of the Antarctica
InSync research programme to ensure that the necessary
infrastructure and logistical support can be made available in time
and in a synergetic manner by national programs. Such
collaborative approaches have been successfully tested in the
International Polar Years and in specific programs such as the
MOSAiC MOSAiC - Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the
Study of Arctic Climate, see https://mosaic-expedition.org drift
mission to Arctica. This proposed mission would also contribute to
the ongoing planning of the next International Polar Year
(2032-2033).
Input and contributions would also be welcome from other
Antarctic and Southern Ocean stakeholders, including CCAMLR, the
World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) and European Polar
Board (EPB), but also from various NGOs, foundations and partners
from industry.
Notional timelines
2023 - Outreach and engagement phase
Talks with decision makers and leaders of Antarctic research
institutes and programmes in other ATCM member states will be
held in the course of 2023, with a kick-off side event at the
ATCM-45 in Helsinki on Friday, 2 June 2023. SCAR, SOOS and
COMNAP and other important partners will be informed about the
Antarctica InSync research program at their respective meetings in
2023, and working groups will be initiated to develop the scientific
agendas. Other stakeholders, including NGOs and industry
associations, will be informed and asked whether they would like to
join.
2024-2026 - Preparatory Phase
The main tasks in the preparatory phase are aligning the scientific
and infrastructure processes for synchronous multidisciplinary
observation. Effort will go to establishing alliances, working groups
with stakeholders, logistic teams and a framework of collaboration.
An Antarctica InSync science plan will be established and approved
by SCAR, SOOS and other key scientific communities to ensure that
key challenges, questions and needs for research are appropriately
addressed and able to decipher the drivers, impacts and feedback
mechanisms of this key region, together with their global
interactions on the oceans, climate, biodiversity, and humanity.
Joint data collection and coordinated, synchronous experiments and
composite observations will be developed. National programs and
institutions operating polar infrastructure, including remote
sensing, meteorology, etc. will be asked for input and to coordinate
the logistical means to implement the science plan. In addition to
central coordination of outreach and data sharing, these could
support additional activities such as stipends for scientists from
countries without national polar infrastructure, opportunities for
artists and writers.
2027-2029 - Implementation Phase
Beginning of 2027 will see an intense planning phase of the joint
field campaigns for land, sea and air. Field observations will include
all components of the Antarctic/Southern Ocean region, and
combine different strategies and technologies for observation,
including process studies and remote-sensing initiatives, to be
carried out from mid-2027 to mid-2029. Most activities will be
carried out in the Antarctic summer season, but there should also be
opportunities organized to collect winter data. It has to be seen
whether certain questions and projects in the Antarctica InSync
Science Plan will require additional field work in the subsequent
Antarctic season.
2029-2030 - Completion and Reporting Phase
Analyses of the results of the joint field campaigns and synchronous
data assemblies should start directly after their completion. In
2029/2030, workshops will be held to discuss and compile the
knowledge gained from the Antarctica InSync programme with a
view to prepare synthesis reports ready for submission as
contributions to SCAR’s Decade Collaborative Centre (DCC).
Technical reports and Policy briefs will be developed to inform
COMNAP and ATCM / CEP. Further, the experience gained under
the Antarctica InSync research programme will then also provide
input to the planning of the 5th International Polar Year (IPY)
2032-33.
The funding
The Antarctica InSync research programme, especially the planned
joint field campaigns and the use of polar infrastructure and
synchronous data assemblies, will be supported primarily by
voluntary contributions from National Antarctic Programs, in their
sole discretion. Where appropriate, they may be enhanced by other
stakeholders / foundations and further pro Antarctica InSync
partners. Foundations can substantially enhance international
coordinated programmes, as previously shown e.g. in the
framework of the Census of Marine Life. The objective is to make
best use of available resources.
Nevertheless, Antarctic Treaty Parties will be asked in the context
of the Antarctica InSync research programme to enhance their
Antarctic and Southern Ocean research programmes with the
special aim to improve sustainable and year-round autonomous
observation. Extra funding would also be invited to support and
connect young scientists globally to build the next generation of
inclusive Antarctic and Southern Ocean expertise. The aim is also to
facilitate access to research infrastructure by scientists from
resource-limited countries through coordinated calls, to achieve a
new level of synergy and FAIR data and knowledge sharing.
Side-event (Lunch seminar) at ATCM-45
To inform about progress with this initiative and further
partnerships to enable this mission, a lunch seminar will take place
on Friday, 2 June 2023.
