MSI BROADCASTING OF NAVAREA VI through the World Wide
Navigational Warning System (WWNWS)
English version provided by the author
MSI BROADCASTING OF NAVAREA VI through the World Wide
Navigational Warning System (WWNWS)
Summary
This report has been drafted with the aim of informing
Consultative, non-Consultative Parties and the whole Antarctic
community about the broadcasting of NAVAREA VI Navigational
Warnings and inviting them to collaborate by providing information
of interest to their Coordinator.
INTRODUCTION
The World Wide Navigational Warning System has been
successfully used since 1979, which currently comprises twenty-one
fully operational NAVAREAS.
If we have a look at the NAVAREAS picture we can see that
NAVAREAS XV, XIV, X, VII, and VI cover the Antarctic region,
being the Argentine Republic the coordinator of NAVAREA VI and
the Servicio de Hidrografía Naval the authority in which the
coordination vests.
GLOSSARY
For a better understanding, it is necessary to set forth some of the
definitions governing this service:
NAVIGATIONAL WARNING:
a broadcast message containing urgent information relevant to
safety in navigation
NAVAREA Zone:
Geographical sea area established for the purpose of coordinating
the broadcast of navigational warnings. The term NAVAREA
followed by a roman numeral may be used to identify a particular
sea area. The delimitation of such areas is not related to and shall
not prejudice the delimitation of any boundaries between States.
NAVAREA Coordinator:
Authority charged with coordinating, collating and issuing
NAVAREA warnings for a designated NAVAREA.
NAVAREA WARNING
Navigational warning issued by a NAVAREA Coordinator for its
zone.
In general terms, NAVAREA WARNINGs provide reliable
information for mariners to navigate safely, safeguarding human
life at sea and protecting the marine environment.
In particular, they include information about the following subjects,
namely:
Casualties to lights, fog signals, buoys and other aids to navigation
affecting main shipping lanes;
The presence of dangerous wrecks in or near main shipping lanes
and, if relevant, their marking;
Establishment of major new aids to navigation or significant
changes to existing ones, when such establishment or change might
be misleading to shipping;
The presence of large unwieldy tows in congested waters;
Areas where search and rescue (SAR) and anti-pollution operations
are being carried out (for avoidance of such areas);
The presence of newly discovered rocks, shoals, reefs and wrecks
likely to constitute a danger to shipping, and, if relevant, their
marking;
Unexpected alteration or suspension of established routes;
Cable or pipe-laying activities, seismic surveys, the towing of large
submerged objects for research or exploration purposes, the
employment of manned or unmanned submersibles, or other
underwater operations constituting potential dangers in or near
shipping lanes;
The establishment of research or scientific instruments in or near
shipping lanes;
Significant malfunctioning of radio-navigation services and shore-
based maritime safety information radio or satellite services;
Notices to mariners NAVAREA:
List of the series numbers of the NAVAREA WARNINGS in force
issued and broadcasted by the NAVAREA Coordinator during a
period covering at least the last six weeks.
PROPOSAL:
Take note of the importance of informing NAVAREA VI Coordinator
about the news related to safety of navigation, some of them listed
in the Glossary under the NAVAREA WARNING title, aimed at
enhancing safety of navigation for the benefit of safeguarding
human life at sea and the protection of the marine environment.
Advice Member States to inform mariners and tourist operators
(IAATO) that organize cruises to the Antarctic about the availability
of forms to report news affecting safety of navigation in NAVAREA
VI.
Request mariners to inform NAVAREA VI Coordinator about
anomalies and failures of these signals or any other information
that they may consider relevant for the broadcasting of a NAVAREA
WARNING.
In order to enable the communication, an online form in Spanish
and English languages has been uploaded on www.hidro.gov.ar.
Conversely you can also send an e-mail to snautica@hidro.gov.ar or
through postal mail to the following address:
Servicio de Hidrografía Naval
Avda. Montes de Oca 2124 (C1270ABV)
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires
República Argentina
