Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS): An overview
of the first 15 years
Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS): An overview
of the first 15 years
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, Australia, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, SCAR,
South Africa, Türkiye, United Kingdom, WMO
Summary
The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) was
founded in the 4th International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-08 with the
mission to provide a platform for early career researchers (ECRs) to
connect internationally, inspire and develop ECRs as future leaders
in polar science and promote education & outreach (E&O). This
paper briefly summarizes the global distribution of APECS members
and its National Committees (NCs) and how APECS promotes
diversity, equality and inclusion. Furthermore, this paper looks in
detail at the role of APECS in E&O, sustaining the momentum
started in the 4th IPY. Lastly, this paper presents the future
perspectives that the current Executive Committee (ExCom) has for
the near future with a special emphasis on the 5th IPY.
APECS and its membership
The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) is one of
the major legacies of the 4th International Polar Year (IPY) and was
officially founded in 2007. It is recognized as the major voice for
early career researchers (ECRs) within the polar community and
strives to:
promote an interdisciplinary and international network;
develop effective future leaders for polar research; and
promote education and outreach (E&O) about polar and alpine
regions (Hindshaw et al., 2018).
APECS is structured at an international level with the Executive
Committee (ExCom), Council, and Project Groups (PGs), and since
its foundation it has been represented in more than 100 countries/
regions through individuals and National Committees (NCs). The
APECS International Directorate is currently hosted in Tromsø,
Norway https://www.apecs.is/who-we-are/leadership/
international-directorate.html.
APECS membership has increased continuously since 2007 having,
as of 18/02/2023, 4713 active members from 84 countries
distributed across five continents (Figures 1 and 2). Similarly,
APECS leadership, i.e. the ExCom and Council, is composed of
members representing the five continents. This diversity presents a
unique opportunity for ECRs to expand their network to include
people from different regions and cultures, but also from different
scientific backgrounds. Furthermore, 57% of APECS members
confirmed at their registration that the Antarctic is one of the focus
regions of their research. 
APECS and its role in equity, diversity and inclusion (EDI)
In contrast to the typical overrepresentation of male-identifying
individuals in science, especially concerning leadership positions
(Larivière et al., 2013), it is noteworthy that APECS has 13 female-
identifying presidents during the past 15 years. Furthermore, a
recent survey of 20 NCs showed a general 2:1 ratio of female-:male-
identifying individuals in their boards. This illustrates the tendency
of female researchers to volunteer in leadership roles, increasing
their
opportunities and international visibility. We hypothesize APECS
leadership positions are popular with females given the difficulty
this group faces in securing leadership roles in formal employment
(e.g., tenure track positions, roles as heads of programs,
departments, and institutes). In addition, APECS aims to support
under-represented groups through many activities. In 2022, a
project group with a mandated to identify and work to overcome
barriers to Indigenous early career researchers was formed. APECS
has important ties to Pride in Polar Research, and though some
challenges exist in maintaining productive partnerships, APECS is
dedicated to understanding its role in the support of LGBTQIA+
groups. As an international organization, APECS is also uniquely
poised to consider the challenges of communication and
collaboration across linguistic, cultural, societal, and disciplinary
barriers. In addition to the existing DEI project group, APECS is
piloting a new workshop combining research practices and EDI with
a focus on collaboration. This is the first year the workshop is
proposed, and as long as the funding proposal is successful, it will
bring together 25 ECRs from around the world to tackle these topics
in a 2-day workshop in the fall of 2023. Finally, in recognition of
the growing mental health pandemic, APECS has formed a Mental
Health Resources project group to support ECRs.
APECS and its National Committees
Regarding NCs, APECS is officially represented in 31 countries, with
3 new emerging NCs being in the process of establishment (Fig. 2).
These include countries that are not ATCM parties, supporting
APECS as a major platform for ECRs to engage in treaties, processes
and organizations, regardless of the status of their home country.
NCs are an important part of APECS because they can directly
address the needs of ECRs in specific countries, extending new
network channels and bringing a deeper understanding of the polar
regions from diverse perspectives to the local community.
Moreover, it facilitates the organization of APECS activities like
development training, ECR fellowships, conference participation,
capacity sharing and access to training and courses with
collaborations to other NCs and APECS PGs. Ultimately, it allows
for all of these opportunities to be held in the native language of
ECRs, reaching a wider audience. 
APECS and its Partners
APECS partners with more than 60 institutions internationally,
including:
Antarctic organizations (e.g., the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR); Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programs (COMNAP); Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS)),
Arctic organizations (e.g., International Arctic Science Council
(IASC)), other ECR organizations (e.g., Permafrost Young
Researchers Network (PYRN)); and
International and political institutions (e.g., European Polar Board
(EPB), the Climate and Cryosphere Project of the WMO co-
sponsored World Climate Research Programme).
The collaboration with these institutions gives ECRs unique
opportunities to actively engage in groups and their meetings (e.g.,
IASC Working Groups), committees (e.g., SCAR strategic plan) and
document writing (e.g., IPCC report) in which ECRs would
otherwise not participate. APECS’ (members) contribution to the
organization of field courses, e.g., UK Polar Network (UKPN)’s and
APECS Russia’s ARCTIS2019, webinars, training sessions,
publication of books and guidelines, and the APECS online
conference, where many polar ECRs do their first international
presentation, place APECS as a major player in the formation of the
next generation of polar scientists. Besides opportunities to engage
within the organizations, these partnerships also provide financially
support to APECS that enable the support of ECRs in the most
diverse ways, e.g. the organization of events by the NCs and PGs,
awards, or the support an international directorate. APECS is
regularly sponsored by the Netherlands Polar Programme, Antarctic
Science Ltd. and TÜBİTAK MAM Polar Research Institute (KARE).
Furthermore, many APECS NCs secure their own funds through
donations, often from polar programs and institutes within the NC
country. In addition, individual donners contribute to APECS’
Adrian Dahood-Fritz Memorial Fund.
Figure. 1. Number of subscribed APECS members (a) and number
countries represented in APECS membership (b).
Figure 2. Map representing the distribution of APECS National
Committees (orange), potential emerging National Committees
(green) and countries with APECS members but not with an official
National Committee (blue).
Education and outreach: a place for ECRs and APECS to shape the
future
Education and outreach (E&O) is accepted as an important tool to
raise awareness among the general public about polar regions and
the ways in which they are changing more rapidly than the rest of
the planet due to amplified climate trends and fragile ecosystems
(Xavier et al., 2016). E&O plays a key role in inspiring the next
generation of students and researchers. It was during the 4th IPY
that a campaign was developed to prioritize E&O. In the following
years, several organizations started to include E&O in their agendas,
e.g., the first E&O workshop associated with ATCM was held at
ATCM XXXVIII, and the CEP raised E&O in its list of
priorities in 2013 (Xavier et al., 2018). Subsequent analysis of the
IPY proved that ECRs played a major role in the success of the IPY
E&O program and that APECS would play a pivotal role in
continuing the momentum of E&O in polar research in the years to
come (Provencher et al, 2011).
APECS E&O activities include two major events: Antarctica Day to
celebrate the signing of the Antarctic treaty, and the International
Polar Weeks (happening twice a year around the equinoxes), which
grew out of the IPY International Polar Days. These activities are
conducted both by the APECS and the NCs, and have reached more
than 200,000 people over 15 years. Common E&O activities led by
APECS and its NCs include lectures from ECRs and established
researchers and activities with school children, like the Antarctica
Day Flags initiative. New strategies are continuously being adopted,
e.g. APECS Belgium is running a science-art collaboration and
introduced a movie to the Anima festival in Brussels, and APECS
Portugal has its monthly “Open Science” articles in which  ECRs
“translate” scientific articles to plain language for a non-specialized
audience.
Many E&O activities are conducted throughout the year; a recent
survey indicated that 14 APECS NCs conducted at least one E&O
activity between September 2022 and January 2023, reaching more
than 3000 people in total. To an increasing extent, social media
plays an important role in E&O. APECS social media accounts have
more than 25,000 followers, supporting the high impact that APECS
has in engaging the general public in polar science. Besides
activities run by APECS and its NCs, several E&O resources can be
found on the APECS website to help and inspire scientists,
educators and students.
Future goals
Given its role of inspiring future leaders in polar research, APECS
shares the responsibility of shaping how future polar research is
conducted. APECS works strategically to make the organization and
polar research overall more inclusive, diverse and equitable. APECS
also aims to contribute to strategies and approaches to limit the
human footprint by scientific research on the Antarctic environment
and wilderness values, for instance by preventing duplication of
research and joint use of data and facilities. APECS has several
current initiatives contributing to these efforts: 
Increase APECS’ presence in regions like Africa, the Middle East and
Southeast Asia where countries such as Namibia, Zimbabwe,
Kazakhstan and Indonesia have many engaged APECS members, but
no NC; 
Maintain diversity in APECS’ leadership, encouraging members
from all continents to apply to positions in the Council and/or
ExCom;
Improve communication across linguistic barriers by providing
resources to address language barriers and training on conducting
meetings in English which are inclusive for native and non-native
speakers;
Support interdisciplinary dialogue and foster collaborations
between fields of polar research; 
Support guidelines on sustainable and low-carbon emissions
research practices;
Solidify APECS’ role as a player in the future of polar research
through engagement in significant polar initiatives by maintaining
partnerships and establishing new ones with the goal of mutual
benefit.
As a partner for the 5th IPY in 2032-33 and an important actor in
E&O, APECS will continue organizing the International Polar Weeks
and the celebration of Antarctica Day, but also promotes new,
innovative E&O activities, like podcasts, polar storytelling, film
festivals and social media campaigns. Moreover, APECS has a
partnership with Polar Educators International (PEI) on the project
Polar Science and Global Climate: An International Resource for
Education and Outreach (commonly called the Polar Resource Book
(PRB)), alongside other actors (see https://polareducator.org/
resources/prb-2/). The PRB was created in 2010 and addressed
climate change-related issues from the perspectives of the
Indigenous population in the Arctic. APECS
is working with PEI to develop the next edition of the PRB, which is
full of opportunities for students from kindergarten through
university to learn about the polar regions. This book features
APECS members and their research. The already announced joint
SCAR-IASC conference in 2030 is a great opportunity to gather
polar ECRs to discuss the 5th IPY and supercharge ECR engagement
in APECS and the polar community overall. APECS is excited to
continue shaping the future of polar research through these
aforementioned activities. 
Concluding remarks
APECS is continuously increasing its diversity and geographic
reach. The global distribution of APECS members and NCs provides
the unique opportunity for ECRs to increase their network.
Furthermore, due to its structure (e.g., NCs, PGs) and partnerships,
APECS creates opportunities for ECRs to develop their skills, such as
leadership and communication, that are integral in their future
careers. Besides developing ECRs, APECS is recognized to have an
important role in raising awareness of polar regions through E&O
activities. The International Polar Weeks and Antarctica Day are
highlights of APECS E&O efforts, but a variety of activities take
place all year approaching polar topics from many perspectives and
delivering material in new and exciting ways. In the future, APECS
aims to increase the representation in additional regions, maintain
and establish partnerships, and utilize the 5th IPY and E&O to
increase awareness of polar regions and the challenges they face in
the general public.
References
Hindshaw, R.S., Mariash, H., Vick-Majors, T.J., Thornton, A.E.,
Pope, A., Zaika, Y., Lenz, J., Nielsen, H., Fugmann, G., 2018. A
decade of shaping the futures of polar early career researchers: A
legacy of the International Polar Year. Polar Rec. (Gr. Brit). 54,
312–323. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0032247418000591
Larivière, V., Ni, C., Gingras, Y., Cronin, B., Sugimoto, C.R., 2013.
Bibliometrics: Global gender disparities in science. Nature 504,
211–213. https://doi.org/10.1038/504211a
Provencher, J., Baeseman, J., Carlson, D., Badhe, R., Bellman, J.,
Hik, D., Huffman, L., Legg, J., Pauls, M., Pit, M., Shan, S., Timm, K.,
Ulstein, K., Zicus, S. (2011) Polar Research Education, Outreach and
Communication during the fourth IPY: How the 2007–2008
International Polar Year has contributed to the future of education,
outreach and communication. Paris: International Council for
Science (ICSU).
Xavier, J.C., Fugmann, G., Beck, I., Huffman, L., Jensen, E., 2016.
Education on Biodiversity in the Polar Regions, in: Castro, P.,
Azeiteiro, U., Bacelar-Nicolau, P., Leal Filho, W., Azul, A. (Eds.),
Biodiversity and Education for Sustainable Development. World
Sustainability Series. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 43–56.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32318-3_4
Xavier, J.C., Azinhaga, P.F., Seco, J., Fugmann, G., 2018.
International Polar Week as an educational activity to boost
science–educational links: Portugal as a case study. Polar Rec. 54,
360–365. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0032247418000621
