ASOC update on marine protected areas in the Southern Ocean
2019-2023
ASOC update on marine protected areas in the Southern Ocean
2019-2023
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
Marine protection is a high profile issue globally, and discussions on
CCAMLR MPAs shape international perceptions of the Antarctic
Treaty System as a whole. Outside the ATS there is a growing
international agreement that MPAs are an essential tool for
preserving ocean biodiversity. In this document, ASOC provides an
update on MPA discussions since ATCM XLI (Prague, 2019). No new
MPAs were adopted since then, however there have been positive
developments including a growing number of MPA co-proponents,
further work in existing and future MPA proposals, and a significant
expansion of the scientific literature related to CCAMLR MPAs. The
document also highlights aspects of MPA development that are of
particular significance for the ATCM/CEP including with respect to
protected areas, specially protected species, tourism, and climate
change. In this context, ASOC:
Encourages all ATCPs who are also Members to support efforts,
both at the technical and diplomatic level, towards reaching
consensus on a wide network of CCAMLR MPAs in the Southern
Ocean in 2023, beginning at the CCAMLR-Special Meeting-III in
June 2023.
Recommends the ATCM/CEP to expand the network of terrestrial
and marine ASPAs and ASMAs in Antarctica, considering also the
harmonisation of these areas and CCAMLR MPAs.
Recommends the designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially
Protected Species, in accordance with SCAR recommendations.
Recommends the ATCM/CEP to take continued action on climate
change (further detailed in other ASOC Information Papers
submitted to ATCM XLV).
Introduction
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are important for global natural
systems and processes; as biodiverse and functioning ecosystems; as
a natural reserve devoted to peace and science; as a place for
international scientific cooperation; and as a place to realise the
30x30 international goals agreed by the Convention for Biological
Diversity.
In this context, the establishment of a representative system of
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) by the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) has
been one of the most significant issues discussed in the Antarctic
Treaty System context in recent years.
In this document, ASOC provides an update on MPA discussions
since ATCM XLI (Prague, 2019). Familiarity with these discussions
is relevant to ATCM delegates as they the provide a backdrop to
some of the ATCM’s own discussions. Furthermore, marine
protection is a high profile issue globally, and discussions on
CCAMLR MPAs shape international perceptions of the Antarctic
Treaty System as a whole.
What happened since 2019?
In 2019 ASOC submitted to ATCM XLII an update on MPA
discussions (ATCM 42/IP 130). ASOC has submitted further updates
and analysis on MPAs to CCAMLR, more recently in
October 2022. Many of the comments made in that paper are still
valid in 2023. Table 1 contains an overview of proposals to date.
Fig. 1 illustrates discussions since 2009.
The 2019 CCAMLR meeting was the last held in person prior to the
pandemic. The CCAMLR meetings of 2020 and 2021 were held
online due to the pandemic. The virtual nature of the meetings
prevented making progress on some issues. The 2022 meeting was
again held in person. Nonetheless, no new MPAs were adopted at
those meetings due to lack of consensus among CCAMLR Members
(thereafter Members).
The number of Members has increased since 2019 to 27 Members –
26 states and the EU. There are currently eight EU Member States
that are also CCAMLR Members. The Netherlands joined CCAMLR
in October 2019 and the UK left the EU on 1 February 2020.
CCAMLR Acceding States Netherlands and Ecuador became
Members in 2019 and 2022, respectively.
A one-week special CCAMLR meeting has been convened for June
2023 in Santiago, Chile, specifically to discuss MPAs. This is only
the third special meeting CCAMLR has ever held, and expectations
for a breakthrough in the process are high.
Outside of the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), there has been
considerable progress with respect to international agreements on
marine conservation. In December 2022, the Conference of Parties
of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) adopted the target
of conserving 30% of the world’s land and oceans in protected areas
by 2030 as part of its post-2020 global biodiversity framework.
https://www.cbd.int/article/draft-1-global-biodiversity-framework
Subsequently, in March 2022, the draft text of a new international
legally binding instrument to under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to protect marine biodiversity in
areas beyond national jurisdiction (known as the BBNJ Agreement)
was agreed after intense negotiations. The BBNJ agreement will
provide a legal framework for the creation of MPAs in areas beyond
national jurisdiction, which is necessary for meeting the 30x30
target for all of the world’s oceans. These significant steps reflect a
growing international agreement that MPAs are an essential tool for
preserving ocean biodiversity.
Overview of recent developments
There are three MPA proposals on the table (EAMPA, WSMPA-
phase 1, and D1MPA) and a fourth proposal is expected soon
(WSMPA-phase 2) (Table 1). The former three add up to ≈ 3.8M
km2, and cover a significant portion of their corresponding
planning domains (planning areas) i.e. the marine areas of which
the MPA is representative. All three MPAs protect in various ways
representative (common) as well as important (unique, vulnerable)
marine areas. In addition, all three MPA proposals include
substantial no-take zones, although the extent and scope of these
zones varies.
In brief, no new MPA has been adopted since 2016, reflecting
diverging positions between Members and a persistent lack of
consensus. See e.g. Arpi et al. (2022); Goldsworthy (2022; Roura
(2023). However:
Most Members have expressed support for MPAs over the years.
Furthermore, since 2019 the number of MPA co-proponents has
increased significantly. Currently 20 Members are co-proponents of
at least one MPA. Eighteen Members are co-proponents of two
MPAs.
MPA processes have become more open and consultative, more
transparent, more efficient, and their technical complexities are
more accessible to decision makers.
In 2018 the WSMPA proposal was split in two phases. Work on both
phases has continued, with phase 1 under the leadership of
Germany. Substantial work on phase 2 has been carried out under
the leadership of Norway, which announced that a proposal will be
submitted to CCAMLR 43 in 2023.
Most MPA proposals have a public interface hosted by leading
proponents and/or CCAMLR. These include the CCAMLR MPA
Information Repository (CMIR) (https://cmir.ccamlr.org/), the
Weddell Sea MPA Project (https://wsmpa.de/en) supported by the
German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture (BMEL) and the
Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI); and dedicated website pages by
NAPs, think tanks, and civil society organizations. This is significant
in that it responds to substantial public interests in Southern Ocean
protection, and demonstrate to the public that the proposals are
alive.
MPA-relevant research and monitoring continues in all planning
domains where proposals are being developed. Highlights include:
The research and monitoring plan for the Ross Sea region MPA has
not been adopted by the CCAMLR, but is proceeding apace.
In 2021 a significant area occupied by a breeding colony of millions
of demersal fish (Jonah’s icefish, Neopagetopsis ionah, Nybelin
1947) was discovered in the Weddell Sea. Purser et al. (2022). The
area was already within the boundaries of the proposed WSMPA-
phase 1, which demonstrates the solid scientific basis of the
proposal. The MPA’s Special Protection Zone was expanded
considerably as a result.
The rebound of whales in the NW Antarctic Peninsula, following the
1986 moratorium on commercial whaling, has now been well
documented, including in the General Protection Zone of the
proposed Domain 1 MPA.
The peer-reviewed literature on MPA-related issues has expanded
considerably. Topics include basic research supporting MPA
development; spatial analysis including Retrospective Analysis of
Antarctic Tracking Data (RAATD) and Key Biological Areas (KBAs);
commentary on the performance of CCAMLR’s MPA network, if and
when adopted; and critical political analyses of CCAMLR’s
processes, outcomes, and effectiveness.
What aspects of CCAMLR MPAs are relevant to the ATCM?
Although CCAMLR and the ATCM are independent bodies with
different mandates, both are essential components of the Antarctic
Treaty System. Further there are significant overlaps in terms of
environment and ecosystems, governance and management, and
membership in Antarctic Treaty System bodies. The CAMLR
Convention’s concept of the Southern Ocean ecosystem (Art. I) and
the ecosystem based approach (Art. II (iii)) address elements of the
environment and ecosystems that are also relevant to the ATCM.
Many of the decisions made (or not made) by CCAMLR have an
impact on thematic areas for which the ATCM is responsible, and
vice-versa. Some illustrative examples are discussed below.
Area protection under ATCM and CCAMLR MPAs
As the network of MPAs expands under CCAMLR, the connectivity
between different activities, and types and scales of protected areas
under ATCM will become apparent. In turn, this requires better
harmonisation between management regimes applicable to those
activities or areas, so that management plans and research and
monitoring plans are compatible and act in synergy.
ASOC contends that harmonization work could start with the Ross
Sea MPA and adjacent ASPAs and ASMAs protecting marine values.
This work should continue with other MPA proposals as they are
developed.
Specially Protected Species and MPAs
Following recommendations from SCAR, in 2022 ATCM discussed
assigning Specially Protected Status to the emperor penguin
(Aptenodytes forsteri, Gray, 1844). This proposal did not reach
consensus, despite overwhelming scientific evidence supporting
SCAR’s recommendation. SCAR (2021). Many colonies of emperor
penguins are adjacent to actual or proposed MPAs.
Emperor penguins dynamic habitat range in all age classes include
proposed and existing MPAs and beyond. Aymeric et al. (2022),
ASOC contends that the Emperor penguin should be designated as a
Specially Protected Species under Annex II of the Protocol. In
parallel, the establishment of MPAs would potentially increase
resilience and reduce pressure on this species and its food sources in
some areas.
Tourism and MPAs
Antarctica tour operators are one of the main users of the waters
around Antarctica and have a significant stake in keeping the
Antarctic environment and ecosystems pristine in order to protect
the natural values that make the Antarctic experience unique. In
this regard tourism could be regarded as a form of rational use.
In 2019 IAATO made a statement on how the organization plans to
support MPAs at its 2019 annual meeting in Cape Town. ASOC
appreciates that the tourism industry has taken an interest in the
CCAMLR MPA process, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula area
where shipborne tourism concentrates, and hopes that it will
reinforce this commitment, as a high standard of marine protection
is essential for the tourism business. This is the case as tourism
reaches a critical mass, particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula,
where multiple activities overlap, each contributing to cumulative
impacts.
Additionally, tour operators routinely provide opportunities for
Antarctic scientists to conduct research from tourist vessels, and as
such could be called upon to assist with research and monitoring in
MPAs.
Climate change
Climate change is one of the defining issues of our time. Climate
change action is part of CM 91-04, which requires the protection of
areas to maintain resilience or the ability to adapt to the effects of
climate change. All MPA proposals include climate change
considerations as key specific and/or general objectives.
Addressing climate change requires coordinated action within and
between ATS bodies, as well as outreach to international bodies.
Some of key climate actions that are within reach of ATS bodies
include increasing area protection on land and at sea as a way of
reducing ecosystem pressure/increasing resilience; the continued
production of scientific research; and dissemination of Antarctic
climate change research in relevant international bodies tasked with
climate change action.
Closing remarks and recommendations
The MPA issue was formally added to CCAMLR’s agenda in 2002,
over twenty years ago. The 2002 WSSD agreed on the goal of
establishing a global network of MPAs by 2012; consequently
CCAMLR added a MPA agenda item and committed to develop
MPAs in the Convention Area. During the last decade in particular,
CCAMLR has devoted a significant amount of time and resources to
considering MPA proposals. This reflects also a significant
investment by many Members developing MPA proposals or
otherwise contributing to the MPA development process agreed by
CCAMLR.
On the negative side, the delay experienced in MPA discussions
over the past decade casts a shadow not only on the reputation of
CCAMLR but on that of the Antarctic Treaty System as a whole.
CCAMLR is an essential part of the ATS and any actions taken or
not taken by CCAMLR has repercussions on the work of the ATCM.
On the positive side, much has been accomplished in recent years in
terms of MPA design, support by Members, research and
monitoring, and public outreach.
ASOC strongly supports the designation of MPAs in East Antarctica,
the Weddell Sea region, and Domain 1 (NW Antarctic Peninsula and
Scotia Sea) by CCAMLR. ASOC also supports completing
outstanding formalities concerning a Research and Monitoring plan
for the Ross Sea MPA.
ASOC looks forward to these proposals being successfully discussed
again. In this context, ASOC:
Encourages all ATCPs who are also Members to support efforts,
both at the technical and diplomatic level, towards reaching
consensus on a wide network of CCAMLR MPAs in the Southern
Ocean in 2023, beginning at the CCAMLR-Special Meeting-III in
June 2023.
Recommends the ATCM/CEP to expand the network of terrestrial
and marine ASPAs and ASMAs in Antarctica, considering also the
harmonisation of these areas and CCAMLR MPAs.
Recommends the designation of the emperor penguin as a Specially
Protected Species, in accordance with SCAR recommendations.
Recommends the ATCM/CEP to take continued action on climate
change (further detailed in other ASOC Information Papers
submitted to ATCM XLV).
References
Arpi, B., McGee, J., Jackson, A., Press, A.J.(Tony), Stephens, T.,
Goldsworthy, L. et  al. 2022. The Antarctic treaty system in 2021.
Important anniversaries but challenges for consensus decision
making. Polar perspectives No. 9, March 2022. Washington, DC:
Wilson Center Polar Institute. Available from: https://
www.wilsoncenter.org/publication/polar-perspectives-no-9-
antarctic-treaty-system-2021-important-anniversaries-challenges.
Aymeric, H., Zitterbart, D.P., …& Le Bohec, C. 2022. Juvenile
emperor penguin range calls for extended conservation measures in
the Southern Ocean. R. Soc. open sci. 9211708211708 http://
doi.org/10.1098/rsos.211708
Goldsworthy, L. 2022. Consensus decision-making in CCAMLR:
Achilles' heel or fundamental to its success? International
Environmental Agreements, 22, 411–437. Available from: https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10784-021-09561-4
Purser, A., Hehemann, L.& Wenzhoefer, F.: Icefish Metropole: Vast
breeding colony discovered in the southern Weddell Sea, Current
Biology 2022. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2021.12.022.
Roura, R.M. 2023. Spatial protection tools as indicators of the
'health' of the Antarctic Treaty System. The Geographical Journal
89-1, 25-39, Mar 2023 https://doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12482PM
SCAR. 2021. Projections of future population decline emphasise the
need to designate the emperor penguin as an Antarctic Specially
Protected Species. ATCM XLIII - CEP XXIII/WP037.
Figures
Fig. 1 – CCAMLR MPA proposals, and number of co-sponsors for all
proposals. Members are counted only once whether they co-sponsor
one or more proposals. Proposals that have been adopted (2009,
2016) are not counted in subsequent years.
Table 1 – Overview of CCAMLR MPA proposals (2023)
MPA
Planning Domain
Original surface area (year)
Current surface area (2022)
Conservation and Management
Current proponents and management
Current status
South Orkney Is. Southern Shelf MPA
Domain 1
≈105,000 km2 (2009)
93,751 km2
Fully no-take MPA
Originally proposed by the UK. Managed by CCAMLR.
CCAMLR MPA adopted in 2009, in force.
Ross Sea region MPA
Domain 8
2,130,564 km2 (Joint NZ-US proposal, 2013)
1,525,651 km2 excluding ice shelves
Includes a General Protection Zone, a Special Research Zone and a
Krill Research Zone. Seventy-two percent of the MPA is "no-take"
where all commercial fishing is forbidden.
Originally proposed by New Zealand & USA. Managed by CCAMLR
CCAMLR MPA adopted 2016, in force since 1 Dec. 2017 and until at
least 2052. Research & Monitoring Plan active but not yet adopted.
East Antarctica MPA
Domain 7
1,716,517 km2 (2010)
969,000 km2
Designates one of its three sub-areas as a krill no-take zone, aside
from other provisions allowing a multiple-use approach and
research fishing. Includes a no-take buffer zone for krill predators
and protects deep areas within inner shelves <550m depth.
Australia, the European Union & its Member States, India, New
Zealand, Norway, Republic of Korea, Ukraine, the United Kingdom,
the USA & Uruguay
Under discussion since 2012.
Weddell Sea region MPA
Domains 3 & 4
2,307,593 km2 (2016)
2,707,594 km2 (Prior to being splitin 2018)
Includes a General Protection Zone, a Special Protection Zone and a
Fisheries Research Zone.
EU & Germany
Under discussion since 2016; split in two phases – E and W - in
2018.
Weddell Sea region MPA - phase 1
Domains 3 & W of Domain 4
2,238,245 km2 (2019)
2,238,245 km2 (2019)
Includes key representative, vulnerable, rare or biodiverse areas.
and aims to provide climate change refugia. Includes a General
Protection Zone, a Special Protection Zone, and a Fisheries Research
Zone inclusive of a no-fishing Scientific Reference Area. 
European Union and its Member States, Norway, Uruguay,
Australia, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, the USA, Republic of
Korea, India & Ukraine
Phase 1 of CCAMLR MPA proposal under discussion since 2016
Weddell Sea region MPA - phase 2
E of Domain 4; MPA planning area extends
further E and N
N/A
TBD
TBD
Proposal being developed by Norway
Phase 2 of proposal under discussion since 2016. Draft proposal
expected in 2023.
Domain 1 MPA
Domain 1
466,000 km2 (2018)
670,000 km2
Includes a General Protection Zone and a Krill Fishery Zone. Over
60% of the MPA is protected as part of the GPZ.
Argentina & Chile
CCAMLR MPA proposal under discussion since 2018.
