The need for increased protection of Antarctica’s inland waters
The need for increased protection of Antarctica’s inland waters
An Information Paper submitted by New Zealand, Spain and the
United Kingdom
Summary
In many parts of Antarctica inland waters are focal points of
biodiversity, but they are poorly represented within the current
system of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs). Only two
ASPA Management Plans cite inland waters as primary values for
protection. Protection of inland water and their related biodiversity
would be enhanced through (i) increased efforts to document
aquatic biodiversity and (ii) the implementation of a new approach
for selection of representative lakes, and their catchments, for
enhanced protection.
Background information
Inland aquatic ecosystems such as streams, ponds and lakes occur
on ice-free land as well as on ice surfaces across Antarctica. They
have been recorded as far south as ice-free ground occurs, including
in the Pensacola Mountains at 83-84° S (Hodgson et al. 2010) and
inland nunataks of the Transantarctic Mountains at 86.5° S (Broady
and Weinstein, 1998).
The availability of liquid water is the single most important
physical driver of Antarctic terrestrial biodiversity, particularly at
higher continental latitudes (Convey et al. 2014). For this reason,
inland aquatic habitats have been recognised since the earliest
expeditions of Scott and Shackleton as centres for biodiversity and
biological productivity (Murray, 1910). While a comprehensive
understanding of the biogeography of Antarctic inland waters is
currently lacking, it is clear that there is a high level of continental
and regional endemism in the Antarctic freshwater biota (Gibson
and Bayly 2007, Hodgson et al. 2013, Davies et al. 2017). The
adequate protection of Antarctic inland waters is therefore critical
for the preservation of environmental, scientific and intrinsic
values, as set out in the Protocol.
The CEP has previously considered the penetration of sub-glacial
lakes (ATCM XLI IP12; ATCM XXXIV WP16; ATCM XXXV WP34;
ATCM XL WP17), the remediation of scientific sites subject to lake
level rise (ATCM XXXVIII IP41) and the clean-up of pollution within
lake catchment areas (ATCM XXXV BP12). Details of a classification
system of Antarctic inland aquatic ecosystems was presented to the
Committee in 2022 (ATCM XLIV IP77) and there have been recent
proposals for three new ASPAs to protect inland waters (ATCM
XLIV WP12; ATCM XLIV WP 15; ATCM XLV WP60), although these
have yet to formally be agreed by the ATCM.
The protection of inland aquatic environments is of relevance to
several CEP priority issues as set out in the CEP Five-Year Work
Plan, including:
Processing new and revised protected / managed area management
plans (Priority 1);
Climate change implications for the environment (Priority 1);
Monitoring and state of the environment reporting’ (Priority 2);
Overview of the protected areas system (Priority 2); and
Biodiversity knowledge (Priority 2).
This paper provides information to facilitate a more strategic
consideration by the Committee of the protection of aquatic
environments and is largely based on a recent peer-reviewed paper:
Hawes, I., Howard-Williams, C., Gilbert, N., Hughes, K. A., Convey,
P. & Quesada, A. 2023. The need to protect Antarctica’s inland
waters. Antarctic Science. doi:10.1017/S0954102022000463
(Available at: https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/antarctic-
science/article/need-for-increased-protection-of-antarcticas-inland-
waters/1B89EF1A158F623E6112A35EE609FCEF).
Threats to inland water bodies
Human activities have resulted in significant impacts on Antarctic
inland waters both directly, such as through activities from station
operations, scientific activities, tourism, etc., and indirectly through
anthropogenic climate change and long-distance atmospheric
contamination. Impacts can include contamination of lake
catchment areas leading to increased nutrient and suspended matter
inflow from nearby roads and research stations, changes to drainage
patterns caused by for example, road construction, pollution from
rock dust, hydrocarbons, wastewater and station litter waste. The
presence of non-native species in inland water ecosystems has
received little attention, with few examples documented.
Status of protection for inland water bodies
The Management Plans for all 75 of the currently designated ASPAs
were examined to determine whether each makes any
acknowledgement of the presence of inland water bodies and their
values. Currently only two of the 75 ASPAs have been designated
explicitly to protect inland water systems (ASPA 119 Davis Valley
and Forlidas Pond, Dufek Massif, and ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula,
Livingston Island) (Table 1). Fourteen additional ASPAs make some
reference to aquatic systems within their ‘Description of values to
be protected’.
Table 1. Representation of inland waters within existing ASPA
management plans
ASPA management plan category
Number of ASPAs
% of all ASPAs
Inland water bodies explicitly identified as the primary value to be
protected
2
2.67
Inland water bodies are identified as a value for protection but not
the primary selection criterion
14
18.67
Protection of inland aquatic system values is most effective where
entire catchments are set aside. Four ASPAs currently meet this
need:
ASPA 119 Davis Valley and Forlidas Ponds, Dufek Massif, Pensacola
Mountains;
ASPA 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land;
ASPA 126 Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland
Islands; and
ASPA 147 Ablation Valley and Ganymede Heights, Alexander
Island.
These four locations are widespread across the continent, and
potentially are the first steps in a systematic approach to protection
of representative catchments.
A way forward
A systematic approach to enable appropriate protection of
representative inland waters in Antarctica has been developed.
Strategic protection of these scarce environments could be further
enhanced through consideration of the following points:
In the absence of comprehensive, high quality, biodiversity and
biogeography data, a conservative approach might be to use
Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBRs; Resolution 3
(2017)) to ensure representative coverage.
Very High Resolution (VHR) remote sensing products could be used
to identify likely areas in poorly documented ACBRs for potential
inclusion for inland water protection.
Goals could be set to protect representative classes of inland water
bodies from each ACBR that (i) are pristine, or close to it, (ii)
include the catchment, or at least the major inflows (iii) are
sufficiently distant from stations and other facilities to avoid casual
visitation. Sites should also include areas known to host rare
aquatic organisms or those with limited distributions. Existing
ASPAs should be reviewed to determine whether they contain
representative inland water bodies.
Consideration could be given to the designation of new ASPAs that
specifically meet requirements under the Protocol to protect
'representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and
aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems'. These could include
areas where access is restricted for significant periods of time to act
as strategic investments in habitat and biological diversity for future
generations.
Designation of such representative inland water bodies and their
catchments may be best accomplished by a collaborative approach
such as multi-party ASPAs (Hughes & Grant 2017), which may also
assist a move away from the reliance on small numbers of
researchers to champion designation of new ASPAs. Both SCAR and
the CEP can also propose such and may offer suitable mechanisms.
A set of steps modified from the framework developed by Margules
& Pressey (2000) (Table 2), could be used to assist the development
of an approach for protection of representative inland water bodies
and their catchments.
Table 2. Six-step guide (partly after Margules & Pressey 2000) to
developing a systematic prioritisation for ASPAs for application to
inland waters in Antarctica under the framework for protected area
designation in Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty. ACBR = Antarctic Conservation
Biogeographic Regions
Step
Task
Sub-tasks: Antarctic Inland waters:
Commentary and requirements for Antarctic Inland waters
1
Compile data on inland water environmental and biological
diversity
Review existing data and identify datasets to serve as surrogates for
the diversity of inland water ecosystems and their associated
biodiversity.
Overlay any information about rare and/or threatened species
Surrogates for representativeness are ACBRs and habitat class
Develop remote-sensing based approaches to classify and map
inland water bodies in ice-free areas across the continent, including
unrepresented ACBR
Incorporate known rare/threatened species distributions.
2
Define the requirements of the protected catchment areas
Set quantitative targets and define criteria underpinning protected
area selection.
Consider classification systems for prioritisation of inland aquatic
environments for protection. Consider likely vulnerabilities.
Most or all of the catchment, particularly the major water sources.
More than one inland water body class, representing those most
common in that region.
Minimum prior disturbance, preferably distant from stations and
facilities.
3
Review existing protected areas
Measure how well quantitative targets and criteria are met by
existing protected areas. Update existing management plans to
explicitly recognise values linked with inland waters.
Identify threats to vulnerable ecosystems, habitats, communities
and species in existing protected areas.
Review representativeness of inland water bodies in existing ASPAs
Of 75 existing ASPAs, ASPAs 119 and 123 provide specific
protection for representative inland waters and their catchments
and meet the criteria in step 2.
Threats include physical disturbance, pollution and non-native taxa,
human activities, anthropogenic climate change.
Assess whether water bodies included within ASPAs but not as a
reason for its designation are truly representative.
4
Select additional areas to propose for protection
Identify and prioritise new areas for protection from Steps 1 to 3,
and facilitate stakeholder review
Develop mechanisms for catchment-based ASPA selection that
involve expert input under CEP and SCAR auspices.
5
Designation of new protected areas
Develop ASPA plans for presentation to CEP and ATCM.
Loop back to step 3 to determine whether further areas are needed
Led by Treaty Parties, the CEP has already developed a process to
ensure the proposal is acceptable before a Party goes to the effort of
developing a Management Plan for the protected area, but evidence
shows long periods of little or no action within the CEP (CEP,
2000).
Case for SCAR intervention to facilitate Parties to propose ASPA
designation.
6
Maintain required values: management and monitoring
Evaluate performance of existing and new management plans and
modify as required.
Loop back to step 3 if values are not being maintained.
Variable quantity and quality across the 75 existing ASPAs.
The requirement for 5-yearly review of ASPA Management Plans
and ongoing monitoring should be retained.
Supporting documentation
ATCM XXXIV WP16. Draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake
Ellsworth, Antarctica
ATCM XXXV WP34. Technology for investigating the water layer of
subglacial Lake Vostok through the ice borehole 5G at the Russian
Antarctic Vostok station
ATCM XXXV BP12. Clean-up of a fuel spill near Lake Dingle,
Vestfold Hills
ATCM XXXVIII IP41. Remediation and closure of Dry Valley Drilling
Project boreholes in response to rising lake levels
ATCM XL WP17. SCAR’s Code of Conduct for the Exploration and
Research of Subglacial Aquatic Environments
ATCM XLI IP12. Preliminary Survey for the International
Exploration Programme of Subglacial Lakes in Southern Vitoria
Land, Antarctica
ATCM XLIV WP12. Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic
Specially Protected Area at Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning
Maud Land, East Antarctica)
ATCM XLIV WP15. Proposal for a new Antarctic Specially Protected
Area in parts of the Western Sør Rondane Mountains, Dronning
Maud Land, East Antarctic
ATCM XLV WP60. Draft Antarctic Specially Protected Area
Management Plan for Farrier Col, Horseshoe Island, Marguerite Bay
ATCM XLIV IP77. A classification system of Antarctic inland aquatic
ecosystems
Davies, B.J., Hambrey, M.J., Glasser, N.F., Holt, T., Rodés, A.,
Smellie, J.L., et al. 2017. Ice-dammed lateral lake and epishelf lake
insights into Holocene dynamics of Marguerite Trough Ice Stream
and George VI Ice Shelf, Alexander Island, Antarctic Peninsula,
Quaternary Science Reviews, 177, 189–219
Ellis-Evans, J.C., Laybourn-Parry, J., Bayliss, P.R. & Perris, S.T.
1997. Human impact on an oligotrophic lake in the Larsemann
Hills. In Battaglia, B., Valencia, J. & Walton, D.W.H., eds, Antarctic
communities: species, structure and survival. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 396–404
Gasparon, M. & Burgess, J.S. 2000. Human impacts in Antarctica:
trace-element geochemistry of freshwater lakes in the Larsemann
Hills, East Antarctica. Environmental Geology, 39, 963–976
Gibson, J.A.E. & Bayly, I.A. 2007. New insights into the origins of
crustaceans of Antarctic lakes. Antarctic Science, 19, 157–163
Hawes, I., Howard-Williams, C., Gilbert, N., Hughes, K. A., Convey,
P. & Quesada, A. 2023. The need to protect Antarctica’s inland
waters. Antarctic Science. doi:10.1017/S0954102022000463
Hawes, I., Smith, R.A. & Sutherland, D. 1999. Development of
microbial mats on contaminated soils from the former site of Vanda
Station, Antarctica. New Zealand Natural Science, 24, 53–68
Hodgson, D.A., Convey, P., Verleyen, E., Vyverman, W., McInnes,
S.J., Sands, C.J., et al. 2010. The limnology and biology of the
Dufek Massif, Transantarctic Mountains 82° south. Polar Science, 4,
197–214
Hodgson, D.A., Roberts, S.J., Smith, J.A., Verleyen, E., Sterken, M.,
Labarque, M., et al. 2013. Late Quaternary environmental changes
in Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, inferred from lake
sediments and raised beaches. Quaternary Science Reviews, 68,
216–236
Hughes, K.A. & Grant, S.M. 2017. The spatial distribution of
Antarctica's protected areas: a product of pragmatism, geopolitics or
conservation need? Environmental Science and Policy, 72, 41–51
Kaup, E. 2005. Development of anthropogenic eutrophication in
lakes of the Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica. Verhandlungen
Internationale Vereinigung Limnologie, 29, 678–682
Kaup, E., & Burgess, J. 2002. Surface and subsurface flows of
nutrients in natural and human impacted lake catchments on
Broknes, Larsemann Hills, Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 14, 343–
352
Margules, C.R. & Pressey, R.L. 2000. Systematic conservation
planning. Nature, 405, 243–253
Peter, H.-U., Buesser, C., Mustafa, O. & Pfeiffer, S. (2008) Risk
assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island, and
development of management plans for their designation as specially
protected or specially managed areas. German Federal Environment
Agency, Dessau, Germany. Retrieved from https://
www.umweltbundesamt.de/en/publikationen/risk-assessment-for-
fildes-peninsula-ardley-island.
Remedios-De León, M., Hughes, K.A., Morelli, E. & Convey, P. 2021.
International response under the Antarctic Treaty System to the
establishment of a non-native fly in Antarctica. Environmental
Management, 67, 1043–1059
Sheppard, D.S., Campbell, I.B. & Claridge, G.G.C. 1993.
Contamination in the soils at Vanda Station. Institute of Geological
and Nuclear Sciences Client report 93/81. Christchurch: New
Zealand Antarctic Programme, 12 pp.
Tin, T. & Roura, R. 2004. Environmental reports of Fildes Peninsula,
1988–1997: benchmarks for environmental management. Antarctic
and Southern Ocean Coalition, Technical Report 13. Washington,
DC: Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition, 188 pp
Webster, J., Webster, K., Nelson, P. & Waterhouse, E. 2003. The
behaviour of residual contaminants at a former station site,
Antarctica. Environmental Pollution, 123, 163–179.
