First inventory of unintentional persistent organic pollutants
emission in Antarctica
First inventory of unintentional persistent organic pollutants
emission in Antarctica
Information paper submitted by the Republic of Belarus
Introduction
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are a group of toxic chemical
substances which are considered a global issue and are regulated by
Stockholm Convention on POPs. Despite of long history of POPs
investigation in Antarctica (Bargagli, 2008; Bengtson Nash, 2011; et
al.), further research of these pollutants is important. In particular,
local sources and emissions within Antarctica have been identified
among the priority research to cover the gaps and inform the policy
making in the framework of the Madrid Protocol (SCAR 2021).
The Information Paper presents the results of the first inventory of
unintentional POPs emission from anthropogenic sources in
Antarctica for modern period and preliminary estimate for the late
1980s.
Methods and Results
Emissions of dioxin/furans (PCDD/Fs), polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and hexachlorobenzene (HCB), which may be formed during
waste and fuel combustion at scientific stations, has been assessed.
Methodology of POPs emission assessment used for this study is
based on activity data and emission factors. To assess the POPs
emission in Antarctica the following tasks were solved:
identification of POPs emission sources in Antarctica; data
collection of human activities characteristics; preparation of input
activity data in required format; and selection of specific emission
factors. Fuel combustion by diesel generators and boilers, motor
vehicles as well as waste incineration were considered as modern
sources of POPs emission for numerical evaluation. Waste burning
in the past was taken into account.
Assessment of PCDD/Fs emission in different media, as well as PCBs
and HCB in air has been done. It is shown that waste incineration
makes the greatest contribution to total POPs emission in Antarctica
for modern period and open burning of waste was the main
anthropogenic source of these pollutants in late 1980s. Over a 30-
year period air emissions of dioxins / furans, PCBs and HCB have
decreased dramatically, that demonstrates the effectiveness of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection. Further measures on POPs
emission reduction should be aimed at improving incineration
practices, the use of afterburners, dust and gas collection
equipment.
Conclusion
For reduction of uncertainties of POPs emission estimates
improvement of emission sources in Antarctica data collection
especially on waste combustion would be useful. Establishment of
emission reporting in the framework of Antarctic Treaty system is
an important step towards better management of POPs emission
sources in Antarctica.
This work was implemented in the framework of the National
Antarctic Program of Belarus for 2021-2025. Results of the
inventory were published in the Advances in Polar Science
(Kakareka, Kukharchyk, 2022).
References
Bargagli R. 2008. Environmental contamination in Antarctic
ecosystems. Sci Total Environ, 400(1-3): 212-226, doi:10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2008.06.062.
Bengtson Nash S. M. 2011. Persistent organic pollutants in
Antarctica: current and future research priorities. J Environ Monit,
13(3): 497-504, doi:10.1039/c0em00230e.
SCAR. 2021. Persistent Organic Chemicals in Antarctica: A horizon
scan of priority challenges. Information Paper submitted by SCAR.
ATCM43, IP137, Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty. https://ats.aq/
devAS/Meetings/Upcoming/92
Kakareka S., Kukharchyk T. 2022. Inventory of unintentional POPs
emission from anthropogenic sources in Antarctica. Adv.Polar Sci,
33(2):156-166 doi:10.13679/j.advps.2021.0044
