Report by the CCAMLR Observer to the Forty Fifth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting
CCAMLR-41 (October 2022)
Summary
1. The 41st Annual Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR-41) met in Hobart,
Australia, from 24 October to 4 November 2022. It was chaired by
Dr J. Granit (Sweden).
2. The Report of the Meeting is in the public domain.
3. The Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance
(SCIC), the Standing Committee on Administration and Finance
(SCAF) and the Scientific Committee also met in Hobart in the week
of 24–28 October.
Organisation of the Meeting
4. The Republic of Ecuador acceded to the Convention on 24 July
2022 and became a Member of the Commission on 19 October
2022.
5. Under its opening agenda item, the Commission received a
presentation from SCAR on its Antarctic Climate Change and the
Environment Report.
Implementation of Convention objectives
6. The Commission discussed a number of issues under this item
noting the work of all Members to build consensus in the
Commission.
7. The Commission noted the progress that has been made across
the recommendations of the Second Performance Review (2017).
Management of marine resources
8. The Commission noted that the Scientific Committee developed a
5-year strategic workplan at its 2022 Symposium and has updated
the terms of reference for all working groups, inter alia to include
consideration of climate change.
9. The Commission welcomed the significant progress made by the
Scientific Committee to apply the new krill management approach
to calculate new catch limits in management units within Subarea
48.1 (Antarctic Peninsula). The Commission developed a workplan
to progress a harmonised approach to management in Subarea 48.1,
including consideration of the means of monitoring catch limits at
small spatial scales, the harmonisation of different spatial
management initiatives, including the proposal for a Domain 1
Marine Protected Area (MPA), and future monitoring of krill
biomass and other components of the ecosystem. Current krill
management measures will remain in place until this work is
completed.
10. The Commission agreed to revise conservation measures
relating to toothfish and icefish fisheries in the Convention Area.
However, the Commission was unable to agree a catch limit for the
fishery for Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) in
Subarea 48.3. The Commission endorsed the advice of the Scientific
Committee for an independent review of data, stock assessments
and decision rules for all relevant CCAMLR toothfish fisheries in
2023.
11. Noting the lack of consensus advice on research on D. mawsoni
in Division 58.4.1, the Commission agreed that this fishery would
not take place in 2022/23.
12. The extrapolated number of seabird mortalities from CCAMLR
longline fishing in 2022 was the lowest on record. The Commission
noted that the success of seabird mortality reductions in CCAMLR
through the implementation of mitigation measures was due to the
past efforts of the Scientific Committee’s Working Group on
Incidental Mortality Associated with
Fishing and it welcomed the renewal of meetings of this Group. The
Commission noted the continued work to improve mitigation
methods for seabirds and whales in the krill fishery, and
collaboration with the Agreement on the Conservation of
Albatrosses and Petrels and the International Whaling Commission
in this regard.
13. The Commission was unable to reach consensus on a proposal
from the EU and its Member States for a new conservation measure
to protect fish nests in the Convention Area.
Spatial management
14. The Commission did not reach consensus to approve the revised
management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs)
Nos 152 and 153 which had been forwarded to it in accordance
with ATCM Decision 9 (2005). The Commission endorsed the
revised management plan proposal for ASPA No. 145.
15. The Commission had an extensive discussion on three proposals
for MPAs (Domain 1 MPA, Weddell Sea MPA and East Antarctic
Representative System of MPAs) and some of the outstanding issues
relating to existing MPAs but did not reach consensus on these
issues.
16. The Commission agreed to hold an extraordinary meeting on
spatial planning and MPAs in 2023. This meeting (the Third Special
Meeting of the Commission) will take place from 19 to 23 June in
Santiago, Chile.
Climate change
17. The Commission agreed a new Climate Change resolution,
Resolution 36/41.
18. The Commission was unable to agree that Conservation Measure
24-04, which allows for the temporary protection of newly exposed
marine areas following ice-shelf retreat in Subareas 48.1, 48.5
and 88.3 for the purposes of scientific research, should be extended
to apply to the whole Antarctic continental coast.
Implementation and compliance
19. The Commission adopted a compliance report, noting that
consensus was reached on all but a few issues. There were no
updates to CCAMLR’s IUU lists.
20. The Commission modified Conservation Measure 10-02 to
require fishing vessels to be fitted with a fully functional automatic
identification system (AIS) and have it switched on at all times in
the Convention Area.
Administration and Finance
21. The Commission adopted its budget for 2023 and approved
expenditure for several Special Funds, including the General Science
Capacity Fund and the General Capacity Building Fund.
22. The Commission has agreed to develop a code of conduct for
CCAMLR meetings, and to improve access to CCAMLR meeting
documents.
Next meeting
23. Ukraine (Mr V. Tsymbaliuk) will Chair the Commission for 2023
and 2024. Argentina will continue to serve as Vice-Chair.
24. The 42nd Meeting of the Commission will be held in Hobart,
Australia, from 16 to 27 October 2023.
