Analysis of the current status of the Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island
English version provided by the author
This document is presented in support of the Working Paper 050
“Status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island”
Analysis of the current status of the Antarctic Specially Protected
Area No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island
Summary
The analysis carried out for ASPA No. 144, Chile Bay (Discovery
Bay), Greenwich Island, is presented, based on the “Checklist to
assist in the inspection of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas” (Resolution 4 (2008)), the
“Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected
Areas” (Article 3, Annex V, Environmental Protocol) and
“Guidelines for de-designation of ASPAs” (Appendix 3, Final Report
CEP XXIII (2021)). Chile suggests the de-designation of the area as
ASPA.
Introduction
In order to establish the relevance of maintaining the protection of
the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 144, Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay), Greenwich island, South Shetland Islands, the
management plan, the activities developed in the area and the
available scientific literature were reviewed.
Following the details and the results of the analyses developed are
presented.
Assessment of the Zone
In 1987, Chile proposed that two small areas of benthic habitat in
Chile Bay be considered a Site of Special Scientific Interest, which
was favorably received. The site was designated SSSI 26 in Rec.
XIV-5 (1987), was re-designated as ASPA 144 in Decision 1 (2002).
In principle, December 31, 1997 was established as the expiration
date of the designation, however, the management plan was
extended until 2005 (Measure 2 (2000)) and finally, until December
31, 2010 under of Measure 4 (2005).
The reasons for its designation were based on the continuous
benthic research that Chile had been conducting since 1967, which
provided a baseline for long-term research, and its usefulness as a
control area, related to the study of the reestablishment of the
benthic fauna in Puerto Foster, Deception Island, after the volcanic
eruption of December 1967.
The protected areas are two polygons, with an approximate surface
area of 0.66 km2, with benthic assemblages with a high diversity of
species and biomass. Benthic habitat A, at depths between 50 and
100 meters, is generated by the coordinates 62º 28.9'S 59º 41.2'W
and 62º 29.3'S 59º 41.7'W, and benthic habitat B, at depths between
100 and 200 meters, is formed by the polygon 62º 28.3'S 59º
40.3'W and 62º28.7'S 59º 40.8'W.
The bottom of both subsites consists of coarse to fine silt that allows
the establishment of benthic communities. The lithological and
mineralogical composition of the sediments indicates their origin
from the outcrops and littoral deposits that surround Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay), that is, porphyritic andesite, aphanitic andesite,
diorite, andesitic volcanic breccias and tuffs, among others. The
composition of the coarse sandy fraction is similar to that of
pebbles. The finer sandy fraction is composed of feldspar, quartz,
pyroxene, biotite, epidote, and organic matter. This material is
transported to the coastline mainly by glaciers, solifluction and
mudflows from the island (Valenzuela and Varela, 1972).
Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) has a transverse submarine barrier
separating subsites A and B of the Area and dividing the bay into an
inner and an outer part, respectively. Sediments in the
inner bay are protected from the action of waves and currents,
thereby preserving the grain size distribution, sorting and shape pf
the contained material (Valenzuela and Varela, 1972).
Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) is considered a highly productive system
during the austral summer, with very well oxygenated waters and
concentrations of inorganic micronutrients consistent with their
productivity, exhibiting seasonal changes in bacterioplankton
communities (Valencia, 1998; Alcamán-Arias et al. 2018; Fuentes et
al. 2019). The vertical temperature distribution is clearly stratified,
with values above 0.46 ºC and up to 1.70 ºC. Salinity also presents
stratification, showing values between 32.5 and 34.2‰. Although
the mixture of the water column is very dynamic due to the strong
winds that hit this coastal area, the glacial melt in Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay) seems sufficient to establish a slight stratification in
the first five meters of the water column (Arcos y Salamanca, 1980;
Alcamán-Arias et al. 2021).
The area has the typical structure of areas with a stable
environment, with a high specific diversity, high homogeneity and
low dominance. Both benthic habitats (subsites) have high diversity
of species and biomass, with about 150 species identified (Clarke,
1995). Bottom topography and sediment features influence the
structure of communities and distribution pattern (Arnaud, 1998).
The benthic fauna in the subsites is dominated by polychaetes,
which represents about 60% of the total number of individuals,
with the presence of at least 13 families, of which Capitellidae was
the most abundant, followed by Spionidae. Nematodes are in
second order of numerical importance, representing approximately
32% of individuals. Amphipods, gastropods, cumaceans and
bivalves together represent about 7% of the community (Calderón
and Jaramillo, 1998).
Bivalve molluscs of the species Cyclocardia astartoides, Thracia
meridionalis, Limopsis liliei, Nacella concinna, Neobuccinum eatoni
and Yoldia eighthsi have been identified (Cruz, 1990).
The distribution of polychaete species on the soft bottoms of Chile
Bay (Discovery Bay) indicates a predominance, in the shallower
parts, of those that feed in suspension, particularly Cirratulidae,
Tharyx sp. and Spionidae, and in the deeper parts, of those that
feed on sediments, especially Maldanidae (Arntz et al. 1994).
In subsite A, the bivalves Yoldia eightsii and Eudorella gracilor
predominated as characteristic fauna. Subsite B is located in the
outer part of the bay and is dominated by Maldane sarci antarctica
polychaetes, especially below 100 m depth, on large cylindrical
colonial sea squirts of the species Holozoa cylindrica. Other
characteristic species are Genaxinus bongranii, Cyamonactra
denticulum, Typhlotanais greenwichensis and Pycogonida spp.
(Gallardo et al. 1988).
Marine mammals have also been identified feeding in Chile Bay,
especially Weddell seals, Leptonychotes weddellii, which frequent
the area to breed, feed and rest. Antarctic fur seals, Arctocephalus
gazella, are regular visitors during the summer, when they can be
seen resting on the beach next to the bay. Some cetaceans, such as
killer whales, Orcinus orca, and minke whales, Balaenoptera
acutorostrata, can also be sighted in the bay.
Since the 1990s, Chile has not carried out benthic research in the
protected area. In that decade, the researches focussed on inter and
subtidal fauna associated to the coastline and present in the water
column, above 50 m depth. These activities were carried out
systematically until 2003, when the Antarctic station "Capitán
Arturo Prat" was closed. Since 2008, upon reopening the station and
the Chilean operations in Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), the scientific
research that Chile develops in the area has been oriented on the
pelagic marine environment regarding the study of fish larvae (La
Mesa et al; 2017; Landaeta et al., 2017) and microbial ecology
associated with bacterioplankton (Alacamán-Arias et al. 2018,
2021; Alcamán-Arias et al, 2022 a and b; Cifuentes-Anticevic et al.
2021), none of them has required work in the protected area.
Ecuador has developed both benthic and pelagic marine research
activities in the area of Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) and Guayaquil
Bay (Cruz, 1990; Calderón and Jaramillo, 1998; Ortega, 1998), but
without carrying out specific investigations within the protected
area. From studies we can infer that the level of benthic
biodiversity is similar to the protected zone, predominating
polychaetes (59.39%) and nematodes (31.88%) (Calderon and
Jaramillo, 1998). Regarding macrozooplankton, Ortega, 1998,
reported that the most representative group were isopods,
constituting 76% of the samples analyzed, followed by salps,
particularly of the genus Salpa and the species Salpa fusiformis.
Chile Bay (Discovery Bay), on the other hand, is not an usual place
for tourist visits; the boats that arrive to the area correspond mainly
to those of the National Antarctic Programs that support the
activities of the stations located in the vicinity of the area, although
sometimes it is possible that those boats visiting Barrientos Island
(Aitcho Islands) or Yankee Bay also visit Chile Bay (Discovery Bay).
The Area is not considered to develop activities by the fishing
vessels operating in subarea 48.1 of the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, CCAMLR.
The Area information was reviewed and analysed based on the
“Checklist to assist in the inspection of Antarctic Specially Protected
Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas”, as well as on the
“Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected
Areas” set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the Environmental
Protocol, and the Guidelines for de-designation of ASPAs, analyses
that are presented below:
1. Analysis according to the Checklist to assist in the inspection of
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas
Assessment of Area Management Plan
1. Are the values for which the Area was designated still relevant?
Quantitative and qualitative benthic research to provide a baseline
has ended in the 1990s and its special interest as a control area for
the reestablishment of the benthic fauna, according to the research
carried out, is no longer valid.
The environmental instability in Port Foster has allowed the equal
and parallel development of a large number of species, regularly
finding changes in the dominant specific composition, which have
maintained low diversity-homogeneity values and high dominance
values, conforming the structure of this type of environment,
altered by volcanic influence (Retamal, 1981; Arnaud et al. 1998),
while Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) maintains a typical structure of
stable environment zones, with high specific diversity, high
homogeneity and low dominance (Retamal, 1981).
According to studies carried out by Arnaud et al. (1998), the
macrobenthic fauna in Port Foster differs significantly from those
found in other Antarctic sites with soft bottoms, as a consequence of
the volcanic activity of Deception Island, which is moderated by its
bottom type. While most Antarctic bottoms are characterized by
substrate heterogeneity (due to material falling from icebergs), the
sediment distribution in Port Foster shows the characteristics of a
closed bay, with grain size decreasing with depth.
Shallow benthic communities within Foster Harbor have recovered
following episodes of volcanic eruptions (1967, 1969, and 1970),
with a predominance of invertebrates, particularly echinoderms
such as ophiuroids, sea stars, and sea urchins (Cranmer et al., 2003;
Angulo-Preckler et al., 2017). In addition, an important community
of filter feeders and suspensivores (mainly sponges, bryozoans and
ascidians) is found on the few hard bottoms described within Port
Foster. Likewise, bivalves contribute to the suspensivore
communities present in the soft bottoms of Deception Island
(Angulo-Preckler et al., 2018).
Upon thorough review of the background information, it is feasible
to assert that the values ascribed to the designated area are no
longer pertinent. Moreover, the current state of Chile Bay
(Discovery Bay), does not demonstrate the existence of other
essential values that would justify the preservation of the subsites as
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.
2. Are the values of the Area being protected effectively?
There are no antecedents that indicate that the values of Bahía
Chile (Discovery Bay) are being threatened. On the other hand, this
community described is similar to that found in other places in
Antarctica such as Bahía Arturo (Anvers Island) and Bahía
Almirantazgo (King George Island) (Gallardo et al. 1988; Sicinski et
al. 2012). The activities carried out in the area are considered to be
of low level and intensity, so it is estimated that its values will
continue to be effectively protected with the general application of
the Environmental Protocol.
3. Are the management aims and objectives appropriate?
The objective of the management plan was to prevent any
disturbance to the habitats and benthic communities present in the
sub-sites, thereby safeguarding the objects of study of the long-term
research program. However, as the program has already reached its
conclusion, it is considered that the original protection goals and
objectives are no longer necessary.
4. Is the period of designation appropriate?
The original designation period expired on December 31, 1997, that
was extended by virtue of Measure 2 (2000) and Measure 4 (2005),
until December 31, 2010, being sufficient to develop and
successfully conclude the research program, as well as other
scientific initiatives that were developed in the area.
5. Do maps and photographs show the boundary of the Area clearly
and the key features it contains?
There are no maps or photographs that clearly show the limits of
the area, which have been defined as polygons formed by pairs of
geographic coordinates.
6. Are the boundaries easy to locate?
The protected area is located in the benthic zone of the marine
environment, below 50 meters depth, without the presence of
specific indications of it, so the location of the limits can only be
done with instrumentation. Locating the limits of the area is
difficult.
7. Are maps and photographs easy to use and up to date?
The current maps are not easy to use because they are not self-
explanatory and have limitations. The last update of the maps was
done in 1998 and was included in the proposed revised
management plan for the area, which has not been formalized
through a measure.
8. What are the geographical coordinates of the Area? Are they
correct (clearly state how this was checked in the field)?
The geographical coordinates of the area are determined by the
polygons established between points 62º 28.9'S, 59º 41.2'W and 62º
29.3'S, 59º 41.7'W, for the benthic habitat A, and 62º 28.3'S , 59º
40.3'W and 62º28.7'S, 59º 40.8'W, for the benthic habitat B. The
revision is based on the cartography of the Hydrographic and
Oceanographic Service of the Chilean Navy, SHOA, scale 1: 20,000,
SAD-69 datum, 1998.
Management activities
9. Are appropriate management activities being undertaken to
protect the values of the Area?
In general, the management plan originally proposed has been
complied with, in order to limit the activities to be developed
within the protected area. In addition, the two countries that
mainly carry out activities in the area, in the vicinity of the
protected area, develop environmental monitoring programs.
10. Is any monitoring of the Area being undertaken?
Since the 1990s, activities have not been carried out specifically
monitoring the protected area.
11. What measures are in place to ensure that the aims and
objectives of the Management Plan are being met? Do they need to
be revised?
In spite of not currently carrying out scientific activities in the
protected area, compliance with the originally indicated measures is
maintained, no artefacts have settled in the bottom or elements are
discharged into the marine environment. Wastes of human origin
generated in the surrounding stations, at 1.5 and 3.5 km from the
ASPA, are discharged into the marine environment only after being
treated. Chile develops an environmental monitoring program since
2009 in the area to determine the impact of human presence in the
area and minimize them. It is not considered necessary to review
the measures for compliance with the purposes and objectives of
the management plan.
2. Analysis according to the Guidelines for implementation of the
Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3, Annex V of the
Environmental Protocol
Assessing Values to be Protected
Checklist of the values
Value
Description
Answer
Environmental values
does the area contain physical, chemical or biological features e.g.,
glaciers, fresh water lakes, melt pools, rock outcrops, plant life or
animal life that are particularly unique or representative
components of the Antarctic environment?
Yes, it contains fauna representative of the Antarctic environment,
characterized by a community of marine invertebrates composed
mainly of polychaetes and nematodes.
Scientific values
does the area contain physical, chemical or biological features of
special interest to scientific researchers where the principles and
methods of science would be applicable?
Yes, it contains features that may be of interest for the development
of scientific research, but without a high degree of endemism.
Historic values
does the area contain features or objects that represent, connate or
recall events, experiences, achievements, places or records that are
important, significant or unusual in the course of human events and
activity in Antarctica?
No, It does not contain.
Aesthetic values
does the area contain features or attributes e.g., beauty,
pleasantness, inspirational qualities, scenic attraction and appeal
that contribute to people’s appreciation and sense or perception of
an area?
No, It does not contain.
Wilderness values
does the area contain characteristics e.g., remoteness, few or no
people, an absence of human-made objects, traces, sounds and
smells, untravelled or infrequently visited terrain that are
particularly unique or representative components of the Antarctic
environment?
No, It does not contain.
Combination
does the area contain any combination of the above values?
Yes, the area combines environmental and scientific values, which
are not particularly unique or of special interest to science as they
are also represented or described for other areas of Antarctica.
Ongoing or planned
scientific activities
does the area include ongoing or planned scientific projects or
activities?
No, the long-term research program in the area has ended. There
are no ongoing or planned activities in ASPA No. 144.
Assessment of Potential Protection and Use Category
Checklist for identifying and clarifying the type of area to be
protected (protection category) as well as the use or reasons (use
category)
Protection Categories
Description
Answer
Ecosystems
would the area be protected for its ecosystems? I.e. dynamic
complexes of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and
their non-living environment interacting as an ecological unit.
No, since they are not unique and this zone was raised as a control
zone for Port Foster.
Habitats
would the area be protected for its habitats? I.e. the places or types
of site where an organism or population naturally occurs.
No, these silt-clay benthic habitats are similar to other areas of the
South Shetland Islands.
Species assemblages
would the area be protected for its species assemblages? I.e.
important or unusual groupings or populations of one or more
species of fauna or flora (usual type of area protection of species in
Antarctica).
No, although it presents important sets of benthic species, they are
not unique to the area and they are similar to other benthic areas.
Species (taxa)
would the area be protected for its species? I.e. special groups of
organisms which resemble each other and sometimes are linked to a
common habitat to a greater degree than members of other groups,
and which commonly form reproductively isolated groups that will
not normally breed with members of another group.
No, there are groups of organisms also present in other habitats
without a high degree of endemism.
Geological,
glaciological or
geomorphological
Features
would the area be protected for its geological, glaciological or
geomorphological features? I.e. distinctive or special characteristics
of the history, structure or components of the Earth’s crust, rocks,
fossils and cryosphere or a result of present or past processes
beneath or at the Earth’s surface in Antarctica.
No
Landscapes
would the area be protected for its landscape? I.e. expanses of
coastal or inland scenery, usually at a scale where they contain a
mosaic of inter-related ecosystems, and characterised by particular
patterns of geometry, heterogeneity, patch dynamics and
biophysical processes.
No
Aesthetic
would the area be protected for its aesthetic features? I.e. attributes
concerned with beauty, appreciation, perception and inspiration.
No
Wilderness
would the area be protected for its wilderness features? I.e.
attributes concerned with remoteness and a relative absence of both
people and indications of past and present human presence or
activity.
No
Historic
would the area be protected for its historic features? I.e. things
which represent or recall events, experiences, places, achievements
or records that are important, significant or unusual in the course of
human events and activity in Antarctica.
No
Intrinsic
would the area be protected for its intrinsic features? (The real or
inherent nature of a thing is worth protecting in its own right i.e.
without requiring use).
No, since this type of benthic community has also been described in
other places.
Use Categories
Description
Answer
Scientific research
would the area be protected for scientific research?
Yes, to develop benthic studies, under 50 m of depth.
Conservation
would the area be protected for its conservation purposes?
(Conservation embraces both protection and judicious use,
management of biodiversity, intrinsic value and importance in
maintaining the life sustaining systems of the biosphere:
distinguished from “sustainable use” and “sustainable
management”.
No
Quality Criteria
Representativeness
Is the potential area representative of other comparable parts of
Antarctica?
Yes
Does it contain ecosystems, species, habitats, physical, historic,
aesthetic and wilderness or other values or features represented
elsewhere?
Yes, it contains species and habitats present in other sites in the
Antarctic Peninsula region.
What contribution would the area make to an Antarctic Protected
Area system with a full range of outstanding natural environmental,
biological, geographic and geological values of the Antarctic
region?
The literature recognizes that Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) has high
values of benthic fauna diversity. However, it would have lower
densities and biomass than other sites within the South Shetland
Islands themselves. In addition, it has a species composition similar
to that recorded in other sites of the South Shetland Islands.
In relation to Antarctica as a whole, what proportion of the values
or types of protected area identified in Articles 3(1) and 3(2) are
represented in the site being investigated?
E.g. an area containing representative examples of marine &
terrestrial ecosystems & assemblages of species of seabird may be
higher quality than one containing a single colony of a common
species.
There is a low proportion of values, mainly presenting the
combination of natural (or environmental) and scientific values.
Diversity
What diversity of species, habitats or other values or features does
the area contain?
For example an area might be of higher quality if it contained a
greater diversity of biological and/or geological features than a
nearby area.
In the protected area, it is possible to find groups of polychaetes.
Distinctiveness
Is the potential area distinctive from other areas? How different is it
from other areas?
It does not present unique/distinctive characteristics.
Does it contain species, habitats or other values or features not
duplicated elsewhere? Are they unique, rare, uncommon or
common?
Yes, they are common.
Are there naturally uncommon taxa present, including “sparse” taxa
which occur within typically small and widely scattered natural
populations, “range restricted” taxa whose distribution is naturally
confined to specific substrates (e.g a specific rock type), habitats
(e.g. geothermally-heated soils) or geographic areas (e.g. nunataks),
“vagrant” taxa which may appear for short periods without
establishing long-term breeding populations, and “seasonal” taxa
which migrate into the polar regions during summer?
No
Are there naturally uncommon abiotic features present that have
been formed or preserved through an unusual or infrequent set of
geological, geomorphological or glaciological processes?
For example an area containing the only example of a terrestrial
ecosystem or a unique fossil locality might be of higher quality than
one that contained a common terrestrial ecosystem or type of fossil.
No
Ecological importance
How important/critical is the area ecologically or numerically for
key species, ecosystems or as a type locality?
The area is representative of the Antarctic ecosystem, but it is not
relevant in ecological terms, according to species presence or the
type of site.
Do the number of individuals or groups occurring at the area
include a high proportion of the global population? For example, if
90% of the global population were present, this would represent a
key population and a very important ecological site.
No
What contribution does the area make to maintenance of essential
ecological processes or life-support systems or habitats?
There is no clear contribution.
Does the area have any inherent vulnerability due to local
endemism, rarity of species, biological vulnerability or for other
reasons?
No. However, the bay faces glaciers on Greenwich Island.
Degree of interference
To what extent has the area been subject to human interference?
It has been subjected to a low degree of human interference: A
station operates throughout the year, with a staff that does not
exceed 12 people and other during the summer period. Staffs at
both stations do not exceed 80 people in summer season. According
to IAATO statistics, a total of 2,214 people visited the area in the
period 2000-2017.
Does the area lack signs of human activities (e.g. tracks, litters)?
Because it is a deep marine zone, there are no visible signs of
human activity.
Is there minimal loss or addition of species, natural processes and
abiotic material?
According to the available scientific information, there are no
changes in species, natural processes or abiotic material in the zone.
What is the degree of visitation and alteration of the adjacent
landscape?
E.g. an area that has not experienced local human-induced change
and is protected from it because of isolation may have higher
quality wilderness values and might be more valuable as an
undisturbed reference area than a less natural area.
In spite of finding two stations in the vicinity of the area, it is
considered that the degree of visits is low, as well as the alteration
of the landscape.
Scientific and monitoring uses
What is the potential for the pursuit of science including gaining of
knowledge by study and analysis?
As in the rest of Antarctica, it is considered high.
What is the potential of the area to be used as a reference area (e.g.
for environmental monitoring)?
Medium, with characteristics similar to other areas in the South
Shetland Islands.
Human activities and impacts
Are human activities regularly, infrequently or almost never carried
out in the area?
The “Arturo Prat” Station (Chile) since 2008 develops regular
activities in the area. The “Pedro Vicente Maldonado” Station
(Ecuador) executes activities during the austral summer. In the
winter months, the bay freezes, so there is no access to the
protected area. In the protected area, as such, activities are not
currently carried out.
Are biological or abiotic components or processes of the area
vulnerable to any existing or likely future human activities in the
area itself or nearby?
Based on the available scientific information, and recognizing that
human activities have been carried out in the area since 1947, it is
considered that the biological and abiotic components of the area
are not threatened by existing or future human activities. As in the
rest of the Antarctic marine environment, the main threats are those
caused by shipping accidents, including the sinking of ships and the
spillage of fuel stored in them.
Could these activities directly, indirectly or in a cumulative way
result in impacts on the values for which this area has been
identified or modify them in any way?
Since 1947 and during more than 25 years in which the area has
had special protection, human activities have been developing.
Today, in addition, there is greater concern in the bases in terms of
environmental protection, so it is considered that human activities
should not directly, indirectly or cumulatively affect the values of
the area.
How likely, frequent and intensive might the impacts be and over
what temporal and spatial scales?
The area is visited regularly by vessels that support the activities of
the National Antarctic Programs. However, the anchorages of these
ships are located near the stations and far from the protected area.
When disturbance occurs, what is the time taken to return to pre-
disturbance or equilibrium levels?
To date, no disturbance caused by human impacts has been
reported in the area.
Natural processes
Are natural processes (e.g. atmospheric, climatic, marine, biological
or glacial processes) likely to modify the area or its values?
Yes, as with any other area in Antarctica of similar conditions of
presence of glaciers in the vicinity.
Natural variability and viability
What are the short and long term variations (e.g. seasonal changes)
in populations of biota present in the area?
According to the available information, in general the populations
are stable. However, if a greater glacial contribution to the bay
occurs (increased melting process), it is possible that the abiotic
conditions undergo modifications, and may even alter the biological
composition of the area. This situation could also occur in other
sites of the South Shetland Islands with similar conditions.
Is the likely variation due to natural processes likely to be smaller,
similar to or larger than impacts of human activities in the area?
The glacial contribution and climate modifications are the main
natural processes that could affect the area and, depending on the
level that could be reached in the future, its impact would be
greater than that of human activities.
Are there any medium- or long-term indications that natural trends
could result in significantly different characteristics of the area
which could affect its future viability, require a reassessment of
protected status or necessitate changes in management?
In the entire region of the Antarctic Peninsula there is currently an
increase in air and sea surface temperature, so those areas with
similar conditions to Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) could face the same
future impacts, with similar effects.
To what extent does natural buffering protect the area from outside
influences?
To date, scientific research indicates that, despite the changes
registered in the region, the area remains stable. In addition, the
geographical location of the area, the English Strait with the Aitcho
Islands in the far north, limits the transit of ships in the area.
Non-Antarctic threats
Would protection of the area be compromised by processes
originating or driven from outside the Antarctic such as global
change, ozone depletion or long-range transport of contaminants
such as long-lived chemical pollutants and introduction of non-
native species?
Like the rest of the Antarctic Peninsula region, the increase in air
and sea temperatures could affect the values of the area in some
way, directly or indirectly, as well as those of the other islands in
the region.
Urgency
Do human activities pose imminent environmental risks?
No, because in general in the area there is a low number of
activities (presence of two stations and few ship visits each season).
Scientific uncertainty
How well known are the natural values and other characteristics of
the area and potential impacts of human activities on them?
Scientific researches are regularly carried out in the area, which
allows a good understanding of its characteristics as well as the
potential human impacts. However, it is acknowledged that there
exists a scarcity of research pertaining to depths below 50 meters in
the region.
Could these uncertainties mask significant threats to the area and its
values?
So far, uncertainties are not recognized.
Boundaries
Are the proposed boundaries consistent with management
objectives? (E.g. do they protect foraging areas of birds in an
important breeding area and/or do they enclose other ecosystem
components required for continuity of species identified?).
The originally proposed limits were intended to facilitate a
comparison with Port Foster in Deception Island. Additionally, the
two selected zones were characterized by distinct depths and
environmental conditions, while still aiming to achieve comparable
representativeness.
Can boundaries be easily defined for management purposes and
identified by visitors? (E.g. can fixed natural boundaries such as
mountain peaks, ridgelines, shorelines, or water depth be used?).
There is an absence of demarcation of surface boundaries. In the
marine zone, two subsites located below a depth of 50 meters are
taken into consideration.
Can management objectives be met regardless of the future use of
areas adjacent to the protected area boundary, including conflicts
between different values or management objectives, and
acceptability to others?
Yes. Indeed, the area was designated as protected in 1987, at a time
when activities were already underway in the vicinity, particularly
in Prat Station. Later, another station (Maldonado) was built in the
area, and tourist activities have also been established. Despite this,
the area experiences a relatively low volume of maritime visits, and
human activities are conducted trying to minimize potential
impacts on the marine environment.
What are the existing scientific or other uses of the area?
Are there conflicting values (e.g. between environmental and
scientific values in Article 3(1)) or between protection and use
categories, or management objectives.
The area presents scientific values (terrestrial, marine,
microbiological and environmental studies) and environmental
ones. The activities are carried out without presenting conflicts
between those values.
Size
Is the area large enough to maximise the chance of management
objectives being achieved?
The protected area covers 0.66 km2 and is located at a depth
ranging between 50 and 200 meters. Chile Bay (Discovery Bay) has
a surface area of approximately 25 km2, stretching from the
intertidal line to a depth of 200 meters. In order to fulfill the
original management objective and facilitate comparison with
Foster Port in Deception Island, the area boasts sufficient size.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that the ecosystems in the two
regions ere different.
Is it large enough to contain all or most of the key elements
identified, in their natural relationships, so that it will be self-
perpetuating?
No, but it is representative.
What is the minimum size needed to achieve management
objectives?
The proposed size allows the achievement of the management
objectives.
Is the area small enough to minimise conflicts between different
values or management objectives?
Yes, the proposed size allows reducing the conflicts between the
different values of the area.
Is the area large enough to accommodate future changes (e.g. due
to climate change?)
The proposed size allows including and considering possible future
changes.
Possible management tools
Are there management tools available that could be used to help
achieve management objectives and minimise conflicts? (E.g. would
zoning be useful to facilitate recognition, protection and
management including partitioning between objectives such as
protection of vulnerable species in core breeding areas, provision of
reference areas and capacity for human activity in suitable fringe
areas?).
There are no other tools available, beyond the methodology of
benthic studies, to facilitate the recognition, protection, and
management of the area, given its depth.
Can management programmes be formulated to attain management
objectives? (E.g. signage or boundary markers, survey and research,
monitoring, any specific information needed for reporting).
Due to the location of the Zone (more than 50 m depth) it is not
practical to establish signs that demarcate it on the surface.
Time period/duration
Can the area be protected for a time period that allows full
achievement of management objectives?
The area was originally protected for a period of 10 years, which
was later extended. As of today, the site has been under protection
for over 25 years, and it is considered that the proposed objectives
were achieved during the initial years of protection while
comparative studies with Foster Port were being conducted.
Are there some seasonal periods when parts of the area or species in
it are not vulnerable to human activity?
In general, due to the location of the Zone (marine environment at
more than 50 m depth), the values are not vulnerable to human
activity.
Accessibility/logistics
Is the area sufficiently accessible for management operations?
Access to the area is easy. However, since the two sub-areas of the
protected Zone are under 50 and 100 m depth, appropriate
equipment is required to perform benthic studies in the area.
Might the logistics needed negatively impact on management
objectives and are there alternative management options?
Eventually, the ships that support the activities of the stations could
have a negative impact. However, the anchorage sites are located
far from the Zone.
Would inaccessibility help achieve management objectives by
deterring potentially impacting activity?
The depth in which the Zone is located hinders the development of
activities in it.
Ability to protect more than one value and meet different
management objectives (i.e. complementarity)
Is there more than one value or objective in Article 3 (1) & 3(2)
that can be protected in the area?
The area has given protection to more than one value (habitats,
species and intrinsic values of the site, in addition to scientific
research).
Would the site add value to the Antarctic protected area system, in
quality as well as quantity?
The Zone contributes to the Antarctic protected area system as a
marine zone, but its contribution is not considered significant, as
the values found within the zone are also present in other areas of
the region.
Is there an appropriate balance between the costs and benefits of
protecting the area, and appropriate equity in the distribution of it
and adjacent protected and unprotected areas?
Based on the available scientific information, there are other sites
within the region that can be considered more significant from both
biological and environmental perspectives than the protected area
in Chile Bay (Discovery Bay). Additionally, given the depth of the
Zone, appropriate vessels are required to study benthic species,
which incurs a cost for the Antarctic Program wishing to undertake
such activities.
In the South Shetland Islands region, there are 12 Antarctic
Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), and in the Antarctic Peninsula
region, there are five marine areas.
Conclusions
The protected area of Bahía Chile (Discovery Bay) was initially
proposed as a specific study control area for Port Foster. However,
the available literature suggests that the sites have different
population structures and environmental conditions, which renders
them incomparable.
Currently, scientific research in the area focuses on the study of
marine microorganisms, invertebrates, and macroalgae. None of
these studies have required work within the protected Zone, but
rather in the coastal, intertidal, and subtidal areas associated with
the coastline, or in the water column at a depth no greater than 50
m.
The Zona has been subjected to a low degree of human interference:
A station operates throughout the year, with a staff that does not
exceed 12 people and other during the summer period. Staffs at
both stations do not exceed 80 people in summer season. According
to IAATO statistics, 2,214 people visited the area in the period
2000-2017 (17 years). In the last report presented by IAATO to the
XLIII ATCM (2021) the Area is not included in the list of the 20
most visited places in the Antarctic Peninsula region.
Due to the low level of activities in the area, it is considered that
the values for which the Zone was originally designated are not
threatened.
Therefore, it is suggested to review the protection of the Zone as an
Antarctic Specially Protected Area.
Bibliographic review
Published articles
Arcos R., D. & M.A. Salamanca O. 1980. Observaciones
hidrográficas en bahía Foster y bahía Chile (islas Shetland del Sur),
enero 1978. Bolm. Inst. Oceanogr., S. Paulo, 29 (2): 51-55.
Arnaud, P.M., C.M. López, I. Olaso, F. Ramil, A.A. Ramos-Esplá & A.
Ramos. 1998. Semi-quantitative study of macrobenthic fauna in the
region of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula.
Polar Biol. 19: 160-166.
Calderón, T. & S. Jaramillo. 1998. Estudio de la macrofauna
bentónica en Bahía Chile y Ensenada Guayaquil (Isla Greenwich,
Antártica). Acta Antártica Ecuatoriana 4 (1): 87-100.
Clarke, A. 1996. The distribution of Antarctic marine benthic
communities. In: R.M. Ross, E.E. Hofmann and L.B. Quetin (Eds.),
Foundations for Ecological Research West of the Antarctic
Peninsula. Antarctic Research Series, 70: 219-230.
Cruz, M. Estudio del bentos marino antártico en bahía Chile o
Discovery, isla Greenwich (islas Shetland del Sur), Antártida. 1990.
Acta Antártica Ecuatoriana, PROANTEC, Ecuador, 2 (1): 33-45.
Gallardo, V.A. 1987. Benthic macroinfauna of Antarctic sub-littoral
soft bottoms. In: El-Sayed, S.Z. and A.P. Tomo (Eds.), Antarctic
Aquatic Biology. Proceedings of the Regional Symposium on Recent
Advances in Antarctic Aquatic Biology with Special Reference to the
Antarctic Peninsula Region, Bariloche, Argentina, 6-10 June, 1983.
BIOMASS Scientific Series Nº 7: 73-86.
Gallardo, V.A. & J. Castillo. 1970. Quantitative observations on the
benthic macrofauna of Port Foster (Deception Island) and the Chile
Bay (Greenwich Island). In: Holdgate, M.W. (Ed.), Antarctic Ecology
(Proceedings of 2nd SCAR Symposium on Antarctic Biology,
Washington, USA, 29 July - 3 August 1968), Volumen 1, 242-243.
Gallardo, V.A., S.A. Medrano & F.D. Carrasco. 1988. Taxonomic
composition of the sublittoral soft-bottom polychaeta of Chile Bay
(Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica). Ser. Cient.
INACH 37: 49-67.
Gallardo, V.A., J.G. Castillo, M.A. Retamal, J. Hermosilla & R.
Trucco. 1975. Benthic community studies in the South Shetland
Islands. Antarctic Journal of the United States 10 (4): 135.
Gallardo, V.A., J.G. Castillo, M.A. Retamal, A. Yáñez, H.I. Moyano &
J.G. Hermosilla. 1977. Quantitative studies on the soft-bottom
macrobentic animal communities of shallow Antarctic Bays. In:
Llano, G.A. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Third SCAR Symposium on
Antarctic Biology. Adaptations within Antarctic Ecosystems. Part II:
The structure and function of Antarctic marine benthic ecosystems,
361-387.
IAATO. 2021. A Five-Year Overview and 2020–21 Season Report on
IAATO Operator Use of Antarctic Peninsula Landing Sites and
ATCM Visitor Site Guidelines. Information Paper IP 111 presented
in the XLIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. 14 pp.
Moyano G., H.I. 1972. Investigación bentónica durante la XXV
Comisión Antártica Chilena. Boletín del Difusión del INACH Nº 7:
17-18.
Ortega, D. 1998. Distribución y composición del macrozooplancton
en Bahía Chile y Ensenada Guayaquil, Isla Greenwich – verano
austral 1998. Acta Antartica Ecuatoriana 4 (1): 115-122.
Retamal, M.A. 1981. Consecuencia en la biota bentónica de las
erupciones volcánicas en la isla Decepción y su comparación con
bahía Chile, Antártica. Bol. Antárt. Chileno 1 (2): 15-17.
Sicinski, J., K. Pabis, K. Jazdzewski, A. Konopacka & M. Błazewicz-
Paszkowycz. 2012. Macrozoobenthos of two Antarctic glacial coves:
a comparison with non-disturbed bottom areas. Polar Biol. 35:355–
367.
Valencia, M. 1998. Estudio de las características físicas y químicas
de las aguas de Bahía Chile para el verano austral, período
1995-1998. Acta Antártica Ecuatoriana 4 (1): 151-162.
Valenzuela, E. & J. Varela. 1972. Sedimentology and submarine
deposits from Bahía Chile (Discovery Bay), Greenwich Island, South
Shetland Island. In: Adie, R. J. (Ed.), Antarctic geology and
geophysics: Symposium on Antarctic Geology and Solid Earth
Science / International Union of Geological Sciences. Oslo, Norway,
6-15 August, 1970, pp 75-81.
Un-published reports
Gallardo, V.A., J.G. Castillo, M.A. Retamal, A. Yánez, H.I. Moyano &
J.G. Hermosilla. 1974. Quantitative studies on the oft-bottom
macrobenthic animal communities of shallow Antarctic bays.
Informe al Instituto Antártico Chileno. 70 pp.
Larraín, E. 1981. Consecuencia en la biota bentónica de las
erupciones volcánicas en Isla Decepción (62º 57’S, 60º 38’W) y su
comparación con Bahía Chile (62º 29’S, 59º 04’W), Antártica.
Memoria para optar al Título de Biólogo Marino. Departamento de
Oceanología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas y de Recursos
Naturales, Universidad de Concepción. 150 pp.
Databases
IAATO. Tourism Statistics, 2000-2001 / 2016-2017. Number of
visits per site per vessel – Peninsula Sites. https://iaato.org/tourism-
statistics.
SCAR Mar-BIN. RAMS taxon details and Distribution maps. http://
www.scarmarbin.be/index.php.
