Antarctic Ecosystem Recovery: Recolonization of Adélie Penguins at
Cape Hallett (ASPA No. 106), Ross Sea
Antarctic Ecosystem Recovery: Recolonization of Adélie Penguins at
Cape Hallett (ASAP No. 106), Ross Sea
Summary
Human-induced disturbances in Antarctica have caused changes in
the structure and function of its ecosystems. Since the
decommissioning and removal of Cape Hallett Station in the Ross
Sea and associated environmental remediation that took place from
2000 to 2007, recolonization of Adélie penguins was visually
confirmed at Cape Hallett for the first time. The site of the former
station was found to be recolonized by 6,175 Adélie penguin nests
in 2019. Recolonization may be facilitated by enhancing the habitat
(Nevins, 2001; Kim et al., 2023). This paper provides information
about the recovery of a region in Antarctica that was impacted by
human-induced changes and draws attention to the importance of
planning and undertaking remediation as well as long-term
monitoring based on environmental assessment in the Antarctic
regions.
Introduction
Antarctica is the most remote and pristine region on earth.
However, Antarctic fauna and flora are affected by climate changes
and human activities (Southwell et al., 2017). The human-induced
disturbances in Antarctica have caused changes in the structure and
functioning of its ecosystems (Frenot et al., 2005). Some nesting
sites of Adélie penguin (Pygocelis adeliae) were destroyed due to
construction activities. Stations built near a penguin colony posed
direct threats to the penguins. The Cape Hallett Station was one of
these stations, which was a joint scientific base between the United
States and New Zealand, established in 1957 and abandoned in
1973 (Gordon 2003). The station was located inside an Adélie
penguin colony, and many penguins were displaced during the
operation period. Studies examining the impacts of the station’s
presence were undertaken over the decades, and initial clean-up,
remediation works and several assessments were conducted for
environmental restoration after the station was closed (Foster,
1987; Gilmore, 2001; Carson 2008; ATCM XXIX– IP115). To
provide verified scientific information about the recolonization of
Adélie penguins and to present evaluation of station clean-up efforts
at Cape Hallett (ASPA No. 106), the number of breeding pairs and
the temporal-spatial changes of nest distribution were compared
across different time periods using historical materials and
literatures as well as field survey data by Korean scientists as a part
of CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP).
Antarctic ecosystem recovery following human-induced habitat
change
The Cape Hallett Station occupied 4.77 ha within the Adélie
penguin breeding area, and 349 nests were identified inside the
station boundary in 1960. The station area decreased to 4.2 ha in
1983 and 1,683 breeding pairs were counted in the old station area.
Initial clean-up of the station was undertaken over several seasons
by 1996 without comprehensive assessment (ATCM XXIX– IP115).
After the implementation of the Environmental Protocol in 1998,
environmental assessment and clean-up efforts were carried out
from 2000 to 2007 by the two national Antarctic programmes of
New Zealand and United States.
For investigating the number of breeding pairs with reduced human
disturbances, UAV (RPAS) was applied. It was identified that a large
number of nests expanded in to the site previously occupied by the
station, and the former station area was recolonized by 6,175
Adélie penguin nests in 2019.The results of the study indicate
numerous recolonized breeding pairs compared to the aerial surveys
from previous reports (see Figure 1). This demonstrates that
successful restoration is possible based on proper planning and
long-term commitments (Nevins, 2001;
Kildaw et al., 2005; ATCM XXIX– IP115). Forty-six years after
station decommissioning, it is confirmed that Adélie penguin
recolonization has occurred at that site. In addition, artificially
created mounds drove penguins to inhabit them with beneficial
results in the case of the Cape Hallett penguin colony (see Figure 2).
Figure 1. Spatial-temporal changes of nest distribution in penguin
colonies at Cape Hallett (Figure 6 in Kim et al., 2023)
Figure 2. Artificial mounds in use by recolonized Adélie penguins
(Figure 7. in Kim et al., 2023)
Conclusion
This study suggests that in order to successfully restore a penguin
colony that has been affected by human-induced disturbances,
enhancing the habitats would be beneficial. This includes loosening
the soil compacted by human activities for facilitating nesting and
restoring habitats to be as close to nearby natural habitats as
possible, such as creating artificial mounds as in the case of Cape
Hallett. Without detailed historical notes, well-documented
pioneering researches,
and long-term research and monitoring, it is impossible to evaluate
the effectiveness of clean-up and remediation efforts. Planning and
commencing the remediation process based on a comprehensive
assessment is also crucial for the recovery of Antarctic ecosystems.
Bibliography
Foster, P. Final Report from the Cape Hallett Demolition Team 9
November to 19 December 1987; Antarctica New Zealand:
Scottbase, New Zealand, 1987.
Frenot, Y.; Chown, S.L.; Whinam, J.; Selkirk, P.; Convey, P.;
Skotnicki, M.; Bergstrom, D. Biological invasions in the Antarctic:
Extent, impacts and implications. Biol. Rev. 2005, 80, 45–72.
Gordon, S. Site Description and Literature Review of Cape Hallett
and Surrounding Areas; Antarctica New Zealand: Scottbase, New
Zealand, 2003.
Gilmore, W.Y. United States Antarctic program environmental
assessment and remediation. Environmental site assessment, Hallett
Station, Cape Hallett, Antarctica; Raytheon Polar Services Company:
Englewood, CO, USA, 2001.
Kildaw, S.D.; Irons, D.B.; Nysewander, D.R.; Buck, C.L. Formation
and growth of new seabird colonies: The significance of habitat
quality. Mar. Ornithol. 2005, 33, 49–58.
Kim, J-U; Kim, Y.; Oh, Y.; Kim H.-C.; Kim J.-H. Antarctic ecosystem
recovery following human-induced habitat change: recolonization
of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Cape Hallett, Ross Sea.
Diversity 2023, 15(1) 51, https://doi.org/10.3390/d15010051
Southwell, C.; Emmerson, L.; Takahashi, A.; Barbraud, C.; Delord,
K.; Weimerskirch, H. Large-scale population assessment informs
conservation management for seabirds in Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean: A case study of Adélie penguins. Glob. Ecol.
Conserv. 2017, 9, 104–115.
