Ecuadorian Projects Completed within the Seventh Turkish
Antarctic Expedition and Signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding between the Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Türkiye (TÜBİTAK) Marmara Research Center (MAM)
Polar Research Institut
Ecuadorian Projects Completed within the Seventh Turkish
Antarctic Expedition and Signing of a Memorandum of
Understanding between the Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Türkiye (TÜBİTAK) Marmara Research Center (MAM)
Polar Research Institute (PRI) and the Oceanographic and Antarctic
Institute of the Navy (INOCAR) Ecuador on Scientific Cooperation
in Antarctic Research
Information Paper Report by Ecuador and Türkiye
Summary
The cooperation between Ecuador and Türkiye is reported in the
context of the 7th Turkish Antarctic Expedition (TAE) and the XXVI
Antarctic Ecuadorian Expedition.
Also, this paper gives information about the signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Scientific and
Technological Research Council of Türkiye (TÜBİTAK), Marmara
Research Center (MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI) and the
Oceanographic and Antarctic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR)
Ecuador on Scientific Cooperation in Antarctic Research.
Ecuador-Türkiye Scientific Collaboration
A Memorandum of Understanding between the Scientific
Technological Research Council of Türkiye (TUBİTAK), Marmara
Research Center (MAM), Polar Research Institute (PRI), and the
Oceanographic and Antarctic Institute of the Navy (INOCAR)
Ecuador, on scientific cooperation in Antarctic research was signed
on May 27, 2022 by the signatures of CPNV-EMT Carlos Zapata and
Prof. Dr. Burcu Özsoy.
As the first collaboration after the signing of the MoU, two
Ecuadorian scientists who were part of the International Scientific
Sub-programme of the XXVI Ecuadorian Antarctic Expedition were
hosted during the TAE-VII.
Prof. Pablo Alejandro Araujo Granda conducted a research project
titled “Modelling Antarctic ecosystems using IBMs and machine
learning techniques” and Mr. Marcos Xavier Vera Morales
conducted a research project titled “Characterization of the
biological diversity of microorganisms associated with Antarctic
vascular and non-vascular plants for bioprospecting purposes”.
Between 1 February – 2 March 2023 the field studies of the project
was completed on Horseshoe Island and surroundings. Prof.
Araujo’s and Mr. Vera’s fieldwork with the support of the Turkish
Antarctic Expedition Team was successfully completed.
In addition, as part of the cooperation and excellent relations
between both countries, on March 1st, personnel of Turkish
Antarctic Expedition visited Pedro Vicente Maldonado Scientific
Station. As well, two spaces have been made available for the
participation of Turkish researchers in the XXVII Ecuadorian
Antarctic Expedition.
It was a mutual pleasure to work together during the last summer
and we hope that this successful collaboration will continue in the
future years.
