Elaboration of an ASPA Draft Mana-gement Plan for Otto-von-
Gruber-Gebirge, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica
Elaboration of an ASPA Draft Management Plan for Otto-von-
Gruber-Gebirge, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica
Summary
In the 2022/2023 Antarctic summer season, German and U.S.
scientists respectively undertook a research expedition into the
Gruber Mountains. The main objective of the German team was to
collect data in order to derive orthomosaics Orthomosaics are
photogrammetrically orthorectified image products mosaicked from
an image collection, where the geometric distortion has been
corrected and the imagery has been color balanced to produce a
seamless mosaic dataset. and digital elevation models of the
proposed ASPA. Further, mapping and assessing the colonies of the
snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea) were important goals of the German
expedition. The U.S. scientists continued both short- and long-term
studies of ecological responses of the glacier, soil and lake
ecosystems within the Untersee Oasis. The results of these
investigations, which are still to be evaluated, will support the
initial compilation a Draft Management Plan for the proposed
ASPA. Finally, Germany and the United States plan to set up an
informal ICG after CEP XXV with the aim of gathering input and
comments to elaborate the first Draft Management Plan for the Area
by involving interested stakeholders and experts.
Introduction
In May 2022 at ATCM XLIV - CEP XXIV in Berlin, the Treaty Parties
agreed to the proposed Prior-assessment for Otto-von-Gruber-
Gebirge and the Committee ‘welcomed the prior assessment and
encouraged Members to work with the proponents towards a
management plan during the intersessional period’. Further, it was
stated that ‘In reply to a concern about older data on snow petrels
and the size of the proposed site, Germany mentioned that an
expedition was planned for 2022-23 to gather more data. Germany
expressed its appreciation for offers of assistance from Members and
IAATO in further work.’ (see paragraphs 111-112 in the Final
Report CEP XXIV and WP12 XLIV ATCM).
Elaboration of an ASPA Draft Management Plan
In November/December 2022 German scientists from Jena carried
out an expedition to the Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge, Dronning Maud
Land, East Antarctica. The investigation area of the expedition
focused on the valley of Lake Untersee. Unpiloted Aerial Vehicles
(UAV) were used to enable surveys of the large and complex high
mountain terrain. It is the first time that UAVs were applied to
support the assessment of a colony of snow petrel (Pagodroma
nivea), the southernmost breeding bird species of the world. Both a
rotary wing multicopter and a VTOL (Vertical take-off and landing)
fixed-wing UAV were used for the survey, combined with ground-
based mappings. In total an area of 54 km² was covered by UAV
imagery (see Figure A.1). From this imagery orthomosaics and
digital elevation models were calculated with a ground sampling
distance of 7 cm and 15 cm respectively. For ground truthing
reference, sites with an area of 0.82 km² were mapped in detail for
the occurrence of snow petrel nests, revealing 1035 nests (430
active). These data are currently being analyzed to quantify the
snow petrel colony and assess its extent in the full area. The
expedition could verify the occurrence of snow petrel subspecies
Pagodroma [nivea] nivea.
For further understanding of the local breeding phenology of snow
petrels, five automatic cameras were installed in the colony.
Additionally, for investigations on the snow petrel colony, samples
(snow petrel carcasses) were taken to search for signs of various
contaminants. The impact of humans in the area, such as waste
dumps and vehicle tracks, were mapped as well.
During their whole stay in the investigation area, the German
scientists were fully supported by U.S. scientists under the lead of
Dr. Dale Andersen (SETI Institute), whose research team and
collaborators regularly visit the Untersee Oasis area to conduct
research on the glacier, soil, and lake ecosystems. These ongoing
studies of the ecosystems of the area's permanently frozen lakes are
of great value because they considerably contribute to the
continuous improvement of knowledge about the area and support
the refinement of the Draft Management Plan.
Future Plans
Germany and the United States like to inform the CEP and the
Treaty Parties that
the first compilation of the first Draft Management Plan for the
proposed Antarctic Specially Protected Area at the Otto-von-Gruber-
Gebirge (Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica) is currently taking
place. Hereby, the results of the recent German and U.S. research
expeditions into the Area should help to significantly improve the
baseline dataset in the area.
As described in the Final Report CEP XXIV, following CEP XXV,
Parties were encouraged by the CEP to work with the proponents
towards a management plan during the intersessional period (see
paragraph 113, Final Report CEP XXIV). Taking this up, an informal
ICG will be set up by Germany and the United States with the aim
of elaborating the first Draft Management Plan for the Area by
involving interested stakeholders (scientists, environmental experts
as well as representatives from ASOC and IAATO).
References
ATCM XLIV WP012, Prior assessment of a proposed Antarctic
Specially Protected Area at Otto-von-Gruber-Gebirge (Dronning
Maud Land, East Antarctica).
ATCM XLIV Final Report, Final report of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting 2022.
Annex A
Figure A.1 Map of the proposed ASPA and investigation Area of the
German expedition in 2022
