IAATO Education, Outreach and Ambassadorship
IAATO Education, Outreach and Ambassadorship
Summary
Education and outreach have been a cornerstone of IAATO since its
inception in 1991, both through targeted learning and training
opportunities for field staff, and in the communication of Antarctic
Treaty System and IAATO information to would-be Antarctic
visitors.
IAATO formed an Education & Outreach Working Group in 2015,
consisting of IAATO Operators and Associate members, with a remit
to develop the Antarctic Ambassador concept. At the 2023 IAATO
Annual Meeting (April 25-27), members unanimously voted for this
working group to become the Antarctic Ambassadorship
Committee.
While Antarctic Ambassadorship has existed as a concept within
IAATO since the beginning, it was in 2016 as IAATO marked the
25th Anniversary of the Environment Protocol as well as celebrating
its own 25th birthday, that the Antarctic Ambassador concept
formally came into being, with the launch of the distinctive three-
gentoo penguin logo.
This paper gives an overview of IAATO’s education and outreach
efforts and developments to its Antarctic Ambassadorship Program.
Background to Education, Outreach and Ambassadorship
The Education & Outreach Working Group was formed to assist the
IAATO Secretariat in an advisory capacity in developing the
Antarctic Ambassador concept and, based on outcomes of other
Working Groups and Committees, assess whether certain issues
(e.g., non-native species) require specific communication internal
and/or external campaigns.
Project work of the Education & Outreach Working Group has
included:
IAATO guidelines for marketing and PR teams – created for
members to make their marketing, sales and PR teams aware of the
importance of aligning their efforts with the values of the ATCM
and the requirements of IAATO for safe, environmentally
responsible travel to Antarctica;
Educational resources to mark the 25th anniversaries of IAATO and
the signing of the Environment Protocol in 1991;
Educational resources to mark 200 years since the first recorded
discovery of Antarctica;
World Albatross Day – supporting The Agreement on the
Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) with highlighting
the importance of albatross conservation;
Polar Guide Week – an annual five-day event of webinars, video
tutorials and downloadable resources including a new pre-season
checklist to enhance our support of guides preparing for their
expedition season;
An Avian Influenza Resource Centre to help communicate updated
biosecurity guidance to polar guides as well as support them with
communicating Avian Influenza protocols to guests.
In 2020–2021, IAATO used the pause in tourism operations caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic to develop an Antarctic Ambassadorship
package to support educational programs; including resources for
field staff, returning guests and Antarctic enthusiasts. In May 2021,
IAATO formalised its definition of an Antarctic Ambassador to be
someone who:
Loves and respects the region;
Educates others by sharing their Antarctic experiences;
Advocates for Antarctica when opportunities arise, and;
Protects Antarctica by making positive changes at home.
The concept behind the LEAP acronym is to empower everyone to
leap into action as ambassadors, using their knowledge and passion
in support of Antarctica. Tools developed to support LEAP include
(Antarctic) Ambassadorship Challenge, Antarctic Ambassadorship
World Map, and Antarctic Ambassadors Beach Clean-up Bingo.
The Ambassadorship Challenge is a 24-task downloadable card
designed to inspire polar enthusiasts to be Antarctic Ambassadors.
Ambassadorship activities have included presentations to
community groups on the Antarctic Treaty and taking part in
citizen science opportunities such as the NASA Globe Cloud
Observation. In addition, these tasks help educate individuals about
the lifestyle changes they can make in their daily life to support the
environment.
The Antarctic Ambassadorship World Map was launched for the
first international Antarctic Ambassadorship Day in 2022 to
showcase Antarctic Ambassadors from around the world - including
polar scientists, researchers, guides, travellers and enthusiasts - and
what they have done in the name of Antarctic Ambassadorship. The
map was designed as a tool to inspire would-be ambassadors by
drawing examples from their peers. Entries on the map highlight
where they are from and what changes they have made to their life
in support of ambassadorship.
Antarctic Ambassadors Beach Clean-up Bingo was launched as part
of the joint Clean Seas work with the Association of Arctic
Expedition Cruise Operators (AECO) on World Oceans Day 2022
(June 8). The card identifies some of the most common trash items
to be found on beaches and encourages the user to pick up this
trash by turning the activity into the popular game. Any trash
posing a potential danger were excluded from the card. Guidance
was provided to help users take part safely and responsibly as well
as to make the game appropriate and accessible for youth.
At the IAATO 2023 Annual Meeting, held in Hamburg, Germany in
April, IAATO’s members unanimously approved the Education &
Outreach Working Group becoming the Antarctic Ambassadorship
Committee. During the upcoming year, the committee will be
developing further tools for individuals to understand the
responsibility of ambassadorship, and educational materials to
enhance the individual’s journey.
