Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (MEASO) -
Key Findings and Recommendations
Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (MEASO) –
Key Findings and Recommendations
Information Paper submitted by SCAR
Summary
The Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (MEASO)
Contact: measo.2020@utas.edu.au is a core program of Integrating
Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics of the Southern Ocean (ICED),
which is co-sponsored by IMBeR and SCAR. It has been an open
participatory, multidisciplinary up-to-date assessment of status and
trends in Southern Ocean ecosystems for use by policy makers,
scientists and the wider public. To date, it has involved over 200
scientists from across the Antarctic and Southern Ocean scientific
community (18 countries, >50% female, >40% early career),
contributing to 25 research articles published in a special research
topic in Frontiers journals (greater than 200,000 views, 38,000
downloads). The international network and outputs of MEASO have
direct relevance for a number of priorities and actions in the CEP in
relation to its Climate Change Response Work Program and the
Five-Year Plan. This paper presents key findings from MEASO on
how Southern Ocean species and ecosystems are already being
affected by climate change and what the future looks like; where to
find fuller explanations behind these conclusions; options for
managers to protect these ecosystems and enhance their resilience;
suggested processes for a wider participation in protecting the
Southern Ocean; and priorities for scientific research to support
management into the future.
Introduction
Global interest in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean and the desire
for its protection are demonstrated by the development of the
Antarctic Treaty System and its emphasis on conservation and
protection.
Global policy and action is required to safeguard Southern Ocean
ecosystems from the effects of climate change and ocean
acidification caused by greenhouse gas emissions.
Regional pressures on Southern Ocean species and ecosystems have
been dominated by fisheries, with human presence (science and
tourism) and pollution having only localised effects at this stage.
The Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (MEASO)
has demonstrated the array of existing knowledge, data, tools and
approaches available for informing decisions on conserving and
sustaining marine ecosystem services in the region, and how their
implementation could be improved.
MEASO contributes to the CEP Climate Change Response Work
Program (CCRWP) on the following issues:
Issue 3) Change to marine near-shore abiotic and biotic
environment
Issue 4) Ecosystem change due to ocean acidification
Issue 6) Marine and terrestrial species at risk due to climate change
Issue 7) Marine, terrestrial and freshwater habitats at risk due to
climate change
and to the 2022 CEP Five-year Work Plan on the following issues:
Climate change implications for the environment
Action: Consider implications of climate change for management of
Antarctic environment.
Monitoring and state of the environment reporting
Action: Identify key environmental indicators and tools
Action: Establish a process for reporting
Marine spatial protection and management
Action: Identify and apply processes for spatial marine protection
Action: Consider connectivity between land and ocean
The first section of this information paper provides key policy-
relevant findings for the CEP and recommended research priorities,
and is followed by three sections underpinning those
recommendations – key findings on the value and change in marine
ecosystems of the Southern Ocean, the background to MEASO, and,
finally a list of peer-reviewed MEASO journal articles that will be
published as an eBook in 2023 and used as the basis for the
Summary for Policy Makers to be released in 2023.
This paper focuses on MEASO findings and recommendations that
are relevant to the CEP; additional information was presented to
CCAMLR in 2022 (SC-CAMLR-41/BG/25).
1. Key policy-relevant findings and recommended research
priorities
Managing for change
Human interventions to facilitate adaptation of Southern Ocean
marine ecosystems to the effects of greenhouse gas emissions are
not available.
Strategies for conserving Southern Ocean marine biodiversity,
including in managing fisheries, need to be developed based on
current knowledge to ensure resilience of Southern Ocean
ecosystems into the future.
Managing local human activities in the Southern Ocean will benefit
from assessments of the risks of different scenarios along with
improved socio-ecological modelling and stakeholder engagement.
Measuring change
Directly measuring the state of Southern Ocean ecosystems requires
greater investment in research than current levels, because of the
complexity of food webs and biodiverse communities, the size of
the areas to be covered, and the remoteness of the region.
A greater spread of comprehensive, long-term ecosystem studies
across all Southern Ocean regions is needed to assess spatial
variability in the structure of Southern Ocean ecosystems and the
relative importance of different ecological processes in different
areas.
Systematic and sustained measurements of biological sentinel
variables in all relevant MEASO areas are needed to underpin
assessments of ecosystem change in the Southern Ocean and for
projecting future changes.
Projecting change to support risk assessments
Projecting future changes of species needs improved models that
relate change in habitats, food webs and human activity to change
in the survival and/or dynamics of those species.
Projecting change of ecosystems in different MEASO areas needs
dynamic food web and ecological community models coupled to
models of Earth’s ice-ocean-atmosphere (physio-chemical models)
scaled to relevant ecological processes.
2. Key findings from MEASO on state, variability and change
Value and importance of Southern Ocean ecosystems in the Earth
System
Southern Ocean ecosystems are an integral part of the Earth System;
changes in Southern Ocean ecosystems will have impacts
throughout the world’s oceans and climate system and vice versa.
Once thought to be isolated, the Southern Ocean exchanges water
with oceans to the north in some locations through surface eddies
driven by wind as well as deep water convection driven by
temperature and salinity. Such connectivity enables movement of
pelagic organisms (plankton and fish) and biological material into
and out of the Southern Ocean.
The Southern Ocean provides important feeding and breeding
grounds for migratory whales, pinnipeds and seabirds; migratory
species transport important nutrients to and from the Southern
Ocean each year and can contribute to the transport of pollutants
and invasive species.
Globally, people have a deep, often unacknowledged, connection
with the Southern Ocean and value it greatly, despite not living
there.
Human activities in the region (science operations, fisheries,
tourism) involve the large-scale transfer of people and material
north and south each year linking communities and social systems
elsewhere to the Southern Ocean but also potentially contributing
to unexpected effects in the region through transport of non-native
species/diseases, direct disturbance and pollution.
The demand for, and global importance of the role of, ecosystem
services from the Southern Ocean, is expected to increase during
the 21st century.
Changing habitats in the Southern Ocean
The Southern Ocean is warming, but to varying extents around
Antarctica.
Sea ice, a key habitat and defining feature of the Southern Ocean, is
changing but in different ways around Antarctica; prognoses for sea
ice are amongst the greatest uncertainties on the future of marine
ecosystems in the region.
The Southern Ocean is freshening and becoming more windy.
The light environment in the Southern Ocean is changing, therefore
affecting blooms of phytoplankton.
Nutrients (iron, silicic acid, phosphate and nitrate) that are required
for primary production are changing but supply is dependent on
local conditions.
Absorption of large amounts of atmospheric CO2 by the Southern
Ocean is causing the water to become more acidic.
The melting and retreat of glaciers and the collapse of ice shelves
due to increased oceanic and atmospheric temperatures affects
coastal ecosystems.
Globally-generated pollutants, including micro-plastics, are
increasingly detected in the environment and in biota of the
Southern Ocean, and local effects of pollution are altering
environments adjacent to stations.
Biological changes and vulnerabilities
Sea ice supports productivity in the spring, autumn and winter, and
provides habitat for feeding, breeding and refuge for many species.
Coastal and shelf systems of the Southern Ocean in waters
shallower than 2000 m are among the most productive ecosystems
in the global ocean and drive production locally and downstream.
Primary production by phytoplankton and carbon export to deeper
water around Antarctica are changing but the outcomes are
complex because of multiple factors affecting iron supply, mixed
layer depth, light availability and export efficiency.
Warming will alter seasonal patterns in production (phenology) and
the relative abundances of different types of phytoplankton
(particularly diatom vs. non-diatom).
Individual sensitivities of benthic and pelagic species to change in
habitat conditions is determined by their morphology, ability to
regulate their physiology, and ability to move if the conditions are
inhospitable.
Evidence for individual tolerances of species and the measured
contraction in the northward extent of the range of Antarctic krill
indicates that the Antarctic (polar) ecosystem is contracting towards
Antarctica; tolerant species and species from more northern areas
may become more abundant in southern areas.
Seals, penguins and flying birds dependent on sea ice for breeding
and haul-out resting are negatively impacted by declining sea ice
conditions.
Shore-based colonies will be impacted by shifting of the primary
locations of their prey, particularly for subantarctic predators, and
in changing conditions at their colonies.
Foraging success of migratory seabirds, seals and whales may be
disrupted should there be a change in timing of productivity in the
coupled ocean-ice ecosystems.
Pollution and pathogens are emerging as factors impacting species
in the Southern Ocean, including fish, marine mammals and birds.
Benthic systems will be negatively impacted by warming,
freshening and acidifying habitats and, on the Antarctic continental
shelf, by increased iceberg scour.
Change in Southern Ocean food webs is dependent on the energy
pathways prevalent in an area and the sensitivity of species (either
as predators or as prey) to the abundance of those species affected
by changes in their habitats.
Reduced dominance of Antarctic krill may arise in the Atlantic
sector of the Southern Ocean due to sea ice loss, warming and
acidification, thereby impacting higher trophic levels and the
energetic efficiency of the ecosystem.
3. Background to MEASO
MEASO is the first circumpolar assessment of Southern Ocean
ecosystem status and trends, beginning its activities in 2018. This
section outlines the key features of MEASO and important outputs
and events since 2018.
Key Features
A spatially-structured circumpolar ecosystem assessment.
A 5-year inclusive international program providing a forward-
looking assessment of trends in Southern Ocean ecosystems. To
date, it has involved over 200 scientists from across the Antarctic
and Southern Ocean scientific community (18 countries, >50%
female, >40% early career), contributing to 25 research articles
published in a special research topic in Frontiers journals (greater
than 200,000 views, 38,000 downloads).
A key output of the program Integrating Climate and Ecosystem
Dynamics of the Southern Ocean (ICED), which is a regional
program of the Integrated Marine Biosphere Research (IMBeR)
project and a co-sponsored program of SCAR.
Outputs and events
2018 Hobart International Conference on the Marine Ecosystem
Assessment for the Southern Ocean, including a one-day Policy
Forum.
2019 Woking Workshop on progressing the first MEASO.
2019-21 Delivery of the Marine Ecosystem Assessment e-book
published in Frontiers; Contributions to Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change: Special Report on Oceans and Cryosphere in a
Changing Climate (Ch 3: Polar Regions), Working Group II (Ch 3:
Oceans and Coastal Ecosystems and their Services; Cross- Chapter
Paper 6: Polar Regions).
2021 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Conference of
Parties 26 (UK) - Cryosphere Pavilion Polar Oceans Day: Antarctic
marine ecosystems under pressure: protection needs action locally
and globally.
2022 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Conference of
Parties 27 (Egypt) - Cryosphere Pavilion Polar Oceans Day:
Southern Ocean ecosystems: need for augmented understanding,
research efforts and protection; Presentations to SCAR Open Science
Conference and to the Challenger 150 Symposium, among others.
4. Publications
Research Topic in Frontiers (to be made into an eBook in 2023)
with participating journals: Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution
(Conservation & Restoration Ecology), Frontiers in Environmental
Science (Conservation & Restoration Ecology), and Frontiers in
Marine Science (Global Change and the Future Ocean). The
research topic can be accessed at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics/10606/marine-
ecosystem-assessment-for-the-southern-ocean-meeting-the-
challenge-for-conserving-earth-ecosys#overview
Context
Global connectivity of Southern Ocean Ecosystems. Murphy, E. J.,
Johnston, N. M., Hofmann, E. E., Phillips, R. A., Jackson, J. A.,
Constable, A. J., Henley, S. F., Melbourne-Thomas, J., Trebilco, R.,
Cavanagh, R. D., Tarling, G. A., Saunders, R. A., Barnes, D. K. A.,
Costa, D. P., Corney, S. P., Fraser, C. I., Höfer, J., Hughes, K. A.,
Sands, C. J., Thorpe, S. E., Trathan, P. N., & Xavier, J. C. (2021).
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 9. doi:10.3389/
fevo.2021.624451
From Data to Marine Ecosystem Assessments of the Southern Ocean:
Achievements, Challenges, and Lessons for the Future. van de Putte,
A. P., Griffiths, H. J., Brooks, C., Bricher, P., Sweetlove, M., Halfter,
S., & Raymond, B. (2021). Frontiers in Marine Science, 8.
doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.637063
Global Drivers on Southern Ocean Ecosystems: Changing Physical
Environments and Anthropogenic Pressures in an Earth System.
Morley, S. A., Abele, D., Barnes, D. K. A., Cárdenas, C. A., Cotté, C.,
Gutt, J., Henley, S. F., Höfer, J., Hughes, K. A., Martin, S. M.,
Moffat, C., Raphael, M., Stammerjohn, S. E., Suckling, C. C.,
Tulloch, V. J. D., Waller, C. L., & Constable, A. J. (2020). Frontiers
in Marine Science, 7. doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.547188
Local Drivers of Change in Southern Ocean Ecosystems: Human
Activities and Policy Implications. Grant, S. M., Waller, C. L.,
Morley, S. A., Barnes, D. K. A., Brasier, M. J., Double, M. C.,
Griffiths, H. J., Hughes, K. A., Jackson, J. A., Waluda, C. M., &
Constable, A. J. (2021). Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 9.
doi:10.3389/fevo.2021.624518
Biota and food webs
Changing biogeochemistry of the Southern Ocean and its ecosystem
implications. Henley, S. F., Cavan, E. L., Fawcett, S. E., Kerr, R.,
Monteiro, T., Sherrell, R. M., Bowie, A. R., Boyd, P. W., Barnes, D.
K. A., Schloss, I. R., Marshall, T., Flynn, R., & Smith, S. (2020).
Frontiers in Marine Science, 7. doi:10.3389/ fmars.2020.00581
Responses of Southern Ocean Seafloor Habitats and Communities to
Global and Local Drivers of Change. Brasier, M. J., Barnes, D., Bax,
N., Brandt, A., Christianson, A. B., Constable, A. J., Downey, R.,
Figuerola, B., Griffiths, H., Gutt, J., Lockhart, S., Morley, S. A., Post,
A. L., Van de Putte, A., Saeedi, H., Stark, J. S., Sumner, M., &
Waller, C. L. (2021). Frontiers in Marine Science, 8, 30.
doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.622721
Evidence for the Impact of Climate Change on Primary Producers in
the Southern Ocean. Pinkerton, M. H., Boyd, P. W., Deppeler, S.,
Hayward, A., Höfer, J., & Moreau, S. (2021). Frontiers in Ecology
and Evolution, 9. doi:10.3389/fevo.2021.592027
Status, change and futures of zooplankton in the Southern Ocean.
Johnston, N. M., Murphy, E. J., Atkinson, A. A., Constable, A. J.,
Cotté, C. S., Cox, M., Daly, K., Driscoll, R., Flores, H., Halfter, S.,
Henschke, N., Hill, S. L., Höfer, J., Hunt, B. P. V., Kawaguchi, S.,
Lindsay, D. J., Loeb, V., Manno, C., Meyer, B., Pakhomov, E.,
Pinkerton, M. H., Reiss, C., Richerson, K., Smith, W., Steinberg, D.
K., Swadling, K. M., Tarling, G. A., Thorpe, S. E., Veytia, D., Ward,
P., Weldrick, C. K., & Yang, G. (2022). Frontiers in Ecology and
Evolution. doi:10.3389/fevo.2021.624692
Productivity and Change in Fish and Squid in the Southern Ocean.
Caccavo, J. A., Christiansen, H., Constable, A. J., Ghigliotti, L.,
Trebilco, R., Brooks, C. M., Cotte, C., Desvignes, T., Dornan, T.,
Jones, C. D., Koubbi, P., Saunders, R. A., Strobel, A., Vacchi, M.,
van de Putte, A. P., Walters, A., Waluda, C. M., Woods, B. L., &
Xavier, J. C. (2021). Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 9.
doi:10.3389/fevo.2021.624918
Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean: Birds and
Marine Mammals in a Changing Climate. Bestley, S., Ropert-
Coudert, Y., Bengtson Nash, S., Brooks, C. M., Cotté, C., Dewar, M.,
Friedlaender, A. S., Jackson, J. A., Labrousse, S., Lowther, A. D.,
McMahon, C. R., Phillips, R. A., Pistorius, P., Puskic, P. S., Reis, A.
O. d. A., Reisinger, R. R., Santos, M., Tarszisz, E., Tixier, P.,
Trathan, P. N., Wege, M., & Wienecke, B. (2020). Frontiers in
Ecology and Evolution, 8. doi:10.3389/fevo.2020.566936
Biological responses to change in Antarctic sea ice habitats.
Swadling, K.M.,Constable, A.J., Fraser, A.D., Massom, R.A., Borup,
M.D., Ghigliotti, L., Granata, A.,Guglielmo, L., Kawaguchi, S.,
Kennedy, F., Kiko, R., Koubbi, P., Makabe, R., Martin, A., McMinn,
A., Moteki, M., Pakhomov, E.A., Peeken, I., Reimer, J., Reid, P.,
Ryan, K., Vacchi, M., Virtue, P., Weldrick, C.K., Wongpan, P.,
Wotherspoon, S.J. (2023) Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 10.
doi: 10.3389/fevo.2022.1073823
Southern Ocean Food Web Modelling: Progress, Prognoses, and
Future Priorities for Research and Policy Makers. McCormack, S. A.,
Melbourne-Thomas, J., Trebilco, R., Griffith, G., Hill, S. L., Hoover,
C., Johnston, N. M., Marina, T. I., Murphy, E. J., Pakhomov, E. A.,
Pinkerton, M., Plagányi, É., Saravia, L. A., Subramaniam, R. C., Van
de Putte, A. P., & Constable, A. J. (2021). Frontiers in Ecology and
Evolution, 9. doi:10.3389/fevo.2021.624763
Challenges for policy makers
Future risk for Southern Ocean ecosystem services under climate
change. Cavanagh, R. D., Melbourne-Thomas, J., Grant, S. M.,
Barnes, D. K. A., Hughes, K. A., Halfter, S., Meredith, M. P.,
Murphy, E. J., Trebilco, R., & Hill, S. L. (2021). Frontiers in Marine
Science, 7. doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.615214
Future Antarctic coastal ecosystems under global change. Höfer, J.,
Barnes, D.K.A., Piñones, A., Schloss, I.R., Stark, J.S. (in review)
Frontiers in Marine Science
Extensions of MEASO
Phenology and environmental control of phytoplankton blooms in
the Kong Håkon VII Hav in the Southern Ocean. Kauko, H. M.,
Hattermann, T., Ryan- Keogh, T., Singh, A., de Steur, L., Fransson,
A., Chierici, M., Falkenhaug, T., Hallfredsson, E. H., Bratbak, G.,
Tsagaraki, T., Berge, T., Zhou, Q., & Moreau, S. (2021). Frontiers in
Marine Science, 8. doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.623856
Subsurface Chlorophyll-a maxima in the Southern Ocean. Baldry,
K., Strutton, P. G., Hill, N. A., & Boyd, P. W. (2020). Frontiers in
Marine Science, 7. doi:10.3389/ fmars.2020.00671
A review and meta-analysis of potential impacts of ocean
acidification on marine calcifiers from the Southern Ocean.
Figuerola, B., Hancock, A. M., Bax, N., Cummings, V. J., Downey,
R., Griffiths, H. J., Smith, J., & Stark, J. S. (2021). Frontiers in
Marine Science, 8. doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.584445
Interaction of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current with seamounts
fuels moderate blooms but vast foraging grounds for multiple
marine predators. Sergi, S., Baudena, A., Cotté, C., Ardyna, M.,
Blain, S., & d’Ovidio, F. (2020). Frontiers in Marine Science, 7.
doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.00416
Giving effect to MEASO
Science and policy interactions in assessing and managing marine
ecosystems in the Southern Ocean. Press, A. J. (2021). Frontiers in
Ecology and Evolution, 9. doi:10.3389/fevo.2021.576047
Overcoming the obstacles faced by Early Career Researchers in
marine science: lessons from the Marine Ecosystem Assessment for
the Southern Ocean. Brasier, M. J., McCormack, S., Bax, N.,
Caccavo, J. A., Cavan, E., Ericson, J. A., Figuerola, B., Hancock, A.,
Halfter, S., Hellessey, N., Höfer, J., Puskic, P. S., de Oliveira, C. S.,
Subramaniam, R. C., Wallis, J., & Weldrick, C. K. (2020). Frontiers
in Marine Science, 7. doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.00692
Stakeholder engagement in decision making and pathways of
influence for Southern Ocean ecosystem services. Solomonsz, J.,
Melbourne-Thomas, J., Constable, A., Trebilco, R., van Putten, I., &
Goldsworthy, L. (2021). Frontiers in Marine Science, 8.
doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.623733
Enabling enduring evidence-based policy for the Southern Ocean
through cultural arts practices. Roberts, L., Kutay, C., Melbourne-
Thomas, J., Petrou, K., Benson, T. M., Fiore, D., Fletcher, P.,
Johnson, E., Silk, M., Taberner, S., Filgueira, V. V., & Constable, A.
J. (2021). Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 9. doi:10.3389/
fevo.2021.616089
A dynamic framework for assessing and managing risks to
ecosystems from fisheries: demonstration for conserving the krill-
based food web in Antarctica. Constable, A.J., Kawaguchi, S.,
Sumner, M., Trathan. P., Warwick-Evans, V. (2023) Frontiers in
Ecology and Evolution, 11. doi: 10.3389/fevo.2023.1043800
Using a Risk Assessment Framework to spatially and temporally
spread the fishery catch limit for Antarctic krill in the west
Antarctic Peninsula: a template for krill fisheries elsewhere.
Warwick-Evans,V., Andrew J Constable, A.J., Dalla Rosa, L., Secchi.
E., Seyboth, E., Trathan, P. (2022) Frontiers in Marine Science, 9.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2022.1015851
Value and limitations of large open biodiversity databases in the
context of a Marine Ecosystem Assessment of the Southern Ocean.
Bonnet-Lebrun, A-S, Sweetlove, M., Griffiths, H.J., Sumner, M.,
Provoost, P., Raymond, B., Ropert-Coudert, Y., van de Putte, A.P.
(in review) Frontiers in Marine Science
