Workshop “The future of Antarctic tourism: towards a strategic
vision and policy program”, 8-10 March 2023, Paris - Chair’s report
This document is presented in support of the Working Paper 13
“Dedicated process for the development of a comprehensive and
consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and other non-
governmental activities”
Workshop “The future of Antarctic tourism: towards a strategic
vision and policy program”, 8-10 March 2023, Paris
Chair’s report
Summary
France and the Netherlands present the Chair’s Report from the
informal workshop on the management of Antarctic Tourism (the
future of Antarctic tourism: « towards a strategic vision and policy
program ») held in Paris (8 to 10 March 2023). This report supports
the Working Paper 13 “Dedicated process for the development of a
comprehensive and consistent framework for Antarctic tourism and
other non-governmental activities”.
Background
France and the Netherlands co-chaired an informal workshop on a
strategic vision and policy program for Antarctic tourism, hosted by
France in Paris (8 to 10 March 2023). This workshop was prepared
by the hosts of the ATCMs XLIII, XLIV, XV and 46 and the
delegations of the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, with the
objective to accelerate and support an ATCM-wide, transparent and
inclusive debate and subsequent decision-making on the future of
Antarctic tourism. The workshop agenda is provided in Appendix 1.
38 participants attended, as follows: 28 delegates representing 17
Consultative Parties, 2 delegates from 2 Non-Consultative Parties, 6
delegates representing Experts and Observers (COMNAP, ASOC,
IAATO, IUCN and SCAR), and 1 external French expert in polar law.
The list of participants is provided in Appendix 2.
The key recommendations supported by many who participated in
this workshop, presented in the present Information Paper, support
the Working Paper 13 for the ATCM to consider.
Day I – Morning session (Sessions 1 & 2) - Workshop introduction
Caroline Krajka (Co-Chair, FR), opening Session 1 (Workshop
introduction - plenary opening), welcomed attendees for this
informal workshop in Paris. She noted with regret that several
delegations were not able to attend as initially planned (Ukraine,
Austria, Ecuador, South Africa and India).
Olivier Poivre d'Arvor, French Ambassador for the Poles and
Maritime Issues, formally opened the workshop with a keynote
speech. Welcoming the 38 attendees to Paris, all Parties to the
Madrid Protocol and particularly involved in the framing of
tourism, the Ambassador reminded that the pandemic did not allow
for participants to be greeted in person during the 43rd Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting, organized by France in June 2021, in
Paris.
The Ambassador recalled the context in which this informal
workshop was taking place: the Rotterdam workshop, co-organized
in 2019 by the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom, provided a great opportunity for the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Parties (ATCPs) and Observers to define international
priorities for tourism management in the Antarctic Treaty area. The
subsequent ATCM XLII in Prague was thus able to make concrete
progress on these issues, and ATCM XLIIV saw the success of the
proposals put forward by France in this area (establishment of a
voluntary common system for the boarding of government
observers on cruise ships; adoption of a “Tourism Rules Manual”
compiling all the rules of the Antarctic Treaty system (ATS) relating
to tourism).
He also noted that the objective of the work conducted within the
ATCM is to better monitor the tourism phenomenon, and that the
ATCM Multi-year Strategic Work Plan, adopted by Decision 3
(2022), contains two priorities relating to tourism, namely: Priority
11, on the development of a strategic approach to the management
of Antarctic tourism, and Priority 12, on compliance. He finally
mentioned that in the margins of the ATCM, the Chairs of ATCMs
XLIII, XLIV, XLV and XLVI and the delegations of the Netherlands
and the United Kingdom discussed ways to accelerate a more robust
discussion on the future of Antarctic tourism.
He stressed that the rapidly increasing number of tourists visiting
Antarctica every year - over 100,000 visitors are expected to do so
during the 2022-23 season- and the diversification of touristic
activities in Antarctica, urge us to develop a new vision for
Antarctic tourism. He added that these developments call for a
robust and coherent policy approach to ensure that activities
comply with the values, principles and rules adopted within the
framework of the ATS. He also insisted that it was time to adopt
stronger regulations on tourism in the Antarctic, to avoid the
exponential rise of tourism.
He hoped that this workshop, by bringing together the most
involved ATCPs and Observers, would provide an opportunity for
the elaboration of a strategic policy on Antarctic tourism. Such an
objective is in line with France’s first Polar Strategy, published in
March 2022, titled “France’s 2030 polar strategy - equilibrium in
extremes”.
The Ambassador emphasised the critical importance of protecting
the polar environment in Antarctica - a continent where humans
must remain visitors and whose stay needs to be responsible and
mindful of nature. It therefore requires preservation of areas that
have not been impacted by humans, so they may be declared as
reserves and used as benchmarks. He highlighted the fact that the
Antarctic Treaty, which was signed in Washington on 1 December
1959, can be seen as a model of success in multilateralism, for
facilitates overcoming divisions to reach a joint solution, respecting
everyone State’s interests.
Finally, he pointed out that France was one of the first signatories
of the Antarctic Treaty and the initiator, together with Australia, of
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(EP) signed in Madrid, on 4 October 1991, which established the
principle that activities in this region should be undertaken “so as
to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and its
dependent and associated ecosystems”. He added that France
intended to increase its efforts to see the ATCPs adopt the most
ambitious and protective legislation possible in the field of
Antarctic tourism. He finally underlined the key role of this
workshop to set out the future of Antarctica, as it is time to adopt
more robust and international regulation on tourism in the
Antarctic.
After this introductory speech, Caroline Krajka (Co-chair, FR)
explained the workshop goals and structure, with the objective of
drafting a Working Paper to be submitted in ATCM XLV in Helsinki
aiming at proposing a clear and concrete vision for Antarctic
tourism.
Jane Rumble (UK) introduced, as a “Thought Starter”, the second
session related to “General remarks and expectations”. She
suggested that arguably the ATCM was not taking a strategic or
comprehensive approach to the management and regulation of
tourism in Antarctica, and as such, ATCPs were not taking a
consistent approach. In her view, Parties had yet to articulate a
clear and shared vision of what tourism in Antarctica should be,
develop goal in terms of tourism management, or have reached a
consensus on
what actions to take. She noted that in her experience, the ATCM
had been focused on address existing problems in a piecemeal way,
rather than being proactive and visionary. Whilst there was limited
evidence of environmental impact from tourism activities,
Antarctica was preserved for peace and science, and Jane asked
whether Antarctica was already a mass market tourism destination,
or whether it might soon become one without proactive action, and
whether Parties would consider that such a scenario was consistent
with the objectives of the Environmental Protocol. She concluded
by advocating that the ATCM look at tourism as a whole activity,
and to look at the bigger picture.  By taking a more comprehensive
approach, rather than looking at specific issues in isolation, ATCPs
may be able to better clarify common values, and be prepared to
accept that compromises had to be found.  It was a clear
responsibility of ATCPs to define what kind of tourism activities and
experience would be consistent with the Protocol and to be better
able to meet new and emerging challenges. Jane proposed that a
new, dedicated, coherent and comprehensive tourism framework
could be considered under the Treaty or Protocol, with a view to
steering away from a piecemeal, reactive approach towards a pro-
active and more dynamic approach.
The workshop participants were split into four small groups, and
invited to express their expectations. They reported back to the
plenary. The wide-ranging discussion made it possible to identify
some common ingredients about a vision of what Antarctic tourism
may look like in the future.
One participant stated that, as ATCM already proposes such a vision
based on Resolution 7 (2009) and on the Environment Protocol,
hence the work should focus on clarifying the existing vision rather
than establishing a new one. However, some participants stressed
that it is not so clear, as values in the Environmental Protocol, the
General Guidelines do exist, but it is unclear what this means in
terms of the kind of tourism Parties want for the future. It thus
justifies that this workshop should define what kind of tourism
participants really want and set it out in a concrete proposal.
Some participants recalled that the interests of the tourism industry
should be taken into account, along with the protection of
Antarctica. In this sense, there is a need for a level playing field for
the industry, as well as a shared understanding of the actions that
both ATCM as well as the industry should take in terms of tourism
management/regulation.
Some participants highlighted that common standards and
procedures at the international level, between the ATCPs, would
help tackle “permit shopping”, prevent freeriding, and provide
clarity and support to the National Competent Authorities (NCAs) as
well as visibility to the operators. So far, each NCA deals with its
respective applications and requests based on ATS provisions. An
objective could be to find methods to ensure that each NCA will
deal with its applications according to a common set of criteria, and
will follow the same kind of procedures, along common standards.
This requires a far more coordinated and pro-active international
approach than the current, reactive, situation. Communication
between Parties is important in that regard, to avoid significant
differences in terms of standards and decision-making.
One participant stated that each Party must require its nationals to
comply with applicable regulations. Monitoring and enforcement
should first be implemented by national authorities and not
international bodies, as each Party is responsible for its own
citizens.
The need for a clear and concrete vision of what Antarctica tourism
will look like in the future, based on scientific data, was underlined.
Some highlighted the need for stronger domestic regulations, based
upon international policies, was underlined as it may constitute a
legal basis upon which NCAs could better handle the challenges
posed by tourism.. It was recalled that NCA’s lack of decisions could
be considered a decision, and that the absence of any prohibition of
some activities means that they are in fact allowed. The question of
banning some activities was raised, and there was an interest
among many participants to determine those activities that would
be regarded by all Parties as environmentally sound. Many
concluded that
addressing the question of what Antarctica tourism may look like in
the future, requires international policies and regulations, so that
NCAs may implement them at the national level. Beyond that, the
ATCM should make its regulations and framework clearer, as well
as more visible, so it will become the main reference for operators.
Better collaboration and communication between Parties was
mentioned as important to be able to monitor cumulative impacts
and to let operators and the public know how NCAs process tourism
applications.
Finally, attention was drawn to defining what tourists should
experience in Antarctica and the possibility of focusing on the
educational value of tourism. Examples from around the world
could be an inspiration. One of the mottos proposed resonated
throughout the workshop: ‘snow tourism should be slow tourism.’
Day I – Afternoon session (Sessions 3) - Stocktaking and vision
IAATO provided the participants with some details about tourism in
Antarctica, with focus on the 2022-2023 season. The operators
opined that their activities are compliant with the ATS and that
their objectives are to promote safe and environmentally
responsible tourism in Antarctica. Thus, IAATO stated it does not
promote tourism, nor advocate for the development of tourism,
rather advocates for responsible tourism. To achieve this goal,
IAATO requires its operators to comply with ATCM instruments,
resolutions and measures, even if they have not entered into force.
IAATO also develops its own bylaws to ensure that the activities of
its members meet this goal of safe and responsible tourism.
IAATO presented its 5-year vision for Antarctic tourism, which it
summarized as "the implementation of safe and environmentally
friendly tourism" and which contains the following key elements:
Operators should be "stewards", able to report on what they see in
the field, provide data and information on the environment; tourism
could support scientific research, e.g. passengers could be involved
in citizen science operations ; based on scientific data or emergency
situations, IAATO is able to close a site to its members if it appears
that visits are causing environmental changes or it is unsafe; IAATO
develops guidelines for site visits and activities as needed ; the
association is also developing mechanisms for operators to share
information, capturing field data that is useful for tourism
management ; finally, IAATO recalled that it can not set numerical
limits.
IAATO presented its needs and opportunities. Regarding its needs,
IAATO noted that it cannot prohibit activities that ATCPs allow,
unless proved unsafe or could potentially damage the environment.
Therefore, harmonization of the NCAs authorization process would
be helpful, to allow for greater consistency in the type of activities
its operators can conduct. IAATO expressed interest in knowing
what activities Parties do not want to see in Antarctica. IAATO
advocated that Measures 4 (2004) and 15 (2009) should come into
force, and that governments should take actions in this regard. In
terms of opportunities, IAATO can help identify “bad actors”, by
reporting instances of bad behaviour to NCAs. However, the
Association has noted that such reports rarely lead to concrete
action by NCAs. In conclusion, IAATO called on the Parties to keep
on working together with the operators that fall under their
jurisdiction.
The discussion that followed the presentation was an opportunity to
raise the following key points. Tourist vessels are expected to carry
close to their maximum capacity next season, but the number of
vessels is not expected to increase significantly. One participant
asked how operators would react if the ATCM set limits on the
number of activities allowed. IAATO stated that its members are
committed to complying with the regulations adopted by ATCM.
However, sudden changes in regulations can be a challenge for
operators. ATCPs should give operators time to adapt. IAATO was
then asked the type
of tourism, number of operators, etc it would like to have in the
future. IAATO recalled its remit to promote safe and
environmentally responsible tourism. Future tourism should meet
these criteria.
With respect to “bad actors”, IAATO does not maintain a "blacklist",
but may provide information on the activities of such operators to
ATCM.
One participant pointed out that IAATO is brilliant at dealing with
what is happening now, quickly and reactively, but cannot restrict
trade and therefore can only try to manage what is authorised.
Thus, it is the Parties that need to undertake action in this
direction.
The discussion then turned to the educational aspects of Antarctic
tourism, and to the experience that tourists should have in
Antarctica. It appeared clearly that visiting Antarctica should lead
tourists to realise how unique this environment is, and that such an
impact on tourists’ understanding should be one of the goals
pursued by IAATO members.
Finally, IAATO was asked what would be the worst decision ATCM
could take in their views. IAATO responded that it is necessary to
be able to continue to explain to operators where decisions come
from and their supporting rationales. To do otherwise could lead to
frustration.
Then Kees Bastmeijer (NL) introduced, as thought starter, the third
session, dedicated to answering the following questions: “Where are
we, where are we going and where do we want to go? - ingredients
for the vision on the future of Antarctic tourism”. He noted that, for
some years now, the Multi-year Strategic Work Plan (MYSWP) has
included on the ATCM agenda the adoption of a strategic vision for
Antarctic tourism, meaning that Parties do not start from scratch.
He pointed out that elements for a strategic vision were presented
in the UK's Working Paper n° 10 submitted in 2009. He furthermore
recalled that the general principles (Resolution 7 2009) and the
work done by the Parties in the framework of some Intersessional
Contact Groups (ICGs) also provide some ingredients.
He added that a vision is not about rules, but rather about what
Parties want Antarctica to look like in the future, what they do not
want, and what that means for tourism. ATCM needs policies to
give substance to this vision. A proposed vision was presented in
the concept note supporting the workshop. It builds on already
accepted language, but does not talk about what the future should
look like, although that should ultimately be its purpose. He noted
that keeping Antarctica unchanged as far as possible, to ensure that
also future generations have the options to enjoy the special values
of Antarctica, could be considered as part of the vision.
One participant pointed out that if the vision clearly expressed the
type of activities that could be implemented in Antarctica, it could
help prevent the development of new and undesirable activities,
which NCAs currently cannot prohibit due to their national
regulations.
One participant noted that one should talk about goals, not just
vision, because a vision is not measurable, while goals are.
Participants then divided into breakout groups, tasked with
identifying elements of a vision, as well as possible goals, to support
the establishment of a policy program by the ATCPs. Each group
reported back to the plenary session. Of all the "ingredients"
proposed by the participants, the following stand out as supported
by many participants :
The vision should reflect the fact that Antarctica is a nature reserve.
Therefore, tourism should not have more than a minor or transitory
impact on the environment. The concept of "slow tourism", i.e.
slow, calm, quiet and simple tourism, was put forward.
Tourism in Antarctica must be subject to adequate environmental
and scientific monitoring, management and control, with dedicated
and consistent instruments.
The vision must be based on indicators that are measurable.
Science on board tourist vessels should not be used as a
promotional tool for tourist operators.
Antarctic tourism management should be based on the instruments
of the Antarctic Treaty system. The ATCM has competency to
establish a coherent framework and provide guidance and
regulations that ATCPs and IAATO could use. These guidelines and
regulations could build on what currently exist to address the
difficult issues raised by Antarctic tourism, such as what type of
activities are acceptable and how to decide if an activity can be
conducted, how to ensure that visiting new sites will not cause
more than a minor or transitory impact, how to use site-specific
guidelines in this regard.
The vision must take into account the positive impact of tourism. In
this sense, the vision could consider that only activities with
educational value can be implemented in the Antarctic treaty area.
Tourism regulations must be predictable for operators, and ATCM
must provide a level playing field for them.
The current piecemeal approach has proven to be unsatisfactory to
many participants. A comprehensive vision is therefore desirable.
However, beyond designing a vision, which may be too general,
ATCPs need to be more specific and take concrete, coherent and
robust action on the relevant issues within the vision.
The Chair tasked the Netherlands to include proposals for
development of a vision, based on the elements of the discussion, as
well as building blocks and no regret measures in the working
document to be submitted to the ATCM.
Day II – Morning session (Session 4) – Policy program and Building
Block 1 (Managing growth)
Rita Fabris (Germany) introduced the building blocks for a policy
program and specifically building block 1 (managing growth) by
giving a presentation drawing attention to the risk that mass
tourism represents for Antarctica. She noted that the number of
trips is increasing and that it will be difficult to restrict what has
already been authorized – but not impossible. Furthermore, she
mentioned that there are several options for management but that
each of them will have implications and consequences. Adjusting
one aspect might put additional pressure on others so there needs to
be a holistic approach. Following this introduction, a participant
noted that continued expansion of tourism may not comply with the
Antarctic Treaty objectives and principles to protect Antarctica.
Some behaviour, or activities carried out by some operators, such as
noisy or visible ones (helicopter flights), can disturb other
operators, conducting more contemplative activities.
The Policy program (list of Building Blocks) proposed in the
workshop’s concept note was considered to be comprehensive by
participants. The discussion continued as follows:
Building block 1: Managing growth
Participants concurred that the ATCM should tackle the issue of the
growth of tourism activities, preferably using existing tools.
Different approaches were proposed in that regard. While some
participants emphasized the need to limit tourism expansion in
some ways, others stated that the ATCM should better manage
growth, rather than limit the activity.
Some avenues were expressed in both directions, to be further
considered:
Limiting landings:
Limiting the number of landings per vessel to only one per vessel
and per day.
Only sites covered by specific site guidelines could be visited.
Designing and implementing a quota system, defining a maximum
number of visitors, either by area or in general.
Limiting the length of the season:
Setting a fixed start and end date for the Antarctic tourism season,
bearing in mind potential negative effects this could have.
Developing spatial management:
Developing dedicated Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs)
for tourism management, in order to properly manage tourism
activities in a given area, under a consistent management plan.
Such ASMAs should be large enough to encompass several popular
tourist sites. A pilot ASMA could be considered.
Setting a clear framework for the visit of new sites:
Identifying what should be considered as a "new site" (e.g., site
without guidelines or any other management tool).
Not permitting any off-ship activities in Antarctica from vessels
carrying more than 500 passengers (additionally to the landing
prohibition of Measure 15 (2009), to ensure these activities are real
‘cruise only’ activities
not allow overnight stays in the top-20 visited sites
Requiring that a prior environmental impact assessment under
existing procedures be conducted before any new site visit. Who
should conduct this assessment, and how, should be further
discussed.
Day II – Afternoon session (Session 5) – Policy program and
Building Block 2 (Managing diversification) and 3 (Monitoring)
Jenny Haukka (Finland) introduced the afternoon session, related to
building blocks 2 & 3 (managing diversification & monitoring).
Regarding diversification, she recalled that by “diversity” is meant
the variety of forms of travel to Antarctica, as well as the variety of
activities and experiences that are undertaken by tourists and non-
governmental expeditions in Antarctica. As highlighted in previous
ATCM discussions, including the "Ad Hoc Working Group on
Competent Authority Issues" that brought up this issue at ATCM
2015, diversity presents some challenges for ATCPs and their NCAs,
such as (among others) the lack of guidelines or information on
how NCAs may deal with new activities and the lack of a
harmonized position across Parties especially in relation to
potentially risky activities for the environment and the safety of the
environment beyond what is provided in the Environmental
Protocol, and the difficulty in regulating and anticipating the types
of interactions with the environment in relation to new activities
etc.
Regarding monitoring, she recalled that it may refer to either the
monitoring of tourism activities or the monitoring of the
environmental impact of these activities, but that this building
block was dedicated to the latter (as monitoring of the activities
will be addressed in building block 4 on compliance). The aim was
therefore to discuss ways and tools to monitor the environmental
consequences of touristic activities in Antarctica.
The discussion continued as follows:
Building block 2: Managing diversification
Outcomes of previous discussions on the need to improve
consistency between NCAs on how they deal with new activities, in
terms of environmental impact assessment, as well as how they deal
with new, unexpected and possibly undesirable activities were
recalled.
Diversification was generally considered to be an issue that ATCPs
should address since it causes challenges in terms of environmental
protection, safety, and consistency with the Antarctic values. It was
generally observed that the ATCM is competent to provide Parties
and NCAs with tools and guidance to address these challenges.
Many agreed following avenues could be further considered:
Limiting the type of activities that can be carried out by tourist
operators:
Establishing a positive list of tourism activities that can be
conducted in the Antarctic Treaty Area, alongside a list of activities
that can only be allowed in certain places, and activities that are
banned. An alternative option would be to design a process rather
than a list. Such a process could be based upon the existing
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process, under which the
ATCM could identify such activities. The distinction between
activities that can and cannot be conducted and must be based on
sensible, clear and objective criteria. A value-based approach should
be followed if we were to develop such a list. This would involve
redefining the values we want to protect.
Setting up a framework for the implementation of new activities:
Requiring that an environmental impact assessment must be
conducted before the implementation of new and/or novel
activities. The CEP could be encouraged to develop a standardized
process in that regard. A precautionary approach should be
followed.
Fostering an increased collaboration and information exchange
between NCAs, with the objective to move towards more coherency
and homogeneity in terms of domestic authorisation processes.
Greater consistency should also contribute to addressing the
“permit-shopping” issue.
Building block 3: Monitoring
Participants noted that monitoring could refer to several concepts,
such as monitoring trends in tourism activities, environmental
impacts, and compliance. While there was a general consensus that
Parties need to strengthen long-term environmental monitoring of
tourism activities, the necessity to clarify which aspects of activities
should be monitored, and how, was pointed out. Monitoring the
social aspects of tourism, i.e., how Antarctica affects visitors, was
also brought up.
In this sense, among all the ideas put forward by participants, the
following seem to be the most promising to most participants:
How to conduct environmental impacts of tourism activities:
Technologies offer opportunities in this regard (dedicated apps,
satellite images). Potential uses of such technologies should be
further explored.
Vessel expedition teams could contribute, by implementing basic
environmental monitoring at selected sites according to a checklist
established by the ATCM. The question of who this report should be
sent to and who should process and analyse the data collected needs
to be further discussed, keeping in mind that this should not cause
an additional burden on NCAs.
Clear indicators should be developed.
Where such monitoring should be implemented:
There is a need to focus on certain areas or sites, as individual
Parties will not be able to monitor all visited sites.
How to finance environmental monitoring:
A tourist fee paid by the operators could be considered to allow for
long-term monitoring.
Establishing a subsidiary group tasked with the actual monitoring,
under the ATCM, could be considered. This work could be financed
through the tourist fee, and work should be guided by the ATCPs,
on the basis of CEP advice.
Day III – Morning session (Session 6) – Policy program Building
Block 4 (compliance and enforcement) and 5 (overall governance)
Kees Bastmeijer (NL) introduced the morning session, related to
building blocks 4 & 5 (compliance and enforcement & overall
governance). To prevent repetition of earlier debates in the
workshop and to try to inspire the discussions in the sessions, he
provided a brief introduction on the concept of Rights of Nature.
The essence of this is that nature or components of nature are no
longer seen only as an object (current situation) but as a subject
(legal person), to which rights can also be attributed. There are now
hundreds of initiatives worldwide to anchor such rights of, for
example, ecosystems, rivers or animals in domestic legal systems.
This thinking can help us not only to look at Antarctica from the
perspective of our own human interests, but to put Antarctica itself
at the center of our discussions.
Building block 4: Compliance and enforcement
Participants noted that compliance issues are currently mainly dealt
with under domestic regulatory systems based on the ATS.
However, a more consistent approach at the international level
seems desirable. In that sense, promoting homogeneity between
NCAs, and fostering dialogue between them on this issue turns out
to be a key point. A more robust dialogue would help to learn from
each other and facilitate information sharing, on cases of non-
compliance for instance. Participants recognized the different
observation, inspection and monitoring systems in place (Article VII
of the Antarctic Treaty, IAATO's mandatory scheme, Resolution 9
2021). Increased use of the mechanisms available to ATCPs to
monitor the activities they authorize was encouraged, while
difficulties, technical or financial, were pointed out. The ICG
currently led by the UK on EIA practices should constitute a
valuable contribution.
Many supported the following proposals:
Harmonizing national policies in terms of authorization processes,
monitoring and implementation:
An enhanced dialogue between NCAs could help them identify and
address common concerns and challenges, better share information,
and work together towards a more harmonized approach in terms
of compliance and enforcement. This dialogue could be
strengthened by a specific NCA meeting in the margins of the
ATCM, and/or a virtual meeting before each Antarctic season. A
dedicated and up to date mailing list for NCAs could also be
valuable in that regard.
Better use of the EIES could also be considered, for example to
highlight and share information on the main activities they permit
in the Antarctic treaty area.
Improving the consistency of national systems with regard to
gathering evidence and criminal proceedings:
Enhanced dialogue between NCAs could be useful in this regard.
Training, presentations, etc., could be considered to strengthen
NCAs' compliance and enforcement capabilities.
Encouraging and developing the conduct of on-board monitoring by
the Parties:
Strengthening the dialogue among interested Parties to address the
financial and technical challenges associated with the
implementation of these observations.
Considering the extent to which the proposed fee for environmental
monitoring, and the subsidiary committees that could be created in
this regard, could also be used to support an international on-board
observer framework.
An international pool of accredited observers, as a complement to
current observation practices (IAATO’s mandatory scheme, national
frameworks), could be considered. The CCAMLR framework could
provide a valuable example to build on.
Building block 5: Overall governance
The attention of the participants was drawn to the opportunity of
engaging in a more robust discussion in order to consider and
design a comprehensive instrument dedicated to Antarctic tourism.
Participants stated that the current approach is piecemeal, often not
resulting in decision-making, which many believe is proving
unsatisfactory.
The following points were made:
Many participants recognized the value of such a comprehensive
and coherent instrument and expressed interest in exploring this
option within the ATCM process.
Pros and cons of such a global instrument were discussed. A level
playing field, providing more certainty for operators, political
profile and support, shifting from a piecemeal approach to a
comprehensive and consistent approach, enabling package deals,
ensuring a future for the industry, and moving forward with regards
to the Measures or annex of the Protocol that are yet to enter into
force, were identified as pros, among others. Cons were mainly
related to the challenging character of this approach, and
subsequent questions that will arise (nature of the document, etc.).
The five Building Blocks put forward in the concept note circulated
prior to the workshop are relevant in terms of the framework
components that should be discussed. Safety should also be
considered as an issue to be addressed in this context.
Day III – Afternoon session (Session 7) – Discussions on next steps,
key elements for Working Papers and closure of the workshop
The Chairs presented a first overview of the discussions, as well as
the next steps, underlining the general understanding in the
workshop for the need of a dedicated approach and the need for the
development of a dedicated coherent framework under the ATS
They thanked participants for their active contributions to advance
the development of a pro-active, precautionary approach and robust
policy building blocks.
An Information Paper (the co-Chairs’ report), and a Working Paper,
containing the specific proposals arising from the workshop, will be
drafted by France and the Netherlands. Participants will be given
the opportunity to cosponsor the WP.
The workshop is closed by the Chairs.
Appendix 1: Agenda
Appendix 2: List of Participants
Appendix 1: Agenda
Day I (morning session) Opening and general discussion
Keynote speech:
French Ambassador for the Poles and Maritime Issues, M. Olivier
Poivre d'Arvor
Session 1 – Workshop introduction (plenary opening)
Round of introductions
Introduction of workshop goals and structure
Session 2 – Opening discussion (plenary)
“Icebreaker’ exercise”
General remarks and expectations
Day I (afternoon session) Vision
Presentation: Developments, with focus on 2022-2023 season (Lisa
Kelley, IAATO)
Session 3 – Stocktaking and vision (plenary and breakout groups)
Discussion: Where are we, where are we going and where do we
want to go?
Discussion in break out groups: ingredients for the vision on the
future of Antarctic tourism
Plenary reporting of break out group discussions
Day II (morning session) Building block 1: managing growth
Presentation: Growth in Antarctic Tourism (Rita Fabris, GER)
Session 4 – Policy program (plenary and break out groups)
Introduction of building blocks and specifically building block 1
Plenary discussion on building blocks for a policy program
Discussion in break out groups: building block 1
Plenary reporting of break out group discussions
Day II (afternoon session) Building blocks 2: managing
diversification & 3: monitoring
Session 5 – Policy program – Building blocks (plenary and break out
groups)
Building blocks 2 and 3 – introduction
Discussion in break out groups: building block 2
Discussion in break out groups: building block 3
Plenary reporting of break out group discussions
Day III (morning session) Building blocks 4: compliance and
enforcement & 5: overall governance
Session 6 – Policy program – Building blocks (plenary and break out
groups)
Building blocks 4 and 5 – introduction
Discussion in break out groups: building block 4
Discussion in break out groups: building block 5
Plenary reporting of break out group discussions
Day III (afternoon session) Next steps
Session 7 – Conclusion (plenary): next steps
Conclusions/ wrap up of the workshop’s discussions
Priorities for immediate actions and no-regret policies: first
reflections / thoughs
Discussion of next steps (including communication of the future
Workshop report and drafting procedures for the Working Paper
submitted to the 45th ATCM)
AOB and closing
Appendix 2: List of Participants
Co-Chairs
Caroline Krajka (FR)
Michael Pistecky (NL)
Rapporteurs
Jeanne Bayle (FR)
Guillaume Cottarel (FR)
Arthur Eijs (NL)
Kees Bastmeijer (NL)
Argentina
Paula Casela
ASOC
Ricardo Roura
Australia
Philip Tracey
Belgium
Nils Vanstappen
Bulgaria
Sasha Raycheva
Canada
David Taillefer
Chile
Marcos Correa
Sebastian Molina
China
Ao Yu
COMNAP
Finland
Sonia Ramos
Tiina Jortikka-Laitinen
Jenny Haukka
France
Olivier Poivre d’Arvor
Caroline Krajka
Jeanne Bayle
Guillaume Cottarel
Yan Ropert-Coudert
Maude Jolly
Germany
Heike Herata
Rita Fabris
Italy
Orazio Guanciale
IAATO
Lisa Kelley
Gina Greer
IUCN
Yu-Fai Leung
Netherlands
Michael Pistecky
Arthur Eijs
Kees Bastmeijer
New Zealand
Nicola Reid
Norway
Anne Stoltenberg
Birgit Njaastad
Poland
Joanna Krawczyk-Grzesiowska
SCAR
Daniela Cajiao
Spain
Sonia Ramos
Türkiye
Burcu Ozsoy
United Kingdom
Jane Rumble
Kim Crosbie
United States
William Muntean
Polly Penhale
External Expert
Anne Choquet-Sauvin (Lecturer and Research in Law at the
European Institute for Marine Studies (IUEM), University of
Western Brittany, specialist in polar law)
