ATCM-CEP Joint Session on Climate Change: Portugal´s research
and policy activities on climate change
ATCM-CEP Joint Session on Climate Change: Portugal´s research
and policy activities on climate change
Information Paper submitted by Portugal
Summary
This paper outlines the research and policy activities undertaken by
Portugal related to climate change. Portugal recognizes the
importance of climate change and its implications worldwide,
including in the Antarctic region. High emissions of greenhouse
gases, linked with warming, has produced substantial impacts in
Antarctic ecosystems. The provision of science-based information
for Antarctic policymaking is essential. Portuguese research teams,
in cooperation with various Antarctic Treaty Parties, Observers and
Experts, have contributed scientific information to advance the
work of the Antarctic Treaty. Portugal supports an urgent and
effective response to address SCAR´s Antarctic Climate Change and
the Environment: A Decadal Synopsis and Recommendations for
Action (Resolution 4 (2022); Decision 4 (2022)). Portugal also
advocates maximizing communication between those engaging in
Antarctic science, policy and education/outreach, under an
international cooperative context, particularly anticipation of the
planned International Polar Year (2032-33).
Relevance of climate change
Portugal acknowledges the Committee for Environmental Protection
(CEP) and Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM) as
excellent forums for international cooperation on science
diplomacy, and education and outreach in relation to climate
change. Some Antarctic regions are among those that have changed
faster in recent decades than any other region on the planet. The
consequences are reflected in changes in the physical and biological
elements of the Antarctic marine and terrestrial ecosystems.
Additionally, climate change puts pressure on Antarctic ecosystems
alongside other factors (e.g., pollution, habitat loss, introduced
species, etc.) that collectively can have substantial cumulative
impacts. Projections show that greenhouse emissions are likely to
continue, resulting in on-going and potentially increasing negative
impacts in Antarctic ecosystems. In response to this situation,
urgent action is needed.
Contributions of Portugal
Portugal signed the Antarctic Treaty in 2010, and since then has
submitted > 30 papers to the ATCM/CEP, thereby demonstrating
its commitment to conducting international and multi-disciplinary
Antarctic research (Xavier et al. 2018; ATCM XXXVIII/IP3).
Antarctic climate change research undertaken by Portuguese teams
(often in collaboration with scientists from other Parties) has
focused on a wide range of topics, including those that have:
assessed the status of climate change effects on marine ecosystems
based on the SCAR Horizon Scan (Xavier et al. 2016) (ATCMXL/
IP24);
identified climate change impacts in biological processes (Constable
et al. 2014, Gutt et al. 2015, Gutt et al. 2021);
identified approaches to improve climate models (Cavanagh et al.
2017),
evaluated long-term impacts on pelagic marine organisms (Abreu et
al. 2020) (ATCM XLIV/IP2);
projected distribution changes on seabirds and fisheries due to
climate change (Krüger et al. 2018) (ATCM XLII/IP70);
Identified biodiversity hotspots relevant to conservation (Hindell et
al. 2020, Ropert-Coudert et al. 2020); and
informed important scientific methodologies for monitoring/
conservation/management (ATCM XLII/IP10; ATCMXL/BP20).
Contributions have been made to identify mechanisms to improve
the links between science and policy needs (Hughes et al. 2018) and
discuss future scenarios of the effects of climate change in
Antarctica in relation to governance (Rintoul et al. 2018). Efforts
have also been made to improve the provision of information
relevant to issues of interest to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting with other organizations, including the UN Ocean
Conference 2022 (ATCM XLIV/IP3) and UN Southern Ocean Decade
(ATCMXLIV/IP107). Much of this work has been undertaken under
the auspices of SCAR Scientific Research Programmes (SRPs) and
Expert/Action groups, and participation in the ATCM/CEP
Intersessional Contact Groups (ICG) (i.e., the Subsidiary Group on
Climate Change Response (SGCCR) and the ICG on ‘Development of
a Specially Protected Species Action Plan for the Emperor
Penguin’).
In terms of education and outreach, out of the 200 ATCM papers
related to “educational issues” submitted to ATCM since 1961,
“climate change” is mentioned in only 31%. We suggest that much
work is still needed on education and outreach on this topic by
Parties, Observers and Experts, including the need to note the level
of urgency for actions and the need for greater access to scientific
evidence. Portugal is an active Party within the ICG on Education
and Outreach. Working with many Parties, it has recognized the
imperative to provide for greater visibility of Parties’ public
education and outreach activities, including those related to climate
change, and has reinforcing the increased interest in education and
outreach activities by ATCM participants (Xavier et al. 2019; ATCM
XXXVII/WP9; ATCM XXXVIII/BP26, ATCM XXXIX WP24, ATCM XL
WP24, ATCM XLII WP33) including with the support of Polar
Educators International (PEI; ATCM ATCMXXXVII/IP2;
ATCMXXXIX/IP7; ATCMXLII//IP95). Moreover, there is an
increasing need to also improve the levels of capacity building of
early career researchers (e.g., working with the Association of Polar
Early Career Scientists (APECS)).
Under the context of the ATCM-CEP Joint Session on Climate
Change, we highlight Portugal’s role in:
making known the need for high-quality science and actions to
minimise environmental impacts related to climate change,
including through international cooperation.
delivering access to the best available science, data sharing and
provision of information to advance policies to tackle climate
change. Portugal has submitted various ATCM papers, based upon
peer-reviewed research delivered by Portuguese research teams,
often in collaboration with researchers from around the world.
contributing to long-term research programmes (e.g., under an
international framework, including with SCAR programmes and
with the support of COMNAP) to provide more reliable information
on trends relating to climate change.
promoting more actions on capacity building, equity, inclusion,
diversity, education and outreach.
Final considerations Portugal has delivered research related to
climate change in Antarctica, often in collaboration with
researchers from other Parties, including Argentina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Korea, New Zealand,
Poland, the Russian Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America, and aims to continue to do so in the
future in preparation for the next International Polar Year
(2032-33).
References
Abreu J, Phillips RA, Ceia FR, Ireland L, Paiva VH, Xavier JC (2020)
Long-term changes in habitat and trophic level of Southern Ocean
squid in relation to environmental conditions. Sci Rep 10:15215
Cavanagh RD, Murphy EJ, Bracegirdle TJ, Turner J, Knowland CA,
Corney SP, Smith WO, Waluda CM, Johnston NM, Bellerby RGJ,
Constable AJ, Costa DP, Hofmann EE, Jackson JA, Staniland IJ,
Wolf-Gladrow D, Xavier JC (2017) A synergistic approach for
evaluating climate model utput for ecological applications. Front
Mar Sci 4:308
Constable AJ, Melbourne-Thomas J, Corney SP, Arrigo K, Barbraud
C, Barnes D, Bindoff N, Boyd P, Brandt A, Costa DP, Davidson A,
Ducklow H, Emmerson L, Fukuchi M, Gutt J, Hindell MA, Hofmann
EE, Hosie G, Iida T, Jacob S, Johnston NM, Kawaguchi S, Koubbi P,
Lea M-A, Makhado A, Massom R, Meiners K, Meredith M, Murphy
E, Nicol S, Richerson K, Riddle MJ, Rintoul SR, Walker Smith Jr. W,
Southwell C, Stark JS, Sumner M, Swadling K, Takahashi K, Trathan
PN, Welsford D, Weimerskirch H, Westwood K, Wienecke B, Wolf-
Gladrow D, Wright S, Xavier JC, Ziegler P (2014) Climate Change
and Southern Ocean ecosystems I: How changes in physical habitats
directly affect marine biota. Glob Change Biol 20:3004-3025
Gutt J, Bertler N, Bracegirdle TJ, Buschmann A, Hosie G, Isla E,
Schloss I, Smith CR, Xavier JC (2015) The Southern Ocean
ecosystem under multiple climate change stresses - an integrated
circumpolar assessment. Global Change Biology 21:1434-1453
Gutt J, Isla E, Xavier JC, Adams BJ, Ahn I-Y, Cheng C-HC, Colesie C,
Cummings VJ, di Prisco G, Griffiths H, Hawes I, Hogg I, McIntyre T,
Meiners KM, Pearce DA, Peck L, Piepenburg D, Reisinger RR, Saba
GK, Schloss IR, Signori CN, Smith CR, Vacchi M, Verde C, Wall DH
(2021) Antarctic ecosystems in transition – life between stresses and
opportunities. Biological Reviews 96:798-821
Hindell MA, Reisinger RR, Yan Ropert-Coudert Y, Hückstädt LA,
Trathan PN, Bornemann H, Charrassin J-B, Chown SL, Costa DP,
Danis B, Mary-Anne Lea M-A, Thompson D, Leigh G. Torres LG, Van
de Putte AP, Alderman R, Andrews-Goff V, Arthur B, Ballard G,
Bengtson J, Bester MN, Blix AS, Boehme L, Charles-André Bost C-A,
Boveng P, Cleeland J, Constantine R, Corney S, Crawford RJM, Rosa
LD, Nico de Bruyn PJ, Delord K, Descamps S, Double M, Emmerson
L, Fedak M, Friedlaender A, Gales N, Goebel M, Goetz KT, Guinet C,
Goldsworthy SD, Harcourt R, Hinke JT, Jerosch K, Kato A, Kerry
KR, Kirkwood R, Kooyman GL, Kovacs KM, Lawton K, Lowther AD,
Lydersen C, Lyver POB, Makhado AB, Márquez MEI, McDonald BI,
McMahon CR, Muelbert M, Nachtsheim D, Nicholls KW, Nordøy ES,
Olmastroni S, Phillips RA, Pistorius P, Plötz J, Pütz K, Ratcliffe N,
Ryan PG, Santos M, Southwell C, Staniland I, Takahashi A, Tarroux
A, Trivelpiece W, Wakefield E, Weimerskirch H, Wienecke B, Xavier
JC, Wotherspoon S, Jonsen ID, Raymond B (2020) Tracking of
marine predators to protect Southern Ocean ecosystems. Nature
580:87-92
Hughes KA, Constable A, Frenot Y, López-Martínez J, McIvor E,
Njåstad B, Terauds A, Liggett D, Roldan G, Wilmotte A, Xavier JC
(2018) Antarctic environmental protection: Strengthening the links
between science and governance. Environ Sci Policy 83:86-95
Krüger L, Ramos J, Xavier J, Grémillet D, González-Solís J, Petry M,
Phillips R, Wanless R, Paiva V (2018) Projected distributions of
Southern Ocean albatrosses, petrels and fisheries as a consequence
of climatic change. Ecography 41:195-208
Rintoul SR, Chown SL, DeConto RM, England MH, Fricker HA,
Masson-Delmotte V, Naish TR, Siegert MJ, Xavier JC (2018)
Choosing the future of Antarctica. Nature 558:233-241
Ropert-Coudert Y, Van de Putte AP, Reisinger RR, Bornemann H,
Charrassin J-B, Costa DP, Danis B, Hückstädt LA, Jonsen ID, Lea M-
A, Thompson D, Torres LG, Trathan PN, Wotherspoon S, Ainley DG,
Alderman R, Andrews-Goff V, Arthur B, Ballard G, Bengtson J,
Bester MN, Blix AS, Boehme L, Bost C-A, Boveng P, Cleeland J,
Constantine R, Crawford RJM, Dalla Rosa L, Nico de Bruyn PJ,
Delord K, Descamps S, Double M, Emmerson L, Fedak
M, Friedlaender A, Gales N, Goebel M, Goetz KT, Guinet C,
Goldsworthy SD, Harcourt R, Hinke JT, Jerosch K, Kato A, Kerry
KR, Kirkwood R, Kooyman GL, Kovacs KM, Lawton K, Lowther AD,
Lydersen C, Lyver POB, Makhado AB, Márquez MEI, McDonald BI,
McMahon CR, Muelbert M, Nachtsheim D, Nicholls KW, Nordøy ES,
Olmastroni S, Phillips RA, Pistorius P, Plötz J, Pütz K, Ratcliffe N,
Ryan PG, Santos M, Southwell C, Staniland I, Takahashi A, Tarroux
A, Trivelpiece W, Wakefield E, Weimerskirch H, Wienecke B, Xavier
JC, Raymond B, Hindell MA (2020) The retrospective analysis of
Antarctic tracking data project. Scientific Data 7:94
Xavier JC, Brandt A, Ropert-Coudert Y, Badhe R, Gutt J, Havermans
C, Jones C, Costa ES, Lochte K, Schloss IR, Kennicutt II MC,
Sutherland WJ (2016) Future challenges in Southern Ocean ecology
research. Front Mar Sci 3:94
Xavier JC, Gray A, Hughes KA (2018) The rise of Portuguese
Antarctic research: Implications for Portugal's status under the
Antarctic Treaty. Polar Record 54:11-17
Xavier JC, Mateev D, Capper L, Wilmotte A, Walton DWH (2019)
Education and Outreach by the Antarctic Treaty Parties, Observers
and Experts under the framework of the Antarctic Treaty
Consultative meetings. Polar Record 55:241-244
