Assessing the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage
values: an update on progress
Assessing the risk of climate change impacts on Antarctic heritage
values: an update on progress
Summary
At CEP XXIV New Zealand, Argentina, Norway and the United
Kingdom presented WP 26 Assessing the risk of climate change
impacts on Antarctic heritage values, which proposed a two year
work plan to progress the development of a climate change risk
assessment tool for Antarctic heritage (to deliver the action on
Antarctic heritage sites specified in the Climate Change Response
Work Programme (CCRWP)). The Committee expressed full support
for the proposed work. This paper provides an update on progress,
as well as an updated work plan.
Context
The CCRWP issue ‘Climate change impacts to the built (human)
environment resulting in impacts on natural and heritage values’
contains the following gap/needs and actions that are directly
relevant to Antarctic heritage:
Gap/Need
Understanding how the abiotic terrestrial environment will change
and how this might impact/ result in impacts on environmental or
heritage values;
Understanding what conservation/remedial interventions might be
applicable to counteract these impacts.
Action
Assess the risk of changes in climate change to HSM/heritage ASPA.
In order to progress the Action to ‘Assess the risk of changes in
climate change to HSM/heritage ASPA’, ATCMXLIV/WP26
proposed the following work plan to work towards the development
of a climate change risk assessment tool:
Year
Steps
Year 1
Review existing work
Connect with other relevant experts and work streams
Develop a draft climate change risk assessment tool for Antarctic
heritage
Year 2
Consult and finalise the risk assessment tool
The Committee expressed full support for the outlined work, and so
Members have been making progress during the 2022-2023
intersessional period.
Summary of year 1 progress
Review existing work
A review of relevant previous work and resources has been started,
and a summary of the resources identified so far are included at
Annex I.
We would welcome further contributions to the database, which
will remain an open resource during the development of the climate
change risk assessment tool.
Connect with other relevant experts and work streams
At CEP XXIV Australia and SCAR indicated their interest in the
work, and will join in contributing to the development of the
climate change risk assessment tool.
We continue to welcome any other Members or Observers who
would like to contribute to the work.
Develop a draft climate change risk assessment tool for Antarctic
heritage
The UK, working closely with the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust, and
together with Argentina, Australia, New Zealand, Norway and SCAR
will lead the development of the draft climate change risk
assessment tool for the consideration of the CEP in 2024. Consulting
widely, the UK would welcome contributions from Members who
would like to participate in the work.
Updated work plan
Following the work during the 2022-2023 intersessional period, we
propose the following updated work plan for the next two years:
Year
Steps
2023-2024
Continue the review of existing work
Develop a draft climate change risk assessment tool for Antarctic
heritage, to be presented at CEP in 2024
2024-2025
Consult on, and finalise the climate change risk assessment tool, to
be presented to CEP in 2025
We continue to encourage Members with an interest to add any
additional resources to the database of previous work, and to
contribute to the development of the draft climate change risk
assessment tool.
