Australia’s Antarctic climate science
Australia’s Antarctic climate science
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
This paper provides a brief synopsis of major elements of Australia’s
Antarctic climate science, with a particular focus on the physical
climate system. The influence of climate change on Antarctica and
the Southern Ocean, and the global impact of changes in the
Antarctic region, make this research a critical and central element
in Australia’s Antarctic science efforts. Australia recognises that the
scale and urgency of the science challenges require strong and
active research and logistical collaboration across National
Antarctic Programs.
Introduction
Australia has a long history of Antarctic climate and weather
research, the latter extending back to the original expeditions in the
early 20th Century. Glaciological and atmospheric data sets dating
from the establishment of the Australian National Antarctic
Research Expedition in 1954provide a baseline for present research.
Climate research has become an increasingly important element of
the program which has worked strongly into projects of the World
Climate Research Program, Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR) and contributed to reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The
cohesiveness, coordination and impact of Australian climate
research benefited from the creation in 1991 of the Antarctic
Cooperative Research Centre, later to become the Antarctic Climate
and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre and, most recently in
2019, the Australian Antarctic Program Partnership (AAPP).
In light of recent IPCC reports,, and the SCAR Antarctic Climate
Change and the Environment report, this paper provides a brief
synopsis of major elements of climate research in the Australian
Antarctic Science Program (AASP). The scope focuses on Australian
research on the physical basis of Antarctic and Southern Ocean
climate, the aim of which has frequently been expressed as
‘understanding the role of Antarctica in the global climate system’.
This scope is not intended to conceal the significant, if more widely
distributed body of research that deals with climate adaptation and
impacts. This critical research connects the physical understanding
with the challenges of conservation, management and
environmental protection as will be briefly elaborated toward the
end of this paper.
The overarching direction for Australian Antarctic research derives
from the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan and
the 2022 Update,. More detailed direction is provided by a Strategic
Science Plan, developed in 2020, which includes a major theme of
Ice, Ocean and Earth-Systems, within which climate science sits.
The Earth-systems approach is a central pillar and the Strategic
Science Plan clearly articulates the need for a multi-disciplinary
approach. This paper, for convenience, steps through the key
physical domains, but it is acknowledged that all of these elements
are connected and the research itself works across boundaries and
disciplines to explore the Earth system. Antarctic and Southern
Ocean climate research also connects with broader climate science,
which in the Australian context is delivered through partnerships
and collaborations across a range of research institutions and
government agencies.
The Strategic Science Plan also highlights the importance of
international collaboration and research, which has been, and
remains, a long-term feature of the Australian Antarctic Program.
While Australian research has a strong focus on East Antarctica and
the adjacent Southern Ocean, Australia recognizes the importance
of integrated circum-Antarctic international research to address the
major challenges noted in IPCC and SCAR reports.
The physical climate system – key domains
The Antarctic Ice Sheet
Melt from the Antarctic ice sheet is accelerating, and is projected to
contribute tens of centimetres of sea level rise by the end of the
21st Century3. It is also the contribution with the greatest
uncertainty and, due to the response time of the large ice sheet, will
continue to drive sea level over subsequent centuries. IPCC note this
as a ‘deep uncertainty’ and include a low-likelihood, high-impact
storyline which could lead to a global mean sea level rise of up to 5
m by 2150.
The profound impacts of even median projected sea level rise and
the challenges posed by the uncertainties make study of the ice
sheet a critical research element in the AASP. The primary focus for
Australian research is the East Antarctic Ice Sheet which has large
potential for long-term mass loss from ice retreat into the large and
deep Wilkes and Aurora subglacial basins. Despite more than a
decade of Australian-led collaborative airborne surveys in East
Antarctica, significant gaps remain in knowledge of the bedrock
under ice and near-coastal bathymetry; knowledge which is
necessary to adequately model the ice sheet and its floating ice-shelf
margins.
These fringing ice shelves act as a buttress for the grounded ice
sheet behind, slowing the flow of ice from the continent to the
ocean. Understanding the response of ice shelves to atmospheric,
oceanic and sea ice changes is a major source of uncertainty in
projections. Modelling the intrusion of warmer waters and
consequent melting of floating ice shelves is impacted by poorly
charted bathymetry and the ice sheet retreat itself is affected by
relatively small scale and often unresolved bed properties upstream
of the grounding lines. The influence of subglacial conditions
including bed properties which control how the ice slides and
deforms are also typically poorly characterised.
Unsurprisingly, research findings paint a complex picture. A recent
review of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet found that after 2100, high-
emissions scenarios could lead to several metres of sea-level rise
over a few centuries, which could be avoided below 2°C warming,
in part due to offsetting increases in snow accumulation. However,
a separate study identifies a complex process involving groundwater
under retreating ice which acts to lubricate and accelerate
discharge, which is not currently included in models.
Australian research planned and underway is addressing these
uncertainties to better constrain the rate and contribution of the
East Antarctic Ice Sheet to sea level rise and seawater freshening.
This research focuses on in situ observations, satellite and other
remote sensing, process-studies and numerical modelling to capture
interactions between ice, ocean and atmosphere. Fieldwork both
underway and planned will provide observations for critical regions
including Denman Glacier and Shackleton Ice Shelf, conduct
dedicated marine science to chart the immediate offshore areas,
undertake sediment coring and explore past changes in ocean
circulation and sediment deposition. Airborne geophysical surveys
will continue to provide data from beneath the ocean, floating ice
and ice sheet in critical areas near the grounding line, contributing
to initiatives including the SCAR-supported BEDMAP and RINGS
projects, and US-led BedMachine project.
To build the necessary international coordination and collaboration
to identify and address East Antarctic ice sheet research priorities,
Australia recently established a new initiative: REACT (Risk of East
Antarctic Collapse and Tipping Points). REACT will undertake a
workshop and open science conference within the next 12 months
to build the community of experts and end users to drive this work
and identify resourcing and logistics requirements.
Sea-ice research
Sea ice is a key component of the global cryosphere, the Antarctic
and Southern Ocean environment, and is a focus of Australian
research.
Sea ice presence, movement, properties, and formation and melt
substantially modify the interaction and physical and chemical
properties of the ocean and atmosphere. Links and feedbacks
between physical, biological and biogeochemical processes also play
key roles in this system. Antarctic sea ice is a key habitat and food
source for ice-dependent biota ranging from micro-organisms to
whales. Sea ice is strongly coupled to the ocean and atmosphere
(and the ice sheet), and is a sensitive indicator, regulator/
moderator and modulator of climate variability and change.
Sea-ice changes have serious and wide-ranging consequences for the
climate system, affecting low-latitude weather patterns,
atmospheric and oceanic properties and circulation, the Southern
Ocean’s capacity to moderate climate change by taking up, storing
and transporting anthropogenic heat and carbon, and the stability
of Antarctic ice shelves and sea-level rise. Sea ice changes also
impact the structure, function and health of the Antarctic marine
ecosystem, and fisheries (including krill), and human activities
including navigation, logistical operations and tourism.
Over the last decade, Antarctic sea-ice coverage has shown abrupt
increases in variability and overall decline, and with record lows
since 2016. The causes of these changes and the differing regional
and seasonal components observed, are uncertain, as are the
physical effects (including climate feedbacks) and ecological
impacts.
Current climate models do a poor job at simulating observed
changes in the mean state and patterns of variability of Antarctic
sea ice. This is due to incomplete understanding and
parameterization of the sea-ice environment and the complex
interactive processes and potential feedback mechanisms involved.
This leads to low confidence in model projections of future climate
and declining sea ice (compared to the Arctic) – a serious ongoing
deficiency highlighted by IPCC2,3.
The overarching motivation of ongoing Australian research is to
improve the representation of the Antarctic sea-ice system and
processes in numerical weather, sea ice, climate and ecosystem
models, in order to improve short-term operational forecasting and
reduce current low confidence in longer-term predictions (of sea-ice
loss over coming decades).
This involves gaining improved mechanistic understanding of the
sea-ice environment: the role it plays in climate and ecosystems and
the processes involved. Research aims to determine and quantify
how, where and why change is occurring and the impacts of this
change on the physical, biological and biogeochemical
environment.
Australian research will include dedicated collaborative cross-
disciplinary experiments in the sea ice zone, both from continental
stations and vessels. Plans include targeting the East Antarctic pack
ice and the coastal fast-ice zones. This work will make increasing
use of autonomous technologies and satellite remote sensing to
extend surface observations in space and time. Key work includes
development of new and improved means for deriving sea-ice
information using remote sensing and associated validation studies.
State-of-the-art technologies on Australia’s new icebreaker RSV
Nuyina will provide unprecedented new capability for sustained
measurement and monitoring of the East Antarctic sea-ice
environment (in concert with the ocean and atmosphere). Other key
elements are ongoing deployment and maintenance of sea ice buoys
(within the International Antarctic Buoy Programme, IABP), the
long-term monitoring of coastal fast ice (via the Antarctic Fast Ice
Network, AFIN) and repeat acquisition of hourly ship observations
within the SCAR Antarctic Sea-Ice Processes and Climate (ASPeCt)
program.
Modelling studies are an important aspect of research to synthesize
observations and investigate processes. This connects closely with
research in the modelling communities that also contribute through
the Australian Community Climate and Earth System Simulator-
National Research Infrastructure (ACCESS-NRI) and the Centre of
Ocean and Sea Ice Modelling in Australia (COSIMA). This and
international collaborations are the route for improving
incorporation of the Antarctic sea-ice system and processes in
climate and forecasting models.
Atmospheric sciences
Study of the high latitude atmosphere is a central element of the
Australian Antarctic Science Program. The Antarctic atmosphere
connects directly to other parts of the globe, and Antarctica exerts
an important influence on weather and climate across the whole
Southern Hemisphere. Conversely, tropical and mid-latitude
influences manifest over the Antarctic via high-altitude wave trains
and atmospheric rivers, which push warm, moist air down toward
the frozen continent. The recurrent springtime ozone hole over the
Antarctic, which has now occurred for over forty years, has resulted
in stronger tropospheric winds over the Southern Ocean, which
have limited the climate warming over much of the Antarctic
surface. The high-latitude atmosphere responds to changes in sea-
ice cover, with a removal of sea-ice allowing heat and moisture
transfer between ocean and atmosphere. Snowfall out of the
atmosphere directly effects sea-ice surface albedo and mass balance,
and snowfall is also a key component of ice sheet mass balance.
Key issues centre around the improvement of atmospheric processes
in numerical models to improve weather forecasts and longer-term
climate predictions. Improvements in climate models over the
southern high latitudes will result in better projections of future
precipitation, cloud cover, sea-ice, and ozone recovery, and more
generally clearer links across the whole Earth system.
Models continue to show significant surface radiation biases over
the Southern Ocean, which is largely due to an incorrect
representation of clouds over this region. Observations made from
surface and ship are beginning to provide the data required to
evaluate and improve climate models in this region, via improved
representation of cloud, precipitation and aerosol microphysics
schemes developed from the collected data. These recent field
campaigns have begun to illuminate the crucial role emissions from
biological organisms have on cloud formation and evolution over
the Southern Ocean, yet large gaps in our understanding of these
complex processes remain.
Observations of large-scale cloud physical properties, such as
rainfall and snowfall rates, liquid water content and ice water
content, remain sparse over the region – as are smaller-scale
properties including cloud particle sizes and phase, and properties
of aerosols.
Models also inadequately represent the influence of small-scale
processes including the effect of small-scale atmospheric waves,
called gravity waves. Accurate representation of these waves is
essential to correctly represent temperatures in models throughout
the atmospheric column. Model representations of winter
temperatures in the stratosphere are often colder than measured.
This bias in temperature has an important effect on temperature-
dependent chemical reactions in
the stratosphere which dictate the size of the Antarctic ozone hole.
Observations of these waves throughout the atmospheric column
above Davis station are helping address this issue.
Atmospheric research efforts are focussed on using detailed
observations of atmospheric phenomena to address long-standing
issues within climate and numerical prediction models. Research
aims to further develop the cross disciplinary approaches necessary
to understand complex links and potential feedbacks with physical
and biological systems.
In addition to data from the Davis observatory and other stations,
the RSV Nuyina will provide significantly enhanced atmospheric
observational capability.
These observational capabilities, process studies and model code
development, together with the ACCESS-NRI modelling
infrastructure provide a pathway to embed improved representation
of high-latitude atmospheric processes into climate and weather
models.
Southern Ocean and Antarctic seas
The Southern Ocean plays a major role in the climate system, taking
up and storing more anthropogenic heat and CO2 than any other
latitude band of the ocean. The Southern Ocean also sustains key
marine ecosystems and ocean-driven melt of the floating coastal ice
shelves, and is strongly influenced by sea ice and its strong seasonal
cycle (see above).
Observing and understanding changes in the Southern Ocean is a
major challenge and focus for Australia. Any change in the uptake
of heat and carbon is profoundly important for the future trajectory
of global climate. Sea ice coverage, seasonality and properties, as
noted above, is subject to large and poorly understood changes
which are intrinsically connected to oceanic processes15. Fresh
evidence is emerging that interactions between the ocean, sea ice
and melting ice sheets will impact deep ocean circulation. The East
Antarctic Ice Sheet also appears vulnerable to oceanic heat delivery
to ice shelf grounding lines10,.
Sustained research from the AAPP and its predecessor the Antarctic
Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre has shown
that the Southern Ocean is becoming fresher, more acidic and less
oxygenated, and that these processes are occurring more rapidly
than any other ocean.
This research is delivered through integrated physical and
biogeochemical observations in the East Antarctic sector of the
Southern Ocean, coupled with modelling and synthesis. Ship-based
observations, in particular from long-term repeated transects, are
complemented by extensive year-round data from autonomous
profiling floats and satellite remote sensing. Other observational
approaches which play an important role particularly in difficult to
access ice-covered waters include the use of instrumented seals,
airborne deployment of expendable sounders and airborne gravity-
derived bathymetry. Australia’s Southern Ocean research is driven
by significant collaborations, including AAPP and its partners, the
Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), Commonwealth Science and
Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), the Integrated Marine
Observing System (IMOS), as well as the Australian Research
Council (ARC) funded centres ACEAS (Australian Centre for
Excellence in Antarctic Science) and SAEF (Securing Antarctica’s
Environmental Future) and various universities.
As the second largest contributor to the global Argo array,
Australian deployments play a key role in monitoring changes in
Southern Ocean properties. The unique capabilities of RSV Nuyina
will provide significant opportunities to access, observe and chart
the Southern Ocean and coastal areas. Australia will use this
enhanced capability, in conjunction with other vessels and
international collaboration, to address critical Southern Ocean
research.
Ocean modelling research examining links between deep and upper
layers of the ocean and the atmosphere, sea ice and ice shelves is
conducted within the AASP and through collaborations in
the wider research community. Ocean modelling in the Antarctic
context also involves addressing the significant challenge posed by
the ocean-ice-shelf interface: an active area of research for the
program,.
Climate history
Our understanding of the climate system rests fundamentally on
observations of its operation on all timescales, and given the
shortness of the instrumental record, this makes proxy climate
records highly valuable: particularly for the slower elements of the
climate system such as the ice sheet, ocean circulation and coupled
geophysical elements. Also, for all elements of the climate system it
is important to sample past epochs where boundary conditions were
different or when the climate operated outside of currently
observed ranges. The Antarctic and adjacent Southern Ocean
regions provide unique palaeoclimate archives, from ocean
sediments to lacustrine records, geomorphology and ice cores. All of
these sources of past climate explorations are included within the
AASP.
Ice core records have played a large role in Australian research
efforts, with significant contributions from the Law Dome ice core
records of greenhouse gases and the high-resolution climate history
over recent millennia,. This work has led to the most detailed
record of carbon cycle changes from oceanic and terrestrial sources
through the last 2000 years, into the anthropogenic fossil carbon
era. It also provides information of direct utility for studying past
Australian rainfall variations, due to teleconnections between low
and high latitude,.
Despite the high value of existing climate records, questions remain
which are central to understanding the Antarctic elements of the
climate system and their hemispheric and global implications.
Knowledge of the pre-instrumental variation in almost all aspects of
the cryosphere is limited, from past sea-ice extent, atmospheric
circulation and climate modes, oceanic circulation, heat and carbon
fluxes, ice sheet changes and snowfall. New technology and proxy
developments (e.g. mean ocean temperature from noble gases in ice
cores), and new records are needed to address these questions.
The major activity for Australian palaeoclimate research over the
next several years is the initiative, as part of the multi-national
efforts of the International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS),
to drill a core in pursuit of the longest possible continuous climate
history from Antarctica’s ice sheet. Australia’s ‘Million Year Ice
Core’ (MYIC) project at Little Dome C began during the 2022-23
season, and will involve retrieval of a 2800 metre ice core
extending back over 1.3 million years. This project, with others
underway by European, Japanese and Chinese researchers is
designed to deliver the necessary replicated climate histories to
answer key questions around the climate system changes known as
the Mid-Pleistocene-Transition around a million years ago.
In addition to the MYIC project, high-resolution ice core studies
continue, based on existing ice and records as well as likely short
coring to expand spatial coverage. This is also important for
building the spatial record of surface mass balance of the ice sheet.
The capability of RSV Nuyina for marine sediment coring also
provides an additional research tool for understanding the Southern
Ocean and Antarctic changes on long timescales.
Looking forward
Decadal plan
The AAD is leading development of a Decadal Plan for the AASP
that will provide guidance on the priority science to be conducted
over the next 10 years. The aim is to define and direct efforts to
deliver an integrated, cost-effective, impactful and scientifically
excellent AASP over the next decade. Implementation of this plan
over time will acknowledge the significant current science
commitments in the program whilst guiding new research into the
future. The decadal planning process has sought input from several
thematic groups of national experts and will be finalised in coming
months following additional consultation with international
advisors.
Adaptation and impacts
While this paper has focused on the physical basis of climate
change, it must be recognized that research to understand and
address climate change impacts in and beyond Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean is also a central element Australia’s Antarctic and
Southern Ocean research. The emphasis on this work is
considerable, and growing as the wider implications of climate
change for the Antarctic region raise critical questions for the wider
Earth system and the protection and conservation of Antarctic
terrestrial and marine environments and ecosystems. This long-
standing work continues to underpin Australian policy,
environmental stewardship and engagement in the Antarctic Treaty
system.
Climate change impacts and adaptation studies have long been a
part of core AAD research, with fundamental aspects also pursued
across the portfolio of university-based projects in the AASP.
Formation of Australian Research Council centres such as SAEF and
ACEAS has provided further capability in this area. It should also be
noted that the AAPP and its predecessors have long included a
significant element of ecosystem study: both for the role of
ecosystem feedbacks in the climate system and also around
ecosystem impacts. Key research findings include identifying
ecosystem risks such as the vulnerability of krill in an increasingly
acidified ocean. In 2022, a flagship project was established at AAD
to assess the current status and function of East Antarctica’s krill-
based ecosystem and facilitate the assessment of changes to this
ecosystem under future climate projections. This will assist in
distinguishing fishery impacts from environmental variation and
change and provide a foundation for decision-making on
conservation and management of the Southern Ocean ecosystem
within the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources (CCAMLR).
SAEF provides a relatively new initiative with a strong focus on
climate impacts on Antarctica and its biodiversity. Recent studies
highlight the impact of climate change on the environment and
identify it as the most threatening process to Antarctic biodiversity,.
Clarifying climate-related vulnerability of Antarctic ecosystems and
biodiversity, and developing climate resilient conservation planning
is a focus of research. This information will guide further
development of the Antarctic Protected Areas system and the
identification and protection of vulnerable species. ACEAS research
also includes effects of East Antarctica’s changes on open water and
under ice biogeochemistry and ecology as well as the carbon cycle.
These limited examples provide insight into wider Australian
Antarctic climate research.
Programmatic change
Two new initiatives in the science program at AAD will significantly
shape the delivery of Australian Antarctic science generally, and
climate science in particular. These are the
establishment of an East Antarctic Monitoring Program (EAMP) and
a new East Antarctic digital platform: Integrated Digital East
Antarctica (IDEA).
Observations and monitoring are fundamental elements of a climate
research program as noted throughout this paper. The EAMP is
presently in a development phase and will provide a structured
basis for much of the related climate studies which provide
monitoring at the individual research project level. EAMP will
commit to sustained observations of essential biodiversity, climate
and ocean variables, underpinned by an interdisciplinary,
strategically prioritized monitoring plan. Such an integrated and
sustained observing system will enable the detection of change at a
range of spatial and temporal scales, and with that information,
Australia will be much better placed to play a leading role in the
management and environmental stewardship of the Antarctic
region. The EAMP will also take advantage of technological
developments in data science, remote and automated sensors,
space-borne instruments, and autonomous vehicles, such as long-
range drones, to enhance observations and monitoring.
The AAD plans to work with the national and international
Antarctic science communities throughout 2023-24 in the
development of the EAMP. Such collaboration will be essential for
the detailed design of a successful EAMP, as it will enable
knowledge sharing, identification of data gaps around critical
variables and processes, and integration of different perspectives
and expertise.
The digital platform for East Antarctica, IDEA, is a science program
that will facilitate and coordinate the acquisition, integration,
analysis, synthesis and delivery of Antarctic and Southern Ocean
data and data products. This platform will provide seamless access
to multiple and integrated sources of data and data products to
underpin science and inform decision making. Importantly, it will
facilitate a truly multidisciplinary approach to better understanding
the nature, extent and implications of a changing climate on
environments and biodiversity in Antarctica and the Southern
Ocean.
Concluding remarks
The influence of climate change on Antarctica and the impact of
changes in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean on climate make this
research a critical and central element in Australia’s Antarctic
research efforts. Present research and increases in capability will
continue to drive the Australian Antarctic Science Program, in
accordance with its strategic framework and through the decadal
planning process currently underway. Australia will continue to
have a central focus on the Earth system, spanning physical and
biophysical aspects of climate change and the understanding of the
impacts of climate change in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean for
ecosystems and the environment. In its plans for Antarctic
operations, policy and science, Australia recognizes the importance
of the climate challenge and will focus on key issues. Australia also
recognizes that the scale and urgency of the science challenges
require strong and active research and logistical collaboration
across the National Antarctic Programs.
References
