The First Basic Plan for the Promotion of Polar Activities of the
Republic of Korea (2023-2027)
The First Basic Plan for the Promotion of Polar Activities of the
Republic of Korea (2023-2027)
Background
In April 2021, the government of the Republic of Korea (ROK)
enacted the “Act on the Promotion of Polar Activities” (hereinafter
referred to as the “Polar Act”). The purpose of this Act is to promote
the activities of the Korean Polar Program in the Arctic and
Antarctic, and to increase Korea’s contribution towards addressing
the global challenges faced by humanity, such as climate change.
To achieve the goals laid out by the Polar Act, the Korean
government has established the first “Basic Plan for the promotion
of Polar Activities (hereinafter referred to as the “Polar Plan”)” in
November 2022. The purpose of the Polar Plan is to systematically
promote activities in the polar regions. The Polar Plan contains a
comprehensive and detailed five-year action plan concerning the
following objectives; investigating the unexplored regions, joint
international science research, climate change, environmental
protection, participating in sustainable economic development,
building up multi-layered cooperative channels, nurturing human
resources, and designing new outreach programs.
Vision and Goals
Vision
A pioneering role in polar activities and endeavours : A Challenge
Toward the Unexplored Polar regions, a Leap Forward to the Future
Goals
Chart the unexplored regions
Respond to climate change
Lay the foundation for sustainable development in the polar regions
Strategy 1
Expand investigation into the unexplored regions in the Arctic and
Antarctic
1-1. Conduct future-driven research in the unexplored regions
1-2. Investigate climate change and its impact on the ecosystem
1-3. Develop polar technologies to support safe exploration
Strategy 2
Resolve climate and environmental issues
2-1. Enhancing prediction capabilities for extreme weather events
originating from the polar regions
2-2. Reinforce competency for protecting the polar environment
2-3. Predict changes in the polar ecosystem caused by climate
change
Strategy 3
Lay the foundation for sustainable development
3-1. Develop cutting-edge technologies for navigating the Arctic
shipping routes
3-2. Develop specialized technologies for construction and
equipment used in cold climate
3-3. Facilitate sustainable use of marine and bio resources in the
polar regions
Strategy 4
Build multi-layered cooperation channels
4-1. Establish channels for pan-government and social consultation
4-2. Expand bilateral and multilateral cooperation with the stake
holders in the Arctic and Antarctic
4-3. Diversify international partnerships in public and private
sectors
Strategy 5
Enhance interactive communications with domestic stakeholders
5-1. Establish a joint research platform and safety control system
5-2. Nurturing future generations of polar experts
5-3. Implement outreach programs for the wider public
Table 1 – Vision and goals of the First Basic Plan for the Promotion
of Polar Activities of the Republic of Korea.
The first Polar Plan outlines the direction of the Korean Polar
Program for the next five-years, from 2023 to 2027. The Korean
government has set five strategies and 15 objectives for policy-
driven implementation. To identify priorities in polar sciences and
to encourage involvement from wider domestic audience, the
government sets nine “Frontier projects” that needs to be addressed
in five years, including; Constructing the second ice-breaking
research vessel operated by the Korean Polar program, establishing
a third research station in the Antarctic, and strengthening
observation in the Arctic and Antarctic to effectively predict and
respond to climate change.
Strategy 1. Expand investigation into the unexplored regions in the
Arctic and Antarctic
To increase the Korean contribution to scientific research in the
Arctic and the Antarctic, the Korean government will expand its
scientific investigation into the unexplored polar regions. The
details of the plan includes (1) construction of the second ice-
breaking research vessel and designing joint international research
program to investigate the Arctic Ocean; (2) establishment of the
third research station in Antarctic inland to take part in
investigating the Earth systems; and (3) strengthen bilateral
partnership to conduct joint observation in the field of ecosystem,
atmosphere, permafrost, and glaciers in the high Arctic.
To enhance the accuracy of predicting changes in the Arctic and
Antarctic, the Korean scientific community is conducting a research
to restore past climate change cycle through ice core, blue ice, and
seabed coring samples from the Antarctic. Sub-glacial lake drilling
program will be launched to conduct research on isolated
ecosystems.
For safe Antarctic exploration on both land and sea, the Korean
polar program will develop an airborne exploring system to obtain
an accurate spatial information of a sub-glacial topography, and
investigate the seas near its research station to create nautical
charts. Microsatellites will be developed to observe the change of
sea-ice in the Arctic.
Strategy 2. Resolve climate and environmental issues
Global climate change influences the polar regions, which in turn
affects the global climate system. The Republic of Korea recognized
that meteorological disasters and the rising sea level caused by the
changing polar regions could affect the Korean Peninsula. The
Korean scientific community will develop model for predicting
meteorological disasters caused by the decreasing Arctic sea ice. To
predict how quickly the Antarctic glaciers are melting and the
extent to which the sea level will rise, the ROK will expand the
scope of the research and consolidate cooperative research activities
through international network.
In the Antarctic, the Republic of Korea will continue expanding our
contribution to monitoring and protecting the Marine Protected
Area (MPA) and the Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No.
171 and No.178. In the Arctic, its effort to monitor changes in
Arctic sea ice, marine environment, permafrost, atmosphere, and
ecosystem will be strengthened. Efforts will be made to contribute
to newly emerging issues such as ocean plastic litters and ocean
noise caused by shipping activities.
The thawing permafrost in the Arctic may pose unique threats to
the environment as it can release biological and chemical materials
that can be harmful for health and the environment. To contribute
to identifying and predicting ecological changes in the polar
regions, technologies are being developed for an unmanned
observation systems and analysis using artificial intelligence.
Strategy 3. Lay the foundation for sustainable development
To pursue potential opportunity that may arise with the loss of sea
ice in the Arctic, while taking into account the importance of
environmental protection, the Korean government will support the
development of eco-friendly technologies that can be applied to
commercial vessels operating in the Arctic. The eco-friendly ice-
breaking container vessel and autonomous ship based on digital
technology will be developed to navigate Northern Sea Route and
ensure the safe operation of the vessel.
Korea will develop construction technologies, platforms, and
systems that can be used in the extremely cold environment.
Ultimately, these technologies will contribute to safety and
sustainable development of polar communities, and also be applied
for exploring other extreme regions such as the deep sea and the
space in the future. There are concerted efforts in Korea to take part
in green and renewable energy projects in the Arctic region.
The government encourages fishing operators to adopt sustainable
fishing practices in the Antarctic and obtain relevant certification.
There are research being conducted to understand unique properties
of the living organisms in the Arctic and Antarctic, and if it could
be useful to humankind.
Strategy 4. Build multi-layered cooperation channels
To systematically coordinate and consult diverse issues related to
the polar regions, the Korean government will organize a “pan-
government consultative committee” consisting of the Ministry of
Oceans and Fisheries, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Science and ICT, and other related ministries. To encourage
economic development and industrial partnerships, the government
will encourage research institutes, universities and industries to
expand their work with Arctic counterparts by operating a
consortium that would facilitate cooperation and increase
information accessibility.
The Korean government will expand bilateral and multilateral
discussions with in the Arctic and Antarctic community, to embrace
diverse agenda and strengthen the cooperative relationship. In
addition, Korea seeks to contribute to facilitating discussion on
polar issues by hosting international conferences and meetings.
The Korean government will launch the Antarctic Forum to
facilitate discussions between domestic and international audiences,
which involve different layers of stakeholders including government
officials, researchers, and the public. With regard to the Arctic, the
Arctic Partnership Week, is held annually to discuss diverse issues
from scientific to socio-economic and industrial issues related to the
region.
Strategy 5. Enhance interactive communications with domestic
stakeholders
The government is building a cooperation research center which
would include a facility to recreate polar environment for joint
research purposes. There are plans to increase the accessibility of
resources for polar research, by implementing integrated polar
information system and setting up platforms that would facilitate
shared use of polar infrastructure.
For the future, the Korean government aims to focus on nurturing
future polar experts in diverse areas, such as scientific research,
international cooperation, marine transportation, and ship
operation.
The Korean government recognizes the importance of public
consensus and support. A new outreach program is being developed
to engage with the public and deliver materials that is tailored to
the target group. The Korean government plans to promote
campaigns that would reach wider audience and develop
experiential learning tools to enable better understanding of Korean
polar activities.
Future of Korea’s Polar Activities
The Republic of Korea will expand its scientific and social
contributions to the global polar community by achieving
milestones specified in the Polar Plan. Seeking for an expanded role
as a responsible member of global polar community, the Korean
polar program plans to explore and investigate uncharted polar
regions utilizing the current infrastructure (King Sejong and
Jangbogo research station in the Antarctic, Dasan station in Ny-
Alseund, and IBRV Araon), and by obtaining an Antarctic inland
station and a second ice-breaking research vessel. This will enable
Korea to take more expansive role and responsibility in dealing with
global climate and environmental changes. Korea will continue to
be a reliable partner in scientific research and sustainable
development in the polar region, and stand together with other
Parties in responding to emerging issues such as climate change and
environment
