Preliminary Survey Responses Regarding Implementation of IMO
Polar Code
National Antarctic Programme vessels
Preliminary Survey Responses Regarding Implementation of IMO
Polar Code National Antarctic Programme vessels
Summary
This paper presents preliminary responses from a COMNAP survey
on National Antarctic Programme vessels and their implementation
of the IMO International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters
(Polar Code). Completion of the survey was disrupted due to
challenges related to the global pandemic, so this paper presents
only preliminary results.
Background
COMNAP has been discussing the IMO Polar Code since before its
adoption in 2014. The Polar Code came into force on 1 January
2017. Generally, the main requirements are related to safety,
protection of the environment and seafarer competence.
In order to inform COMNAP discussions and assist our Members to
share best practice related to these requirements, and also to inform
the ATCM session to “share views on the IMO Polar Code”,
COMNAP prepared a survey of its Member National Antarctic
Programmes and asked for responses in regards to the 63 vessels
that were listed as “in service” in the COMNAP Quickbase Database
as at 1 February 2020.
The survey was opened on 15 February 2020, suspended through
February 2023, and is now open for new responses. This paper
presents preliminary responses received to date for fourteen vessels.
COMNAP will continue this work through our Marine Platforms
Expert Group and intends to bring back complete results to a future
ATCM.
Preliminary responses
A COMNAP survey of National Antarctic Programmes that operate,
manage or use at least one of the vessels listed as “in service” in the
COMNAP Quickbase Database was developed by the Leader of the
COMNAP Marine Platforms Expert Group, Miguel A. Ojeda (CPE).
The survey consisted of 23 questions in total presented in four parts
(see Attachment 1):
Survey Respondent Details
General Vessel Information
IMO Polar Code Compliance
Finalise Submission
Of the 63 vessels in the dropdown list [Q4] of the survey, responses
relating to 14 (22%) of those vessels were entered and recorded
before the suspension of the survey.
Preliminary results from these responses indicate that:
Fifty percent (50%) of these vessels are considered “Government,
Military (Navy, Coast Guard, etc.) [Q6].
The oldest vessel of the fourteen was “Year of build/launch” of
1981; with the average age of the fourteen vessels being 20.7 years
[Q8].
Eight of the eleven vessels (73%) that indicated that the IMO Polar
Code applied to the vessel [Q13] answered “yes” that the vessel
held a Polar Code Certificate [Q18].
Although the results are not complete, preliminary responses show
the commitment of the National Antarctic Programmes in
complying with the maritime regulations and, in particular, in the
application of the IMO Polar Code. This is no small task especially
in a vessel fleet with an average age of more than 20 years.
Attachment 1: COMNAP survey questions on IMO Polar Code
implementation for National Antarctic Programmes’ vessels
Survey Respondent Details
Q1 Your full name:
Textbox
Q2 Your national Antarctic program (NAP):
Dropdown list in Qualtrics taken from the COMNAP database
Q3 Your e-mail address:
Textbox
General Vessel Information
Q4 Name of the vessel:
If "Other", please specify the name of the vessel
Dropdown list in Qualtrics taken from the COMNAP database
Textbox
Q5 Is this vessel an:
Choose one of the following options:
Icebreaker
Ice-strengthened
Not ice-strengthened or Icebreaker
Q6 Is this vessel operated by:
Choose one of the following options:
Government, Military (Navy, Coast Guard, etc.)
Non-Governmental Contractor
Your own NAP
Other
Q7 Year of build/launch:
Dropdown list including all other years between 1900 and 2030.
Q8 Tonnage:
Textbox
Q9 Length:
Textbox
Q10 Beam:
Textbox
Q11 Estimate percentage of the operations time used:
Percentage range slider 0-100%
Q12 What is this vessel’s usual region of Antarctic operations:
Choose as many of the following options:
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Ross Sea region
Circum-Antarctic
Q13 Does the IMO Polar Code apply to this vessel?
If Yes (Continue to Q14)
If No (End of Survey)
IMO Polar Code Compliance
Q14 What Polar Class is this vessel:
Choose one of the following options:
PC 1 Year-round operation in all polar waters
PC 2 Year-round operation in moderate multi-year ice conditions
PC 3 Year-round operation in second-year ice, which may include
multi-year ice inclusions
PC 4 Year-round operation in thick first-year ice, which may
include old ice inclusions
PC 5 Year-round operation in medium first-year ice, which may
include old ice inclusions
PC 6 Summer/autumn operation in medium first-year ice, which
may include old ice inclusions
PC 7 Summer/autumn operation in thin first-year ice, which may
include old ice inclusions
No Polar Class
Q15 What category from the IMO Polar Code have you applied for
for this vessel?
Choose one of the following options:
Category A ship - a ship designed for operation in polar waters in at
least medium first-year ice, which may include old ice inclusions
Category B ship - a ship not included in category A, designed for
operation in polar waters in at least thin first-year ice, which may
include old ice inclusions
Category C ship - a ship designed to operate in open water or in ice
conditions less severe than those included in categories A and B
Q16 Which Polar Service Temperature (PST) has been determined
for this vessel’s operations?
Textbox
Q17 Has the introduction of the IMO Polar Code involved major
shipyard works on this ship?
If yes, please describe major shipyard works.
Yes
No
Textbox
Q18 Does this vessel hold an IMO Polar Ship Certificate?
If Yes (Continue to Q19)
If No (End of Survey)
IMO Polar Ship Certificate
Q19 Total approximate budget required to obtain the IMO Polar
Ship Certificate.  (Please indicate currency, ie US$ or Euro)
Textbox
Q20 Approximately, how long did the whole process take to obtain
the IMO Polar Ship Certificate?
Textbox
Q21 Which of these categories were the main impediments (if any)
to certify this vessel?
Choose as many of the following options:
Fire safety and protection
Life saving gears
Machinery
Navigation systems
Ship structure
Ship stability
Training
Watertight integrity
Q22 Does your country offer the appropriate training courses/
resources necessary to obtain the IMO Polar Ship Certificate?
Yes
No
Finalize your submission
Q23 Finalize your submission 
Submit this vessel data and end your survey
Thank you for completing the on-line IMO Polar Code
implementation for NAPs vessels.
If you would like to submit another survey for an additional vessel
operated by/for your NAP, please click here.
If you have any additional questions and/or comments on IMO
Polar Code topics not covered by this survey but relevant for your
NAP, please contact sec@comnap.aq.
