Conclusions of the UN Ocean Conference 2022 in Lisbon, Portugal
Conclusions of the UN Ocean Conference 2022 in Lisbon, Portugal
Information Paper submitted by Portugal, France, Sweden and
WMO
Summary
In 2022, Portugal co-hosted – alongside Kenya – the second UN
Ocean Conference in support of the implementation of UN
Sustainable Development Goal 14 (Conserve and sustainably use the
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development). At
least 4 events related to the Antarctic and Southern Ocean were
carried out during the UN Oceans Conference. The declaration “Our
ocean, our future, our responsibility” was adopted, by consensus, by
the conference. France and Costa Rica declared their availability to
host the third UN Oceans Conference. The information on the
relevance of the Antarctic region and the work of the Antarctic
Treaty System in future UN Oceans conferences will surely be
welcomed.
Background
The Antarctic Treaty has an important role in sharing and
promoting Antarctic research with the World community, in
accordance with Art. III of the Antarctic Treaty (ATCM XLII/IP68).
The United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Developments and
its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) aim to address global
challenges facing humankind, including issues that overlap with
some of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty (Ex. Art. I, II and III),
such as climate change, ocean threats and gender equality. The aim
of this paper is to provide the conclusions of the UN Ocean
Conference, that took place in Lisbon 2022 (ATCM XLIV/IP3).
Conclusions of the 2022 UN Oceans Conference (UNOC)
Organized by Portugal and Kenya, the UN Ocean Conference took
place in Lisbon, between the 27th June and the 1st July 2022
(https://www.un.org/en/conferences/ocean2022). The Conference
held eight interactive dialogues addressing themes related to the
different targets under SDG 14, thus exploring the key role and the
potential partnerships can bring to the full implementation of SDG
14 and other Ocean-related SDGs. Another key outcome of the
Conference was the adoption of an action-oriented political
declaration, focused on essential areas where solutions based on
science and innovation can play a transformative role in addressing
Ocean challenges.
UNOC gathered approximately 6 500 people from 159 countries,
including 181 personalities of political level (I.e. 13 Heads of State,
3 Deputy-heads of State, 9 Heads of government, 124 other
members of government, 17 heads of the system of the United
Nations and 12 leaders of intergovernmental organizations) and
1178 non-governmental organizations and various entities such as
businesses, foundations, Universities and research institutes (Figure
1).
Figure 1. President of Portugal, Prof. Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, at
the opening ceremony of the UN Ocean Conference (Lisbon, 2022).
At least five events linked to the Antarctic took place, namely:
“From the Southern Ocean to the Arctic – a call to action via the UN
Ocean Decade” to bring together polar ocean initiatives and leading
polar experts and discuss cross-cutting issues at the poles and
provide insights for actions to the UN Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development. It was organized by the European Polar
Board, Royal Belgium Institute of Natural Sciences, Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Southern Ocean
Observing System, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research,
World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), the Climate and
Ocean – Variability, Predictability, and Change (CLIVAR) of WCRP,
Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean
and Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation,
“Polar oceans: Engine to the global ocean-Messages and
Messengers” to raise awareness to the role of the Southern and
Arctic Oceans in driving ocean and climate change. It was
organized by Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation, Oceanographic
Institute - Prince Albert I of Monaco Foundation, Oceano Azul
Foundation, SCAR, International Arctic Science Committee (IASC),
International Cryosphere Climate Initiative (ICCI) and European
Polar Board,
“Antarctica, microplastics and conservation photography: How
Portuguese researchers are leading international marine research
and public engagement in ocean protection” to address three
societal challenges to promote ocean conservation and potential
solutions to them. It was organized by the Marine and Environment
Sciences Centre (MARE),
“Ocean Research: the future for science collaboration” to discuss
science, data collection, mobility and capacity building issues in
which the Antarctic was provided as an example. It was coordinated
by the British Embassy in Portugal.
“Polar regions in a changing climate: ocean solutions through
science to services” to raise discussion about the Arctic and
Antarctic, including identification of gaps and needs in ocean and
ice observations, improved methods for assimilating these data into
Earth prediction models, and recommendations for how best this
can be achieved through a coordinated approach to services. It was
coordinated by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) in
collaboration with University of Lapland (Finland); Environment
and Climate Change Canada; US National Ocean and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), Ministerie de Defensa Republica Argentina;
and UNESCO Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC).
See https://public.wmo.int/en/events/events-of-interest/wmo-side-
event-un-ocean-conference-polar-regions-changing-climate-ocean
The declaration “Our ocean, our future, our responsibility” was
adopted by the Conference https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/
files/2022-06/UNOC_political_declaration_final.pdf. Its following
nine objectives should be highlighted:
Adoption of urgent measures to accelerate the achievement of
SDG14 targets, thus contributing significantly to the delivery of the
2030 Agenda.
Recognition of the Climate-Ocean links and the need of more
actions to tackle climate change
Need to increase decisions and solutions based on science and
technological innovation
Develop a sustainable Blue Economy, compatible with the
protection of biodiversity and value of the natural marine resources,
including the commitment to protect 30% of marine areas by 2030.
More than 100 member states agreed to goal.
Address plastic and litter pollution via the negotiation of a global
agreement, with the commitment to prevent, reduce and control
marine pollution, including single use plastics.
Swift conclusion of the treaty on the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction
(BBNJ)
Clear directives towards fisheries, with the objective of restoring
and maintaining populations at levels that produce, at least, the
maximum sustainable yield in the least possible time, through plans
of management, fighting illegal/not declared/not regulated fishing,
and the end of harmful subsidies, in line of the target 14.6,
protecting therefore, the contribution of healthy oceans for the
resilience of feeding systems
Strengthen the connections between SDG6 and SDG14
Reinforce private-public partnerships, with the objective of
promoting solutions of innovative finances, raising the viability of
projects and reinforce the support of developing countries,
especially in relation to capacity building, funding and transfer of
technology.
In addition to these objectives, nearly 700 new voluntary
commitments were noted, addressing issues such as the global
number of marine protected areas (goal 30 x 30: protect 30% of
marine habitats by 2030), obtaining a global agreement to fight
plastic pollution and the support of the establishment of a legal
international framework for BBNJ.
France and Costa Rica declared their availability to co-host the
third UN Oceans Conference in 2025. The Antarctic Treaty System
has the capacity and expertise and will certainly be a contributor to
the success of this event.
