Preliminary responses to comments on the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the renovation of Petrel Base,
Dundee Island, Antarctica
English version provided by the author
Preliminary responses to comments on the draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the renovation of Petrel Base,
Dundee Island, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Argentina
Summary
The National Directorate of the Antarctic of the Argentine Republic,
in its capacity as competent authority of the Protocol to the
Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection (Environmental
Protocol), prepared a draft Comprehensive Environmental
Evaluation (CEE) with the purpose of renovating the Petrel
Antarctic base while the scientific and operational activities of the
Argentine Antarctic Program (AAP) are maintained at that base,
both in places on the ground and in the facilities that the base
provides support. The draft received comments and suggestions
from the Parties that participated in the ICG coordinated by New
Zealand. Argentina thanks the Parties for their contributions to
improve the Petrel Draft CEE in accordance with the circulation
mechanisms required by Annex I to the Environmental Protocol.
Background
Argentina prepared and submitted the Draft CEE regarding the
renovation of the Petrel Base on Dundee Island, with the purpose of
modernizing it, eliminating the present environmental risks and
making the activities of the Argentine Antarctic Program in the
north of the Antarctic Peninsula more efficient. The Draft CEE was
prepared according to the relevant provisions established in Annex
I, Article 3 of the Environmental Protocol (1991) and in the Revised
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
(2016).
The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat distributed the notification on the
availability of the CEE to all Parties through Secretariat Circular 4
(January 30, 2023). In turn, the Presidency of the Committee for
Environmental Protection (CPE) reported it through CPE Circular 3
(January 31, 2023). Also, the Secretariat made available to CEP
members, on the workspace of its website (https://www.ats.aq/
devAS/EP/CEPWorkspace), both the Non-Technical Summary and
the full package of files that make up the Draft CEE, in the four
official languages of the Antarctic Treaty.
According to the Procedures for the Consideration Procedures for
intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs (Appendix 3 to the
Final Report of the XX Meeting of the CEP), an Intersessional
Contact Group (ICG) was established, coordinated by New Zealand,
to carry out the review of the draft CEE. The texts with the
comments made within the framework of the GCI are available to
CEP Members and Observers through the CEP discussion forum,
which also provided the Non-Technical Summary (NTS) translated
into the official languages of the Treaty.
General comments
For Argentina, this is the first experience of comprehensive renewal
of one of its Antarctic bases. It is also the first time that a draft CEE
has been prepared to be presented to the Parties, through a great
effort of all the actors that participate in the Argentine Antarctic
Program.
As this is the first CEE of Argentina for an activity in Antarctica, the
availability in the database of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty
of the CEEs previously carried out by other National Programs
constituted an invaluable reference source for obtaining
information on procedures of this type, in relation to the various
types of activities carried out and the levels of impact assessment
required. Likewise, in the preparation of the Draft CEE, the best
available science was used, making use of the main studies and
surveys on the area that exist to date.
The product of that work was turned into the draft submitted to the
Parties last January, which has received comments and suggestions
in the GCI created for that purpose. Argentina considers this stage
of the process extremely valuable, since it can use the opinion of
the Parties to enrich its CEE. Therefore, thanks the effort made by
the ICG participants to provide substantive and constructive
feedback on this project , and in particular to New Zealand for
coordinating the ICG and producing an excellent summary of the
responses (Working Paper 32, Report of the intersessional open-
ended contact group [ICG] to Review the Draft Comprehensive
Environmental Evaluation prepared by Argentina for the
‘Redevelopment of Petrel Station, Dundee Island, Antarctica, from
ATCM XLV). Argentina will also take into account for the
preparation of the final version of the CEE the debates generated
during the CPE meeting.
It should be remembered that the Petrel Base renovation project
will represent the largest investment made in the Argentine
Antarctic Program in many years, with the purpose of recovering a
base that now a days does not have the appropriate logistical
capacity to support current scientific needs. It should be noted that
in addition to the investment planned for this remodeling,
Argentina has invested a large sum in scientific instruments and
new laboratories for its bases and ships, for which it needs logistical
support to sustain the growth in science that this investment in
equipment and laboratories implies. This will result in increased
research opportunities not only for Argentine research projects but
also for research projects of all Parties.
The implementation of this project will allow a better use of the
resources of the Argentine Antarctic Program. Activities that are
currently carried out from the Marambio base can be carried out
from the Petrel base, thanks to the favorable climatic and
geographical conditions that it presents, generating a
complementarity between both bases that will result in a more
efficient use of resources.
Likewise, it will allow continuing to remedy the environmental
passive that Petrel currently presents, by proceeding with the
removal of historical waste from the Base and replacing obsolete
infrastructures with functional ones. Part of the historical garbage
removal tasks have already begun with the project "Repair and
Maintenance Works at Petrel Base, Dundee Island. Summer and
Winter Antarctic Campaign 2021-2022”, whose Initial
Environmental Assessment is available in the information exchange
system.
Initial responses to comments from GCI participants
The extent to which the CEE meets the requirements of Article 3 of
Annex I of the Environmental Protocol
The participants of the GCI stated that the mentioned project
complies in general terms with these requirements, but that it
would be necessary to include some additional information and
clarifications. The additional details required by Parties are well
developed in WP32 prepared by New Zealand. These will be
considered by Argentina when preparing the final version of the
CEE for the renewal of the Petrel Base.
Whether the CEE : i) has identified all environmental impacts of the
proposed activity; and ii) suggests appropriate methods to mitigate
(reduce or avoid) those impacts
The participants of the ICG noted that the CEE draft submitted by
Argentina generally identifies most of the environmental impacts of
the proposed activity and presents mitigation measures to address
those impacts. However, they requested to provide more
information on possible impacts not clearly identified in the CEE,
and a clearer
presentation of the mitigation measures in the body of the
document, among other issues. Argentina will modify the project to
explain in more detail and with the best available science the
expected environmental impacts and the proposed mitigation
measures.
Draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained in
the document
The Parties agreed with Argentina that due to the scale and
complexity of the activities proposed for the renovation of the
Petrel Base, described in the CEE, it is likely that they will have a
greater than minimal or transitory impact on the Antarctic
environment. Therefore, a CEE is the appropriate level of
environmental impact assessment for the proposed activity.
On the other hand, the Parties indicated that an improvement of the
environmental impact assessment and a more detailed description
and consideration of mitigation measures are needed, in order to
support more clearly the conclusion of the CEE. Argentina will carry
out this task, especially by further developing mitigation measures
to assess their effectiveness and to support more clearly the
conclusions reached by our CEE.
The clarity, format and presentation of the Draft CEE
We appreciate the comments of the GCI participants who
mentioned that the CEE draft is a complete document. We also
value suggestions to improve the structure and clarity of the
document, which will be taken into account. As an example, key
information found in the Annexes will be included in the main
document. On the other hand, unnecessary references related to the
Port will be eliminated, a construction that is not expected to be
carried out. Efforts will be made to reduce the length of the
document and synthesize its content, in order to facilitate its
reading.
Conclusion
Argentina appreciates the valuable and constructive suggestions of
the Parties that exhaustively analyzed the Draft CEE for the
renovation of the Petrel Base on Dundee Island, Antarctica. In
particular, the work of New Zealand as coordinator of the GCI
stands out, which prepared a Working Document that very clearly
summarizes the comments made in the group by the participants.
This document, as well as the individual contributions of each
Party, will be the basis on which Argentina will work to present the
final CEE.
Argentina is convinced that this project will substantially improve
the logistics of its National Antarctic Program. In this way, it will be
able to continue contributing to the strengthening of the Antarctic
Treaty System through international cooperation, providing more
scientific information for the management and conservation of the
Antarctic continent.
The proposed activities are considered acceptable, taking into
account that the benefits that they will bring in terms of
improvements to safety, environmental protection and the ability to
support science, outweigh the negative impacts associated with
such activities.
