Report on the Replacement of the Cape Shirreff Field Camp,
Livingston Island, Antarctica
Report on the Replacement of the Cape Shirreff Field Camp,
Livingston Island, Antarctica
Information Paper Submitted by the United States
Summary
The Cape Shirreff field camp is a temporary, seasonally-occupied,
multi-year field camp located within ASPA 149 Cape Shirreff and
San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. It was
constructed in the 1996/97 Austral summer and since its assembly,
it has served as a shelter for scientists conducting integrated marine
ecosystem assessments with the U.S. Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (AMLR), a program operated by the National Oceanic
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Due to degradation from 27
years of use, a rebuild of the shelter is required to ensure the safety
and reliability of the research scientists to effectively conduct their
surveys. In 2021, NOAA started an Initial Environmental Evaluation
(IEE) to analyze the potential environmental impacts of building a
new structure and determined that there is no more than a minor or
transitory impact on the Antarctic environment from the planned
construction activities. Preparation for the rebuild started in
December 2022 and will resume in January 2024. Proposed impact
mitigation and monitoring observations will occur in accordance
with the IEE.
Background
Since 1996, the U.S. Antarctic Marine Living Resources (AMLR)
Program, National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), located at the
Southwest Fisheries Science Center (SWFSC), has conducted
integrated assessments of the marine ecosystem at Cape Shirreff in
the South Shetland Islands. The Cape Shirreff field camp (hereafter
“the camp”) is a temporary, seasonally-occupied, multi-year field
camp located at 62°28'S, 60°46'W. The camp was constructed
during the 1996/97 Austral summer and is located within ASPA
149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South
Shetland Islands. Operations at the camp are subject to
management and mitigation protocols found in the Management
Plan for ASPA 149. The U.S. AMLR Program chose Cape Shirreff for
the camp because it is located near an area where krill (and other)
fisheries occur, and krill-dependent seabirds (particularly penguins)
and pinnipeds (particularly Antarctic fur seals) breed at this
location. After 27 years of use, the infrastructure at Cape Shirreff
has degraded and requires replacement. New structures will ensure
safe and reliable shelter for research scientists who are responsible
for implementing the scientific mission of the U.S. AMLR Program.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
In 2021, NOAA began analysing potential impacts of installing new
structures, as well as decommissioning the existing buildings. The
analysis also included potential impacts of installing a temporary
tent camp that would house the ten-person construction team for
approximately 30 days during each year (nominally 2) of the
rebuild period.
NOAA’s environmental assessment analysing these potential impacts
is described in an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE). A
determination that no more than a minor or transitory impact on
the Antarctic environment resulting from construction activities was
made. This determination is consistent with the National Science
Foundation's (NSF) implementing regulations for the Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. The IEE was
made publicly available and can be found on the Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty’s webpage in the EIA database.
Replacing the Existing Structures
During 2021/22, NOAA staff worked closely with architects and
engineers to design new structures that support seasonal residence
for up to eight scientists. The new buildings were designed to meet
specific research and operational requirements and include main
camp buildings with central decking, and an emergency shelter at a
separate site. Centralizing the decking at the main camp minimizes
the total amount of
decking required and minimizes the impact to the surrounding
terrain of foot traffic between buildings.
Among the key features of the new main camp design is a smaller
footprint (~240 m2) compared to the original camp (~280 m2).
The main camp includes a galley, bunkhouse, laboratory and a
latrine. All structures are semi-permanent and can be disassembled
and removed with minimal impact at a time when research is either
concluded or the structures have reached the end of their lifespan
(estimated 30 years). The new structures are oriented to maximize
solar exposure and water collection while reducing moisture, snow,
and ice accumulation. Finally, the foundation was designed to
minimize contact and impact on underlying substrates and soil.
A replacement emergency shelter, approximately 1.6 km away from
the main camp, was also designed. This structure is located close to
penguin colonies and helps facilitate seabird research on a daily
basis. The replacement shelter was designed using the same
concepts as the main camp and will occupy the same footprint (43
m2) as the old structure.
The new structures are scheduled to be installed over a period of
two field seasons (austral summers): Phase 1 during the 2022/23
season, and Phase 2 during the 2023/24 season. Each Phase is
scheduled for approximately 30 days and decommissioning of the
old buildings will occur as new buildings become operable.
Phase 1 Completed
As described in the IEE, the prefabricated building materials were
shipped from the U.S. to Punta Arenas, Chile, and then to Cape
Shirreff. Part of the construction team arrived at Cape Shirreff in
December 2022 and quickly installed a tented camp (Figure 1) to
house the ten-person construction team. They also opened and
prepared the nearby Guillermo Mann Field Camp (Chile) to provide
additional shelter, an infirmary, and cooking and eating space for
the construction team.
The team spent the next several days setting the foundation for the
new galley and bunkhouse structures (Figures 2 and 3). In early
January 2023 the rest of the construction team arrived and began
construction of the galley and the bunkhouse (Figure 4). When the
construction team departed in early February 2023, the two new
building structures were nearly complete, including the exterior
decking that connects the two buildings (Figure 5 and watch video
here).
The existing emergency shelter was decommissioned (watch video
here) during the 2022/23 field season, taken down from the inside
out over the course of seven work days spanning roughly 39 hours.
All insulation was bagged and removed from the island at the end
of the field season. Wood, metal, and glass debris was bundled and
securely stored on-site for removal from the island in 2023/24. The
new emergency shelter is set to be built on the vacant site during
the 2023/24 field season.
Impact mitigation measures and site monitoring observations were
conducted in accordance with the IEE. Movement was restricted
away from sensitive vegetation and animal breeding sites, and
regular visual, photo, and video surveys of the site were completed
before and after construction. Preliminary analysis of impacts from
collected observations were minor and transitory, consistent with
those described in the IEE.
Next Steps, Phase 2
NOAA staff and the construction team will return to Cape Shirreff in
January 2024 when work will resume to outfit Phase 1 buildings
with power, water collection, and communications systems.
Construction of the laboratory and the emergency shelter will
occur, and the team will decommission the original structures in the
main camp. At the end of the field season, the tent camp will be
decommissioned, and materials from the construction of the new
structures and decommissioning of the old structures will be
packaged for transport and removed from the island for proper
disposal. Proposed impact mitigation and monitoring observations
will occur before, during, and after Phase 2 construction in
accordance with the IEE.
Figure 1: Tented camp site installed during early deployment.
Figure 2: Setting the foundation.
Figure 3: Foundation designed and constructed to minimize contact
and impact on underlying substrates and soil.
Figure 4: Intermediate stage of building.
Figure 5: Main camp at the end of Phase 1.
