Progress of the activities of the Beyond EPICA Oldest Ice project
Progress of the activities of the Beyond EPICA Oldest Ice project
Information Paper submitted by Italy, France, Germany,
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom
Summary
This Information Paper reports a synthesis of the activities
performed by the ongoing Beyond EPICA Oldest Ice project, which
represents the European effort to obtain a 1.5 Myr Greenhouse Gas
– Climate Feedback Record from an Ice Core in East Antarctica. In
the introductory section an overview of the project with its key
features, objectives and expected impacts, is provided. The
following sections briefly report firstly, the status of the project
with the field activities carried out so far and secondly, the plans
for future field activities.
Introduction
The project “Beyond EPICA Oldest Ice Core: 1,5 Myr of greenhouse
gas – climate feedbacks” has been funded by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 - Research and Innovation Action (RIA) programme
under the Grant Agreement No. 815384, with a budget of €10 999
942.00 and significant financial contributions from participating
nations.
It started on 1st June 2019 and will last until 31st May 2026: 7
years of activities in total (six initially, extended to seven due to the
cancellation of one field season due to the COVID19 pandemic). In
2020 an Initial Environmental Evaluation was prepared, indicating
that the activity was estimated to have a minor or transitory impact
and therefore the activity could proceed.
The project is led by the Institute of Polar Sciences of the National
Research Council of Italy, who is driving a consortium of 12
European and non-European international research institutes.
The list of partners and third parties with their contacts persons can
be found at the following link https://www.beyondepica.eu/en/
about/participants/
The main scientific objective of the project is to retrieve a
continuous ice core to bedrock in Antarctica, in order to obtain
quantitative, high-resolution ice core information on climate and
environmental changes over the last 1.5 Myr in Antarctica. This will
allow to understand the role of forcing factors and especially
greenhouse gases during the Mid-Pleistocene transition (MPT),
which occurred between 800,000 and 1.2 million years ago. During
this period, the climatic periodicity transitioned from 41,000 to the
current 100,000 years between ice ages.
Once the ice cores are collected, the aim is to fully document and
prepare them to delivery to European laboratories and partial
archiving in Antarctica. The analysis of the ice cores aims to
establish a first robust age scale for the core and to derive first high-
resolution climate records over the time interval older than seven
hundred thousand years (700kr).
The new climate records will be used to constraint the cause of the
MPT and long-term carbon cycle-climate feedbacks.
During the previous EPICA (European Project for Ice Coring in
Antarctica) project, which ended in 2008, an 800,000-year-old ice
core has been extracted and analysed.
Beyond EPICA project wants to travel back further in time and go
beyond this result, by improving and extending the understanding
of the linkages between GHGs and climate that began with EPICA.
In addition, Beyond EPICA builds on the team and institutions that
successfully completed the EPICA project and now includes a new
generation of ice core science leaders.
Ice cores contain direct and quantitative information about past
climate forcing and atmospheric responses, thus contributing to the
knowledge of global changes on the climate system and to
understanding the cause-and-effect relationship that led to the
enigmatic MPT change.
The expected impacts of Beyond EPICA project are:
support the major international scientific assessments such as the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) by improving
estimates of Earth System sensitivity to GHG changes and of climate
and carbon cycle feedbacks;
increase confidence in climate change projections by contributing to
design solutions to mitigate future climate changes;
providing an evidence base to support and validate climate model
thus providing added value to decision and policy makers;
sustain European leadership in climate science by increasing the
expertise of the joint European science area.
State of the Art of the Beyond EPICA project
The drill site is located at Little Dome C (Figure 1 and 2), an area of
about 10 km2, 35 km away from Concordia Station, the Italian-
French research station on the Dome C zone, in the high Antarctic
Plateau. Dome C is 1000 km from the coast, at an altitude of 3233
m above sea level, and is run by the French Polar Institute (IPEV)
and the Italian Research Program in Antarctica (PNRA), the French
and Italian polar agencies.
Figure 1: Beyond EPICA drill site at Little Dome C
Figure 2- Little Dome C camp layout
The project is currently in its fourth year of activity, with three field
campaigns successfully completed.
During the first field season (November 2019 – January 2020),
ENEA (Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and
Sustainable Economic Development) and
IPEV built the drill camp at the site previously identified by an EU
funded geophysical survey project, including more than 4,000 km
of airborne and ground-based Radar Echo Sounding (RES) survey
and basal temperature assessment based on vertical velocity and
temperature measurements.
Figure 3: Drilling tent at Little Dome C
During the second field season (November 2021 – January 2022),
ENEA and IPEV completed the field camp installation and set up the
drilling area, the international team started drilling, reaching a
depth of 130 m, the temporary storage cave was completed, and a
complex drilling system was installed, which was necessary to
continue drilling activities during the following seasons.
During the third field season (November 2022 – January 2023), the
international team completed the installation of the deep ice
drilling system and fine-tuned it to continue the drilling operations
started in the previous campaign. Drilling activities reached a depth
of 808.47 metres. At this depth the ice preserves information about
the climate and the atmosphere of the last 49,300 years.
This year, the first 217 metres from the Beyond EPICA ice core were
also processed at the “Cold Lab” at Concordia Station, making
observations on the cores and measuring its conductivity
parameters, as well as performing the first cuts. A part of these ice
cores is being transferred to Europe for analysis in European
laboratories.
Figure 4. Drilling Depth.
Since the beginning of the Beyond EPICA project, Scientific
Consortia, have been working on ice core science. These are
represented by groups of researchers, who work together to carry
out analyses and to progress in the study of the ice core analysis.
Fourteen consortia, including overall 200 researchers, have so far
been identified and formed. The list is reported at the link https://
www.beyondepica.eu/en/about/science-consortia-sc/. These groups
are platforms to exchange ideas, share expertise, research tools, ice
samples, data and facilities, and to define key science goals for the
future.
Future Plans
The Beyond EPICA project has three more field seasons ahead to
conclude drilling activities and to close the Little Dome C camp.
The specific objectives and actions for the coming seasons are:
Continuing deep drilling to a depth of about 2000 m. Transport by
traverse to Little Dome C of 20 m3 of fuel, and 20 m3 of drilling
fluid. Transport by Basler/l’Astrolabe The French ice-breaker which
connects Hobart, Australia to the French research station Dumont
d’Urville on the coast of Terre Adélie. Dumont d’Urville and
Concordia are subsequently linked by a terrestrial convoy of
caravans (the “traverse”)./cargo of the ice samples to the EU (Field
season 2023-24).
Drilling to the bedrock - replicate cores (the last 2/300 m, older
than 700 kyr) and retrograding the traverse module and camp at
Concordia. Transport by traverse to Little Dome C 20 m3 of fuel.
Transport by Basler/l’Astrolabe/cargo of the ice samples to the EU
(Field season 2024-25).
Borehole logging. Retrograde the traverse module and camp at
Concordia. Clean the camp (Field season 2025-26). Once drilling
activities will be completed the borehole will be monitored, from an
environmental assessment point of view, as it will remain of
scientific relevance. New methods will allow the fluid to be
recovered if scientific activity will not continue.
