Annual Report of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Annual Report of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
An Information Paper submitted by WMO
The World Meteorological Organization www.wmo.int (WMO) is a
specialized agency of the United Nations and is the UN system's
authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's
atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces
and the resulting distribution of water resources.
WMO covers a range of activities of relevance to the Antarctic
Treaty System, including Antarctic Science via the World Climate
Research Programme Co-sponsored by the International Science
Council (ISC) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission (IOC) of UNESCO and World Weather Research
Programme; Antarctic Observations and Infrastructure, for example
via the Global Cryosphere Watch; and Antarctic Services via, for
example, the Antarctic Regional Climate Centre network.
Antarctic Science activities of the World Climate and World
Weather Research Programmes
Through the World Climate Research Programme2 (WCRP), WMO
carries out several research and modelling activities in which the
climate of the Antarctic region is a key aspect. Its activities are
often conducted in partnership with other organisations, such as
SCAR.
WCRP’s Climate and Cryosphere Core Project (CliC)
WCRP’s CliC project, with a new international office hosted by the
University of Massachusetts Amherst in the US, focusses on the
cryosphere component of the climate system. CliC is a connector
and integrator of cryosphere research worldwide, coordinating
research and modelling activities (often in partnership with SCAR)
on ice sheet mass balance and sea level, ice shelves and alpine
glaciers, sea ice, and permafrost. With a vision of cultivating future
leaders in cryospheric research, CliC has also established a grant
program, particularly aimed at early career scientists. https://
climate-cryosphere.org/2021-clic-fellowships-grants-open-call/ See
accompanying IP for further details.
WCRP also coordinates several modelling activities of relevance to
Treaty Parties, including Antarctic CORDEX https://cordex.org/
domains/region-10-antarctica/ (the Coordinated Regional
Downscaling Experiment, with an office at the Swedish
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute), and CMIP (the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project, with a project office hosted by the
European Space Agency in the UK) that generates the scenario runs
that are integral to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). https://www.wcrp-climate.org/wgcm-cmip assessment
reports.
Antarctic CORDEX
Antarctic CORDEX https://climate-cryosphere.org/antarctic-cordex/
was initiated by WCRP to develop regional climate downscaling of
Antarctica to provide an accurate description of regional-to-local
scale climate phenomena and their variability and changes. This
project strengthens cooperation and knowledge exchange between
polar climate modelling groups throughout the world, for the
delivery of these simulations. A coordinated set of simulations
enables regional model inter-comparison studies,
which are required to characterise uncertainties. Output from the
project also contributes to studies assessing the impact of climate
change on Antarctica and the development of adaptation and
mitigation strategies, which are required by a diverse range of
stakeholders, in particular by the cryosphere community in order to
produce an improved understanding of how ice sheets, glaciers, ice
shelves, and sea ice respond to climate change. See IP for further
details.
Antarctica 2300 Projections
The Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison Project for CMIP6 (ISMIP6) is
a crucial part of the WCRP Climate Model Intercomparison Project
Phase 6 (CMIP6), which focuses on ice sheets. The goal of ISMIP6 is
to provide processed-based projections of ice sheet contribution to
sea level rise for the 21st century, and to assess the uncertainties
associated with these projections and their origins. It is also
essential to consider ice sheet projections beyond the 21st century,
as instability mechanisms have the potential to rapidly destabilize
ice sheets, and several regions may reach tipping points, potentially
leading to much larger sea level contributions.
Antarctica 2300 Projections is a continuation of the successful
ISMIP6 project, and is open to the international community. This
project extends previous simulations of ISMIP6 until 2300, using
climate forcings from both CMIP5 and CMIP6 under different
scenarios. It evaluates the stability of basins around Antarctica until
2300 using an ensemble of ice sheet models and assesses the
uncertainty from ice flow models and climate forcings. It also
analyzes the role of ice shelf collapse in future projections and
compares the results obtained using climate forcings until 2300
with those from simulations based on forcings from the end of the
21st century repeated after 2100. The analysis of results is ongoing
with expected publication in the coming year. See accompanying IP
for details.
The YOPP/PPP final summit and next steps
The Polar Prediction Project (PPP) of WMO’s World Weather
Research Programme (WWRP) formally concluded on 31 December
2022 but activities in three key areas (Year of Polar Prediction in
the Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH), the Model Intercomparison
and Improvement Project, and the PPP Societal and Environmental
Research Applications group) will continue during 2023. WWRP is
finalising plans for a follow-on project on polar research, as part of
their new Implementation Plan for 2024-2027.
The YOPP Final Summit https://yoppfinalsummit.com/ took place
in Montreal, Canada, 29 August - 1 September 2022, and brought
together the polar prediction community – from operational
centres, academia, environment services, polar prediction users and
northern communities. The Summit showcased the successes of
YOPP and included Science-to-Service sessions where key users
described their engagement with environmental predictions. The
discussions around the Science and Service sessions identified that,
whilst good progress had been made in identifying key user groups
and their needs, more effort is needed to expand research around
identifying the range of information needs of a greater diversity of
user groups as well as tailoring services to their needs.
Antarctic Observations and Infrastructure
WMO has adopted a new Unified Data Policy that is necessary for
the global efforts to monitor, understand and then predict weather
and climate, as well as the Global Basic Observing Network
(GBON). GBON paves the way for a radical overhaul of the
international exchange of observational data, which underpin all
weather, climate and water services and products.
The increased frequency of extreme temperatures seen in Antarctica
recently emphasises the need for systematic observations of
demonstrated quality. There are significant challenges to
obtaining continuous quality measurements over the ice sheet
surface of the Antarctic, e.g., due to the impact of the snow albedo
and of the extreme operating conditions. For that reason, WMO is
committed to continue bringing together the international
community of experts engaged in maintaining observing stations in
Antarctica as part of its Global Cryosphere Watch https://
globalcryospherewatch.org/, to address specific observations,
instrumentation, challenges, e.g., measurements of snow depth, air
temperature, fast ice, etc.
Antarctic Climate Services
WMO, with partners, continued efforts to establish the Antarctic
Polar Regional Climate Centre (AntRCC) Network, building on
lessons learned from the establishment of the Arctic RCC Network.
The AntRCC aims at producing coherent and harmonized climate
products and services over the Antarctic domain and establishing a
dialogue platform between stakeholders and users of climate
information. WMO Member states (also signatories to the Antarctic
Treaty) that earlier expressed interest in contributing to the
AntRCC-Network are finalizing the AntRCC-Network structure,
agreeing on technical and organizational arrangements, developing
mechanisms for engaging with partners, and developing a roadmap
towards the AntRCC-Network implementation, including the
initiation of the demonstration phase. WMO will continue providing
updates and engaging with Treaty Parties as relevant.
Antarctic Maritime Safety Services
Providing maritime safety services for vessels in the Antarctic is
crucial. For this, WMO plays a key role in supporting the National
Meteorological and Hydrological Services responsible for provision
of meteorological maritime safety information as required under the
International Convention for Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS).
Supporting these efforts, the International Ice Charting Working
Group (IICWG), comprising the world’s national ice services,
promotes maritime safety by coordinating all aspects of operational
sea ice and iceberg information services. Task teams of the IICWG
are presently focused on aligning key Southern Ocean sea ice and
iceberg products with those of the North Atlantic, improving sea ice
and iceberg detection using multi-spectral Synthetic Aperture
Radar, developing new ice hazard risk products to augment
traditional ice charts and support the IMO's Polar Code requirement
for voyage-specific risk assessments, and working with maritime
training institutes to provide better tools for teaching mariners
about sea ice and icebergs.
Further to this, the WMO-IMO Worldwide Met-Ocean Information
and Warning Service (WWMIWS) includes METAREAS coordinated
by Argentina, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand and Chile, each
of which covers a portion of the southern polar region, providing
sea ice information including icebergs in the same way that the
METAREAs coordinated by Canada, Norway and Russian Federation
do for the northern polar region.
WMO is developing the updated Maritime Service description on Ice
navigation service (MS 13). The MS 13 is to provide ice navigation
information to maritime users in the vicinity of ice infested regions.
WMO and IMO are also preparing for the 2nd WMO-IMO
Symposium on Extreme Maritime Weather, expected in September
2024 at the IMO Headquarters in London, at which discussion
topics will include polar themes for safe navigation.
High-level Publications of Interest
WMO produces several Antarctic and climate related science
publications. Just to highlight three high-profile publications:
WMO Statement on the State of the Global Climate
Each year WMO produces a high-level “Statement on the State of
the Global Climate” with key partners, including SCAR. These
statements are presented at the Conference of Parties (COP)
meetings and other fora and are available in English, Spanish,
Russian, French, Chinese and Arabic. Copies of the 2022 provisional
report can be downloaded from: https://library.wmo.int/
doc_num.php?explnum_id=11359
United in Science
The United in Science report is a multi-organization high-level
compilation that presents the very latest scientific data and findings
related to climate change, to inform policy and decision-makers.
See:
https://public.wmo.int/en/resources/united_in_science
10 New Insights in Climate Science
WCRP co-produces the “10 New Insights in Climate Science” with
Future Earth and the Earth League. The 2022 edition was launched
at COP27 and the 2023 version is currently being prepared. For
further details see: https://10insightsclimate.science/.
WMO continues to look forward to a positive, mutually beneficial
engagement with Treaty Parties in Antarctic weather and climate
observations, services and research. For further queries please
contact Mike Sparrow (msparrow@wmo.int) in the first instance.
