Slow Antarctic Tourism
Slow Antarctic tourism
Information Paper submitted by ASOC
Summary
This document introduces the concept of “slow tourism” and
discusses how it could be applied to Antarctica. Antarctic tourism
needs to slow down to remain viable in the longer term, and that
this can be achieved without adversely impacting the tourism
industry. We do not attempt to fully conceptualize Antarctic slow
tourism or its practical implementation, but rather to explore
potential ways forward that resonate with current policy discussions
around new paradigms and a comprehensive framework for
Antarctic tourism. Important elements of this framework for ATCPs
to consider would include:
Encouraging low impact modalities of tourism – slow tourism being
(only) one of them;
Ensuring consistent assessment of tourism activities;
Developing dedicated programs for monitoring of tourism impacts;
Expanding area protection under Annex V; and
Evaluating the effectiveness of existing tourism regulation.
Introduction
At ATCM XLIV in May 2022 ASOC suggested slow tourism as a
potential lower impact modality of Antarctic tourism,ATCM XLIV
Final Report, paragraphs 314-316. ASOC introduced an earlier
version of this paper at the informal workshop “The future of
Antarctic tourism: towards a strategic vision and policy” jointly
convened by France and the Netherlands (8-10 March 2023, Paris).
and an adjunct to existing ASOC proposals for managing the
impacts of Antarctic tourism. See also ASOC 2018, 2019, 2022.
Slow tourism “accentuates sustainable tourism practices as well as
tourism at a reduced pace”, and is a potential alternative to the fast-
pace of living that is seen as the norm, including in travel and
leisure. Klarin et al, 2023. In this document we discuss slow tourism
as it could be applied to tourism in Antarctica. Cajiao & Leung
(2022) suggest that the inherent challenges of voyaging in the polar
environment “may facilitate what the academic literature refers to
as a slow tourism experience”. We also suggest a working definition
of slow tourism.
ASOC suggests that exploring the notion of Antarctic slow tourism
presents an opportunity to rethink how tourism is conducted in
Antarctica, and offers a flexible framework within which to
reconceptualize the tourist experience with respect to collective
ecological impacts, travelling in tune with natural rhythms, and
forging a deeper connection with place and human history in
Antarctica. This, in turn, may contribute to the industry’s stated
aspiration of creating lifelong Antarctic ambassadors, IAATO
bylaws, II - Section H – “To create a corps of ambassadors for the
continued protection of Antarctica through education and the
opportunity to experience the continent first hand.” https://
iaato.org/about-iaato/our-mission/bylaws/. and may also support
the Parties’ desire to emphasize forms of tourism that contribute to
the enrichment and education of visitors. Resolution 7 (2009) -
ATCM XXXII - CEP XII, Baltimore.
What is slow tourism?
Slow tourism is part of a global ‘slow’ movement, which began with
the development of ‘slow food’ in 1986, and has expanded to
include Cittaslow (slow cities), slow tourism and other ‘slow’
activities.
There is no single definition of slow tourism in the academic
literature. Lowry & Lee, 2016; Calzati & de Salvo, 2018. Broadly,
“slowness in tourism appears as an alternative to fast, massified
tourism and highlights a sense of responsibility towards the
environment combined with a search for a meaningful experience
for tourists”. Calzati & de Salvo, 2018. From this anti-definition
some core principles emerge such as “taking time”, “being in tune
with a sense of place” and seeking quality of experience over
quantity, creating an enriched, authentic experience of place
through “not just sightseeing, but rather by using all five senses”.
Matos, 2004. Slow tourism involves a personal choice as well, in
that tourists already have an ethical commitment built into their
travels. Lowry & Lee , 2016 and references. In response to the
zeitgeist of tourism growth and diversification – globally as well as
in Antarctica – slow tourism connects to a larger paradigm of
tourism that includes degrowth and deceleration, and is an
alternative to mass tourism and overtourism. Matos, 2004; Hall,
2009; Calzati & di Salvo, 2018.
We propose this working definition: “Antarctic slow tourism is a
form of tourism that facilitates a personal connection and lasting
attachment to Antarctica through intentionally slower paced
activities, within a framework that places Antarctic environmental
protection at its core.” Exactly how Antarctic slow tourism could
look in practice is an open question, and we have collated some
preliminary suggestions in the section below as a starting point for
further discussion.
The case for Antarctic slow tourism
Under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty environmental protection shall be a “fundamental
consideration” in the planning and conducting of human activities,
and ecological sustainability should be a priority of tourism
management.
While a range of environmental protections have been put in place
by both Antarctic Treaty Parties and the International Association
of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) to minimize the impact of
tourism operations, it is unclear whether these measures are
sufficient to protect Antarctic ecosystems at a time of significant
change driven by a warming climate and rapidly growing human
presence including, but not limited to tourism. This is particularly
the case for the Antarctic Peninsula.
In recent decades Antarctic tourism has grown in response to
market demand, with a diversification of adventure and other
activities offered both on site and on board. See e.g. Roura, 2012.
Means of travel to and within Antarctica are also diversifying. In
some locations semi-permanent camps support a range of land-
based tourism activities, accessed by air or overland travel. Some
cruise vessels offer tours in submersible crafts, or helicopter
transfers to emperor penguin colonies. This trend towards
diversification is likely to continue.
The expectations of tourists visiting Antarctica can be high, many of
them having anticipated their visit for many years or, in some cases,
decades. Some expect to see and do in a short Antarctic trip more
than others would in years of Antarctic service (e.g. scientists or
ship’s crew). Unrealistic demands can result in overambitious
itineraries and frantic schedules, with a cascading range of potential
impacts including passenger experience and operational safety.
Implementing slow tourism in Antarctica
Many aspects of Antarctic tourism today are fixed and largely
unchangeable, even in the context of climate change: the location of
Antarctica as a destination; points of departure to Antarctica; the
availability of sites that enable safe and rewarding visitation by
groups of tourists; time available to travel to, from and within
Antarctica; the duration of seasons, days and nights. Despite these
conditioning factors, new travel patterns, tourism experiences and
behaviours more in tune with natural rhythms may be possible,
resulting in a deeper experience of place.
Under “slow tourism”, many activities would be maintained but
“slowed down” and simplified. There would be fewer but
potentially longer landings, allowing a deeper experience of places
and reducing local transport, resulting in less marine noise and a
lower likelihood of collisions with whales, among other benefits.
ASOC understands that some shipborne tour operators have already
considered or adopted a “one landing per day” policy.
Hybrid activities could also be developed. For instance, at least one
operator of shipborne tourism has tested the use of so-called “base
camps” in which a ship remains in a certain area for some days and
serves as a hub for the conduct of activities on board, at sea or
onshore. The focus of the trip is the activities, which are not subject
to additional charges, rather than cruising around and conducting
landings (although those activities are carried out as well). https://
oceanwide-expeditions.com/to-do/outdoor-activities/basecamp-
trips.
Additional activities could also be offered to enhance connection
with Antarctica, including educational, artistic and citizen science
activities. Emphasis could be placed on the appreciation of sensory
aspects of Antarctica that are not site-specific, such as cold, light or
silence. These could be “rediscovered” through activities such as
guided cold water immersions, photography classes, painting
sessions, and silent landings.
Closing remarks
We suggest that Antarctic tourism needs to slow down to remain
viable in the longer term, and that this can be achieved without
adversely impacting the tourism industry.
We have made some preliminary suggestions above, and encourage
Parties and IAATO to consider these ideas, which we aim to develop
further. Roura & Gallo, in prep. However, there is no panacea to
managing rapid tourism growth, and slow tourism is no exception.
Potential “slower tourism” modalities – such as “base camps” –
would need to be subject to impact assessments and mitigation
measures to ensure that they do not inadvertently create greater
impacts or problems than those it is trying to solve.
Developing a new paradigm for lower-impact slow tourism would
require a suite of policy actions that build on the existing corpus of
Antarctic Treaty system instruments and previous experience but
also go beyond those. Indeed, it requires the development of a
“comprehensive framework” for Antarctic tourism. Important
elements of this framework for ATCPs to consider would include:
Encouraging low impact modalities of tourism – slow tourism being
(only) one of them;
Ensuring consistent assessment of tourism activities;
Developing dedicated programs for monitoring of tourism impacts;
Expanding area protection under Annex V; and
Evaluating the effectiveness of existing tourism regulation.
References
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC). 2018. Anticipated
growth of Antarctic tourism. ATCM XLI - CEP XXI, IP061.
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC). 2019. Antarctic
tourism: Using lessons learned to inform effective, proactive
management. ATCM XLII – CEP XXII, IP128.
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC). 2022. Antarctic
tourism policies after the “pandemic pause”. ATCM XLIV - CEP
XXIV, IP091.
Cajiao, D. & Leung. F.-F. 2022. Experiencing Antarcticness: Slow
tourists, fast penguins and timeless landscapes. In: Antarcticness
Inspirations and imaginaries. In: Kelman, I. (editor). UCL press. pp.
210-223.-
Hall, C.M. 2009. Degrowing Tourism: Décroissance, sustainable
consumption and steady-state
tourism, Anatolia, 20:1, 46-61, DOI: 10.1080/13032917.2009.10518894
Klarin, A., Park, E. , Xiao, Q., & Kim, S. 2023. Time to transform the
way we travel?: A conceptual framework for slow tourism and
travel research. Tourism Management Perspectives 46. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tmp.2023.101100.
Lowry, L. L. & Lee, M., "CittaSlow, slow sities, slow food: Searching
for a model for the development of slow Tourism" (2016). Travel
and Tourism Research Association: Advancing Tourism Research
Globally. 40. https://scholarworks.umass.edu/ttra/2011/Visual/40
Matos, R. (2004). Can slow tourism bring new life to Alpine
regions? In K. Weiermair & C. Mathies (Eds.), The tourism and
leisure industry: Shaping the future (pp. 93-103). London:
Hawthorn Hospitality Press.
Roura, R.M. & Gallo, N. (in prep.) Antarctic slow tourism
Roura, R.M. 2012. Being there: Examining the behaviour of
Antarctic tourists through their blogs. Polar Research 31,
10905, http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/polar.v31i0.10905
