The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
(COMNAP) Annual Report 2022/23
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs
(COMNAP) Annual Report 2022/23 April 2022–June 2023
Highlights
Key Outcomes of COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) 34
(2022)
Online on 8−16 June, & 21, 25−27 July 2022. Plenary business,
regional and expert group sessions were the main components. 266
representatives from Member and Observer programmes and four
invited expert organisations participated. The AGM considered
Canada’s application for COMNAP Membership. After discussion,
the National Antarctic Programme of Canada, as represented by
lead agency Polar Knowledge Canada (PKC), was accepted by
consensus as a COMNAP Member. The AGM recognised the Arctic &
Antarctic research programme being facilitated through PKC,
including through their world-class Canadian High Arctic Research
Station (CHARS). COMNAP Membership is 32 Member and 5
Observer programmes (see Attachment Table 1).
Programmes freely exchanged and further developed their expertise
during Expert Group forums (see Attachment Table 2c): Air
Operations, Advancing Critical Technologies, Safety, Education,
Outreach & Training, Marine Platforms, Environmental Protection,
Science Facilitation, and the Joint Expert Group on Human Biology
and Medicine (JEGHBM). COMNAP Members endorsed a draft
policy “Welcoming the Power of Diversity within our Membership”
with a commitment to contribute to positive change and ensure
everyone who works in Antarctica feels safe, respected and
welcomed.
Regional sessions (see Attachment Table 2d) were: Peninsula, Ross
Sea, East Antarctica, Larsemann Hills Management Group, Dronning
Maud Land, and High Plateau. National Antarctic Programmes
exchanged 2022/23 pre-season information with most confirming
plans to return to pre-pandemic levels of activity. Through
collaboration, National Antarctic Programmes are actively
supporting and coordinating international efforts to provide
globally important data from all Antarctic regions from terrestrial,
marine and atmospheric environments. Antarctic research is
enabled by a multitude of key scientific infrastructure, facilities and
support platforms operated by many countries.
Projects related to modernisation of aging infrastructure that will
improve environmental performance and support to science
continued. Route-proved land traverse operations in support of deep
field science, including those related to recovery and return of
“oldest ice” cores were confirmed. Several programmes highlighted
advanced capabilities related to new icebreaker class, research
vessels that dramatically increase marine research possibilities.
Advancements on COMNAP projects were noted and the Antarctic
Aviation Project completed. The AGM acknowledged the
outstanding work and commitment of all persons who contribute to
the implementation of their countries’ Antarctic strategies
recognising that each persons’ contribution matters and is
fundamental to our collective success.
The series of COMNAP Townhall Meetings (online April 2022) were
instrumental for pre-season information sharing. In addition to the
challenges that the global pandemic presented, availability of fuel
for ship operations was identified as a challenge for the 2022/23
Antarctic season, recruitment of personnel for Antarctic deployment
was identified as more difficult than usual, and the projection of
significantly increased tourist numbers, particularly in the Antarctic
Peninsula, region was noted.
COVID-19 Preparedness Continued
We worked together to navigate our way through the global
pandemic. During the early days of the outbreak, COMNAP
developed guidelines that adopted an elimination strategy and all
programmes’ commitment to, and strict implementation of, that
strategy gave assurances to governments that enabled transiting of
Antarctic expeditioners at a time when almost all international
travel was cancelled and borders were officially closed to all foreign
nationals. The guidelines also ensured there were no COVID-19-
related deaths in Antarctica within National Antarctic Programmes.
As vaccines became more readily available and immunity increased,
risk reduced and the world moved from elimination to mitigation
practices. COMNAP considered this move carefully. On 28 July
2022, COMNAP Members adopted the “COMNAP COVID-19
Outbreak Mitigation & Management Guidelines for the 2022/23
Antarctic Season”. The revised strategy recognised that cases would
be identified in National Antarctic Programme personnel in the
Antarctic Treaty Area but that risk of morbidity and mortality had
significantly decreased. National Antarctic Programmes committed
to strict hygiene practices and did risk analysis and response based
on their specific set of circumstances. The mitigation strategy has
proved very successful with National Antarctic Programmes
reporting no loss of life in Antarctica due to COVID-19.
We continue to assess our guidance to Programmes based on WHO
information. The COMNAP COVID-19 ad hoc Subcommittee
remains convened and the JEGHBM stands ready to provide advice
including through telemedicine to any Programme that requests
assistance for any medical circumstance. COMNAP continues to
share best practice and technical information related to the
prevention of reverse zoonosis from direct human contact to
Antarctic species.
International Collaboration
The global pandemic brought with it the need to reduce our normal
levels of international collaborations. There is now an opportunity
to return to high levels.
International collaboration is a hallmark of Antarctic activity and is
not limited to scientific research collaborations. Collaboration
extends to vessels, to operations, logistics, transport of personnel
utilizing aircraft and to opportunities for collaboration and
exchange of personnel at home institutions and labs to name only a
few. National Antarctic Programmes collaborate on a range of
education activities, on Antarctic weather forecasting, Search &
Rescue (SAR) coordination and response, and maintain and open
data repositories and sample collections to international experts.
COMNAP is also collaborating with SCAR and IAATO on a range of
topics and issues including to support and promote the early career
persons’ fellowship schemes, and since July 2022, on the
heightened risk of avian flu presenting in Antarctic species (See
joint SCAR, COMNAP, IAATO IP to this ATCM for further
information).
All these collaborations are not a snapshot in time, but are part of
long-term continuous cooperation in the spirit of the Antarctic
Treaty (see examples in COMNAP ATCM XXII (1998) IP7 “Scientific
and Operational Cooperation” and COMNAP ATCM XXVII (2014)
IP047 “International Scientific and Logistic Collaboration in
Antarctica”). The COMNAP meetings provide the opportunities to
build on these strong collaborative relationships and identify ways
to increase cooperative activities for the benefit of all based on
trust.
COMNAP Projects (For the full list of Projects and Project
Managers, see Attachment Table 2b.)
SAR Workshop 5 (2023) (See COMNAP IP to this ATCM for further
information). The COMNAP Antarctic SAR Workshop 5, will be held
in Hobart, Australia, 23 & 24 June 2023, hosted by the Australian
Antarctic Division. All RCCs with Antarctic responsibilities have
confirmed their participation, including through Steering
Committee membership.
Earthquake, Tsunami, Volcanic, Natural Hazards Events Awareness
(See COMNAP IP to this ATCM for further information). COMNAP
convened (online) “Towards a regional network for seismic
surveillance in the Peninsula region” on 18 October 2022 attended
by participants from ten National Antarctic Programmes. The aim
was to discuss the intention to create a network to connect
currently placed seismic systems in the Antarctic Peninsula. An
April 2023 online meeting will serve to advance plan for further in-
person discussion during the COMNAP AGM 35 (June 2023).
COMNAP has reviewed our “Tsunami Awareness in Antarctica”
(July 2014) brochure. The updated brochure will be finalised at
COMNAP AGM 35 and distributed thereafter.
Antarctic Research Fellowships https://www.comnap.aq/comnap-
antarctic-fellowships COMNAP provided support for two early
career persons: 1. COMNAP Antarctic Research Fellowship 2022 to
Aanchal Jain (Universidad Mayor, Chile) “Policy analysis to curb
plastic pollution in Antarctic environments”, working with the
British Antarctic Survey, United Kingdom. 2. Joint IAATO/
COMNAP Antarctic Fellowship 2022 to Antonio Polo Sánchez
(Universidad de Salamanca, Spain) “Constraining the eruptive
mechanisms of Three Sisters, Orca and Deception Island volcanoes
(Bransfield Strait, Antarctica) through Noble Gases isotopic ratios.
Implications for Geochemical Monitoring (BRANSVOLC)”, working
with the National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology,
Palermo, Italy.
COMNAP Products and Tools
Website & Database
The move of the COMNAP website, database and Member’s only
documents to their new platforms is complete. The database and
Member’s only documents require username/password, with
various portions of the data shared with the Antarctic Treaty
Secretariat. The website is public with publicly available data also
available from:
https://www.comnap.aq/antarctic-facilities-information https://
github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/comnap-antarctic-facilities/
releases https://github.com/PolarGeospatialCenter/comnap-
antarctic-vessels.
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (e-AFIM)
COMNAP e-AFIM general information
e-AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published in PDF
format as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as per
ATCM Resolution 6 (2021). Releases were: 21-04 (15 March 2022);
22-01 (15 September 2022); 22-02 (20 October 2022); and 22-03
(15 March 2023).
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS) COMNAP Asset Tracking
System general information
CATS is a voluntary information exchange system developed by the
Australian Antarctic Division to display positional information for
situation-awareness of vessels and aircraft. For the 2022/23, CATS
contained positions for 63 assets. We are exploring a new system as
a replacement for CATS.
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
ATOM is the collection of contact details to which ATCM
Recommendation X-3 refers. Access is via the COMNAP database
and the CATS. Update of the ATOM is in real-time, meaning, when
a National Antarctic Programme updates their information in the
COMNAP database, the field is automatically updated in the online
(downloadable) ATOM.
SAR As per ATCM Resolution 4 (2013), COMNAP provides a SAR
webpage of all RCC contacts.
_______
www.comnap.aq | @comnap1 | YouTube Channel: https://
www.youtube.com/channel/UCjzR1uM_ZP62eEy6QLCbHxw
Attachment: Statistics
Formally established in September 1988 to develop and promote
best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the
Antarctic; 2023 marks the 35th year of COMNAP. Our
headquarters, the COMNAP Secretariat, moved to new facilities on
the campus of the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand (MOU to Sept 2027).
Table 1: Our Membership
Member programmes from 32 Antarctic Treaty and Environmental
Protocol countries:
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
China
Czech Republic
Ecuador
Finland
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Peru
Poland
Republic of Belarus
Republic of Korea
Russian Federation
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Türkiye
In addition, five Observer programmes from:
Colombia
Malaysia
Portugal
Switzerland
Venezuela
Table 2: Our Leadership
a. The Executive Committee (EXCOM) is six elected officers plus the
appointed Executive Secretary:
EXCOM Officers
Topic Portfolios
Term
Chair: Antonio Quesada (CPE)
Science Facilitation, Medical
2021–24
Vice Chairs:
Charlton Clark (AAD)
Air Operations, Marine Platforms
2021–23
Gen Hashida (NIPR)
Environmental Protection, Marine Platforms
2020–23
Pavel Kapler (CARP)
Advancing Critical Technologies, Safety
2021–23
Dragomir Mateev (BAI)
Education, Outreach & Training, Safety
2021–24
Patricia Ortúzar (DNA)
Air Operations, Environmental Protection
2021–24
Executive Secretary: Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Medical
to 2027
b. COMNAP Projects:
Project Leaders
Project
Robb Clifton (AAD)
COMNAP Asset Tracking System (CATS)
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore &
Tim Heitland (AWI)
COVID-19 Outbreak Mitigation & Management Response; includes
the COVID-19 ad hoc Subcommittee
Andrea Colombo
Database & Document Migration
Andrea Colombo
Earthquake, Tsunami & Volcanic Events Awareness
Agnieszka Kruszewska (PAS)
Efficiency Task Force: Peninsula (Phase 2)
Charlton Clark (AAD)
Antarctic Search & Rescue (SAR) Workshop 5
c. COMNAP Expert Groups
Expert Group Leaders
Expert Group Topic
Özgün Oktar (TÜBITAK) & Mike Rose (BAS)
Advancing Critical Technologies
Rod Arnold (BAS) & Sven Lidström (NPI)
Air Operations; includes the Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) Working Group
Ceisha Poirot (ANZ)
Environmental Protection
Andrea Peña-Aguirre (INACH)
Education, Outreach & Training
Giichiro Ohno (NIPR)
Joint Expert Group on Human Biology & Medicine
Miguel Ojeda (CPE)
Marine Platforms
Simon Trotter (ANZ)
Safety; includes Equity, Diversity, Inclusivity, & Harassment
Prevention
Robb Clifton (AAD)
Science Facilitation
d. COMNAP Regional Break-out Groups
Regional Group Conveners
Collaboration Region (informal)
Uwe Nixdorf (AWI)
Dronning Maud Land
Charlton Clark (AAD)
East Antarctica
Margaret Knuth (NSF USAP)
High Plateau
Shailendra Saini (NCPOR)
Larsemann Hills Management Group
Agnieszka Kruszewska (PAS)
Peninsula
Simon Trotter (ANZ)
Ross Sea
Table 3: Meetings
From 1 April 2022 through 1 June 2023
COMNAP Townhall Meetings (online): 20, 21, 27 & 28 April 2022.
COMNAP AGM XXXIV (2022) (online): including Expert Group
Topical Discussion Forums on 8, 9, 10, 15 & 16 June 2022 and 25
July 2022; and Regional Break-out Group Discussions on 25, 26 &
27 July; and Plenary sessions on 27 July 2022.
COMNAP EXCOM Meetings: 3 & 4 June 2022 (in-person, Madrid,
Spain); 27 September 2022 (online); 1 December 2022 (online); 7
March 2023 (online).
Upcoming
Full information on all the 2023 COMNAP Meetings can be found at
https://www.comnap.aq/annual-general-meeting.
The COMNAP SAR Workshop 5, Hobart, Australia, 23 & 24 June
2023.
The joint COMNAP & SCAR EXCOM Meeting (hybrid format),
Hobart, Australia, 25 June 2023.
The 20th COMNAP Symposium “Innovations & Collaborations” will
be held as a hybrid event. Video and in-person presentations,
posters and keynote presentations with a resulting Proceeding
publication, Hobart, Australia, 26 June 2023.
The 35th COMNAP AGM, Hobart, Australia, 27–29 June 2023.
The 36th COMNAP AGM (2024), hosted by Dirección Nacional del
Antártico, Argentina, tentative dates are 14, 15 & 16 August 2024.
Table 4: COMNAP representatives/participants in other fora
Antonio Quesada, COMNAP Chair & MNAP Spanish Polar
Committee (CPE), invited radio interview “Comunidad científica de
la Antártida” (Antarctic Scientific Community), with Sonia Ramos
(CPE), https://www.rtve.es/play/audios/a-golpe-de-bit/golpe-bit-
comunidad-cientifica-antartida-20-12-22/6760883/, 20 December
2022.
Patricia Ortúzar, Vice Chair, participated in and tabled COMNAP
information at the Reunión de Administradores de Programas
Antárticos Latinoamericanos (RAPAL) Meeting XXXIII, 23–25
August 2022; COMNAP delegate to the 23rd International Ice
Charting Working Group (IICWG) Meeting, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
26–30 September 2022.
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore, Executive Secretary, co-author (with
CCAMLR Secretariat and IAATO Secretariat, Lisa Kelley presenting
author) on “Vessel Patterns/Trends during a typical Antarctic
Season” to the 23rd International Ice Charting Working Group
(IICWG) Meeting, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 30 September 2022;
Invited panellist on the “Days of Ice Asian National Antarctic
Programmes in Antarctica” public engagement, 3 October 2022;
Invited presenter “The Role of COMNAP”, 7 October 2022, New
Zealand Antarctic Society public engagement; Attendee " The Future
of Work and Workforces In The Antarctic And Southern Ocean"
Conference, IMAS, Hobart, Australia, 1 December 2022; Attendee
“World Meteorological Organization (WMO) World Weather
Research Programme (WWRP) Polar Research Project Plenary
Discussions”, Hobart, Australia, 18 April 2022.
John Guldahl, DMNAP Norwegian Polar Institute, COMNAP
representative to the SCAR RINGS Action Group Workshop, 27–30
June 2022.
Agnieszka Kruszewska, MNAP Poland National Antarctic
Programme, COMNAP representative on the SCAR Equity, Diversity
& Inclusion Action Group and invited speaker at the SCAR Open
Science Conference Workshop on Inclusive Collaborations in
Antarctic Research”, co-author of “Welcoming the Power of
Diversity in our Membership”, 9 August 2022.
Dirk Mengedoht, Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for
Polar and Marine Research, COMNAP representative to the Forum
of Arctic Research Operators (FARO) at the Arctic Science Summit
Week (ASSW), presented “COMNAP: An Update”, 17 February
2023, Vienna, Austria.
Sonia Ramos, Comité Polar Español, COMNAP representative to
“The future of Antarctic tourism: time to adopt a common vision
and to build a basic policy program” Workshop, Paris, France, 8–10
March 2023.
