Advancing Antarctic Research with Canadian Space Science and
Technology
Advancing Antarctic Research with
Canadian Space Science and Technology
Information Paper submitted by Canada
Summary
The Canadian space program supports scientific research on
Antarctica through the development of key technologies, knowledge
and expertise. This Information Paper describes important
contributions of the Canadian space program that have enabled
Antarctic research across a variety of priority science research
areas. The paper discusses how open and accessible Canadian
satellite data contributes to international collaboration and
coordination on Antarctic research, including environmental
monitoring and climate change. It also outlines additional activities
being conducted by the Canadian space program that may have a
potential impact on future Antarctic studies and research.
Introduction
Since the creation of the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) in 1989,
Canadian atmospheric and Earth observation satellites have played
an important role in monitoring the Polar Regions. Satellite Earth
observation (SEO) data has, for decades, offered the only
continuous source of scientific observations of the challenging and
changing Antarctic environment. Canadian satellites have provided
the international scientific community with a rich source of
atmospheric and geophysical information, expertise and knowledge
that has documented environmental changes, enabled space science,
and advanced the understanding of Antarctic research.
Canadian Space Programs and Capabilities supporting Antarctic
Research
Data collected from Canada’s RADARSAT satellites has contributed
to consistent monitoring and mapping of Antarctica and support
Antarctic science and research for over 28 years. The CSA has
collected a large archive of images over the Polar Regions,
providing imaging of the Arctic Ocean, Greenland ice sheet and
Antarctic ice sheet, which has provided unique comparative
datasets for assessing climatic conditions around both poles. 
Launched in 1995, RADARSAT-1 (R-1) was Canada’s first Earth
observation satellite equipped with a powerful C-band synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) that captured high quality images of the Earth
during the day and night and in all-weather conditions, including
through clouds, smoke and haze. As part of the Antarctic Mapping
Mission (AMM), a collaboration between the CSA and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), R-1 images were
acquired between September and October 1997. The SAR images
that were collected were instrumental in developing the first
complete mosaic of Antarctica and supported the scientific
community’s understanding of the geological and glaciological
features of the continent. SAR images collected by R-1 were also
critical to monitoring glaciers, ice sheets, sea ice cover, seasonal
changes, ice shelves, and coastline during a period of increased
Antarctic ice. In April 2019, Canada made over 710,000 historical
R-1 SAR images of the Earth openly and freely available to
researchers, industry and the global public to use in support of
international climate change research.
In December 2007, Canada launched RADARSAT-2 (R-2). Similar to
its predecessor, R-2’s orbital inclination, field-of-view, and
advanced SAR instrument have allowed consistent coverage of
Antarctica. In 2008, the CSA collected more than 3,150 images of
the continent comprising a single pole-to-coast map covering all of
Antarctica. The full dataset is available free of charge
for science and research purposes and has contributed to the
significant scientific discoveries that require continuous coverage of
the continent, including the landmark discovery of unique features
revealing direction and velocity of ice in Antarctica during the
International Polar Year 2007-2008.
The RADARSAT Constellation Mission (RCM), launched in 2019, is
Canada’s newest generation of Earth observation satellites. The trio
of satellites are equipped with advanced SAR and Automatic
Identification System (AIS) payloads. Designed to allow daily access
of approximately 90% of the Earth’s surface, the system offers
Antarctic coverage up to four times daily. The RCM continues to
provide satellite Earth observation coverage over Antarctica for sea
ice and glacier monitoring, serving as a key data source for
international science activities involving Antarctica.
Canadian satellites monitoring the atmosphere of Polar Regions
include Canada’s SCISAT satellite and the Canadian OSIRIS optical
instrument on-board the Swedish Odin satellite. These missions
monitor ozone and ozone depleting substances (ODSs), all major
greenhouse gases (GHGs), including Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
more atmospheric trace gases than any other satellite worldwide,
and complement the air quality observations of Canada’s MOPITT
instrument on NASA’s Terra satellite. SCISAT and OSIRIS have been
instrumental in detecting ozone depletion (or the “ozone hole”)
above Antarctica. With over 20 years of datasets that are free and
openly available, Canada’s atmospheric missions contribute to
accurate global monitoring efforts, improved climate and air quality
models, ozone recovery, and Antarctic studies from researchers
around the world.
Lastly, through the CSA's Geospace Observatory (GO) Canada
program and its predecessors, scientists have taken advantage of
Canada’s northern location to deploy more than 120 sophisticated
space weather instruments. These instruments gather data on one of
the most active regions of near-Earth space and have enabled a
significant increase in Canadian knowledge and expertise to better
predict and respond to potential threats and impacts from solar
disturbances that can affect the Earth. Due to a unique magnetic
connection between Canada (in particular the Northern part of the
province of Quebec) and Antarctica, instruments deployed in
Canada’s High Arctic and in eastern Canada experience the same
space weather as Antarctica, making Canadian instruments and
expertise highly relevant to Antarctic space weather research.
International Scientific Cooperation and Contributions
Openly available long-term datasets from Canadian satellite data
collected over Antarctic ice sheets continue to enable international
collaboration and coordination through the Polar Space Task Group,
established under the auspices of the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO). Ice sheets are acknowledged by the WMO and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) as an Essential Climate Variable (ECV), and significant
progress has been made in the generation of global climate products
and derived information using Canada’s RADARSAT satellites and
heritage space assets.
The long duration and consistent quality of Canadian atmospheric
measurements and resulting datasets have historical value and play
an important role in international efforts, as well as in the
development of ECV data products for ozone and all major GHGs.
The measurements inform and support monitoring for multilateral
environmental agreements, legally binding international treaties,
and international assessment reports.
Supplemental Activities with Benefits to Antarctic Research
Canadian innovations in the Arctic have brought about support for
technological development in remote regions that have had an
impact on life sciences, health sciences and the human and social
sciences. The CSA’s Naurvik project, “the growing place” in
Inuktitut, is a community-led hydroponic food production system
located in Gjoa Haven, Nunavut. The project provides
expertise in hydroponics, controlled environment food production
and environmental control systems powered almost entirely by
renewable energy sources. The technologies developed through the
Naurvik project will assist in developing high-quality and fresh
produce in an extreme, frigid climate that will benefit many remote
communities, as well as astronauts on long-duration space missions.
In 2021, the CSA created the Health Beyond initiative to identify
and develop innovative, relevant and sustainable solutions to
healthcare challenges experienced by astronauts in deep-space
missions. The initiative aims to address existing healthcare
challenges that are shared between remote and medically isolated
populations, including polar communities on Earth, and future
astronauts in outer space.
Lastly, Canada is exploring options to develop new sources of SEO
data and expertise that may further advance Antarctic science. For
example, the CSA is exploring a potential satellite mission that
would provide new observations with unprecedented frequency and
density for weather, GHGs, air quality and space weather over
northern latitudes using two satellites in a highly elliptical orbit,
with datasets and scientific knowledge that could be employed for
comparative Antarctic studies. The CSA is also exploring a potential
satellite mission that would measure snow cover in the Arctic,
including permafrost warming and thawing under a changing
climate, as a key component of the water cycle, which could be
leveraged for Antarctic observations during the Arctic summer.
Supporting Antarctic Science and Research from Outer Space
Canada’s advancements in space science and technology
significantly contribute to Antarctic research, benefitting
researchers, industry and the global community. Through Canadian
observations and space assets, Canada will continue to support
international collaboration and coordination to monitor, and
enhance the understanding of Antarctica’s unique and challenging
environment.
End Notes
