Update on the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan and major initiatives
Update on the Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action
Plan and major initiatives
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan update
of 2022 affirms Australia’s commitment to the Antarctic Treaty
system and to Antarctic science, protection and environmental
stewardship. This paper highlights new measures and reports on the
progress of major initiatives, including: the state-of-the-art
icebreaker, RSV Nuyina, Australia’s traverse capability to support
drilling for a million-year ice core, and krill research. Looking
forward over the next five years, the updated Strategy and Action
Plan identifies a number of activities to further strengthen
opportunities for Antarctic science.
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan update
of 2022
In 2022, Australia reviewed and updated the Australian Antarctic
Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan (the Strategy and Action Plan),
which was first released in 2016. The Strategy and Action Plan sets
out Australia’s Antarctic interests and vision for future engagement
in Antarctica. The 2022 update further strengthens Australia’s
logistic and scientific capabilities in the region, and reaffirms
Australia’s strong commitment to the Antarctic Treaty system to
ensure Antarctica remains valued, protected and understood.
New measures in the 2022 update to the Strategy and Action Plan
include:
an expansion of Australia’s scientific capabilities, including:
research focused on Antarctic ice sheet science to build global
understanding of climate change impacts
new research to improve our understanding of Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean’s role in the global climate system supported by
logistical capability, including new longrange helicopters
logistical shipping support to allow Australia’s new icebreaker, RSV
Nuyina, to focus on extended scientific voyages, and
marine science in the Southern Ocean and a new krill aquarium in
Hobart.
greater support for Australia’s environmental management
including a ‘Cleaner Antarctica Strategy’, and
support for Hobart as a gateway to East Antarctica.
The updated Strategy and Action Plan can be found on the
Australian Antarctic Division’s website.
Updates on major initiatives
Consistent with the updated Strategy and Action Plan, Australia is
continuing with major initiatives announced in 2016, including:
making use of Australia’s new, state-of-the-art icebreaker, RSV
Nuyina, long-term planning for infrastructure upgrades to our
Antarctic research stations, contributing to the international efforts
to retrieve a million-year ice core, and development of a state-of-
the-art krill research facility in Hobart. Information Paper 71
outlines highlights from the Australian Antarctic Science Program in
2022-23.
RSV Nuyina
Figure 1: RSV Nuyina on the Derwent River, Hobart
Australia’s Antarctic research and resupply vessel, RSV Nuyina, was
delivered to Hobart in October 2021. Nuyina’s maiden voyage to
Antarctica departed Hobart in December 2021 to deliver helicopters
to Davis research station, refuel Casey research station and
commission marine science systems. The vessel’s second voyage saw
it retrieve helicopters from Davis research station and conduct a
resupply of Macquarie Island research station in March 2022.
Following these two successful voyages, Nuyina travelled to
Singapore in April 2022 for scheduled warranty work and
maintenance. While in Singapore, an unexpected fault was
discovered in the large couplings that connect the propulsion shafts
with the clutches. Rectification works have been completed and
Nuyina returned to Hobart in April 2023.
This delay meant the Nuyina was unavailable to support Antarctic
resupply and continue marine science commissioning over the
course of the 2022-23 Antarctic season. Two additional vessels, the
icebreaker Aiviq, and an ice-strengthened cargo ship Happy
Diamond, were secured to resupply Australian continental stations
and transport expeditioners.
The RSV Nuyina is scheduled to depart Hobart in early May 2023 to
conduct a resupply and project support voyage to Macquarie Island
research station.
Further information about RSV Nuyina is available from the
Australian Antarctic Division’s dedicated RSV Nuyina website.
Enhanced traverse capability and million-year ice core
The Traverse and Inland Station Project supports Australia’s
involvement in the collaborative Million-Year Ice Core project to
recover a million-year ice core to aid climate research.
The first traverse was successfully completed in early 2023. The
team departed Casey station on 23 December 2022 traversing a
distance of approximately 1200 kilometres arriving at Little Dome C
on 10 January 2023. The route from Casey rises to Law Dome, at an
elevation of 1500 metres, and then drops down towards the Totten
Glacier before ascending to the project site at Little Dome C, at
more than 3200 metres above sea level.
Figure 2: Traverse tractors
The traverse team included five bespoke tractors, two snow
groomers, sleds, fuel, food and the infrastructure to support 10
people at Little Dome C mobile inland research station and drilling
camp for the Million-Year Ice Core project.
Ice core test drilling was completed at Little Dome C in early 2023.
Ice cores were successfully transported to gas analysis laboratories
in Hobart, thereby proving the cold supply chain for the Million
Year Ice Core project. The first full drilling season is expected to
commence in the 2023-24 Antarctic summer.
Further information about the Traverse and Inland Station Project
and Million-Year Ice Core Project is available from the Australian
Antarctic Division’s website.
Modernising Antarctic research stations
Figure 3: Australia’s Antarctic research stations
Long-term planning work is underway to modernise Australia’s
Antarctic research stations, including summer facilities at Wilkins
Aerodrome. Modernisation works aim to improve operations,
revitalise our science programs, and improve environmental
sustainability, including:
Modernise fuel storage, water supplies, energy provision, and
communication technology
Upgrade the heavy vehicles and mobile equipment that maintain
our daily operations
Provide Antarctic doctors with access to cutting-edge medical
technology
Enhance the environmental sustainability of Australia’s research
stations, including pathways to lower greenhouse gas emissions
Improve operational assets such as boats, field huts, and
aerodromes
Provide new science equipment to support leading-edge research
and development.
Masterplans are being developed to deliver sustainable world-class
facilities to support Antarctic science and operations, as well as
addressing the challenges of living and working in Antarctica and
supporting diversity, equity and inclusion in the Australian
Antarctic program.
Southern Ocean research aquarium (SOra)
Figure 2: Close up of krill swimming in laboratory tank. Photo:
Robert (Rob) King
In 2022, the Australian Antarctic Division launched a 10-year
Flagship ‘Krill and Krill Ecosystem (KaKE)’ Project to inform the
sustainable and ecosystem-based management in the Southern
Ocean and to quantify impacts of climate change on krill and the
krill ecosystem.
The updated Strategy and Action Plan commits to ensuring the
sustainable management of the Southern Ocean krill fishery, and
building research infrastructure in Hobart to establish Australia as
the world’s leader in krill research. Our current krill research
aquarium, the only one of its kind, has long been recognised as an
international hub for experimental krill biology.
The new Southern Ocean research aquarium (SOra) will be located
at the University of Tasmania’s Taroona site in Hobart and will
provide a fivefold increase in capacity from the existing facility. The
aquarium is designed to interface with RSV Nuyina’s 20-foot
aquarium containers to seamlessly transfer live specimens collected
in Antarctica to this new state-of-the-art research aquarium facility
in Hobart. All approvals to build SOra have been successfully
obtained with construction expected to commence in 2023.
In addition, the ‘wet well’ system in RSV Nuyina allows the
collection and maintenance of live krill and plankton in perfect
condition without the need to trawl or stop the vessel. This new
concept in sampling is a step change that allows major advances in
experimental research.
More information on krill research is available from the Australian
Antarctic Division website.
Forward activities
The 2022 Update to the Strategy and Action Plan outlines
Australia’s commitment to Antarctic science and stewardship.
Future activities include to:
Strengthen Australia’s collaborative relationships with Antarctic
nations to capitalise on the capabilities of the RSV Nuyina and the
new traverse infrastructure, such as:
collaborative large-scale Southern Ocean marine science research
programs with key partners, and
new opportunities for Antarctic science with Australia’s space and
medical sectors, as well as safety, environmental monitoring and
communications.
Implement an enhanced program of mapping and charting of areas
in East Antarctica including seabed mapping.
Establish a regular forum called the Risk of East Antarctic Collapse
& Tipping-points (REACT) Initiative to cultivate a coordinated
international approach to science activities focussed on regions
thought to be vulnerable to rapid ice sheet retreat in East
Antarctica. A website will be established to foster coordination,
collaboration, and relevant announcements, including facilitation of
meetings.
Investigate opportunities for a greater scientific presence in
Antarctica with minimal environmental impact including
establishing autonomous monitoring stations and remote controlled
and autonomous drones.
Develop future capabilities to deliver a safe Antarctic program,
including the addition of four new medium-lift multi-engine
helicopters by 2023-24 with flow on benefits for increased logistical
capability and range, and exploration of future intracontinental
aviation options between stations and access across East Antarctica.
Develop Digital Earth Antarctica, a world leading management of
satellite imagery, aerial photography, radar and hyperspectral data
for near real-time detection of changes in the landscape including
monitoring of iceberg and ice calving, marine biology, nutrient
observations and other Antarctic activity.
