Report of a finding of Trichocera maculipennis in Antarctic
Specially Protected Area 128
Report of a finding of Trichocera maculipennis in
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 128
Summary
This paper was prepared to report to the Consultative Parties and to
the wider Antarctic community the finding of non-native Trichocera
maculipennis (Diptera) imago individuals in the 2022/2023 austral
summer season in Antarctic Specially Protected Area no. 128 in the
Western Shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South
Shetland Islands.
Background
The boreal trichocerid fly Trichocera maculipennis is a species that
is primarily known from the Northern Hemisphere, inhabiting the
Boreal Zone (also found in Europe in caves or mines) as well as the
sub-Arctic and Arctic Zones - Greenland, sub-Arctic islands, and
Scandinavia (Petrašiūnas & Weber, 2013). In the boreal zone, these
insects reproduce twice a year, whereas in the Arctic zone, they
reproduce only once a year during the summer season. T.
maculipennis has four larval stages, where pupation usually lasts
only a few hours, and adults can even emerge through the snow
layer (Hågvar & Krzemińska, 2008). It is believed that they were
brought to Antarctica with supplies for science stations or with
tourists. T. maculipennis flies are perfectly adapted to low
temperatures, which allows them to spread to high latitudes. They
mainly occur in the vicinity of human aggregates, preying on dead
organic matter, including sewage systems (Carlsson, 1962). Adults
are active at low temperatures, although they do not fly at
temperatures below -10 °C. The development of eggs and the
pupation of larvae is possible in the temperature range of -1.5 °C to
18.0 °C, and larvae are able to survive when frozen in ice (Dahl,
1969, 1970; Platcher, 1983). T. maculipennis larvae have been
detected in nutrient-rich substrates, such as decomposing plant
matter and excrement, or as pests in stored vegetables (Volonterio
et al., 2013).
The first report documenting the presence of T. maculipennis on
King George Island was from the Uruguayan Base Científica
Antártica Artigas in 2006 (Volonterio et al., 2013). Subsequently,
there have been reports of the fly within or in the surroundings of
the following stations on the island: Artigas, Arctowski, Escudero,
Frei, Fildes, and King Sejong. This species has established itself in
natural areas, as well as within buildings such as sewage treatment
plants, scientific research stations, military bases, and hydroponic
installations (Hughes et al., 2005; Volonterio et al., 2013).
The non-native T. maculipennis fly was first reported at the Polish
Antarctic Arctowski Station with live larvae and adult individuals in
the sewage system in October 2017 (Potocka & Krzemieńska, 2018).
Only a few adult individuals were observed outside the facility at a
distance of less than 50 cm from the septic tank (Potocka et al.,
2020). Since their discovery, their presence has been recorded on a
regular basis. Imago individuals of T. maculipennis have been
recorded at Arctowski Station throughout the year.
Since its first discovery, systematic monitoring and control
measures have been carried out at the Arctowski Station to
eradicate this invasive species. As the septic tank was considered to
be the main breeding location, it was regularly emptied at least
once every 14 days. Opening of the septic tank lid was accompanied
by alcohol spraying to immobilize any individuals, which if present,
were collected before the tank was emptied. Subsequently, the tank
was cleaned using fresh water and then washed with a solution of
hydrochloric acid at a concentration of approximately 2-3%. The
internal walls of the protective box, lid, and available parts of the
tank were sprayed with an insecticide containing lambda-
cyhalothrin, e.g., Oxyfly or Solfac. Spraying was carried out
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Applications were
performed only within the sewage system, and the chemical
substances had an active period of up to 12 weeks, which
subsequently decomposed into non-hazardous substances. Food
stored at the station was regularly reviewed, with the storage rooms
being cleaned frequently and any developmental stages of the flies
present removed. Adhesive traps were installed in station
infrastructure buildings, particularly in food storages, to identify
population trends throughout the year. Traps were regularly
checked and changed. An ultraviolet lamp was deployed in the
main food storage area.
After the initiation of several control measures, the number of
recorded individuals dropped significantly, with fewer than 10
individuals being observed during the summer season of
2019/2020. In the 2020/2021 season, 1 individual was found in the
adhesive trap in a 4 °C storage container, and no flies were found in
the septic tank or in the buildings. The number of individuals
recorded on adhesive traps on station infrastructure increased to 33
individuals reported in two summer seasons combined: between
November 2021 and the beginning of April 2023. No T.
maculipennis was found in the septic tank during these seasons.
In the 2022/2023 austral summer season, a new sewage storage
system together with a sewage treatment plant were implemented
at Arctowski Station.
Monitoring and eradication of the fly are carried out continuously
on the station's infrastructure and will be continued the next season.
Report on Trichocera sp. found in ASPA No. 128
In December 2022, imago individuals of the genus Trichocera were
reported at two locations of ASPA no. 128 (attached figure). The
first location includes a stream located near Llano Point where three
live individuals of Trichocera sp. were observed on 23.12.2022, and
none of the individuals were caught. Another observation took
place within the analogous area on 30.12.2022, where a total of
approximately 20 individuals were observed. Three individuals
were caught. On the same day, 30.12.2022, on the opposite shore of
the Glacier Ecology lagoon, in the Rakusa Point area, approximately
30 individuals were observed, and 6 individuals were caught. Later,
single individuals were observed in the Rakusa Point area. The
locations of sightings of the non-native species within ASPA no. 128
are indicated on the map attached to the report.
Follow-up activities planned for the 2023/24 season
Due to the finding of numerous individuals of Trichocera sp. in an
Antarctic Specially Protected Area, in locations remote from the
station infrastructure, detailed monitoring is planned for the next
season, including an attempt to identify if the reproduction of T.
maculipennis is taking place in the natural environment. We
recommend that field inspections be also carried out by other
stations in King George Island.
Figure: Locations of reported individuals of Trichocera sp.
