ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                   XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 65
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English

DEEP ICE CORE DRILLING STARTED AT DOME FUJI STATION,ANTARCTICA
(agenda item 13)

(Submitted by Japan)
(XX ATCM INF Paper)

Deep Ice Core Drilling Started at Dome Fuji Station, Antarctica

1. Introduction
A new station "Dome Fuji" for the ice core drilling together with glaciological and meteorological research has been settled in December 1994, at the summit of Queen Maud Land ice sheet at 77°22' S, 39°37' E. The site is 1000 km south of Japanese Main Station, Syowa and its altitude, 3810 m a. s. l., is the highest among all the wintering stations in the Antarctic. The deep ice core drilling has been started under the "Deep Ice Coring Project at Dome Fuji, East Antarctica (1992-1997)", aiming to study climate change over the past 200,000 years, by the 36th Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE-36), and has been taken over by JARE-37. The construction and operation of the station have been conducted following the IEE issued in December 1993.

2. Station
First wintering at the station was started by 9 personnel of JARE-36 in January 1995. Till then, main part of the station was constructed following the transportation of equipment and fuel total about 300 t by overland traverses with oversnow vehicles, tractors and sledges by JARE-35 and 36.

The station consists of living and observation area, drilling site, supply depot and observation field. The living and observation area is composed of five above-ground prefabricated structures: two living huts, mess hut, observation hut, of which size is 8.1 x 4.5 m, and generator hut of rather larger size. The drilling site is a roofed trench, 21.5 m long, 4 m wide and 4 m deep. Since the drill is of 10 m in length, and has to be rotated, the top of the drilling hole is at the 7.5 m depth. Emergency hut of Quonset type is located about 50 m from the main part of the station, equipped with the oversnow vehicle operational at any time. Fuel and borehole liquid are stored to leeward of the station not to contaminate the observation field.

Energy required to operate the station is supplied by three 28 kVA diesel generators; two for living and basic observation, operated alternately, and one for drilling. For reasons of both fire prevention and environmental protection, all cooking is done by electricity. The heating of living and observation hut is made with hot water from the radiator of the generator engine. Kerosene and electric heaters are also available as backup. Water for living is obtained by melting snow using excess heat from generators and electric heaters. Waste water is heated and disposed in waste water holes. Other sewage and waste are to be removed to Syowa Station and then to Japan.

The member of JARE-37 wintering at the station now is composed of 1 leader, 2 drilling engineer, 1 ice core scientist, 2 mechanics, 1 meteorologist who also cover radio communication, 1 medical doctor, and 1 cook, 9 in total. Communication between Syowa Station is made by HF radio, and telephone and facsimile connections to Japan are conducted using INMARSAT system.
3. Ice core drilling and other observations
Ice core drilling has been conducted extensively till now and has reached to the depth of 
944 m on April 21, 1996. It is intended to reach to the depth of 2500 m at the end of 
this year. Also, ice core processing has been done at the site till the depth of 551 m, as 
for the bulk density, stratigraphy, DC-, AC-electric conductivity measurements (ECM). 
From these preliminary processing, Wisconsin Ice Age Ice is found from 370 m in 
depth by ECM data, and volcanic ashes are visible at 505.8 m in depth.

In addition to the drilling, meteorological and hydrological observations are conducted 
at the station. Surface synoptic observation is continued with reporting at three times a 
day, Automatic Weather Stations, snow temperature measurements at 8 depths are 
continued. Biweekly surface snow sampling, daily measurement of evaporation/
condensation rate, monthly aerosols sampling, 36-snow stake farm measurement for 
twice a month, and 3 m snow-pit observation and sampling four times a year are 
conducted at the station. The minimum temperature recorded during 1995 was -79.6 °C 
on August 18.
Fig. 1. Dome Fuji Station

Fig. 2. Deep ice core drilling room

Fig. 3. Ice core
