ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                            XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




XX ATCM/INF 58
April, 1996
Original: English


___________________________________________________________

FINANCIAL PREPAREDNESS AND THE JOINT COMPENSATION FUND
IN THE ANNEX ON ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY TO THE MADRID PROTOCOL

(Agenda item 6b)

(Submitted by IUCN)

___________________________________________________________
Financial Preparedness and the
Joint Compensation Fund
in the
Annex on Environmental Liability
to the Madrid Protocol

Comments on the "Chairman's Fourth Offering"
from the
IUCN Commission on Environmental Law

November 1995
FINANCIAL PREPAREDNESS AND THE JOINT COMPENSATION FUND 
IN THE ANNEX ON ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY TO THE MADRID PROTOCOL

Comments on the "Chairman's Fourth Offering" from the 
IUCN Commission on Environmental Law

I. Introduction

The IUCN Commission on Environmental Law (IUCN-CEL) -- at its Steering Committee 
meeting of October 1995 -- decided to consult its member specialists on liability and 
Antarctic affairs, as well as other experts in the IUCN network, and offer the results of this 
consultation as an input into the current discussions on the Liability Annex. Since the 
forthcoming meeting of the Working Group of Legal Experts in Belgium will deal with 
issues relating to financial preparedness and the joint compensation fund, it was decided 
that this first input should focus on these matters. It is anticipated that this paper will be 
the first of several contributions IUCN-CEL will make in support of the Liability Annex's 
development.

The "Chairman's Fourth Offering" includes provision for financial preparedness and a joint 
compensation fund, the latter referred to as the Environmental Protection Fund. Both 
concepts are essential if the principles articulated in the Liability Annex are to be applied 
in practice. With a view to making these provisions as effective as realistically possible, 
this paper is intended to provide comments on the Fourth Offering and suggestions for the 
further development of the Liability Annex.

II. How Financial Preparedness and the Environmental Protection Fund are contemplated 
so far in Fourth Offering

The two salient provisions relating, respectively, to financial preparedness and a joint 
compensation fund, are Articles 8 and 10, although other provisions of the Fourth Offering 
are also relevant. Article 8 reads as follows:

    Each Party shall ensure taking due account of the nature and the risks of the 
    activities undertaken, that non-State operators conducting activities in the 
    Antarctic Treaty area be required to have and maintain insurance or an 
    equivalent up to a limit to cover the liability under this Annex [up to a 
    minimum amount of ...]

The Fourth Offering indicates that India has proposed an alternative form of drafting which 
covers the same idea, but with the addition that "the costs of undertaking remedial 
measures for elimination or mitigation of possible damage caused to the environment 
should be the guiding factor."

Article 10, which creates the Environmental Protection Fund, reads as follows:

(1) An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established with the following aims:

 
1
(a) to provide compensation for damage upon the Antarctic environment as referred to in Article 3 to the extent that the protection afforded under Articles 4 and 5 was proved to be inadequate;

(b) to provide for compensation, on an interim basis, in cases a response action has to be undertaken on an emergency basis.

(2) *For the purpose of fulfilling its functions under paragraph 1 the Fund shall pay compensation to those having undertaken response action,

(a) because no liability arises under the Protocol;

(b) the cause of the impact in accordance with Article 3 cannot be established.

(3) The Fund shall provide for the necessary financial means expeditiously with a view to enabling timely action under Article 15 of the Protocol.

(4) Contributions to the Fund shall be made

(a) in accordance with Article 5 paragraph 2 of this Annex:

(b) on the basis of fees levied on the departure of ships or aircraft other than for scientific purposes for Antarctica. These fees shall be collected by the State Party in which the environmental assessment procedure has been undertaken and shall be transferred to the Fund.

The Fourth Offering notes the proposal of India that contributions to the Fund be based on fees collected by State parties from operators or other entities visiting Antarctica.

III. Issues Related to Financial Preparedness

a. General considerations: is this provision desirable?

The stipulation that operators (in this instance non-State operators) carry compulsory insurance or other financial guarantee has proven useful and popular, as demonstrated by its application in several international liability regimes.1 The advantage of this form of


1Precedents include Articles V(3), VI and VII of the Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage ("CLC")(1973 UNTS 3), Article 10 of the Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy ("Paris Nuclear Convention")(956 UNTS 251, as amended) Article III Convention on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear Ships (57 AJIL (1963) 268), Article VII of the Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage ("Vienna Nuclear Convention")(1063 UNTS 265), Article 8(1) of the Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage Resulting from Exploration for and Exploitation of Seabed Mineral Resources (UK Misc No. 8 (1977), Cmnd 6791) and Article 12 of the Convention on Civil Liability for Damage Resulting from Activities Dangerous to the Environment ("Council of Europe Convention")(32 ILM 1228 (1993). Cf. Article 37(3) of 
(continued...) 
2
risk-spreading is, naturally, that victims may still receive compensation in the event that 
such amounts involved are beyond the means of the operator causing the damage. This 
is a fortiori the case in the event that the operator becomes insolvent. Accordingly, this 
requirement is intended to satisfy the interests of both industry and victims.

By virtue of the general propensity of insurers to scrutinise their potential clients carefully, 
mandatory insurance can play a useful role in monitoring operators. Since the level of 
premiums tends to reflect the severity of the potential hazard, compulsory insurance 
creates an incentive for operators to take preventive and precautionary action. This is 
especially so if the insurance is linked to the operators risk management; for example, in 
area of maritime insurance, premiums are based, inter alia, on prior loss record, operating 

Coupled with international and national environmental standards, mandatory insurance is 
thus a useful compliment to effective regulation.

Activities which are potentially hazardous, as all activities in the Antarctica must be 
presumed to be,2 should not be permitted to take place unless the financial preparedness 
of the operators are adequate.3

(b) How much financial preparedness should an operator have?

(i) The Fourth Offering suggests the possibility of limiting the obligation of financial 
preparedness. If the Liability Annex were to contain liability limits (see section (c) below), 
guidance would effectively be provided as to how much insurance or equivalent should be 
required.

Given that the Fourth Offering provides for the possibility of any State Party or entity 
undertaking response action, the possibility of a State Party requiring insurance over and 
above any liability limit should not be precluded.

(ii) In the absence of any "bright line" signal in the Liability Annex resulting from a liability 
limit, it will be left to national authorities to decide on the level of financial preparedness 
of each operator. Although a patently unreasonable regulation which provides for 
inadequate financial preparedness in relation to the risk involved would likely trigger 
residual State liability under Article 7, less clear-cut cases may be more difficult to decide.

1(...continued)
Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities ("CRAMRA")27 ILM (1988) 
868). See also Article 11(1) EC Draft Directive on Civil Liability for Waste Damage (OJ C 251, 4 
October 1989). This requirement is present in international private agreements, such as the Oil 
Pollution Offshore Liability Agreement ("OPOL"). National precedents also exist, such as Section 
19 of the German Law on Environmental Liability (Federal Law Gazette (BGBI), Part I, 1990, No. 
67, p. 2634-2643).

2See Articles 2 and 3 of the Madrid Protocol.

3See, e.g. Article 19(4) of the German Act on Environmental Liability.

3
Since the risk of harm will vary from activity to activity, the general guidance suggested in the proposal from India, based on the costs of remedial action, is a useful ground rule.

(iii) If the Liability Annex does not stipulate a formula for the calculating the amount of financial preparedness, then a risk is created of State Parties requiring different amounts for the same activities. At least in respect of commercial activities, State Parties will have an interest in harmonization of these requirement so as to permit free competition to take place.

In order to prevent widely different financial preparedness requirements as between State Parties, the following two safeguards might be considered:

•      Expressly requiring that the Committee on Environmental Protection develop detailed guidelines on financial preparedness, and

•      Allowing for the possibility of application to the Committee on Environmental Protection by a State Party in respect of the financial preparedness rules of another State Party.

(iv) The specific terms and conditions under which insurance or the equivalent might be made available in each State Party, as well as the terms of such policies, will vary from Party to Party. For example, equitable considerations may call for the differentiation of premiums in respect of the size of risk, the size of the firms, or their ability to cover the costs involved. This is not the kind of particularity which the Liability Annex could hope to address, given that the circumstances in each State will differ. But the flexibility to enact appropriate measures under Article VII(1) of the Vienna Nuclear Convention and Article 10(a) of the Paris Nuclear Convention is noteworthy. Although it is the sovereign right of each State to address this, a provision to this effect in the Liability Annex might head off possible future claims of unfair competition.

It would be desirable to expressly provide State Parties with the flexibility to govern the conditions under which insurance or the equivalent may be made available and the terms under which they would operate.

(c) Relationship between financial preparedness and liability limits

Although there may be a relationship between insurance and limited liability, neither provision need be unnecessarily compromised for the sake of the other. The availability of a liability limit in the Liability Annex may make it easier for operators to obtain insurance, although any such limit still ought to be set high enough so as to be meaningful in the context. The insurance market does have the capacity to insure high levels of risk, by establishing a secondary market involving reinsurance and the pooling of insurance, as is done, for example, in the marine industry. A useful precedent is Article 7(b) of the Paris Nuclear Convention, which allows Contracting Parties to set higher liability limits for their nationals than that provided for under that Convention; the provision goes on to require Contracting Parties seeking to varying the liability limit to consider the possibilities for operators obtaining financial security, which is mandatory under the Convention.4 This

4Contracting Parties may also set lower liability limits so long as they do not fall below an absolute minimum set forth in the Convention. 
                                                                                           4
precedent is interesting on account of the flexibility it allows Parties in addressing their 
own particular circumstances. Such flexibility may make sense in the Antarctic context, 
where the quantum of potential harm to the environment may vary enormously from 
activity to activity.

Liability limits should not be set lower than otherwise appropriate solely on the ground of 
fears about the availability of insurance. The possibility of establishing a flexible approach 
should be explored.

(d) Should State-owned operators be required to carry insurance?

The Fourth Offering imposes the requirement to carry insurance or the equivalent only on 
non-State operators. The assumption must be that State operators do not need insurance, 
despite the fact that the predominance of activity in Antarctica will be by State operators, 
for two reasons: (1) States themselves are available to discharge the debts of 
governmental operators and (2) there is provision in the Fourth Offering of residual State 
liability which might apply in these circumstances. International precedents are divided on 
this question. Insurance is required by all operators (defined so as to encompass both 
State-owned and non-State) in the Paris Nuclear Convention, but not in the Vienna Nuclear 
Convention. The Council of Europe Convention also appears to allow for the possibility 
that States will carry financial security, although the subject is not expressly dealt with. 
In the CLC, State-owned ships are not required to carry insurance, although they may do 
so; if they do not, they must carry a certificate stating that they are owned by the State 
and that liability will be covered.

Since in some cases controversies may arise over whether an operator is State-owned or 
not, it might be appropriate to require that all operators from State Parties either be 
financially prepared or else carry a certificate issued by a national authority indicating that 
liability under the Liability Annex will be covered by the State.

(e) What happens if the financial guarantor is unable to discharge its obligations?

The Fourth Offering does not directly provide for the case where the financial guarantor 
is unable to discharge its obligations. As will be seen below, the Environmental Protection 
Fund also does not capture this situation. It is arguable that the residual State liability 
under Article 7 would be triggered, in that this occurrence might be the result of national 
regulatory failure. Nevertheless, the present ambiguity is undesirable. One option might 
be to follow the precedent in Article VII(1 1) of the CLC, which requires Contracting States 
to ensure, under their national legislation, that the insurance or other security is in force. 
Another option is that set forth in Article VII of the Vienna Nuclear Convention, which 
requires the Installation State to ensure the payment of compensation, within the liability 
limit of that Convention, if the insurance or other financial security is unable to satisfy the 
claims against it. For policy reasons, it is appropriate for the Party which exercises 
jurisdiction over the operator to cover the costs in this case, since the failure of the 
financial guarantor would be a purely internal matter. In addition, that State Party, through 
its permitting procedures, would have approved of the activity causing the damage. It, 
therefore, should be called upon as a contingent source of funds. A third option, 
discussed below in IV(d), is to have the joint compensation fund provide the compensation 
in these circumstances.

5
Accordingly, the Party which exercises jurisdiction over the operator should be required 
to provide compensation, within any limits set forth in the Liability Annex, in the event that 
neither the operator, insurer, or other financial guarantor is able to meet this obligation, 
and there is no provision for the joint compensation fund to do so.

(f) Miscellaneous particulars

(i) The international precedents contain several matters of detail which may also be 
appropriate in the Antarctic context. One is an express requirement that no insurer or 
financial guarantor be permitted to suspend or cancel its coverage without providing at 
least two months notice to the competent public authority.  A second, which seems 
designed to satisfy concerns of clarity, is to stipulate that the sums provided by the 
insurance or equivalent be used exclusively for purposes of compensation under the 
treaty.  Thirdly, Article VII(8) of the CLC provides that claims for compensation may be 
made directly against the insurer, for reasons of administration and efficiency.

Therefore, the following should be considered for inclusion in the Annex:
  • provision of a notice requirement before insurance or equivalent may be cancelled,
  • requirement that sums available from the insurance or equivalent be used 
    exclusively for compensation under the Liability Annex, and
  • permitting of claims for compensation to be made directly against the insurer.

(ii) A requirement that all operators carry certificates attesting to their financial 
preparedness is an important element of the CLC. Article VII(7) of the CLC provides for 
the mutual recognition by Parties of such certificates. Article VII(2) of the CLC enumerates 
several particulars relating to such certificates, namely that they indicate: (a) name of 
operator and State of registration, (b) name and principal place of business of owner, (c) 
type of security, (d) name and principal place of business of insurer or other person giving 
security and, where appropriate, place of business where the insurance or security is 
established, and (e) period of validity of certificate which shall not be longer than the 
period of validity of the insurance or other security. The CLC also contains provision for 
the language the certificates must be in (English and French) and requires that the 
certificates be carried aboard the ship in question and that a copy deposited with the 
authorities who keep the ship's registry (Articles VII(3) and (4)).

Consider the establishment of a certification scheme to attest to the presence of insurance 
or equivalent, as well as the necessary particulars relating to the content of such 
certificates and their efficient verification (see also the discussion in III(d) above). These 
certificates could then be made available to any inspectors acting under Article VII of the 
Antarctica Treaty.

5See Article 10(b) of the Paris Nuclear Convention, Article VII(4) of the Vienna Nuclear 
   Convention. Cf. Article VII(5) of the CLC.

6See Article VII(9) of the CLC, Article VII(2) of the Vienna Nuclear Convention, and Article 10(c) 
   of the Paris Nuclear Convention.

                                                                                           6
IV. Issues Related to the Environmental Protection Fund

(a) General considerations: is a joint compensation fund desirable?

The concept of joint compensation funds has been applied in several international and national settings. The general advantages of these funds have often been recognized, inter
alia, as follows: (a) that they allow for quick response action by avoiding the delays which might arise in the event of disputes, (b) that the burden of damage is more easily shouldered collectively, rather than by individuals, and (c) since these funds tend to be financed by the relevant industries, the burden is borne by those associated with the risks, rather than society as a whole or future generations. All of these considerations clearly apply in the case of Antarctica and are reflected, to a greater or lesser extent, in the Fourth Offering.

A joint compensation fund in the Antarctica context was provided for in Article 8(7)(c)(iii) of CRAMRA. A fund (or other measure) was to have been created so as to provide immediate response action and satisfy the liability requirements of the Convention if: (a) the operator is financially incapable of meeting it obligations in full, (b) the operator has a defence to liability, or (c) the cause of the loss or damage is of an indeterminate origin. The fund contemplated in CRAMRA was to have the following characteristics: (a) financing by operators (including State-owned) or on an industry-wide basis, (b) ensuring permanent liquidity and mandatory supplementation of funds in the event of insufficiency, and (c) reimbursing costs of response action.

So far, there is only one fund scheme which has been developed under public international law and which is in operation: the International Oil Pollution Compensation (IOPC) Fund, established by the Fund Convention, which operates in the marine context. The Fund Convention is a complement and supplement to the CLC and is intended to provide compensation up to a specified limit where the compensation available under the CLC is not sufficient. The IOPC Fund is financed by private enterprise on the basis of the amount of oil received. A private law contract, the Contract Regarding an Interim Supplement to Tanker Liability for Oil Pollution ("CRISTAL"),7 was established to supplement to the compensation available under the Fund Convention. Although not without problems and critics, the international oil pollution compensation scheme has generally been considered a success.

National precedents for joint compensation funds also exist. Notable examples include those created under the Japanese Pollution-Related Health Damage Compensation Law8 and the Dutch Air Pollution Fund.9 Several other funds have been established in the United States.10

7 10 ILM 137 (1971).

8 Law No. 11, 5 October 1973. See Articles 47-67.

9 Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 1981, No. 411. See Articles 64-66.

10 E.g., the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, 33 USC 2701, et. seq., as well as several joint compensation funds established under individual pieces of State legislation.

7
A strong framework should be elaborated for a joint compensation fund which equitably 
and efficiently meets the need for effective remedial and response action in relation to 
harm to the Antarctic environment.

b) How will the Environmental Protection Fund be financed?

(i) The Fourth Offering provides for three possible sources of financing of the 
Environmental Protection Fund: (a) lump sum payments to be made by operators where 
irreversible ecological damage has occurred, (b) fees levied on departure of ships and 
aircraft operating for purposes other than scientific, and (c) voluntary contributions.

Although the Environmental Protection Fund will only be required to discharge funds in 
limited circumstances, there is a risk that the amounts accumulated from the sources 
currently contemplated will prove insufficient to cover the Fund's obligations. The 
proposal from India to extend the obligation to pay charges to all operators would cure 
possible arbitrariness arising out of taxing only vessels and would also raise additional 
revenue.

Just as insurers may demand higher premiums in cases of high risk of harm or poor safety 
records, levies could also be made on these bases. As with insurance, this would have 
the advantage of encouraging effective risk management, thereby lowering the possibility 
of firms acting negligently. The governance structure of the Fund (see IV(c) below) could 
be endowed with the task of developing a formula for differentiated levies.

A levy on all operators in Antarctica, not only vessels, should be considered and provision 
should be made for developing a formula for differentiated levies based on the level of risk.

(ii) The Fourth Offering suggests the possibility of State-owned operators contributing to 
the Fund on the same basis as non-State operators. Nonetheless, it might be appropriate 
to provide for an even greater financing role for State Parties in the form of regular 
contributions. After all, State Parties, as reflected by Article 15 of the Madrid Protocol, 
have a strong interest in the effective restoration of the Antarctic environment. Any 
regular State Party contributions should be supplementary to the levies on private 
operators, so that the incentive effect of these levies (discussed in (ii) above) is not 
diminished.

Several formulae for regular State Party contributions are possible. A flat contribution, 
perhaps collected annually, is one possibility. The Fund Convention, is an example of 
another possibility, in providing for initial and annual contributions, albeit from private 
entities and not States. The Fund Convention's approach is noteworthy because it is 
based on considerations of equity, by having establishing differentiated obligations on the 
basis of the amount of oil received. In the Antarctic context, differentiation could be 
based on a percentage of each State Party's annual Antarctica budget, the number of 
personnel or persons per year that visit Antarctica from that State Party, or on the basis 
of a risk assessment of the activities undertaken by its nationals.

In sum, an appropriate procedure for regular State Party contributions to the Environmental 
Protection Fund, possibly differentiated, should be considered.

8
(iii) Despite widening the capitalization base of the Fund, particularly disastrous circumstances may, on occasion, occur such that the Fund would be unable to meet its obligations.

Provision should be made for extraordinary emergency replenishment by State Parties if necessary for the Environmental Protection Fund to discharge its obligations.

(iv) Articles 15(1) and (2) of the Fund Convention requires each Contracting State to inform the Director of the Fund of all enterprises liable to make contributions. The Regulations under that Convention prescribe what form the reports are to take. Although the IOPC Fund itself invoices the private operators, in contrast to what is proposed in the Fourth Offering, such a provision serves the important function of increasing transparency.

Given that the Fourth Offering requires State Parties to collect the fees, it would seem appropriate to institute in the Antarctic context a system of national notification to the Environmental Protection Fund.

(c) Status and governance structure of the Environmental Protection Fund

The Fourth Offering does not yet elaborate on the status or structure of the Environmental Protection. In order to operate effectively, however, the Fund should have a clear and transparent structure. For the Liability Annex to provide guidance is therefore important.

(i) The IOPC Fund is expressly endowed with legal personality in Article 2(2) of the Fund Convention. Among the many advantages to be derived from such status include the capacity to take legal action for monies owing and the capacity to invest its capital so as to accrue interest.

Therefore, express provision in the Liability Annex should be made endowing the Environmental Protection Fund with legal personality.

(ii) The effective operation of the Fund will require policy decisions to be taken as well as day-to-day administration.

The Environmental Protection Fund might follow the precedent of the Fund Convention in creating a participatory governance body of Parties to take policy decisions. A permanent secretariat, should facilitate the administration of the Fund. The Liability Annex should provide guidance on the privileges and immunities of the Fund and any of its organs.

(iii) There have been recent examples of national compensation funds which also involve the private sector in their governance.11 Although the role of the private sector is not specified in the Fund Convention, the practice of the IOPC Fund has been to work closely with the maritime insurance and oil industries.

It might be appropriate for cooperative possibilities to also be developed in Antarctica, whereby private industry and relevant non-governmental organizations (NGOs) active in

11See, e.g., Abfallentorgungs und Altastensanierungsverband of 27 June 1988, GV NW, p. 268 (North-Rhine Westphalia) and Hessisches Abfallwirtschafts und Altastengesetz, of 26 February 1991, GVB1, I, p. 106 (Hesse).

9
Antarctica to contribute to the relevant policy-making. At a minimum, though, provision 
should made in the Liability Annex for the points of view of private industry and relevant 
NGOs to be presented and considered by the governance body.

(iv) The Fund Convention provides for the elaboration of specific regulations on matters 
of form and detail, such as the designated currency, amount of the levies, claims 
procedures, etc.

The Liability Annex should provide for the future elaboration of internal regulations to deal 
with the particulars of the Fund's operations.

(d) When will the Environmental Protection Fund pay compensation?

(i) The Fourth Offering provides for two instances when the Environmental Protection Fund 
will pay compensation: (a) when no liability arises under the Protocol and (b) when cause 
of the damage cannot be established. The latter case is an improvement over the Fund 
Convention. The former is also a positive feature, especially if it is intended to cover 
environmental harm which is not "damage" under Article 3.

But there are two major gaps arising out of the first instance which ought to be remedied. 
Even if there is liability under the Protocol, full compensation for the costs of remedial 
action may not actually accrue if: (a) neither the operator or the financial guarantor is able 
to fully meet their obligations, and the State of origin does not make up the difference, and 
(b) the actual costs of remedial action are beyond the liability limits set by the Liability 
Annex. Unlike the Nuclear Conventions, the Fourth Offering does not contain mandatory 
residual State liability where the State has taken proper measures to regulate its operators 
but compensation still does not issue. However, in all the precedents for joint 
compensation funds, both international and national, a wider scope for payment is 
provided for than what is anticipated in the Fourth Offering. In cases of severe harm to 
the Antarctic environment, response action should not be inhibited, either by virtue of the 
financial failure of an operator or its financial guarantor or by an artificial liability limit set 
in advance of the harm.

Provision should be made for the availability of compensation from the Fund to be paid in 
cases where (a) there is liability under the Protocol, but where the liable entity or its 
financial guarantor is unable to discharge its obligations and (b) the reasonable restoration 
costs exceed the liability limits set by the Liability Annex.

Several possibilities for dealing with situation in an operational manner might be 
considered. If the Fund were to undergo significant capitalization, as suggested above, 
then the ecologically optimal solution would be to cover all the reasonable restoration costs 
which are not paid for by the liable entity or Party. A second possibility might be to 
impose a maximum limit which the Fund will compensate, but to allow for exceeding that 
limit in extraordinary circumstances. A third option would be to set a fixed limit, but one 
which is high enough to be meaningful. It should be noted that if the suggestion put forth 
in III(e) above is adopted -- to have the relevant State Party pay the difference where the 
operator or insurer are unable to discharge their obligations -- then it would be unnecessary 
to have the Fund do so in these circumstances.

 
10
(ii) A Working Group under the Fund Convention considered that claims for the cost of 
research studies should be compensated for by the Fund if the studies are directly related 
to a particular instance of harm covered by that Convention. Given the current state of 
scientific uncertainty regarding environmental impacts in Antarctica, research on harm to 
the Antarctic environment should be encouraged. Any such findings would likely be of use 
to the Parties in determining both the extent of the environmental harm and the amount 
of compensation should accrue.

Provision should be made for financial support from the Fund towards scientific research 
relating to environmental damage in Antarctica.

V. Treatment of Non-Party Operators

International law only provides for treaty obligations to be binding as against parties to the 
treaty, except in limited circumstances.12 Since the argument cannot be convincingly 
made that the obligations under the Liability Annex are declaratory of customary 
international law, it would appear that the Liability Annex cannot per se bind non-Parties.

And yet, unregulated activities of non-Parties present a major threat to the Antarctic 
environment. Not only might they be dangerous in themselves, but by virtue of the "free-
rider" principle an incentive may be created for operators from State Parties to avoid 
obligations by acquiring the nationality of non-Parties. The effectiveness of the Liability 
Annex, thus, risks being defeated if this is not addressed. In addition, State Parties have 
a material interest in developing incentives for other States to join the regime. This is 
because the Fund would be required to pay compensation in cases of such harm, since no 
liability is triggered under the Liability Annex where non-Parties have caused the damage. 
In other words, State Parties may, in some cases, de facto bear the financial costs of 
damage caused by non-Parties.

This problem is not a new one, as exemplified by Article X of the Antarctic Treaty, which 
reads:

    Each of the Contracting Parties undertakes to exert appropriate efforts, 
    consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no one 
    engages in any activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles of purposes 
    of the present Treaty.

Article 13(2) of the Madrid Protocol contains a similar provision in relation to the Protocol, 
and Article 13(5) requires the ATCM to draw to the attention of non-Parties any activities 
undertaken by such States which "affect the implementation of the objective and 
implementation of this Protocol". It is clear that the aforementioned provisions must be 
implemented effectively in relation to the Liability Annex as well.

To go beyond the provisions of this nature poses difficult problems. For instance, it would 
be impossible in the Antarctic context to institute a full-fledged system of "Port-State 
control". Nonetheless, it is permissable under international law for State Parties to deny 
their facilities to operators of non-Parties that do not undertake obligations equivalent to 
those in the Liability Annex. Such a scheme is contemplated under Article VII(11) of the 

12See Articles 25 and 75 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (155 UNTS 331).

11
CLC in relation to financial security. In the present context, this scheme could not go so 
far as to prevent an operator from continuing on its way to Antarctica. But given that the 
important gateways to the Antarctica are under the jurisdiction of Consultative Parties, the 
mere denial of facilities might effectively act as a deterrent. At the same time, such 
conditionality might induce non-Parties to become Parties.

Such a formula raises practical, as well as legal, issues, especially in relation to financial 
preparedness. In this regard, such equivalent measures might take the form of operators 
placing refundable deposits in any State Party equal to what an operator from a Party 
would be required to have as insurance cover. The receiving State Party would then be 
under an obligation to make the compensatory payments which would normally be due 
under the Liability Annex. Another possibility would be if the non-Party State of origin of 
the operator were to undertake, by way of bilateral agreement with any State Party 
negotiated prior to the commencement of the activity, the obligation to compensate for 
damage caused by its nationals. Such compensation would not only include the response 
and restoration costs anticipated by the Liability Annex, but also the lump-sum payments 
to the Fund under Article 5(2). Again, the receiving State Party would be required to pass 
on the compensatory payments.

A parallel argument can be advanced in relation to financing the Fund. Although Article 
10(4) in the Fourth Offering is worded generally, it must only apply on a voluntary basis 
to non-Party operators. Similarly, though, the use of Party facilities to non-Party operators 
could be made conditional on appropriate voluntary contributions being made.

The treatment of non-Party operators should be given utmost attention. A possible 
solution would be for the Liability Annex to render the use of Parties' facilities by non-Party 
operators conditional upon the acceptance of those operators of equivalent obligations to 
the Liability Annex in relation to financial preparedness and contributions to the Fund.

 
12
● IUCN Environmental Law Centre
      Adenauerallee 214
      D-53113 Bonn, Germany
      Telephone: 49 228/2692 231
      Telefax:  49 228/2692 250
      E-mail:  elcb@hq.iucn.ch

      IUCN Headquarters
      Rue Mauverney 28
      CH-1196 Gland, Switzerland
      Telephone: 41 22/9990 001
      Telefax:  41 22/9990 002
      E-mail:  mail@hq.iucn.ch

 
IUCN
