ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

XX ATCM/INF 63
April, 1996
Original: English

GREENPEACE DE COMMISSIONED STATION:ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MONITORING

(Agenda item 22)

(Submitted by ASOC)
PRELIMINARY REPORT

GREENPEACE DECOMMISSIONED STATION
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MONITORING

Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica

January 1996

Greenpeace International
Keizersgracht 176
1016 DW Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Telephone: (31 20) 523 6222
Fax:(31 20) 523 6500
PRELIMINARY REPORT: GREENPEACE DECOMMISSIONED STATION

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MONITORING

1.      INTRODUCTION

Greenpeace operated the year-round World Park Base (WPB) in Antarctica for five years,
from early 1987 to the beginning of 1992, when it was completely removed. WPB consisted
of a main building, a fuel rack, a survival hut and three antennae. All waste except treated
grey (washing) water was returned to New Zealand. The base had a crew of four and was
resupplied by ship once a year.

Monitoring of the base's impact on the environment was carried out throughout the operation
of the base and a comprehensive study was done the summer of the base's removal. Further
studies were carried out one year later, in the 1992/93 season.

The 1995/96 Antarctic summer saw the return to the site for follow-up studies of two
Greenpeace scientists: Lic. Ricardo Roura from Argentina (a geomorphologist and one-time
overwinterer at World Park Base) and Dr. Alan Pickaver from the United Kingdom (a
microbiologist and formerly responsible for Greenpeace's science unit). The pair travelled
to Antarctica with the New Zealand Antarctic Programme and spent twelve days in the field
at Cape Evans and nearby Cape Barne, both in Ross Island. The programme was fully
funded by Greenpeace. Greenpeace's research laboratory at the University of Exeter, United
Kingdom, is responsible for the analytical work.

2.      OBJECTIVES

The 1995/96 monitoring season had the following objectives

(i) To address specific scientific issues
The impacts caused by the operation of WPB, and their evolution after the removal of the
base, raise scientific issues that are relevant to most land-based operations in Antarctica.
These include questions as to:
•   the long lasting effects of modifications to the physical environment;
•   the distribution of contaminants derived from fuel combustion and spillage on the ice
free area around the ex-base site;
•   the fate of jet fuel in the Antarctic environment;
•   the effectiveness of remedial action;
•   the effect of jet fuel on Antarctic micro-organisms;
•   the long lasting effects of human activities on the local sea-bird population.

Other objectives included:

(ii) To comply with the Madrid Protocol
The monitoring program at the site was designed to assess and verify the actual
1
environmental impacts of the base construction, operation and decommissioning, thus meeting 
the obligations established by Article 3 and Annex I of the Madrid Protocol.

(iii) To apply the Precautionary Approach to Antarctic operations 
This principle operates on the basis that a cautious and conservative approach should be taken 
to human activities in environments where there is imperfect scientific understanding of even 
key parameters and which appear susceptible to significant, and perhaps irreversible, damage. 
The Precautionary Principle places the burden of proof of environmental sustention on the 
potential modifier of the status quo rather than on the environment itself.

In the context of monitoring impacts of past activities in the Antarctic environment, applying 
the Precautionary Principle implies not only verifying the severity of foreseen impacts but 
also, whenever possible, trying to detect unforeseen impacts.

To test a hypothesis of no impact beyond the perimeter of WPB (which was in the past the 
focus of monitoring), in 1995/96 the area of study was expanded to include environmental 
components (soils and freshwater bodies) in most of the ice free area of Cape Evans where 
some lasting evidence of chemical pollution could have been detected. This, however, did 
not include the marine environment.

3.    WORKING HYPOTHESIS

The initial assumption was that the presence and operation of WPB primarily affected the 
terrestrial environment, in the form of (mainly) hydrocarbon contamination, degradation of 
the physical environment (in particular the permanently frozen soils or permafrost), and 
extended physical denial of space to wildlife (mostly skua gulls). The first two were 
considered to cause the more important lasting effects and were the focus of the 1995/96 
monitoring season.

At the time the base was removed, it was postulated that the excavations that took place at 
the time of building or removing the base could potentially trigger a process called 
"thermokarst", in which the ice in the permafrost melts causing a subsidence of the surface 
and a positive feedback that produces further subsidence. The intensity of initial 
disturbances, and the effect of wind action, were thought to be instrumental in initiating this 
process. Forms and deposits were studied to assess the evolution of thermokarst processes.

The present distribution of contaminants such as hydrocarbons and heavy metals, their 
movement into the soil and their dispersal by wind, and changes in the metabolism of 
microbial populations, were assessed at the ex-base site and elsewhere at Cape Evans. For 
that effect, a three-dimensional sampling of soils at contaminated and control sites was 
carried out.

The spatial distribution of small-size litter such as paint chips, and its ingestion by seabirds, 
was also assessed.

2
4. METHODOLOGIES

Detailed methodologies are not included in this document. In 1995/96, the study of problem 
areas (of contamination and other degradation) identified in past studies followed 
methodologies used previously, enabling comparisons.

5. PRELIMINARY RESULTS

Further laboratory analysis are required before more conclusive results can be produced. 
While these analysis are underway, field observations and preliminary analysis allow for the 
following assessment:

Physical impacts: degradation of permafrost

A set of surface samples was coarser and better sorted than a similar set collected in 
February 1993. A process of grading of surface sediments by effect of wind action had taken 
place, leaving a lag deposit of gravel (desert pavement). Periglacial features (patterned 
ground), which had been concealed when WPB was operating due to trampling, had again 
become apparent on the ground surface. There was no significant correlation between the 
depth of depressions and the depth at which the frozen ground table was found. This 
suggests that modifications to the ground surface had not changed the depth of the active 
layer. No development of thermokarst was detected.

Chemical impacts: hydrocarbons and heavy metal contamination

Total hydrocarbon content analysis was carried out in 74 soil samples from within the ex-
base site perimeter, and from a radial grid extending to the limits of the ice free area of Cape 
Evans. Preliminary results indicate that no hydrocarbon contamination was detectable on 
radii of 40m and 200m around the ex-base site.

Contamination values in known spill sites are generally non detectable or two to four orders 
of magnitude lower than in previous assessments (prior to remedial action, described in 
section 7). In one spill site hydrocarbon contamination was detected as deep as 0.7m into 
the permafrost (1m below the ground surface). Although only the uppermost 30–40cm of the 
frozen ground thaws during summer, the permafrost is unsaturated (ie. has a low moisture 
content) and therefore is not completely impervious. In other two spill sites, hydrocarbon 
contamination was only detectable above 20cm.

Hydrocarbon contamination was detected in two samples some tens of meters downslope 
from the spill sites. These samples are associated with periglacial features (polygons). One 
of the samples had the highest THC level detected in all samples. The migration of 
subsurface residual hydrocarbons would be associated with meltwater runoff and temperature 
gradients within the soil. Polygons could channel the movement of moisture and fuel. 
However, no contamination was detected in meltwater pools which accumulated at the base 
of the slope.

3
A "plume" of litter (and hence maybe contaminants) extends out from the ex-base site some 100m downwind and reaches the sea.

Microbiological impacts

Microbial analysis was performed on 64 soil samples on two different media at two different temperatures. Non-contaminated soils contained microorganisms capable of utilising Jet A1 as a sole carbon source. Colony forming units were smaller and slower when growing in Jet A1 agar.

The highest counts were associated with moist sand; in the case of the three highest counts, the soil was backfill material, used at the site to replace fuel contaminated soil. At all spill sites mesophilic bacteria were found in the soil subsurface (20cm depth), in contrast to the uninhabited control site.

In contaminated sites, the soil microflora is more likely to contain culturable numbers of Jet A1 degraders, which may be derived from a number of possible sources. This prominence of Jet A1 degraders may be transient; a "normal" microbial balance is likely to be restored when the fuel has been degraded to a concentration below that which the microbes can utilise.

Biological impacts: seabirds

A notable amount of foreign matter was found as a content of skua pellets. A similar finding was made in 1992/93. The materials (mostly paper, plastics, aluminium, glass) did not generally match the litter found at the ex-base site (mostly wood chips, paint flakes, nails). No conclusive results can be taken from this match but, however, it suggests a source of foreign materials different than the ex-base site.

6.    EFFECTIVENESS OF REMEDIAL ACTION

When WPB was removed, an estimated 200 litres of fuel were found to have been spilt into the soil in areas of fuel use and storage. Contamination covered a total area of around 110 square metres. A requirement for remedial action was that it should be low-low tech and carried out in small scale. As in most sites the contamination decreased with depth, the top 10 to 15 cm of contaminated soil was removed and returned to New Zealand for disposal. An estimated 50 litres remained in the soil. The excavations were covered with uncontaminated beach sediments, principally to prevent wildlife from coming in contact with residual hydrocarbons in the soil subsurface.

In 1995/96, no evidence of permafrost degradation associated with the remedial action was found. At spill sites, the depth of the frozen ground table was comparable to sites elsewhere in the immediate vicinity, and no subsidence was apparent on the ground surface. A grading process of the surface sediments took place; the wind velocity, as estimated on the evidence of the sediment size, was found to match average winds as measured in situ when WPB was operating. This suggests that wind erosion and accumulation have reached a state of balance and therefore, that the backfill cover of contaminated sites is stable.

4
Hydrocarbon contamination was detectable on previously uncontaminated backfill, suggesting 
migration and re-deposition of fuel from subsurface sources. The contamination levels, 
however, were either non detectable or two to four orders of magnitude lower than before 
remedial action.

These findings suggest that the remedial action achieved its objectives adequately.

7. OTHER ACTIVITIES

Litter clean-up

Despite the care taken during the operation and removal of WPB, and regular clean ups, 
some small-size litter was left within the base perimeter. The snow and ice cover at the time 
of the removal of WPB hampered the total clean up of the site (the removal of litter in 
exposed areas was, however, exhaustive). Further litter clean up was carried out in the 
1992/93 season.

In 1995/96, a clean up at the ex-base site yielded four small plastic bags half-filled with 
small litter such as nails, wood chips, etc., and a few larger items. These included a drum 
lid, an adsorbent pad to contain spills, a metal anchor plate, and some pieces of coal (the last 
are remains of the "Footsteps of Scott" Expedition, 1984-1986).

Removal of benchmark

At the time of removal of WPB, a benchmark (granite block 50x40x15cm) was left as a point 
of reference to facilitate future monitoring. The benchmark was removed at the end of the 
1995/96 season.

8. CONCLUSIONS: FUTURE MONITORING

Complete analysis is required to evaluate the need for future monitoring. However, it 
appears that the impact of WPB, including long term effects and secondary impacts, falls 
within the limits of area and intensity as predicted in past assessments. While there is 
potential for worthwhile research on environmental sciences, it appears that no further 
monitoring will be required to assess the past and ongoing environmental impact of WPB, 
which is judged to be negligible.

9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Greenpeace thanks Mark Bradford and Catherine Bass, Exeter University Environmental 
Microbiology Group, for carrying out microbiological analysis.

The support of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme was instrumental in the success of the 
field programme. Greenpeace was favourably impressed by the level of field training 
provided and grateful for the support received.

5
ANNEX I: FURTHER INFORMATION SOURCES

Greenpeace International has published all information related to the operation, removal and monitoring of World Park Base. Some of this material will in time be submitted to scientific journals. Greenpeace will made information on this site available to interested parties that may wish to carry out studies in the area.

A detailed description of the operation and removal of the base, and the rationale for the remedial action, were published in:
•	Initial Environmental Evaluation, Removal of World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica 1991/92 (1991)
•	1991/92 Antarctic Expedition Report (1992)
•	Treading Lightly: a Minimal Impact Antarctic Station (1994)

The results of the 1991/92 monitoring season can be found in:
•	The Greenpeace Report of The Antarctic Environmental Impact Monitoring at World Park Base 1991/92 (1994)

A summary of findings for the 1992/93 monitoring season was published in:
•	1992/93 Antarctic Expedition Report (1994)

The annual Expedition Reports provide an overview of the activities at WPB.

For copies of the above mentioned reports and further information on the environmental impact and monitoring of World Park Base, please contact:

Dr. Maj de Poorter
Greenpeace New Zealand
Private Bag 92 5007, Wellesley Street
Auckland, New Zealand
Telephone: 64-9-6306317      Fax: 64-9-6307121
Email: <maj.depoorter@green2.greenpeace.org>

or	Lic. Ricardo Roura
Greenpeace New Zealand
Email: <ricardo.roura@green2.greenpeace.org>

For further information on Greenpeace's research and this project's analytical work, please contact:

Dr. Paul Johnston
Greenpeace Research Laboratory
Earth Resources Centre, University of Exeter
North Park Road, Exeter EX4 4QE, United Kingdom
Telephone: 44-1392-263917      Fax: 44-1392-263907
Email: <exeter.lab@green2.greenpeace.org>

6
