X UTRECHT X
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                 XX ATCM/INF 95
                                 Mayo, 1996
                                 Original: Espagñol

DESARROLLO DEL PROYECTO DE RADAR MST EN LA ANTARTIDA
CAMPAÑA 1992-1994

(Tema de Programa 13)

(Presentado por Peru)
DESARROLLO DEL PROYECTO DE RADAR MST EN LA ANTARTIDA
CAMPAÑA 1992 - 1994

ABSTRACT

A 50 Mhz radar with 25 KW peak power has been installed at the Peruvian base on St. George Island,
Antarctic in early 1993. A search for PMSE echoes was made during its first year of operation, with negative
results. These results have already been reported in the literature. We report here our results during the
summer of the second year of operation. This time the observations were made starting earlier, i.e., closer
to the summer solstice. On this occasion PMSE were observed, albeit much weaker that what one would
expect based on the Poker Flat radar results at a comparable latitude in the Northern Hemisphere. A large
asymmetry, therefore, remains. It is explained in terms of subtle differences in temperature and water vapor
in the mesopause region of both polar regions. The potential of the technique to monitor global changes of
anthropogenic origin is discussed.

INTRODUCCION

Important discoveries of upper atmospheric geophysical phenomena are becoming
relatively uncommon. Decades of intense research in atmospheric and ionospheric
physics initiated during the International Geophysical Year (1957-1959) has left little
to be discovered. One interesting exception is the discovery by Ecklund and Balsley
[1981] of what has come to be known as Polar Mesospheric Summer Echoes or
PMSEs (See Cho and Kelley [1993] and Röttger [1994] for recent reviews). PMSEs are
manifested as very strong VHF (30-300 Mhz) radar echoes near the mesopause at
high latitudes during summer. These VHF echoes cannot be explained on the basis of
standard turbulent mixing theories, and their occurrence at even higher frequencies
(UHF = 300-3000 Mhz) makes their existence more puzzling still [Röttger et al., 1990].

There is no current consensus regarding the generation mechanism(s) responsible for
the occurrence of PMSE. Weaker mesospheric echoes -with are still significantly
stronger than incoherent scatter returns- are observed at lower latitudes in all seasons.
These weaker echoes have been postulated to arise from small-scale fluctuations in
the refractive index resulting from turbulence-induced fluctuations in the ionization
density [Woodman and Guillén, 1974]. Even these weaker echoes, however, are
explained only marginally by turbulent processes, since the "inner scale"2 of turbulence
is comparable to, or possibly larger than, the meter-scale wavelengths to which the
radar is sensitive. In other words, echo-producing meter-scale turbulence may be very
difficult to sustain, since such small-scale irregularities will be heavily damped by
viscosity and diffusivity.

Current speculation is that, while turbulence must still play an important role in the
generation of PMSE, it is also necessary to include the existence of slowly-diffusing,
large, heavy ions or charged particles that can exist in the mesosphere at these

2 The inner scale is the smallest scale that turbulence can create as it works against
the competition of molecular diffusion.
high-latitudes, provided that the temperature is low enough. The reader is referred to 
the work of Cho and Kelley [1993] for a review of the physical processes that have 
been put forward to explain PMSE occurrence.

Interest in PMSE is further heightened by a possible relationship between PMSE 
and Global Climate Change. A relationship appears to exist between PMSE and the 
occurrence of both Noctilucent Clouds (NCL) and a related phenomenon, Polar 
Mesospheric Clouds (PMC) [Thomas, et. al., 1991]. A correlation between both PMC 
and NLC occurrences and man's industrial activity has been postulated by Thomas et 
al., [1989]. This correlation is based on the fact that NLC -as spectacular as they are-
were never reported prior to the industrial era. According to Thomas et al. [1989], the 
first observation of NLC was made by R. Leslein in 1885, who attributed the formation 
of the clouds on this occasion to the eruption of the Krakatoa volcano some two years 
before. Thomas et al. [1989] propose that these first observations, and all subsequent 
observations, are due to the increase in methane in the earth's atmosphere. Methane, 
which is the primary source of water vapor in the mesosphere, is necessary in the 
condensation process responsible for the particles that produce the light scattering.

Both the mecanisms proposed for NLC and PMSE require extremely low 
temperatures (the polar mesosphere in summer is the coldest region of the earth's 
atmosphere). It is interesting, therefore, to speculate how anthropogenic activities 
could produce temperature and water vapor mixing ratio changes at these altitudes. 
It is perhaps even more intriguing to examine whether or not PMSE may turn out to be 
an easily observable phenomena that can be used to monitor these changes.

In the summer of 1993, we installed a VHF radar at Peru's Machu Picchu Station 
(62° 06' S, 58° 28' W) on King George Island, Antarctica. This on-going project is an 
important part of the Peruvian research activities in Antarctica, and is being carried out 
with the collaboration of the University of Colorado with partial funding from the Division 
of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation.

The most interesting result of our first campaign (1992-3) was the discovery that 
essentially no PMSEs were observed [Balsley et al, 1993, 1995]. This was very 
surprising, since a comparable radar located at an equivalent latitude in northern 
latitudes would have observed echoes of the order of 30 dB (i.e., one thousand times) 
above the noise level during an equivalent period of the arctic summer. Note that the 
observations in this first Antarctic campaign were made between January 21 and 
February 15, i.e., toward the later part of the summer months. A careful summary of 
the first campaign [Balsley et al., 1995] compared our negative results with northern-
hemispheric, high-latitude observations. We concluded that Antarctic PMSE were at 
least 34 dB to 44 dB weaker than their northern-hemispheric counterparts. We also
reported, as a footnote following acceptance of our manuscript, that a more thorough 
analysis using refined noise reduction techniques yielded one very weak PMSE return 
lasting for a few hours. While this result did not alter our fundamental conclusions 
regarding the disparity between PMSE intensities in the two hemispheres, it did change 
the estimated magnitude of the difference by about 8 dB to 26-36 dB.

We have carried out a second summer campaign, during the summer 1993-94, and have 
been able to detect echoes, although they are again much weaker than comparable 
PMSE observed in northern latitudes. The purpose of this present paper is to report 
the results of this second campaign, and to discuss their significance in the context 
of our previous (largely negative) results reported by Balsley et al. [1993,1995] 
and in comparison with more quantitative statistics of the Poker Flat results. We also 
provide additional details of the earlier 1992-1993 short PMSE event, which was 
detected after a more extensive analysis. Note that, in an attempt to get these 
intriguing, albeit preliminary, results out to the scientific community in a timely manner, 
we will discuss here only the echo power characteristics. The large interhemispheric, 
difference in power are explained in terms of subtle differences in temperature, of the 
order of few degrees.
