ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 98
May, 1996
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR JOCHEN TREBESCH HEAD OF DELEGA-
TION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

(Submitted by Germany)
Opening Address by Ambassador Jochen Trebesch
Head of Delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany

Mr Chairman,

First of all allow me to warmly congratulate you on your election. After all the preparatory work I can well imagine how difficult it is to chair and lead to a successful conclusion a conference such as the Consultative Meeting of Antarctic Treaty Parties. We look forward to working with you and will be happy to do all we can to support you in your task. We wish you good luck and a successful conference.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Government of the Netherlands on behalf of my Government for hosting the XXth Consultative Meeting. The organization of such a conference requires much effort, dedication and skill. We very much appreciate the work they have done.

The XXth Consultative Meeting is a special event due to the round figure: above all, it gives us an opportunity to look back at what the Consultative Parties have achieved at such meetings in the past.

We note with satisfaction that since its establishment the Antarctic Treaty system has created a reliable network of measures, decisions and resolutions which has become denser and more specific, particularly during the last few years.

The Protocol of Environmental Protection adopted in 1991, which is playing an important role in developing the Antarctic Treaty System, was a milestone of the last few years. It represents a crucial new development in that it is not only binding upon the State Parties themselves but also upon operators under their jurisdiction. The Federal Republic of Germany, which, like other Consultative Parties, has invested a substantial sum in Antarctic research, particularly in the research into the global ecological interrelations, has from the outset supported the environmental protocol project. In the meantime we have enacted domestic legislation implementing the Protocol of Environmental Protection. This shows the importance attached to the aim of ensuring effective and comprehensive environmental protection on the sixth continent without impairing Antarctic research.
- 2 -

My Government has therefore noted with satisfaction that most Consultative Parties to the 
Antarctic Treaty have now ratified the Protocol of Environmental Protection. We are confident 
that those Parties whose ratification process has not yet been concluded will help ensure that 
the Protocol enters into force at an early date.

At this 20th anniversary of the Consultative Meetings, however, we must not content ourselves 
with a look back. On the contrary, this is not least an opportunity to look to the future to nec-
essary and possible further improvements which can be made to the Antarctic Treaty System. 
We will have to live up to further challenges in many areas if we are to keep it vigorous and 
effective in the interests of all.

One way in which we can foster effective environmental protection is by elaborating a liability 
regime regarding environmental damage in the Antarctic. Meetings of legal experts from the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have been working on this complex issue for the last 
three years. This matter is also a theme of this Consultative Meeting and we hope that further 
progress will be made.

Another challenge is the improvement of the organizational basis of our work. This is not an 
end in itself but, rather, the prerequisite for ensuring that we continue to perform our duties 
responsibly.
This includes enhancing the efficiency of the secretariat tasks to be performed by the host 
states of future Consultative Meetings and pursuing considerations on the establishment of a 
small and cost-effective Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. The efficient implementation of the Pro-
tocol of Environmental Protection is linked to this issue. Furthermore, we are confronted with 
the growing volume of exchange of information between Parties, which will increase to an 
even greater extent once the Protocol has entered into force.
Considerable progress has been made in the opinion-forming and decision-making processes at 
the Consultative Meetings. However, much remains to be done here if we are to be equal to 
the increasingly complex problems.

Mr Chairman,

Germany attaches great importance to its membership of the Antarctic Treaty and to its active 
participation in the Antarctic Treaty System. Therefore, we, too, hope that this XXth Consul-
tative Meeting will succeed, and will do all we can to help bring about consensus in a con-
structive way.
Thank you.
