ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTATIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 101
                                  May, 1996
                                  Original: English

IAATO SLIDE PRESENTATION RECOMMENDATION XVIII
(Agenda item 15)

(Submitted by IAATO)
DRAFT SLIDE PRESENTATION: RECOMMENDATION XVIII-1

Information Paper submitted to the XX ATCM

(Agenda Item 15)

Submitted by IAATO

As part of the pre-departure prepared by IAATO members, travelers receive a copy of Recommendation XVIII-1 and an Antarctic Primer, which contains additional material on the Antarctic Treaty System, the Environmental Protocol and the _Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic_ (Recommendation XVIII-1).

In addition, all passengers must attend a mandatory briefing on safety and conservation once en route to the Antarctic. Normally given by the expedition leader, the briefing outlines obligations (domestic and international) of Antarctic visitors, specifically in reference to activities ashore. When possible, this briefing is repeated in the native languages of the various travelers.

The IAATO Secretariat has prepared this draft slide presentation to assist expedition leaders with this briefing. Now being circulated for comment, the final version of the presentation will be approved at its annual meeting and implemented for the 1996-97 Antarctic season. Additional copies will be available from the Secretariat.

IAATO notes with pleasure XX ATCM/INF 68 tabled by New Zealand, _Environmental Code of Conduct_. This practical document is an excellent example of an effective tool used to educate visitors -- and implement the obligations of the Antarctic Treaty System.
19

IAATO

A member organization 
founded in 1991 to advocate, 
promote and practice safe 
and environmentally responsible 
private-sector travel to the Antarctic.

GUIDANCE FOR VISITORS 
TO THE ANTARCTIC

(ADAPTED FROM RECOMMENDATION XVIII-I)

Antarctica is governed by the 
Antarctic Treaty System as a 
natural reserve dedicated to peace 
and science. 42 nations participate.

In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Parties 
adopted the Protocol on Environmen-
tal Protection to the Antarctic Treaty -
which sets out principles, procedures 
and obligations for the comprehen-
sive protection of Antarctica.

To help visitors avoid damaging the 
Antarctic environment, or degrading 
its scientific and aesthetic value, the 
Antarctic Treaty Parties adopted 
Recommendation XVIII-I in 1994.
219

PROTECT   ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE

Taking — or harmful interference with — Antarctic wildlife is prohibited (except in accordance with a permit issued by a national authority).

  Do not introduce non-native plants or animals into the water, onto the land or ice shelves of the Antarctic.

  Do not use aircraft, vessels, small boats, or other means of transport in ways that disturb wildlife — either at sea or on land.

  Do not feed, touch, or handle birds or seals, or approach or photograph them in ways that cause them to alter their behavior.

  Yield right of way to wildlife.

  Keep noise to the minimum to avoid frightening wildlife. Do not use guns or explosives.

  Watch your step! Be alert to the presence of wildlife and monitor its reaction to you.
3/9

o Do not damage plants. Avoid 
stepping, walking, driving, or landing 
on extensive moss beds or lichen-
covered scree slopes.

o Take special care 
around animals that are 
breeding or molting. Be 
aware of the periphery 
of a rookery and 
remain outside of it.

o Never harass wildlife.
4/6

RESPECT PROTECTED AREAS

Areas in the Antarctic 
are specially protected 
because of ecological, 
scientific, historic 
or other values.

o Know the locations 
of specially 
protected areas -
and take note of 
any restrictions 
regarding them.

DO NOT
ENTER

o Do not remove, disturb or damage 
anything associated with a historic 
site or monument.Take care of 
Antarctica's heritage.
5/6

RESPECT SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Do not interfere with 
scientific research, 
facilities or equipment.

o Understand that Antarctic research 
facilities are busy places. Your 
scheduled visit may be cancelled 
because of work at the station.

o Respect the wishes of the station 
leader. Do not enter any buildings 
unless invited to do so.

o Historic huts may be entered only 
when accompanied by a proper 
authority.

o Do not interfere with, or remove, 
scientific equipment or marker 
posts. Take care not to disturb study 
sites, field camps or supplies.
O Accept the hazards 
in and of 
the boats.

O Take speacial care of the Zodiac 
platform.

O Take note of the 
head and the flow 
of our leaders. Do not 
hesitate to ask them for 
guidance.

O Keep a safe distance from 
wildlife; both on 
and at sea.

O Know your capabilities 
and coordinate with 
your antarctic 
environment. 
With all at stake in 
times of crises 
and calamity at 
sea.

O Be prepared for severe 
changable weather 
and ensure that 
your undipment meets 
Antarctic standards.

The Artic is 
unforgiving. 
Continual 
contingency 
planning 
and 
foresight 
are 
imperative.

BE SAFE
79

  Expect slippery, uneven terrain.

  Do not walk onto glaciers or large
  snow fields without the proper
  equipment and experience.You
  could fall into a hidden crevasse.

  Do not enter emergency refuges
  (except in an emergency).

  Do not stray from your group — or
  wander off alone.

  Respect any smoking restrictions,
  particularly around buildings. Fire is
  a real hazard in the dry Antarctic
  environment. Guard against it.
KEEP ANTARTICA PRISTINE

 
Antarctica is the largest wilderness area on Earth, not yet subjected to large-scale human perturbations. Please help to keep it that way.

○ Take away only memories and 
   photographs. Do not collect 
   souvenirs or remove anything.

○ Leave no evidence of your visit 
   ashore. Do not paint or engrave 
   anything on rocks or buildings.

○ Do not disturb or pollute lakes or 
   streams. Any materials discarded at 
   sea must be disposed of properly.

○ Do not dispose of litter or garbage 
   on land. Open burning is prohibited.

○ Do not collect biological or 
   geological specimens or man-made 
   artifacts without a permit, including 
   rocks, feathers, bones, eggs, fossils, 
   and parts or contents of buildings.

○ Do not deface or vandalize 
   buildings or emergency refuges, 
   whether occupied, abandoned, or 
   unoccupied.
CREATING AMBASSADORS
TO THE LAST GREAT CONTINENT

The End
9/9
