X     UTRECHT     X
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 104
                                  May, 1996
                                  Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS OF AMBASSADOR SERGIO CATTANI, HEAD OF THE
ITALIAN DELEGATION

(Submitted by Italy)
Opening Address by Ambassador Sergio Cattani, Head of the Italian Delegation

Mr. Chairman,

I would like, first of all, to congratulate you on your election to the Chair of this XX th Consultative Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty. The Italian Delegation wishes also to thank the Government of the Netherlands for its hospitality and the efficient organisation of this meeting.

During the next two weeks, many important issues will be under discussion. Three of them are of special importance for Italy: the implementation of the Protocol on environmental protection; the liability annex; the establishment of the Secretariat.

  As to the first question, we are pleased to note that, since our last meeting in Seoul, progress has been made in the ratification process. However, a few States have not yet ratified the Protocol, which, therefore, is not yet in force. Although the Antarctic Treaty Parties have agreed to apply provisionally the Protocol and its annexes in the course of their activities in Antarctica, this occurs only "to the extent practicable" and in accordance with the legal system of each Contracting Party. It is in the spirit of this provisional application of the Protocol that, pending the establishment of the Committee on Environmental Protection, a Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) began to function at the XIX ATCM . This was an important step. However, I believe that now it is is necessary an urgent to provide the TEWG with appropriate guidance, so that it may perform its duties in the most efficient and useful manner and within the framework of a clear mandate from the ATCM.

  The second question, concerning the liability annex, has occupied us for three and a half years. The complexity of the subject certainly justifies such an investment of time and energy. Italy believes that every effort should be made toward the timely completion of the negotiations on this annex. We favour a workable liability regime that may reasonably guarantee the effectiveness of the substantive system of environmental protection established with the Madrid Protocol without unduly sacrificing the viability of Antarctic research and Antarctic science especially at a time when funding becomes increasingly difficult. A compromise to this effect must be found in light of the principles and objectives of the Protocol which designates Antarctica as "a natural reserve" while recognizing at the same time that it is devoted to " peace and science".

Finally, I would like to address the need for the stablishment of a small and viable Secretariat which may ensure for the future a smooth operation of the Antarctic Treaty System. Italy has supported the establishment such structure since the XVIIth ATCM in Venige and continues to believe that this important matter deserves a timely solution in a manner that may be acceptable to all Parties.
04/1996  12:08   0577298795                                  2                                             
SEGR. ISTITUTI GIUR.    PAG. 03         

The Antarctic Treaty System has demonstrated in the past a 
remarkable degree of adaptability to new situations. The creation 
of a Secretariat would constitute further evidence of this quality 
and would reinforce the institutional cooperation already taking 
place within the ATCM.

Mr. Chaiman

International cooperation has been, indeed, a characteristic of 
Antarctic activities for a very long time and I am glad to say 
that international cooperation is the most important feature of 
the Italian Antarctic Research Programme. We have just concluded 
our eleventh Antarctic campaign with good results in all our 
scientific and logistic endeavours. Our main international 
ctivities, the cape Roberts Project and the CONCORDIA Project are 
progressing smoothly. The same can be said of the other cooperation 
programmes in Antarctica. In fact, this last campaign was one of 
the best we ever had.

Thank you.
