ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                  XX ATCM/INF 84
                                                  April, 1996
                                                  Original: English

ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF THE HUMAN IMPACTS AT KING SEJONG
STATION, KING GEORGE ISLAND

(Agenda item 22)

(Submitted by Rep. of Korea)
Environmental monitoring of the human impacts at King Sejong 
Station, King George Island

Agenda item 22

Submitted by the Republic of Korea

Introduction

Environmental impacts made by human activities at Antarctic 
bases have been of our growing concerns over the past years. 
In order to assess the human impacts at the Korean Antarctic 
station, environmental monitoring programs have been 
implemented recently. Fundamental for the understanding of the 
environmental impacts is a precise evaluation of the current 
state of the environment.

At the 19th ATCM, Korea introduced the scope, objectives, and 
methods of the monitoring programs in the information papers 
submitted to ATCP's. In this paper, we present a summary of 
the monitoring studies, some are new, and some with 
preliminary results, where available. The monitoring studies 
are categorized into 3 subgroups by the nature of the research 
activities.

Monitoring Programs

1. Coastal marine ecosystem monitoring

Focused mainly on phytoplankton communities in the Marian 
Cove, monthly variations in the species composition, 
abundance, and production are being investigated. The study 
includes other ecosystem components at the base of the coastal 
marine food web, such as microorganisms and benthic micro 
algae. Scientists also measure routinely in parallel 
oceanographic and meteorological parameters, such as ice 
cover, seawater and air temperature, salinity, wind speed and 
direction, and UV radiation. This study is to understand the 
change of the community structure and the components' 
interactive functions with the changes of the environmental 
parameters.

The study also attempts to characterize the material flux and 
the energy budget within the ecosystem. Operation of the 
station inevitably places the nearby ecosystem under the 
direct influence of the human activities; for example, the 
release of the sewage, although treated by the standard 
method, puts extra loads of organic matter to the coastal 
marine ecosystem. One of the ultimate goals of this monitoring 
study is to evaluate the human influence on the flow of the 
organic material in the ecosystem.

This work, started from the 1993/1994 season, and amended and 
expanded year after year, is now being carried out year round 
at the station. A similar study, but with a smaller scope and 
for a limited period of the year, is being performed every 
1
year at fixed stations in the central Bransfield Strait area.

In anticipation of future international collaborations with 
other programs, e.g., CS-ESIZ (Coastal Shelf Ecosystem and Sea 
Ice Zone) program, scientists incorporate the standard methods 
and protocols into the current work frame for the measurement 
of the environmental parameters. Our monitoring study is open 
to the other nations operating stations at the King George 
Island for the participation of or coordination with their 
existing programs.

2. Baseline levels of pollutants in the coastal marine 
ecosystem; monitored in a benthic shell fish Laternula 
elliptica.

Although the Antarctic environments have been least affected 
by human activities, significant chemical contaminations of 
coastal benthic fauna were well documented, particularly in 
the area of human settlement, i.e., Antarctic stations. 
Bivalve mollusks are known to accumulate heavy metals in their 
tissue, and have been used extensively for the monitoring of 
the pollution in coastal marine waters. Mussel Watch program 
is a good example of the worldwide use of the bivalve 
mollusks.

Concentrations of the heavy metals, such as Mn, Cu, Zn, Pb, 
Cd, Ni, Co, Cr, and Fe, were determined in various tissues 
(digestive glands, gonads, gills, kidneys, muscle) of the 
Antarctic clam L. elliptica, one of the common marine benthic 
organisms in the Antarctic nearshore waters. L. elliptica were 
collected from the Marian Cove and the Collins Harbour in the 
Maxwell Bay. The two sampling sites are about 6 km-distant 
from each other, the Collins Harbour being away from the King 
Sejong Station at the Marian Cove.

The study is to determine the baseline levels of the heavy 
metals from the distant site, the Collins Harbour, where the 
anthropogenic influence is unlikely or least, and compare the 
baseline with the levels in the clams collected near the 
station. Results showed that L. elliptica tends to accumulate 
most of the heavy metals with tissue concentrations being 
comparable to those of mussels and oysters in temperate 
waters.

We have presented the results in detail at the previous ATCM, 
and elsewhere in the form of research paper. The overall 
conclusion is that the bivalve species serves as a suitable 
biomonitor for metal pollution in the Antarctic coastal 
waters, and that this monitoring program is worth continue for 
the coming next decade.

3. Impacts on the terrestrial ecosystem; heavy metal 
accumulations in lichen around the station

Human activities at the Antarctic stations generate airborne 
pollutants. These pollutants, e.g., PCB, sulphur dioxide, can
                  2
affect the algae component of the lichen, unbalancing the symbiotic interactions, which may result in the total 
destruction of the lichen community. Heavy metals are also known to be concentrated in the lichens.

We have chosen the lichen, Usnea antarctica, to monitor the effect on the terrestrial ecosystem of the airborne 
pollutants, which are mostly from the exhaust fume of the fossil fuel combustion. Lichens are often used as a 
bioindicator, since they are long-lived organisms and very sensitive to airborne pollutants. Concentrations of the heavy 
metals, organic toxins, and refractory hydrocarbons are of our interest in this monitoring study.

Sampling schemes of the 1994/1995 season were introduced in the information papers of the 19th ATCM. To repeat briefly, 25 
sampling sites were dispersed on a quarter circle (a delta-fan shape) along the 5 radii evenly spaced, with the Antarctic 
station at the center of the circle. Spacing between the sites were ca. 100 m, and thus the outermost circle and the sites on 
this circle are 500 m away from the station.

Scientists analyzed the lichen specimen by ICP-MASS to investigate the dispersion of the airborne pollutants (heavy 
metals at present) from the combustion gas and their accumulation in the lichen tissue. Preliminary results from 
the analysis of Pb showed that the concentration was max. 18.6 
ppm within the 100 m circle (within the station premise) and decreased to the background level, 1.4 ppm, at the most 
distant sites (500 m from the station). The highest concentrations are in the area within 200 m distance, and the 
level dropped to the background beyond this distance.
Interestingly, higher levels of the concentration were found in the leeward direction of the dominant wind direction.

Conclusions

Scientists currently plan similar studies to be implemented in the near future, for the soil and packed snow (or ice) in the 
station area. The existing programs certainly need to be further revised and expanded. We invite multinational 
collaborations for a better understanding of the environmental impacts by the human activities. Korea pledges its sincere 
duty to minimize the human impacts in the Antarctic. The effort for the environmental conservation also involves the 
contributions from non-scientific fields, for example, improvements of the incineration method, sewage treatment 
system, and waste handling.

3
