X     UTRECHT     X
29.4.96 - 05.5.96


ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                      XX ATCM/INF 70
                                      (REV 1)
                                      May, 1996
                                      Original: English


ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING

(Agenda item 15)

(Submitted by SCAR)
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Information Paper submitted to XX ATCM by SCAR and IUCN

Agenda item 15

Introduction

As part of a series of joint workshops on areas of common interest SCAR and IUCN convened
a workshop at Gorizia, Italy in 1993, on opportunities for Antarctic environmental education
and training. Copies of the published proceedings of this workshop have been circulated in
advance to all Consultative Parties. This paper summarises four major conclusions of the
workshop.

1. The Protocol

With only six Parties now left to ratify the Protocol, and with all of these having
undertaken to abide by it pending domestic legislation, Antarctic management is effectively
already under the new regime. The Protocol itself, and in many cases the derived national
legislation implementing the Protocol, is written in a legal form that is difficult for many
people to understand. This is particularly the case for the increasing numbers of visitors
going to Antarctica. Since the Protocol exhorts the Parties to improve information
exchange and availability for everyone in the Antarctic a very useful step would be the
production of a lay guide to the Protocol requirements. Since the implementation of the
Protocol into national legislation varies between countries and it is necessary to have such
a guide available in a wide range of languages the most practical scheme might be for each
national operator to undertake to produce such a guide.

2. Progress in Education

In making the obligations of the Protocol better understood and in ensuring that they are
implemented there must be a role for education and training. There has never been any
discussion between Parties on the best and most effective forms of training for this and
any other purposes in the Antarctic. To provide for a regular interchange of ideas and the
development of improved training techniques it might be useful for the Transitional
Environmental Working Group, and in due course the Committee for Environmental
Protection, to periodically review progress in environmental education and training.

3. Educational Courses

There are a considerable number of academic educational activities being undertaken at
present in Treaty countries. It seems certain that if more details were generally available
valuable resource sharing might be possible in the design and provision of material for
schools and tertiary educational courses. IUCN have agreed to undertake the preparation
of such a list.

4. Deposit Libraries

At present public access to information on Antarctica varies considerably between
countries. Some Parties have well established polar institutes with comprehensive libraries
whilst others have no clearly identifiable publicly accessible focus for Antarctic
information. One way forward to meet the Protocol requirements could be for all Parties to
consider designating at least one publicly accessible library where Antarctic Treaty material
would be deposited.
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING WORKSHOPS

Information Paper submitted to XX ATCM by SCAR and COMNAP

Agenda item 22

In 1994 the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (XVIII ATCM) requested that SCAR and COMNAP jointly convene technical workshops to provide expert advice on the design and implementation of environmental monitoring programmes in the Antarctic. The Terms of Reference were defined at that meeting.

Because of the scope and complexity of the subject it was decided to hold two linked workshops. The first workshop was tasked to develop options for monitoring impacts from human activities, based on the list of activities defined by the Group of Experts Meeting in Buenos Aires. The second workshop was required to examine these options and provide a more detailed technical evaluation of feasibility, methodologies and available technology.

The first workshop was held in Oslo, Norway in November 1995. It was attended by 50 participants from 18 countries. The second workshop was held in College Station, USA in March 1996. It was attended by 79 participants from 19 countries. The financial and resource support for the workshops was provided by SCAR, COMNAP, National Science Foundation, Norsk Polar Institut, Norwegian State Pollution Board, and Texas A&M University.

Very significant progress was made with all the major terms of reference. A draft report is in preparation at present and will be considered by SCAR and COMNAP during August 1996 in Cambridge, United Kingdom. A working paper with recommendations will be provided to XXI ATCM in Christchurch, New Zealand, together with detailed supporting documentation as Information Papers.
