ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                      ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                      XX ATCM/INF 130
                                                      May 1996
                                                      Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR J. ARVESEN, HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF NORWAY

(Agenda item 3)

(Submitted by Norway)
Norwegian implementation legislation following up Norway's earlier ratification of the Madrid Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, entered into force on the 5th of May of last year. This means that Norwegian citizens, Norwegian juridical persons, Norwegian flag vessels and aircrafts, as well as foreigners domiciled in Norway, are under legal obligation to observe and abide by the rules and regulations of the Madrid the Protocol.

We are coming closer to the entering into force of the Madrid Protocol. As of today, 22 of the 26 Consultative Parties have ratified the Protocol. The Norwegian delegation would hope that by next's years ATCM in New Zealand, the remaining 4 Consultative Parties will also have ratified the Protocol.

In view of the fact that the entry into force of the Protocol can be envisaged in a year or so, my delegation would like to express its concern about two outstanding issues that need to be resolved in the near future. I am referring to the question of the location of the Secretariat and the finalization of the Liability Annex.

With regard to the Secretariat issues, we are still faced with an impasse. The Norwegian delegation is of the opinion that it is imperative that renewed, constructive efforts be made after the XXth ATCM, with a view to achieving at a consensus decision on the location of the Secretariat at the next ATCM in Christchurch.

Regarding the Liability Annex, we have now made substantial progress in our deliberations. The Norwegian delegation would express the hope that this new trend will continue and that the Consultative Parties would do their utmost in order to truly help the eminent Chairman of the Group of Legal Experts, Professor Rudiger Wolfrum, to bridge the cap of different views on the various concepts and terms that are to be included in the Annex.

At the XIX ATCM in Seoul last year, we agreed on a trial basis on a so-called guideline regarding pre-sessional document circulation and document handling at the present ATCM. This guideline, and in particular the efficient way in which the provisions of the guideline have been implemented by out host country, The Netherlands, has proved to be very useful. Consequently, my delegation would strongly favour that the appropriate decision be taken here in Utrecht to make the guideline a permanent tool for the submission and handling of ATCM-documentation.
