ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                              XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                              XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                              XX ATCM/INF 54
                                                              April, 1996
                                                              Original: English

BELGIAN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH PLANS 1996-2001

Agenda Item 13
(Submitted by BELGIUM)
Since 1985 the Belgian Government has been organizing Antarctic scientific activities through 
a multi-annual national research programme, for which two main objectives were defined:

○ to give tangible form to Belgium's willingness to participate actively in the international 
research effort on the Antarcticin keeping with the spirit of co-operation of the Treaty

○ to contribute towards the development of scientific terms of reference for the protection 
of the Antarctic environment and ecosystems and for the assessment of interactions 
between the Antarctic and the global climate.

So far there have been three phases in the programme. The current phase will end next autumn.

Belgium intends to maintain its interest in and commitment to Antarctic research. Last March 
the Council of Ministers adopted the new phase of the programme proposed by the Federal 
Minister for Science Policy for the next five years. The programme strategy and goals have been 
drafted in line with global climatic issues and the conservation of the Antarctic for the benefit 
of the present and future generations. The research work will concentrate on three priority 
themes:

(i)    marine biota and global change (resilience of ecosystems, biodiversity, biogeoche-
mical cycle of carbon)

(ii)   dynamics of the Southern Ocean (formation of deep waters, marginal sea ice 
zone, Polar Front)

(iii)  palaeoenvironmental record (ice cap, marine sediments).

The total budget of the new phase should be near 250 million BEF, including supporting 
initiatives (data management, international co-operation, dissemination and exploitation of 
results), which represents an increase of 56% compared to the previous phase.

Besides such new initiative, Belgium has recently joined the group of ten countries which 
implement the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA). Belgium contributes to 
the logistics and operational costs of EPICA for an amount of 20 million BEF.

 
*** 
*
