ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




XX ATCM/INF 2
March, 1996
Original: English


DEVELOPING AN UNDERSTANDING OF MINOR AND TRANSITORY

(Agenda item 18)

(Submitted by New Zealand )
DEVELOPING AN UNDERSTANDING OF "MINOR" AND "TRANSITORY" AS USED 
IN THE MADRID PROTOCOL

Introduction

Minor and transitory are terms utilised in the Madrid Protocol to help determine the level of 
environmental impact assessment appropriate for the effects an activity will have on the 
environment. These terms are not defined in the Protocol and a question that has been posed is 
whether there is any value in establishing specific definitions. At the XIX ATCM in Seoul Professor 
Ruediger Wolfrum, Head of the Meeting of Legal Experts, working on a draft Liability Annex to the 
Protocol, discussed with Working Group 2 whether these terms should be defined or whether the 
parameters for these terms could be identified. In developing an understanding of these terms and of 
the best practices to follow in implementing the Protocol, and especially the requirements for 
environmental impact assessment, the work done to date by various Consultative Parties provides 
guidance and assistance.

The Madrid Protocol

Article 8 of the Protocol (Environmental Impact Assessment) states in para 1 that "Proposed 
activities ..... shall be subject to the procedures set out in Annex I for prior assessment of the impacts 
of those activities on the Antarctic environment or on dependent or associated ecosystems according 
to whether those activities are identifed as having:

(a) less than a minor or transitory impact;

(b) a minor or transitory impact; or

(c) more than a minor or transitory impact."

The objective to be achieved is set out in Article 3 of the Protocol which requires that the protection 
of the Antarctic environment is a fundamental consideration in the planning and conduct of activities 
in Antarctica and that they are planned and conducted on the basis of:

"information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informal judgements about, their possible 
impacts on the Antarctic environment."

The New Zealand Antarctic (Environmental Protection) Act

Part III of the New Zealand Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994 (s 17-24) contains this 
process for assessment based on a hierachy of effects whereby three stages are identified. These 
stages match the different levels of predicted impact from activities. In the Antarctica Act these 
conform to those laid down in Article 8 of the Protocol and are:

*   a Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) will be prepared (s 17) if the activity is likely to 
have less than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment; or

*   an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) will be prepared (s 18) if the activity is likely to have 
a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment; or
2

*   a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) will be prepared (s 19 and 20) if the activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.

In New Zealand the agency responsible for administering the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). MFAT will provide advice and guidance to prospective applicants seeking approval under the Antarctica (Environmental Protection ) Act for their activities. An example of this guidance is the preparation of a New Zealand Antarctic Tourism Policy: For Management of Tourist and Non Governmental Activities in 1996. In Appendix 2 of this policy there is a guide to environmental impact assessment methodology, definitions and criteria (see also Table 1 and 2 below).

**Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment of Activities in Antarctica**

What type of activity or situation will determine whether the proposer should consider a PEE, a IEE or a CEE? At the XIX ATCM the United Kingdom issued a "Draft Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment of Activities in Antarctica" (INF 14). This useful document has now been published by the Polar Regions Section of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office as a "Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment activities in Antarctica (July 1995).

This gude suggests that activities which are probably likely to have only a negligible impact (or in other words less than a minor or transitory impact) include:

*   small, light-weight scientific research projects using tents;
*   scientific research projects operated from permanent or summer research stations;
*   aircraft operations using unprepared ice and snow fields or skiw[?]ays;
*   small, light-weight adventure expeditions using tents;
*   small vessel (eg yacht) operations;
*   clean-up and removal of waste and rubbish from abandoned research stations;
*   conservation of historic sites.

Activities suggested in the guide which would have more than a negligible impact on the Antarctic environment (or in other words a minor or transitory impact) include:

*   construction of major, new or replacement facilities at established research stations;
*   abandonment or removal of research stations;
*   major deep ice core drilling projects using drilling fluids;

Activities in the guide likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment include:
* the construction and operation of a new research station;
* the construction and operation of a new crushed rock airstrip or runway;
* major or sediment drilling projects using drilling fluids or muds.

This suggested break down of activities is related to their likely impact. It is a start in considering where various activities may fit on the assessment scale. However, this guide will need to be further refined as consideration is given, for example, to the type of research work being undertaken and the impact of chemicals that are used. Also when considering activities that have more than a minor or transitory impact a 50m hole into sediments using an appropriate drilling fluid will have much less impact than say the construction of new facilities or a large scale clean up of an old base using major plant.

Also three main factors need to be considered in any attempt to categorise activities into a hierachy of effects for PEE, IEE,and CEE. These are:
* the nature and size of the proposed activity;
* the location of the proposed activity;
* the likely environmental effects of the proposed activity.

Assessing the environmental impact of an activity

There is no single method or technique for assessing the potential environmental impact of an activity and the methods and techniques used will depend very much on the characteristics of the activity and on the nature of the receiving environment. Environmental impact has a number of dimensions including the aesthetic, the biological, the physical environment and the scientific. For example electromagnetic radiation could produce a very significant impact scientifically but not otherwise. Three impact categories can be identified:
* Likely direct effects, that is, first order effects associated with an activity;
* Indirect and second order effects which are impacts that may be causally associated with an activity; and
* Cumulative impacts which are effects that may come from similar or varied sources and can have a "snowballing" effect.

Various EIA methods that can be used to measure environmental impact are checklists, overlays, scaling and weighting techniques, networks and matrices. When the Cape Roberts drilling CEE was done by New Zealand (XVII ATCM, Info 19) the matrix method was employed and this has been found to be a useful approach for determining the parameters of minor and transitory.
The Matrix Method

Matrices were used for the Cape Roberts CEE and for the Bahia Paraiso IEE (IEE associated with 
the salvage operation of the remaining oil from the Bahia Paraiso prepared by the Instituto Antartico 
Argentino and Rijkswaterstaadt, October 1992) to identify the range of cause-effect relationships 
from an activity and the likely magnitude, extent, duration and probability of an activity's impact. 
Thus the impact of any proposed activity or activities is cross related with environmental 
components and factors. Four aspects are measured: Intensity; Extent; Duration; and Probability. 
The impacts are then rated in each cell/interaction point using four symbols: High; Medium; Low; 
and Nil or Negligible.

Where on the matrix the proposer places the impact of an activity eventually involves professional 
judgement firstly in the construction of each matrix and then by the listing of the most significant 
effects. For an impact to be judged significant or potentially so, its intersection on a matrix is 
required to have at least one High value or two Medium values for intensity, extent and duration, 
even if its probability was assessed as Low or Negligible. The tables below list the criteria as first 
used in the Bahia Paraiso IEE with a suggested overall level of EIA added. Over time, and as more 
EIA proposals for Antartic activities use the matrix method, then assessments and judgements can 
be tested so that the parameters for the categories of minor and transitory, as contained in Article 8 
of the Protocol, will become better known. The assessment of the impact of an activity is also best 
done by someone who knows the activity not an outsider (see Table 1).

The resource of completed Environmental Impact Assessments

Also as the parameters of minor and transitory are developed a valuable resource for those seeking 
guidance is the range of previously completed EIAs. In fact Resolution 6 from the XIX ATCM 
recommends that lists of IEEs and CEEs prepared by Consultative Parties should be provided to the 
host Government of the next ATCM, circulated as an information paper and then published as an 
annex to the final report of the ATCM. As a record of working practices to produce impact 
statements are built up the standard or level for the three categories of minor and transitory will 
become more precise.

Conclusion

Thus the understanding of minor and transitory, by those proposing an activity, will be increased as 
good examples of environmental impact assessment are developed. An initial guide for the 
categories of environmental impact assessment has already been produced. With a wider use of 
matrix methodology, for example, the boundaries of the hierachy of effects contained in Article 8 of 
the Protocol for environmental impact assessment will be further elaborated. Thus assignment of 
"national practice" or "cumulative experience" of predicted impacts by Treaty Parties will support a 
greater understanding of minor and transitory and lead to improved consistency of interpretation by 
Treaty Parties. A future task for the Committee for Environmental Protection will be to assemble, 
analyse and disseminate this "case law" for the benefit of Treaty Parties as they assess the impact on 
the environment of their activities and those of other operators.
5

Table 1 Criteria for assessing intensity and individual intersections on an assessment matrix 
of environmental impact and an overall significance of likely and potential impacts.

| IMPACT        | ENVIRONMENT                                      | ANALYTICAL EQUIVALENT                                    | EIA LEVEL FOR OVERALL ACTIVITY |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Nil or Negligible | Little impact detected                          | measured parameters may not be detectable or altered only marginally | PEE-less than minor or transitory |
| Low or Minor  | Low magnitude impact limited in space/time      | Measured parameters would change within natural variability | "                              |
| Medium        | Impacted features would recover in the medium time | Measured parameters would change above natural variability but within the limits of the system | IEE-minor or transitory        |
| High          | Impacted features would not recover              | Measured parameters would change above the systems limits | CEE-more than minor or transitory |

Of importance when considering the criteria in Table 1 for either individual intersection points on a 
matrix or for an overall activity is the choice of what to observe and measure. Also to be determined 
is who assesses natural variability, the time scale to be used and what are the "limits of the system".

Table 2 Criteria for assessing duration of general impacts

| IMPACT        | DURATION OR PERSISTENCE OF IMPACT              | EIA LEVEL          |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Nil or Negligible | Seconds to hours                              | PEE-less than minor or transitory |
| Low or Minor  | Days to weeks                                 | "                  |
| Medium        | Months/single season to a few seasons        | IEE-minor or transitory |
| High          | Several years to several decades/centuries   | CEE-more than minor or transitory |
