ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                          XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

                                                  XX ATCM/INF 134
                                                  May 1996
                                                  Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. R. TUCKER SCULLY
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES

(Agenda item 3)

(Submitted by the United States of America)
OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. R. TUCKER SCULLY
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE UNITED STATES

My delegation wishes to express its deep appreciation to the 
Government of The Netherlands for providing such excellent 
facilities, and for the hospitality of the City of Utrecht.

We look forward to significant progress on many important 
items on the agenda. We continue to believe that the entry into 
force of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental 
Protection should be the highest priority of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties. We note, as depositary country, that 22 
of the 26 parties have so far ratified the Protocol. In the past 
12 months, the U.S. has made substantial progress towards 
enacting domestic implementing legislation for the Protocol, 
which is the final step that is required under U.S. law before 
the ratification process is complete. The United States hopes 
that all Parties will give full legal and practical effect to the 
Protocol and its Annexes to ensure the protection of the values 
of Antarctica as articulated in the Protocol.

We also believe that the establishment of a modest 
Secretariat is essential to assist the functioning of the 
Protocol, and the Antarctic Treaty System in general, and that 
it should begin operation by the time the Protocol enters into 
force. We continue to support and encourage the participation 
of experts from the scientific, technical and conservation 
communities, to help identify actions necessary to effectively 
implement the Protocol and other parts of the Antarctic Treaty 
System.

Recalling that Antarctica is a continent dedicated to 
science, and that environmental protection is essential to 
maintain the scientific values of Antarctica, we are pleased to 
note the impressive progress being made in many areas of 
research.  Antarctica is again proving itself a natural 
laboratory providing significant new evidence of global change 
and of the interrelationship of glaciological, biological, 
meterological, and oceanographic processes manifesting these 
changes. Antarctica is also proving to be a very valuable site 
for astrophysical investigations. Research there continues to 
be a model of international scientific cooperation.

We note the important work undertaken last week by the 
Transitional Environmental Working Group and the Group of Legal 
Experts, and we are pleased to note the improved integration of 
CCAMLR, SCAR and COMNAP within the Antarctic Treaty System.

Progress can be made at this meeting in a variety of areas 
including tourism, environmental impact assessment, environmental 
monitoring, protected areas, and management and exchange of 
scientific data.

In conclusion, we reiterate our pleasure at being here in 
the very friendly city of Utrecht and our commitment to 
cooperation to ensure the success of the meeting.
