ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                       XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                 XX ATCM/INF 17
                                                 March, 1996
                                                 Original: French

SCIENCE IN ANTARCTICA: MAJOR NEW INITIATIVES
THE CONCORDIA PROJECT DEVELOPMENT

(Agenda item 12)

(Submitted by France and Italy)
FROM : PONETTE                         PHONE NO. : +81 45 434 4270     Mar. 28 1996 07:07PM P3

THE CONCORDIA PROJECT DEVELOPMENT

The CONCORDIA project is a joint cooperation undertaking by the French and Italian agencies responsible for their countries' Antarctic programs. It is also open to other participants.

Since 1991, French and Italian scientists had been considering the possibility of launching a joint project. In 1993, after two years of meetings and talks, the French Institute for Polar Research and Technology (Institut Français pour la Recherche et la Technologie Polaires) and the Italian Agency for New Energy, Technology and Environment (Ente per le Nuove Energia, Technologia e l'Ambiente), in charge of the Italian research program in Antarctica, signed on March 9 in Paris a formal agreement of cooperation.

This project aims at developing a joint scientific and technological programme whose main objective would be the construction of a permanent research station on the Eastern Antarctica shelf, close to Dome C, as well as the implementation of deep ice drilling activities on the same site. The agreement initially covers a four year period, being understood that it can be renewed automatically for another four years.

A joint body has been set up for the implementation of this project :

-   A six-member Steering Committee, three for each of the two countries, with two secretaries. This Committee meets twice a year and, where necessary, can be assisted by administrative and scientific experts;

-   A Management Board comprising two members whose duty is to look after the practical implementation of the project;

-   Working groups can be appointed by the Steering Committee to discuss specific matters or problems. So far, two working groups, one dealing with engineering and the other with science and technology, have been established.

Dome C (75°06'S, 123°23'E) stands at an altitude of 3 250 m above sea level and is situated at approximately 700 miles from the coastal French base of Dumont d'Urville and 800 miles from the Italian base of Terra Nova Bay. Ice thickness at Dome C goes 3 500 m deep. A radar overflight has taken place during the 1995/96 season, allowing the scientists to make a profile of the rock platform under Dome C and thus to take a decision concerning the precise location of the future drilling site.

The Dome C site offers scientific research very favorable, features four of which should be emphasized :

-   its distance from the coast, far away from oceanic disturbance. This allows the use of modern techniques in the field of seismology and magnetism for the study in the Antarctic area of
FROM : PONETTE                            PHONE NO. : +81 45 434 4270   Mar. 28 1996  07:08PM P4

2

the terrestrial mantle;

-     the low water vapour content in the air, one of the lowest in 
Antarctica. This allows for the very precise measurement of the 
ozone and aerosol content in the atmosphere as well as the 
cosmological radiation with  infrared and  submillimetric 
wavelengths;

-     the ice cover thickness under Dome C, one of the thickest in 
Antarctica. Ice core drilling will provide scientists with very 
valuable information on past climates;

-     The site remoteness and extreme climatic conditions make it an 
ideal place for the testing and labelling of spatial exploration 
techniques and processes, both in terms of technological 
developments and physiological and psychological studies of the 
individuals responsible for operating the station.

According to the CONCORDIA agreement, five flagstaff projects have 
been identified for implementation :

-     Glaciology : the deep ice drilling should allow scientists to 
reconstruct the climatic and environmental changes history for 
approximately the past 500 000 years.  Eight other European 
scientific agencies are supporting this project known as EPICA 
(European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica). It has been 
submitted to the European Union which will help finance it.

-     Atmospheric Sciences : this project consists of two main 
parts, that is the physico-chemical study of the stratosphere and 
the study of the troposphere, including the dynamics of the 
threshold planetary layer. The Concordia station will be part of 
the Network for the Detection of Stratospheric Changes;

-     Astronomy and Astrophysics : the low water vapour contant in 
the air allows the making of unique observations in the field of 
cosmology, of astronomy and of solar-terrestrial relationships. 
Australia will set up at Dome C one of the Antarctic Geophysical 
Observatory Network (AGONET) stations.

-     Geophysics : automatic seismological and magnetic stations 
will be set up at the site.

-     Human Biology and Medecine : the study of problems linked to 
man's adjustment to remote and unfriendly environments, similar to 
those in space.

-     Technological Research : the development of automatic links 
for data transmission and of automated supports for activities 
undertaken in an unfriendly environment.
FROM : PONETTE                                  PHONE NO. : +81 45 434 4270    Mar. 28 1996 07:08PM P5

3

A description of the station, of the related logistics and of the 
scientific equipment that will be used has already been made in the 
two documents (Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations or CEEs) 
dealing with the Concordia project. Both documents have been 
submitted to the XIXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
(ACTM).

The first crossing took place during the 1992/93 season. Its aim 
was a route survey, its marking every 60 miles and the equipment 
testing. It took place on the road linking Terra Nova Bay and Dome 
C.  Because of dysfunctional problems, it had to be stopped 165 
miles from the coast.

During the 1993/94 season, two crossings have been made from the 
Dumont d'Orville base, the first in November 1993 in order to carry 
personnel and equipment for a radar drilling at Dome C. The second 
in January 1994 aimed at controlling the new equipment (sledges, 
tractors and wannigans). This crossing did not reach Dome C 
because of bad climatic conditions at the time and of a late 
departure from the coast. Nevertheless, quite a large amount of 
materials were deposited at around 500 miles from the coastline to 
be transported at a later date. These first crossings were very 
useful as they allowed equipment control, staff training and route 
optimisation.

During the last two seasons, four crossings have been made from 
Dumont d'Orville. Fuel and equipment for ice coring activities 
have been transported to Dome C. Drilling will in any case be 
given priority over the station construction and it should start 
during the 1997/98 season.

During the last season 1995/96, two air transport operations have 
taken place : a C-130 from the Italian air force based in Terra 
Nova Bay on a sea ice runway, and a lighter aircraft also chartered 
by the Italians. The first operation was used to parachute fuel 
drums on the road leading to Dome C while the second one aimed at 
transporting staff members from and to the coastal bases and site. 
That same aircraft was used at the beginning of the season to make 
a radar sounding of the rock mantle.

During the next season (1996/97), three surface transport 
operations will be held, each one with 7 tractors and 8 people. 
The equipment transported will consist of drilling material. The 
scientific and technical personnel should reach the site by 
aircraft.

Two CEEs related to the Concordia station and drilling activities 
have been prepared and submitted in May 1995 to the XIXth Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). Those two evaluations had 
taken into consideration the comments made after the preliminary 
study submitted by France at the XVIIIth ATCM in 1992.
FROM : PONETTE                            PHONE NO. : +81 45 434 4270   Mar. 28 1996 07:09PM P6

4

The Concordia Project is open to international cooperation. It is already the case for the ice drilling activities which 8 other 
European countries are associated to (see below). Other agreements are being considered to include into the research dealing with 
astronomy, atmospheric physics or geophysics the scientists willing to take part in the establishment of those physical processes that 
govern the structure or evolution of the Antarctic region and its environment.

Note on the EPICA Project

EPICA is a European multinational project dedicated to ice coring operations in Antarctica. Its aim is to reconstruct as precisely 
as possible the history of past climatic changes as well as the changes in the Antarctica atmospheric composition and ice cover 
that have taken place over many ice cycles. This reconstruction will provide us with a better understanding of the existing 
interrelationship between the atmospheric and climatic chemistry while allowing us to validate and improve the digital models used 
in the climate surveys. EPICA is linked to various international programmes such as the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
(IGBP) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climatic Change (IPCC). This drilling activity should complete et extend the results 
obtained at Vostok while giving additional information for the Southern Hemisphere on the GRIP and GIPS recordings obtained in 
Greenland.

Within the framework of the EPICA Project, two ice coring operations are being considered :

-   the first one at Dome C should give us the opportunity to go back in time by at least 500 000 years and provide us with the 
longest record of climatic changes obtained through ice drilling. A major feature of Dome C is the possibility to get a high 
resolution for the oldest eras because of a lesser snow build up in relation to Vostok.

-   the second one at Dronning Maud Land in Western Antarctica marked by bigger snowfalls and impacted by the oceanic and 
atmospheric conditions in the Southern Atlantic. This should allow us to determine the relationship between the changes in Atlantic 
flow and the quick climate changes that are observed through the ice drilling in Greenland.

The drilling activities at Dome C constitute the first phase of the EPICA Project. It should end in January 2000. The drilling 
activities at Dronning Maud Land would then follow. Indeed, the years 1996/2000 should be used to specifically develop the drilling 
site and set up the required facilities.
