ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                           XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                                   XX консультативное совещание



                           XX ATCM/INF 136
                           May 1996
                           Original: English


SPEECH BY THE MINISTER OF HOUSING,
SPATIAL PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT, MARG[?]RETHA DE BOER.


(Submitted by the Secretariat)
Speech by the Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment, Margaretha de 
Boer, on the occasion of the opening of the Antartic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Jaarbcurs 
Utrecht, 6 May 1996; 10.00 am.

Your Excellencies, Mr. Burgomaster, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen,

On behalf of the Netherlands Government I should like to extend a warm welcome to you 
all.

This year marks the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty's entry into force. The 
Netherlands, which acceded to the Treaty in 1967 and acquired consultative status in 1990, 
has the pleasure of organising this twentieth Consultative Meeting. Reaching two such 
milestones gives us an excellent opportunity to dwell for a moment on the achievements of 
the Antarctic Treaty.

The first articles of the Treaty dedicate Antarctica to peace and science. The Treaty has hecn 
successful in preserving the peace: it has kept Antarctica out of the Cold War. In prohibiting 
nuclear explosions and measurcs of a military nature, the Treaty was an early example of an 
arms control treaty. To this day Antarctica is still the world's only weapon-frcc zone. It also 
provided the basis for successive Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings to display a great 
potential for settling problems beforc conflicting interests rendered such settlement 
impossible. A good example of this is Article 7 of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, which prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources 
other than scientific research.

That the Treaty has served the interests of science goes without saying.

Science is by far the most important human activity in Antarctica and long may it remain so. 
However, the Treaty's achievements, or to be more precise, the achicvements of your 
Consultative Meetings, go much further.

It is interesting to see how rapidly concern for the Antarctic environment has become an 
important instrument at these meetings. The first meeting in 1961, adopted a 
Recommendation on this subject, despite the fact that at the time the majority of 
Recommendations still related to the advancement of science. Only threc ycars later the 
Brussels meeting furnished a fully-fledged instrument in the form of the Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. This essentially constitute an 
environmental treaty. These measures provided for the protection of species and areas on 
biological grounds.

Your meetings have, however, gone further by adopting other grounds for protection or 
management of areas. They have also introduced the concept of environmental impact 
assessment in an Antarctic context. Furthermure, they have drawn up rules and guidelines 
for waste prevention and waste management.

1
This was finally all put together in the Protocol on Environmental Protection, to which I 
referred a moment ago. It resulted in the formulation in a treaty text of a third objective: the 
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems. In recent decades the Antarctic Treaty System has served this third purpose 
effectively. May it continue to do so.

For the Netherlands Government, concern for the environment was an important political 
factor when it expressed interest in acquiring consultative status. In fact, the same applies 
to the country's observer status in respect of the Arctic Environment Protection Strategy. 
Scientific interest in the two polar regions goes further back. The first Dutch Antarctic 
survey took place in 1963. The Netherlands now has a permanent national Antarctic research 
programme which has, among other things, an important environmental component.

The Netherlands Government attaches great importance to the entry into force of the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection and its five Annexes. The protocol and its Annexes concern all 
human activities in Antarctica. We hope they will prove to be particularly good tools for 
barring structural provisions, for instance for tourists. We hope that agreement can soon be 
reached on the complexities of the sixth Annex. This concerns liability and is obligatory 
under the Protocol. In theory, the legal instruments for the proper supervision of tourism 
would then be in place. However, the enforcement of rules in Antarctica remains a problem, 
even allowing for the comprehensive rights of inspection pursuant to the Treaty. Viewed 
thus, a study of the problem from the international law angle to determine whether port state 
control could help towards a solution is desirable.

It is good to see at this meeting that, when it comes to the discussion of complex problems, 
organisational matters have not been forgotten. At the meeting in Seoul last year, you 
recognised that only those decisions which imposed actual obligations on the Contracting 
Parties needed in the future to be subjected to a burdensome approval procedure. It is worth 
examining which decisions taken previously still require this approval. In addition, you have 
made a start on improving the distribution of documents. Such improvements are especially 
important given the fact that a Secretariat has not yet been established.

Finally, let me point out that this meeting is taking place in the city of Utrecht. First settled 
in 48 AD and once the frontier of the Roman Empire, the city's original name was Trecht, 
from the Latin "trajectum", which means a ford, a place where a river can be crossed. I 
hope that Utrecht will also be a place where you can bridge the divides between your own 
different points of view. Perhaps you will be fortified in your efforts by the knowledge that 
the river one has to cross in this city is the Rhine, not the Rubicon.

Thank you.

2
