ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 127
May 1996
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY DR EMMANUEL
GOUNARIS, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF GREECE

(Agenda item 3)

(Submitted by Greece)
1

OPENING ADDRESS BY MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY DR EMMANUEL
GOUNARIS, HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF GREECE

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the Greek Delegation, I would like to congratulate you on your election
as Chairman of the XXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.
May I also through you Mr Chairman express my gratitude to the Government of
the Netherlands for hosting this Meeting in the beautiful city of Utrecht and also
my thanks for its warm hospitality. On this opportunity I would like to congratulate
Turkey for its accession to the Antarctic Treaty. Greece believes that it is in the
interest of all nations to preserve Antarctica and its waters for peaceful purposes
only and to guard against their becoming the scene or object of international
discord, Mr Chairman. Greece has last year ratified the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty or 1991 and works now for the establishment
of its internal legislation.

Mr Chairman,
The question of the location of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat is always a very
important matter. All of us need this Secretariat, especially the Non-Consultative
Parties. My Delegation deeply regrets that no official consensus has yet been
reached regarding this issue, even though almost all the Parties, have already
decided on Buenos Aires as city for the location of the Secretariat. The
"intermediary solution" regarding this matter, is neither good nor practical and has
negative effects as far as the exchange of information about Antarctica is
concerned. During this meeting we have started to study drafts regarding the legal
status, the privileges and immunities, of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. This is a
very positive step. At the same time Mr Chairman, I like to express my deep
satisfaction to Prof. Dr. Francioni regarding the establishment under his
chairmanship of the internal regulation of the Secretariat. Matters, related to the
establishment of the Liability Annex need a satisfactory solution. I am very happy
to see that the Liability Working Group, chaired by Prof. Dr. Wolfrum, has made a
great progress.

Mr Chairman,
The 8th issue of our Agenda related to the exercise of Jurisdiction in Antarctica has
been solved under Article VIII, paragraph I of the Antarctic Treaty. This article
covers only the scientific personnel associated with the stations or expeditions and
the observers in charge carrying out inspections. However, as Prof. Dr. Caflisch,
Ambassador of Switzerland has said in his opening address during the XVIII ATCM,
in Antarctica are not only such activities undertaking. There are also activities
undertaking by fishermen, hunters, tourists, tour operators, film makers, etc. This
agenda item is therefore very important and has to be discussed in detail.

Mr Chairman,
Greece is also particularly concerned about the ozone layer over Antarctica and
support in this matter, any action and suggestion of SCAR and non-governmental
2

organizations ECO and ASOC, necessary to ensure the earliest possible recovery 
of the ozone layer.
As far as the use of methyl-bromide is concerned, I would like to inform this 
Meeting that Greece very soon will eliminate the use of this material.

Mr Chairman,
Greece believes that the establishment of tourist facilities ashore in Antarctica is 
not desirable. Such facilities could have a serious negative environmental impact 
on the 6th Continent. For this reason we have to avoid the establishment of such 
facilities.

Finally Mr Chairman I would like to inform this meeting that Greece and especially 
the National Center for Marine Research, in collaboration with other Greek 
Institutions, has already created a National Program for Antarctica for 1996-2000. 
The realization of this program will start very soon.

Thank you, Mr Chairman
