ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 42
April, 1996
Original: English

PROTECTED AREAS IN ANTARCTICA

(Agenda item 20)
(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
PROTECTED AREAS IN ANTARCTICA

 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                
1.  Introduction

1.1 Objective

The objective of this report is to provide a simple and easily understood reference list
of all the different types of protected areas designated in Antarctica.

It is hoped that this report will be of use to those travelling to and within Antarctica
who need to know where the various protected areas are, and to those who undertake
visits to, or manage, such areas.

1.2 Background

Antarctica is the largest and most pristine wilderness on Earth. Activities in the region
are regulated by the Antarctic Treaty, 1961, which applies to the area south of 60°
south latitude, including all islands and ice shelves.

Under the Antarctic Treaty System the concept of setting aside areas for special
protection was first introduced by the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of
Antarctic Fauna and Flora, 1964 which also designated Antarctica as a "Special
Conservation Area". There are at present five categories of protected areas: Specially
Protected Areas (SPAs), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), Historic Sites and
Monuments (HSMs), Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs), and Multiple-use Planning
Areas (MPAs). Some areas designated under one category overlap or include areas in
another category. Management plans are required for all areas except HSMs. In 1975
the Treaty Parties introduced the concept of Areas of Special Tourist Interest (ASTIs)
though none has subsequently been designated.

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted in
1991, designates Antarctica as "a natural reserve devoted to peace and science", and
provides for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment. Annex V of
the Protocol rationalises the existing area designations, and distinguishes more clearly
between protected sites and managed sites. Two new categories have been
designated: Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially
Managed Areas (ASMAs). Entry into an ASPA is prohibited except in accordance
with a permit as specified in the Area Management Plan. Entry into an ASMA does
not require a permit, but activities are guided by a Code of Conduct set out in a
Management Plan. ASPAs will include all SPAs and SSSIs designated by past
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) and probably also the one SRA
voluntarily adopted by the ATCM. They will also be re-numbered and have new
Management Plans adopted by future ATCMs. ASMAs are likely to include the one
MPA which has been voluntarily adopted by the ATCM. Existing or proposed
Historic Sites and Monuments may be designated as either an ASPA, ASMA or simply
listed.

New protected areas, and alterations to designated areas are adopted by legally binding
Measures agreed at ATCMs, normally as a result of review and recommendations from
                                                  1
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). States party to the Antarctic 
Treaty apply such Measures through domestic legislation in order to control the 
activities of their own nationals.

Other protected areas have been designated under Conventions to the Antarctic 
Treaty. Three Seal Reserves have been established under the Convention for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS), 1972. Two CCAMLR Ecosystem 
Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Sites have been set aside under a Conservation 
Measure adopted by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (CCAMLR), 1988. Work is in progress to examine whether CEMP Site 
designations and management plans can be brought into conformity with those of 
Annex V of the Protocol.

Further information on protected areas, and full details of individual sites, except 
CEMP sites, can be found in Heap (1994). Additions or amendments to SPAs, SSSIs 
and HSMs are given in the final reports of subsequent ATCMs. Details of the CEMP 
Sites can be found in CCAMLR publication "Schedule of Conservation Measures in 
Force 1995/96".

1.3     Format

This report is derived from Chapter 6 of the Antarctic Digital Database User's Guide 
and Reference Manual (BAS, SPRI and WCMC, 1993). The notes on each protected 
area provide the following information.

    i)      Name of area (unofficial, non-gazetted place names are put in quotation 
            marks).

   ii)      Latitude and longitude of mid-point or boundary of area taken from the most 
            recent large scale maps, as appropriate. (Note that, depending on the location 
            of the area, its latitude and longitude may be slightly different to that given in 
            the Antarctic Treaty Handbook or the official, gazetted place name).

  iii)      If appropriate, approximate area (km²)

   iv)      If appropriate, description of location

    v)      Reason(s) for designation

   vi)      If appropriate, expiry of designation

These notes are intended only as a very brief summary of each area. They have no 
official status and do not replace the internationally accepted Area Descriptions or 
Management Plans adopted by past ATCMs.

2
In this report the following protected areas are listed:

i)    Specially Protected Areas

ii)   Sites of Special Scientific Interest

iii)  Historic Sites and Monuments

iv)   Specially Reserved Area

v)    Multiple-use Planning Area

vi)   Tomb

vii)  CCAS Seal Reserves

viii) CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Sites

It is intended that the list will be updated annually by the British Antarctic Survey, 
usually immediately after the ATCM.

1.4    References

CCAMLR. (1996). Schedule of Conservation Measures in force (CCAMLR), Hobart.

Heap, J. (1994) Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System. Eighth edition, U.S. 
Department of State, Washington D.C.

BAS, SPRI and WCMC (1993) Antarctic Digital Database User’s Guide and 
Reference Manual. SCAR, Cambridge.

1.5    Acknowledgements

The use of text from the Antarctic Digital Database User’s Guide and Reference 
Manual is by kind permission of SCAR. Maps in the report were compiled by the 
Mapping and Geographic Information Centre (MAGIC) of BAS. Thanks to Anne 
Roberts and Janet Thomson of MAGIC for checking the list of the different protected 
areas for any mistakes, and to Dr Mike Richardson, Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office for many useful amendments.
2. Specially Protected Areas

2.1 Purpose

The purpose of SPAs is to preserve both unique and representative examples of the
natural ecological systems of areas which are of outstanding scientific interest. Vehicles of
any kind are forbidden. Entry to an SPA is prohibited without a permit. Permits can only
be issued by an appropriate authority for its own nationals. The collection of any native
plant or animal requires a further and more specific permit.

2.2 List of Specially Protected Areas.

1. "Taylor Rookery", Mac. Robertson Land
67°27'S, 60°52'E. Approximate area 0.4 km². The area consists of the whole of
the northernmost rock exposure on the eastern side of Taylor Glacier. Designated
because Taylor Rookery contains a colony of Emperor penguins which is one of
the few, and probably the largest, of the known colonies of this species breeding
wholly on land (see also SPA No.8).

2. Rookery Islands, Holme Bay
The area includes all of the approximately 75 small islands within a rectangle
centred on 67°37'S, 62°32'E. Approximately 30 km². Designated because of the
unusual association of all six bird species resident in the Mawson area. The
southern giant petrel and the Cape pigeon breed nowhere else in the region.

3. Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast
Ardery 66°22'S, 110°27'E, Odbert 66°22'S, 110°33'E. Approximate area 1.9 km².
The area lies off-shore in Vincennes Bay, 13 km south of the former Wilkes
Station. Designated on the grounds that it supports several breeding species of
petrel and provides an example of their habitat. Two of these species, the Antarctic
petrel and Antarctic fulmar, are of particular scientific interest.

4. Sabrina Island, Balleny Islands
66°57'S, 163°16'E. Approximate area 0.4 km². Sabrina Island is 2 km south of
Buckle Island. Designated on the grounds that the Balleny Islands, as the most
northerly Antarctic land in the Ross Sea region, support fauna and flora which
reflect many circumpolar distributions at this latitude; and that Sabrina Island in
particular provides a representative sample of such fauna and flora.

5. Beaufort Island, Ross Sea
76°57'S, 166°56'E. Approximate area 18.4 km². Beaufort Island lies 37 km north
of Ross Island. Designated on the grounds that the island contains a substantial
and varied avifauna, that it is one of the most important breeding grounds in the
region, and that it should be protected to preserve the natural ecological system as
a reference area.

[Cape Crozier redesignated as SSSI No.4]

4
7.    Cape Hallett, Victoria Land
72°19'S, 170°13'E. Approximate area 0.2 km². The area comprising a roughly 
rectangular block south of the northern coast of Cape Hallett between the road, 
which runs along the eastern side of Willett Cove and the western margin of the 
permanent ice cap and to the north of an E-W line from a projection of the line of 
the road southward to a point 200 m south of 72°18'S to the margin of the 
permanent ice cap. Designated on the grounds that Cape Hallett includes a small 
patch of particularly rich and diverse vegetation which supports a variety of 
terrestrial fauna and that the ecosystem includes a rich avifauna.

8.    Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
67°52'S, 68°42'W. Approximate area 6 km². A group of small, rocky, low-lying 
islands in Marguerite Bay, about 13 km south of Adelaide Island. The area 
comprises all of the Dion Islands archipelago together with the intervening sea. 
Designated on the grounds that amongst the Dion Islands is found the only colony 
of Emperor penguins known to exist on the west side of the Antarctic Peninsula, 
and that the isolation of this colony from others of the same species makes it of 
outstanding scientific interest. It is also the most northerly and probably the 
smallest Emperor penguin colony, and one of only two in which breeding occurs 
on land (see also SPA No.1). Adélie penguins and blue-eyed cormorants also 
breed here.

9.    Green Island, Berthelot Islands, Antarctic Peninsula
65°19'S, 64°09'W. Approximate area 0.1 km². A small island situated 150 m north 
of the largest of the Berthelot Islands. Designated on the grounds that the 
vegetation on Green Island is exceptionally rich, with well-developed continuous 
banks of moss turf which overlie peat more than 1 m deep, supporting Antarctic 
hair grass. A large blue-eyed cormorant colony, Brown skuas, South polar skuas 
and hybrids are also found.

[Byers Peninsula redesignated as SSSI No.6]

[Cape Shirreff redesignated as SSSI No.32]

[Fildes Peninsula redesignated as SSSI No.5]

13.    Moe Island, South Orkney Islands
60°44'S, 45°41'W. Approximate area 1.3 km². A small island lying about 300 m 
off the south-western extremity of Signy Island. The off-lying rocks are not 
included in the area. Designated on the grounds that Moe Island provides a 
representative sample of the maritime Antarctic ecosystem, including large areas of 
peat, chinstrap penguins, cape petrels, Antarctic prions, Weddell seals, leopard 
seals, and fur seals. Intensive experimental research on the neighbouring Signy 
Island may alter its ecosystem and Moe Island should be protected as a control 
area for future comparison. The island contains the greatest continuous expanses 
of Chorisodontium-Polytrichum moss turf found in Antarctica.

5
14.  Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands
60°39'S, 45°36'W. Approximate area 0.1 km². A small island in Marshall Bay, off 
the south coast of Coronation Island. Designated on the grounds that the island 
supports one of the most extensive and dense stands of Antarctic hair grass known 
in the Treaty area and that it provides an outstanding example of a rare natural 
ecological system. Several species of moss are unusually fertile, and the soil 
contains a rich invertebrate fauna. Most species of Antarctic seals are common 
around the island.

15.  Southern Powell Island and adjacent islands, South Orkney Islands
60°43'S, 45°00'W. Approximate area 18 km². The area includes all of Powell 
Island south of the latitude of the southern summit of John Peaks, together with 
the whole of Fredriksen Island, Michelsen Island, Christoffersen Island, Grey 
Island and adjacent unnamed islands. Designated on the grounds that southern 
Powell Island and the adjacent islands support substantial vegetation and large 
concentrations of breeding birds and seals, which are representative of the natural 
ecology of the South Orkney Islands, and which are rendered more important by 
the presence of a small breeding colony of fur seals.

16.  Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island
62°22'S, 59°43'W. Approximate area 0.9 km². The area comprises all the land 
west of a line drawn from north to south across the peninsula 100 m west of the 
two shelters found on the isthmus. Designated on the grounds that Coppermine 
Peninsula is a biologically diverse area, supporting rich vegetation, together with a 
variety of terrestrial fauna, and that the ecosystem includes a rich avifauna. It has 
one of the largest continuous moss stands in the Antarctic. There are chinstrap 
penguins, Southern giant petrels, Wilson's storm petrels, Antarctic terns, 
Dominican gulls, elephant seals, Weddell seals and fur seals.

17.  Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbour, Palmer Archipelago
64°46'S, 64°06'W. Approximate area 2.7 km². A small island designated on the 
grounds that, together with its littoral zone, it possesses an unusually rich 
collection of marine and terrestrial life, is unique amongst the neighbouring islands 
as a breeding place for six species of native birds and provides an outstanding 
example of the natural ecological system of the Antarctic Peninsula area.

18.  North Coronation Island, South Orkney Islands
Centroid of area 60°33'S, 45°35'W. The area is between Conception Point, 
60°31'S, 45°41'W; Wave Peak, 60°37'S, 45°36'W; and Foul Point, 60°32'S, 
45°29'W. Approximate area 88.5 km². The area lies on the central north side of 
Coronation Island. The entire area between the two points is included. The eastern 
boundary follows a precipitous ridge 6 km southwards to a position at 750 m 
altitude immediately to the west of Mt Nivea summit at 60°35'S, 45°29'W, thence 
WSW for 5.5 km to a position at 700 m altitude north-east of Wave Peak summit, 
then 2 km due west to a point north-west of Wave Peak summit. It continues 
north-west for 5 km to the summit of an unnamed peak at the north-west end of 
Brisbane Heights, and from here 6.5 km north to Conception Point. The summits 
6
of Mt Nivea and Wave Peak and the col known as High Stile are outside the area. 
Ommanney Bay and the unnamed bay to the west are included within the area 
south of the boundary between Conception and Foul points (11.5 km). Designated 
on the grounds that it embraces areas of coastal ice-free terrain with large seabird 
colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs, and permanent ice rising to the Brisbane 
Heights plateau which provides an excellent representative area of a pristine ice 
environment near the northern limit of the maritime Antarctic, and that the 
interrelated terrestrial, ice and marine components of the area comprise an 
integrated example of the coastal, permanent ice, and sublittoral ecosystems typical 
of the maritime Antarctic environment.

19.     Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
67°53'S, 67°24'W. Approximate area 1.2 km². The island lies about 3 km west of 
the southern part of Horseshoe Island. Designated on the grounds that the island 
contains a relatively diverse flora and fauna typical of the southern Antarctic 
Peninsula. Of particular interest is the abundance of the only two Antarctic 
flowering plants which form stands up to 10 m². These are amongst the largest 
stands known south of the South Shetland Islands, being only 90 km north of their 
southern limit. In the area both Antarctic hair grass and Antarctic pearlwort 
flower profusely and the seeds have a greater viability than those in the South 
Orkney and South Shetland islands. Numerous mosses and lichens also form well-
developed communities on the island and a few of the mosses are fertile, a rare 
phenomenon in most Antarctic localities. The invertebrate fauna is rich and that 
the island is one of the southernmost sites for the apterous midge. The shallow 
loamy soil developed beneath the plant swards and its associated invertebrate 
fauna and microbiota are probably unique at this latitude. There is also a colony of 
about 1,000 Adélie penguins and one of the farthest south colonies of blue eyed 
cormorants and numerous pairs of Brown and south polar skuas breed on the 
island.

20.     New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
77°13'S, 166°24'E. Approximate area 0.1 km². The area consists of the ice-free 
terrain lying between the cliff top above Caughley Beach and about 100 m east of 
the Mt Bird ice cap, and between a line south of the main stream bed of Keble 
Valley and the south ridge of New College Valley. It is surrounded on three sides 
by SSSI No.10. Designated on the grounds that the area contains some of the most 
luxuriant stands of vegetation (algae, mosses, and lichens) and associated 
microflora and microfauna in the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica; that because of the 
susceptibility of the cryptogamic vegetation to damage from trampling, the 
designation of the area provides protection for its biota; and that the area should 
serve as a conservation reserve representative of the adjacent SSSI.

21.     Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
67°46'S, 68°53'W. Approximate area 0.8 km². The island lies 0.25 km south of the 
south-west tip of Adelaide Island. The area consists of the island together with its 
littoral zone. Designated on the grounds that it is unique in the Antarctic Peninsula 
region for its abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds, the important of 
7
which are Adélie penguins, blue-eyed cormorants, Southern giant petrels, 
Dominican gulls, skuas, and Wilson's storm petrels. Weddell seals breed and fur 
seals come ashore.

22.  "Cryptogam Ridge", Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
74°21'S, 164°42'E. Approximate area 0.7 km². The area includes most of 
Cryptogam Ridge on the southern rim of the main summit crater and lies within 
SSSI No.24. Designated on the grounds that the geothermal ground supports a 
unique community of bryophytes, algae, and microbiota, including the only known 
occurrence in the Antarctic of the moss Campylopus pyriformis and the very rare 
continental occurrence of the liverwort Cephaloziella exiliflora. The site is 
comparable with the only other known high-altitude geothermally-influenced ice-
free area near the summit of Mount Erebus and on the side of Mount Rittman.

23.  Forlidas Pond and Davis Valley ponds, Dufek Massif
Forlidas Pond 82°27'S 51°21'W, Davis Valley ponds 82°28'S 51°08'W. 
Approximate area 9.8 km². Forlidas Pond is near the east end of Dufek Massif in a 
small unnamed dry valley about 1 km east of the northern edge of Forlidas Ridge 
and about 1 km north-west of Davis Valley. The area is in two parts. A: within 500 
m of the centre of Forlidas Pond, and B: within 500 m radius of several meltwater 
ponds at the ice margin along the northern edge of Davis Valley. Designated on 
the grounds that the area contains some of the most southerly freshwater ponds 
known in Antarctica that contain plant life which would be threatened by possible 
contamination by human activity. SPA No.23 lies within SRA No.1.

24.  Pointe Géologie Archipelago, Terre Adélie
The centroid of the area is 66°40'S 140°02'E. Limits of area are 66°39'30"S to 
66°40'30"S, 140°00'E to 140°02'E. Approximate area 2 km². Jean Rostand, 
Alexis Carrel, Lamarck and Claude Bernard Islands, Bon Docteur Nunatak and 
breeding Emperor penguin colony. Designated on the grounds that it is a 
representative area of considerable biological, geological, and aesthetic value; 
contains a high diversity of animals and plants and is an important area for 
research; and that long-term research programmes on bird colonies and geology 
have been conducted in the area since 1952.

Total land area of SPAs: 132.0 km²
Total sea area of SPAs: 51.5 km²
Total area of SPAs: 183.5 km²

8
Table 1: List of Specially Protected Areas in Antarctica

1     "Taylor Rookery"
2     Rookery Islands
3     Ardery Island and Odbert Island
4.    Sabrina Island
5.    Beaufort Island
      [Cape Crozier redesignated as SSSI No. 4]
7.    Cape Hallett
8.    Dion Islands
9.    Green Island
      [Byers Peninsula redesignated as SSSI No. 6]
      [Cape Shirreff redesigned as SSSI No. 32]
      [Fildes Peninsula redesignated as SSSI No. 5]
13.   Moe Island
14.   Lynch Island
15.   Southern Powell Island
16.   Coppermine Peninsula
17.   Litchfield Island
18.   North Coronation Island
19.   Lagotellerie Island
20.   New College Valley
21.   Avian Island
22.   "Cryptogam Ridge"
23.   Forlidas Pond
24.   Pointe Géologie Archipelago

 
9
90°W


                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 Scale
                                 1:35 000 000


Map 1                                                    
                                 Map 2


                                 SPECIALLY PROTECTED
                                 AREAS


Sarah King, MAGIC, 18.1.96


                                 
                                 10
3. Sites of Special Scientific Interest

3.1 Purpose

The purpose of SSSIs is to protect sites where scientific investigation are being carried out 
or are planned where there is a risk of harmful interference, or to protect sites of 
exceptional scientific interest. Sites are protected for a specified period but the time limit 
can be reviewed and extended. Each SSSI has a management plan. Some national 
Antarctic programmes (e.g. British Antarctic Survey) require their staff to obtain an 
internal permit before being allowed to enter an SSSI.

3.2 List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest

1.    Cape Royds, Ross Island
77°33'S, 166°08'E. Approximate area 4.6 km². The area west of a line drawn from 
the south coast of Cape Royds through Flagstaff Hill to the south-eastern tip of 
Pony Lake, and the west shoreline of this lake; and south of a line drawn from the 
western extremity of Pony Lake 280° true to the coast; including the littoral and 
sublittoral zones from Derrick Point on the east side of Arrival Bay about 4 km 
northwards to Rocky Point to the north of Horseshoe Bay, extending 500 m 
offshore from high water mark. Designated on the grounds that the area supports 
the most southerly Adélie penguin colony known, the viability of which is 
marginal. The population declined rapidly from 1956 following interference by 
visitors, until 1963 when US and New Zealand authorities agreed to restrict 
activities. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

2.    Arrival Heights, Hut Peninsula, Ross Island
77°49'S, 166°39'E. Approximate area 1.1 km². The area of Arrival Heights 
enclosed by a line drawn from the Trig T510 north-west over First Crater to the 
500 foot contour, then north along this contour to a point immediately west of 
Second Crater, then around the lip of this crater and south to Trig T510. The area 
is a natural and electromagnetically quiet site offering ideal conditions for the 
installation of sensitive instruments for recording minute signals associated with 
upper atmosphere programmes. Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

3.    Barwick Valley, Victoria Land
The site is defined by lines joining Skew Peak (77°13'S, 160°42'E), Sponsors Peak 
(77°18'S, 161°24'E), a point on the Insel Range (77°24'S, 161°26'E), a point in 
the Apocalypse Peaks (77°24'S, 160°46'E), Mount Bastion (77°19'S, 160°29'E) 
and Skew Peak. Approximate area 279 km². Designated on the grounds that 
Barwick Valley is one of the least disturbed and contaminated of the dry valleys of 
Victoria Land, which are environmentally unique and possess extreme polar desert 
ecosystems. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

4.    Cape Crozier, Ross Island
The site is defined by lines joining 77°28'S, 169°20'E; 77°28'S, 169°28'E; 
77°31'S, 169°28'E; 77°31'S, 169°20'E; and also includes the land area lying north
11
of a line from 77°28'S, 169°20'E to the summit of Post Office Hill and north-east 
of a line bearing 315° true from the summit of Post Office Hill to the coast. 
Approximate area 19 km². Designated on the grounds that the emperor and Adélie 
penguin colonies are the subject of long-term studies of population dynamics and 
social behaviour, and are relatively accessible by air from McMurdo Station and 
Scott Base. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

5. Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
There are two sites. (a) between 62°10'50"S and 62°11'28"S, and between 
58°55'27"W and 58°56'38"W, and between 62°12'30"S and 62°13'30"S, and 
between 58°57'11"W and 58°59'32"W. Approximate area 1.8 km². Designation on 
the grounds that unique fossil ichnolites found in these areas are located close to 
several permanent scientific stations which are frequently, and increasingly, visited 
by tourist groups. The areas also contain representative sequences of Tertiary 
strata. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

6. Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Byers Peninsula is an extensive, largely ice-free area at the western end of 
Livingston Island and centred on 62°37'S, 61°03'W. Approximate area 65.7 km². 
The site comprises the entire area of Byers Peninsula extending from the ice 
margin on the west side of Rotch Dome to a point directly north of Stackpole 
Rocks westwards to the west end of Ray Promontory. The littoral zone of the 
peninsula is included within the site. Designation on the grounds that the fossils 
found in this area provide evidence of the former link between Antarctica and the 
other southern continents. It is important to protect these Jurassic and Cretaceous 
rocks from being used as building materials or removed as souvenirs. Lakes 
contain aquatic mosses and serve as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus 
steineni, the only native winged insect in the Antarctic. The peninsula is of 
exceptional historical interest, containing the greatest concentration of 19th 
century archaeological sites in Antarctica. Expiry of designation 31 December 
2001.

7. Haswell Island
66°31'S, 93°00'E. Approximate area 1 km². The site consists of Haswell Island, 
the largest of a group of islands lying off Mirny Station, together with its littoral 
zone and the surrounding fast ice (when present). Designation on the grounds that 
the site is an exceptionally prolific and representative breeding locality for all the 
species of birds which occur in this part of the Antarctic: five species of petrel, one 
species of skua, and one species of penguin. The site provides exceptional 
opportunities for research and needs protection in view of its close proximity to a 
large research station. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

8. Western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island
62°11'S, 58°27'W. Approximate area 17.5 km². An area on the western shore of 
Admiralty Bay, south of Ezcurra Inlet, south of a line connecting Jardine Peak and 
the shoreline immediately to the north of a prominent group of rocks characterized 
by a covering of orange lichens bearing approximately 068° from Jardine Peak,
12
and east of a line joining Jardine Peak, The Tower and a point on the shoreline 
bearing 180° from The Tower. Designation on the grounds that the area supports 
an exceptional assemblage of Antarctic birds and mammals close to the Polish 
station Arctowski which is frequently visited by tourist ships. Long-term research 
programmes could be jeopardised by accidental interference, especially during the 
breeding season. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

9.  Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    67°34'S, 68°06'W. Approximate area 0.1 km². Rothera Point is in Ryder Bay at 
the south-east corner of Wright Peninsula. The site is the north-eastern third of the 
point and is representative of the area as a whole. The British Rothera station and 
airstrip lie about 350 m west of the western boundary of the site. Designated on 
the grounds that the site serves to monitor the impact of the nearby station on an 
Antarctic fellfield ecosystem. The vegetation is not rich or well-developed and the 
soils are shallow and confined to small pockets; there is no significant avifauna. 
Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

10. Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
    77°13'S, 166°29'E. Approximate area 0.3 km². Caughley Beach and its hinterland 
lie between the areas known as the Cape Bird northern and Cape Bird middle 
penguin rookeries, about 1 km north of Cape Bird. The site encompasses the area 
between the top of the coastal cliffs of Caughley Beach and the Mount Bird ice 
cap, and between a line 200 m south of the New Zealand Antarctic Research 
Programme's summer station and a line 500 m north of Cape Bird middle Adélie 
penguin rookery. SPA No.20 is within the area of SSSI No.10. Designated on the 
grounds that the area is the site of the most extensive stands of moss, algae, and 
lichens in southern Victoria Land. The terrestrial ecosystem within the site is the 
subject of long-term research. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

11. “Tramway Ridge”, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
    77°31'S, 167°07'E. Approximate area 0.01 km². Mount Erebus is one of two 
active volcanoes on continental Antarctica. Tramway Ridge is situated between 
3350 m and 3400 m altitude 1 km north-west of the main crater of Mount Erebus 
at the lower end of “Tramway Ridge”. The boundary of the site is a square with 
sides of 100 m and encompasses the entire warm ground area of lower “Tramway 
Ridge”. Designated on the grounds that Mount Erebus provides one of only two 
known high-altitude areas of fumarolic activity and associated vegetation in the 
Antarctic (see also SSSI No.24). The warm ground and its vegetation are of 
interest to botanists, phycologists and microbiologists, and will serve as a reference 
site. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

12. Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
    77°37'S, 163°03'E. Approximate area 1.2 km². The site is located between the 
tongue of Canada Glacier and the shoreline of Lake Fryxell. Surface features 
include old moraine deposits and ancient lake levels. A New Zealand Antarctic 
Research Programme hut lies within the SSSI. Designation on the grounds that the 
site contains some of the richest plant growth (algae and mosses) in the southern 
13
Victoria Land dry valleys. The concentration of research activity within the area makes it necessary to regulate human impact with respect to trampling, water quality and sampling. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

13.    Potter Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
       62°15'S, 58°39'W. Approximate area 1.9 km². The site is on the east side of Maxwell Bay between Mirounga Point and the east side of Stranger Point, and occupies the coastal zone of varying width up to 500 m from the shoreline. The area has a diverse avian and mammal fauna and locally rich vegetation. It is close to the Argentine station Jubany which is frequently visited by tourist cruises. Long-term research programmes could be endangered by accidental interference, especially during breeding periods. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

14.    Harmony Point, Nelson Island, South Shetland Islands
       62°18'S, 59°11'W. Approximate area 4 km². The site is on the western side of the island and includes Harmony Point and The Toe, the adjacent ice-free land and the intertidal zone. Designation on the grounds that it is an area rich in avian species. Vegetation cover is extensive, often dense, and comprises a relatively rich flora including both species of vascular plants. Its rocky coasts are inhabited by large numbers of marine invertebrates. Long-term research programmes could be disrupted by accidental interference, the destruction of the vegetation and substratum, and the perturbation of nesting areas. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

15.    Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
       64°10'S, 61°01'W. Approximate area 51.8 km². The site comprises the Cierva Point peninsula with the land west of a line from the south-east of the north side of the point through the summit of Mojon Hill to the south-east of the south side of the point. Also included are Sterneck, Midas, and Moss islands. The Chilean Primavera Base and all its associated installations and areas of disturbance are excluded. Designation on the grounds that it sustains important avian populations, extensive vegetation and a diverse flora including the two Antarctic flowering plants and several liverworts, and an invertebrate fauna. Long-term research programmes could be endangered by accidental interference, destruction of vegetation and soil, pollution of rock pools, and perturbation of breeding birds. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

16.    North-east Bailey Peninsula, Budd Coast
       66°17'S, 110°33'E. Approximate area 0.5 km². Bailey Peninsula is situated between Newcomb and O'Brien bays at the west end of Vincennes Bay. The site consists of an irregular area of rock exposed during summer, surrounding the Casey station transmitter building. Designation on the grounds that it contains contrasting habitats and water bodies, has extremely rich lichen and moss communities and an important stand of liverwort. Proximity to Casey station minimizes logistic problems for field research and, at the same time, maximizes the potential for disturbance of study areas. It is primarily for this latter reason that the
                    14
site requires protection. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

17.    Clark Peninsula, Budd Coast, Wilkes Land
66°15'S, 110°35'E. Approximate area 12.1 km². Clark Peninsula is situated on the 
north side of Newcomb Bay at the western end of Vincennes Bay. The site 
comprises all land on Clark Peninsula within the southern boundary line connecting 
the east side of Stevenson Cove with trig station NM/5/6, trig station G3 and a 
point to the ESE on Løken Moraines. The western boundary is the easternmost 
limit of Løken Moraines as far north as a point due east of Blakeney Point, and 
thence to the coast. Designation on the grounds that, within the site, moss and 
lichen communities are being used as control sites to monitor environmental 
impact at Casey station. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

18.    North-west White Island, McMurdo Sound
78°07'S, 167°11'E. Approximate area 170 km². White Island rises out of the Ross 
Ice Shelf about 30 km SSE of Hut Point, Ross Island. It includes the north-west 
coastline of White Island from Cape Spencer-Smith in the north to a point 
protruding into the strait between White and Black islands in the south-west. It 
extends from high water mark to 5 km offshore across Ross Ice Shelf. Designation 
on the grounds that the site supports a small population of Weddell seals which is 
physically isolated from the rest of mainland Antarctica by an ice shelf. It is one of 
the very few areas where Weddell seals feed under an ice shelf. It is also one of the 
most southerly Weddell seal populations and has been studied year-round. Expiry 
of designation 31 December 2001.

19.    Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria Land
77°35'S, 161°05'E. Approximate area 3.2 km². The site is at the east end of 
Asgaard Range to the north of Oliver Peak, between Don Juan Pond in South Fork 
Valley, and Inland Forts, a small mountain range south-east of the Asgaard Range. 
The site includes the flat terrace north and east of Oliver Peak. Designation on the 
grounds that Linnaeus Terrace is one of the richest localities for the unique 
cryptoendolithic communities which colonize the Beacon sandstone. Exposed rock 
surfaces exhibit a range of biological and physical weathering forms. Expiry of 
designation 31 December 2000.

20.    Biscoe Point, Anvers Island
64°48'S, 63°47'W. Approximate area 2.7 km². Biscoe Point is on the south-east 
side of Biscoe Bay on the south side of Anvers Island. The site includes the rocky 
promontory ending in Biscoe Point, the smaller headland immediately to the north 
and the small islet off the south-west of Biscoe Point. A narrow area of land 
between the two promontories is included, as is the inshore marine environment. 
Designation on the grounds that the site contains a large but discontinuous stand 
of the two native vascular plants, Antarctic hair grass and Antarctic pearlwort. A 
relatively well-developed loam occurs beneath closed swards of the grass and 
contains a rich biota. Long-term programmes could be jeopardised by interference 
from nearby Palmer station and from tourist ships. Expiry of designation 31 
December 2000.
15
21. Parts of Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Approximate area 1.7 km². The site includes 5 areas on the coast of Port Foster.
Area A: 63°00'S 60°34'W. From the west side of Entrance Point to the west side 
of Collins Point on the south side of Neptune's Bellows, and extending 500 m 
inland from the shore. Area B: 62°57'S 60°42'W. Mid Fumarole Bay, south-west 
of Wensleydale Point extending for 500 m along the shore, to the line of 
precipitous lava cliffs about 100 m inland. Area C: 62°56'S 60°40'W. The island 
created during the 1967 eruption in Telefon Bay, and including the low land, 
containing a lake, which joins the new island to the main island. Area D: 62°56'S 
60°35'W. A strip 100 m wide extending from the high water mark of the heated 
shoreline of Pendulum Cove inland to a series of gullies about 750 m inland. The 
area lies about 300 m south of the former Chilean station Pedro Aguirre Cerda. 
Area E: 62°58'S 60°34'W. Kroner Lake including the land within 50 m of its 
shore. Designation on the grounds that Deception Island is exceptional because of 
its volcanic activity, having had major eruptions in 1967, 1969 and 1970. The 
island offers unique opportunities to study colonization processes in an Antarctic 
environment. Expiry of designation 31 December 2000.

22. "Yukidori Valley", Langhovde, Lützow-Holm Bay
69°14'S, 39°45'E. Approximate area 3.6 km². "Yukidori Valley" is situated in the 
middle part of Langhovde on the east coast of Lützow-Holm Bay. The site 
encompasses the area between a tongue of the ice cap and sea at the western end 
of the valley; it extends up to 50 m offshore near the mouth of the stream. 
Designated on the grounds that it is representative of the typical Antarctic fellfield 
ecosystem. The area is used for long-term biological research and monitoring. 
Pedestrian traffic is increasing and it is necessary to reduce human impacts. Expiry 
of designation 31 December 2003.

23. Svarthamaren, Mühlig-Hofmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land
71°54'S, 5°10'E. Approximate area 3.8 km². Svarthamaren is an ice-free area 
about 200 km inland. The site consists of the north-east facing cliffs and screes 
north of the summit of Svarthamaren. Designated on the grounds that the 
Svarthamaren Antarctic petrel colony is the largest known seabird colony situated 
inland on the Antarctic continent, and probably represents a significant proportion 
of the world population of this species. The site provides for research on the 
Antarctic petrel, snow petrel and south polar skua, and the study of adaptations of 
seabirds breeding inland. Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

24. Summit of Mount Melbourne, Victoria Land
74°21'S, 164°41'E. Approximate area 8.4 km². The site comprises all terrain 
above the 2200 m contour surrounding the main volcanic crater. Designation on 
the grounds that the warmed ground supports an unique cryptogamic flora and 
microbiota and accumulations of organic matter. Uncontrolled human activity 
within this area could cause severe damage by trampling of plants, compacting soil 
and altering soil temperature gradients, changing rates of steam release and 
possibly causing the introduction of alien micro-organisms and cryptogamic plants. 
Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

16
25. "Marine Plain", Mule Peninsula, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land 
68°36'S, 78°07'E. Approximate area 19.9 km². Marine Plain opens into an arm of 
Crooked Fjord on the southern side of Mule Peninsula. The site extends from 
68°36'30"S, 78°09'00"E; to 68°36'45"S, 78°10'30"E; to 68°37'30"S, 78°12'30"E; 
thence south along the meridian 78°12'30"E. Designated on the grounds of its 
vertebrate fossil fauna, including a new species, genus, and probably family of 
fossil dolphin. Burton Lake, within the site, represents an unique stage in the 
biological and physico-chemical evolution of a terrestrial water body from the 
marine environment. Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

26. Discovery Bay (Chile Bay), Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands 
The site comprises two small areas of benthic habitat. A: between 62°28'54"S and 
62°29'18"S; and between 59°41'12"W and 59°41'43"W. B. between 62°28'18"S 
and 62°28'42"S; and between 59°40'15"W and 59°40'47"W. Approximate area 
0.8 km². Designation on the grounds that in Chile Bay there has been continuous 
benthic research since 1947. Data being accumulated provide a baseline for long-
term investigations. The site requires protection from possible harmful 
interference. Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

27. Port Foster, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands 
The site comprises two small areas of benthic habitat. A: between 62°55'30"S and 
62°56'12"S; and between 60°37'00"W and 60°38'00"W. B. between 62°57'12"S 
and 62°57'54"S; and between 60°36'20"W and 60°37'20"W. Approximate area 
1.9 km². Designation on the grounds of exceptional ecological interest because of 
its active volcanic character. The two habitats are subject to long-term research 
and it is necessary to reduce the risk of accidental interference which could 
jeopardise those studies. Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

28. South Bay, Doumer Island, Palmer Archipelago 
The centroid of the area is 64°52'S 63°35'W. The site consists of a small area of 
coastal and sub-tidal benthos bounded by 64°51'42"S to the north, between 
63°34'00"W and 63°35'20"W, and to the south by a diagonal line that starts at a 
point 100 m north of the Chilean refuge Yelcho on the southern shore of South 
Bay and extends to 64°51'58"S, 63°34'00"W. Approximate area 1 km². 
Designation on the grounds that the site is the subject of a long-term study on 
marine ecology, and to reduce the risk of accidental interference which might 
jeopardize those investigations. Expiry of designation 31 December 1997.

29. Ablation Point-Ganymede Heights, Alexander Island 
The centroid of the area is 70°50'S 68°24'W. The site extends from 70°45'S to 
70°55'S; and from 68°40'W to the George VI Sound coastline. Approximate area 
186 km². Designation on the grounds that it represents one of the largest ablation 
areas in West Antarctica. It has a complex lithology and a wide range of 
geomorphological features including raised beaches, moraine systems, and 
patterned ground. There are several freshwater lakes and ponds, some ice-covered, 
supporting a diverse fauna. The terrestrial and freshwater systems are vulnerable to 
human impact and therefore merit protection.
[Avian Island redesignated as SPA No.21]

31. Mount Flora, Hope Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
63°25'S, 57°00'W. Approximate area 0.6 km². Mount Flora is situated about 1 km south of Hope Bay and about 1 km south-east of the Argentine station Esperanza. 
The site comprises the upper slopes of Mount Flora above 250 m altitude where the plant-beds of sandstone and siltstone outcrop as a distinct black band between 
the lower black band of conglomerates and light-coloured volcanic rocks which cap the mountain. Designation on the grounds of its rich fossil flora. It was one of 
the first fossil floras discovered in Antarctica and has played a significant stratigraphic role in deducing the geological history of the Antarctic Peninsula. Its 
long history as an easily accessible site has made it vulnerable to souvenir collectors, and for this reason it merits protection. Expiry of designation 31 
December 1999.

32. Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
62°29'S, 60°48'W. Approximate area 6.3 km². The ice-free peninsula lying to the north of the northern margin of the permanent ice cap on Livingston Island, 
between Barclay Bay and Hero Bay. The site includes most of the Telmo Island group about 2 km west of Cape Shirreff. Designated on the grounds that both 
Antarctic fur seal and penguin breeding colonies, and krill fisheries within the foraging range of these species, make this a critical site for ecosystem monitoring. 
Cape Shirreff supports a diversity of plant and animal life, including many invertebrates, and a substantial population of elephant seals. Expiry of designation 
31 December 1999. (This site is also a CEMP Monitoring Site).

33. Ardley Island, Maxwell Bay, King George Island
62°13'S, 58°56'W. Approximate area 1.5 km². The island is situated 500 m east of the coast of Fildes Peninsula. It is 1 km south-east of the Russian station 
Bellingshausen and the Chilean station Teniente Marsh, and 500 m east of the Chinese station Great Wall. Designation on the grounds that it has diverse avifauna 
with 12 breeding species, and is of particular importance for its breeding colonies of gentoo, Adélie, and chinstrap penguins; southern giant petrels, Wilson's storm 
petrels, and black-bellied storm petrels. The island possesses a climax fellfield ecosystem dominated by macrolichens; such vegetation is extremely sensitive to 
human intervention. A "tourist area" has been designated on the north side of the island within the boundary of the site. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

34. Lions Rump, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
The area is bounded by 62°07'48"S, 58°09'17"W; 62°07'49"S, 58°07'14"W; 
62°08'19"S, 58°07'19"W; and 62°08'16"S, 58°09'15"W. Approximate area 1.3 
km². Designated on the grounds that the area is representative of the terrestrial, limnological and littoral ecosystems of King George Island, possessing diverse 
biota and rock formations. There is a rich flora, especially of lichens, and two native vascular plants. Twelve species of birds nest within the area, including 
colonies of Adélie, chinstrap, and gentoo penguins. There are large numbers of elephant seals and fur seals on the beaches. It is a rich part of the coastal 

18
ecosystem that has not been disturbed by human activity apart from research 
personnel. Expiry of designation 31 December 2001.

35. Western Bransfield Strait off Low Island, South Shetland Islands
The area lies off the southern shore of Low Island between 63°20'S and 63°35'S;
61°45'W and 62°30'W. Approximate area 1100 km². A small portion of Low 
Island projects into the area; here the northern limit of the marine SSSI is the 
associated intertidal zone, extending to depths of about 200 m and then deepening 
rapidly near the boundaries of the marine SSSI. Designated on the grounds that the 
shallow shelf south of Low Island is one of the only two known sites in the 
western South Shetland Islands to Palmer Archipelago region that are suitable for 
bottom trawling for fish and other benthic organisms. The shelf appears to be a 
major spawning ground for several fish species. Expiry of designation 31 
December 2001.

36. East Dallman Bay off Brabant Island, Palmer Archipelago
The site lies off the western shore of Brabant Island between 64°00'S and 64°20'S; 
and from 62°50'W east to the intertidal zone. Approximate area 710 km². 
Designated on the grounds that the shallow shelf off Brabant Island is one of only 
two known sites near Palmer Station (USA) that are suitable for bottom trawling 
for fish and other benthic organisms. The benthic community includes numerous 
fish species, invertebrates, and marine plants. Expiry of designation 31 December 
2001.

Total land area of SSSIs: 655.0 km²   
Total sea area of SSSIs: 2029.3 km²   
Total area of SSSIs: 2684.3 km²   

 
19
Table 2: List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Antarctica

1  Cape Royds
2  Arrival Heights
3  Barwick Valley
4  Cape Crozier
5  Fildes Peninsula
6  Byers Peninsula
7  Haswell Island
8  Western shore of Admiralty Bay
9  Rothera Point
10 Caughley Beach
11 "Tramway Ridge"
12 Canada Glacier
13 Potter Peninsula
14 Harmony Point
15 Cierva Point
16 North-east Bailey Peninsula
17 Clark Peninsula
18 North-west White Island
19 Linnaeus Terrace
20 Biscoe Point
21 Parts of Deception Island
22 "Yukidori Valley"
23 Svarthamaren
24 Summit of Mount Melbourne
25 "Marine Plain"
26 Chile Bay
27 Port Foster
28 South Bay
29 Ablation Point
   [Avian Island now redesignated as SPA No. 21]
31 Mount Flora
32 Cape Shirreff
33 Ardley Island
34 Lions Rump
35 Western Bransfield Strait
36 Dallman Bay
                  20
SITES OF SPECIAL
SCIENTIFIC INTEREST

Sarah King, MAGIC, 18.1.96
                                                                             21
4. Historic Sites and Monuments

4.1 Purpose

The purpose of each HSM is to preserve and protect from damage individual historic sites 
and monuments within the Antarctic Treaty area. Each HSM must be appropriately 
marked with notices in English, French, Spanish, and Russian indicating that it is 
scheduled for preservation in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. 
There are no restrictions on entry to HSMs but, under the Environmental Protocol, there 
is an outright prohibition on damage, removal, or destruction of listed sites.

4.2 List of Historic Sites and Monuments

1.    South Pole
      Flag mast erected in December 1965 at the south geographic pole by the first 
      Argentine Overland Polar Expedition.

2.    Ongul Island, Prins Harald Kyst
      69°00'S, 39°35'E. Rock cairn and plaques at Syowa Station in memory of Shin 
      Fukushima, a member of the 4th Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition, who 
      died in October 1960.

3.    Proclamation Island, Enderby Land
      65°51'S, 53°41'E. Rock cairn and plaque erected in January 1930 by Sir Douglas 
      Mawson to commemorate landing by a party of the British, Australian and New 
      Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition 1929-31.

4.    Pole of Inaccessibility
      83°06'S, 54°58'E. Station building to which a bust of V I Lenin is fixed, together 
      with a plaque in memory of the conquest of the Pole of Inaccessibility by Soviet 
      Antarctic explorers in 1958.

5.    Cape Bruce, Mac. Robertson Land
      67°25'S, 60°47'E. Rock cairn and plaque erected in February 1931 by Sir Douglas 
      Mawson to commemorate landing by a party of the British, Australian and New 
      Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition 1929-31.

6.    Walkabout Rocks, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land
      68°22'S, 78°32'E. Rock cairn erected in 1939 by Sir Hubert Wilkins. The cairn 
      houses a canister containing a record of his visit.

7.    Mabus Point, Queen Mary Land
      66°33'S, 93°01'E. Stone with plaque erected at Mirny Station in memory of 
      driver-mechanic Ivan Kharma who perished on fast ice in 1956.

8.    Mabus Point, Queen Mary Land
      66°33'S, 93°01'E. Metal monument-sledge with plaque at Mirny Station in
22

18. Hut Point, Ross Island
77°50'S, 166°37'E. Hut built in February 1902 by the British Antarctic Expedition 
1901-04 led by Captain R F Scott. Partially restored in January 1964 by the New 
Zealand Antarctic Society with assistance from the US government.

19. Hut Point, Ross Island
77°50'S, 166°37'E. Cross erected in February 1904 by the British Antarctic 
Expedition 1901-04 in memory of T Vince, a member of the expedition, who died 
in the vicinity.

20. Observation Hill, Ross Island
77°51'S, 166°41'E. Cross erected in January 1913 by the British Antarctic 
Expedition of 1910-13 in memory of Captain R F Scott's party which perished on 
the return journey from the South Pole in March 1912.

21. Cape Crozier, Ross Island
77°31'S, 169°22'E. Remains of stone hut constructed in July 1911 by Dr Edward 
Wilson's party of the British Antarctic Expedition 1910-13 during the winter 
journey to collect Emperor penguin eggs.

22. Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
71°18'S, 170°12'E. Hut built in February 1899 during the Southern Cross 
Expedition led by C E Borchgrevink. There are three huts. Two date from 
Borchgrevink's expedition and one from Scott's Northern Party, 1910-11.

23. Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
71°17'S, 170°13'E. Grave of Norwegian biologist Nicolai Hanson, a member of C 
E Borchgrevink's Southern Cross Expedition 1899-1900. This is the first known 
grave in the Antarctic.

24. Mount Betty, Queen Maud Range
85°11'S, 163°47'W. Rock cairn, known as Amundsen's Cairn, on Mount Betty, 
erected by Roald Amundsen on 6 January 1912 on his way back to Framheim from 
the South Pole.

25. Framnesodden, Peter I Øy
68°50'S, 90°43'W. Hut and plaque built by Norwegian Captain Nils Larsen in 
February 1929. The plaque is inscribed "Norvegia-ekspedisjonen 2/2 1929".

26. Barry Island, Debenham Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
68°07'S, 67°06'W. Abandoned installations of Argentine station General San 
Martin, with cross, flag mast, and monolith built in 1951.

27. Megalestris Hill, Petermann Island, Antarctic Peninsula
65°10'S, 64°09'W. Cairn with plaque erected in 1909 by the second French 
expedition led by J-B Charcot. Restored by British Antarctic Survey in 1958.

24
28.  Port Charcot, Booth Island, Antarctic Peninsula
65°03'S, 64°02'W. Rock cairn with wooden pillar and plaque inscribed with the 
names of the first French expedition led by J-B Charcot which wintered here in 
1904 aboard Le Français.

29.  Lambda Island, Melchior Islands, Antarctic Peninsula
64°18'S, 62°58'W. Lighthouse named Primero de Mayo erected by Argentina in 
1942. This was the first Argentine lighthouse in the Antarctic.

30.  Paradise Harbour, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
64°49'S, 62°51'W. Shelter erected in 1950 near the Chilean base Gabriel Gonzales 
Videla to honour Gabriel Gonzales Videla, first Head of State to visit the 
Antarctic.

31.  Whalers Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
62°58'S, 60°34'W. Memorial plaque marking the position of a cemetery where 
some 40 Norwegian whalers were buried in the first half of the twentieth century. 
The cemetery was swept away by a volcanic eruption in February 1969.

32.  Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
62°28'S, 59°40'W. Concrete monolith erected in 1947 near Arturo Prat Base. 
Point of reference for Chilean hydrographic surveys.

33.  Arturo Prat Base, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
62°29'S, 59°40'W. Shelter and cross with plaque near Arturo Prat Base. Named in 
memory of Lieutenant-Commander Gonzales Pacheco, who died while in charge 
of the station.

34.  Arturo Prat Base, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
62°30'S, 59°41'W. Bust of the Chilean naval hero Arturo Prat erected in 1947.

35.  Arturo Prat Base, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
62°29'S, 59°40'W. Wooden cross and statue of the Virgin of Carmen erected in 
1947 near Arturo Prat Base.

36.  Potter Cove, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
62°14'S, 58°39'W. Metal plaque erected by Eduard Dallmann to commemorate 
the visit of his German expedition on 1 March 1874.

37.  General Bernardo O'Higgins Base, Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula
63°19'S, 57°54'W. Statue of Bernard O'Higgins, the first ruler of Chile to foresee 
the importance of Antarctica.

38.  Snow Hill Island, Antarctic Peninsula
64°22'S, 56°59'W. Hut built in February 1902 by the main party of the Swedish 
South Polar Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld.

39.  Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula
63°24'S, 56°59'W. Stone hut built in January 1903 by a party of the Swedish 
South Polar Expedition.
25
40. Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula
63°24'S, 56°59'W. Bust of General San Martin, grotto with a statue of the Virgin
of Lujan, and a flag mast at Base Esperanza. Erected by Argentina in 1955;
together with a graveyard with stele in memory of members of Argentine
expeditions who died in the area.

41. Paulet Island, Antarctic Peninsula
63°34'S, 55°45'W. Stone hut built in February 1903 by survivors of the wrecked
vessel Antarctic under Captain C A Larsen, members of the Swedish South Polar
Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjold, together with a grave of a member of the
expedition.

42. Scotia Bay, Laurie Island, South Orkney Islands
60°44'S, 44°41'W. Stone hut built in 1903 by the Scottish Expedition led by W S
Bruce; the Argentine meteorological hut and magnetic observatory, built in 1905;
and a graveyard with seven graves dating from 1903.

43. Filchner Ice Front, Weddell Sea
77°58'S, 38°48'W. Cross erected in 1955, 1300 m north-east of the
Argentine base General Belgrano I (station subsequently destroyed during
break-up of ice shelf).

44. Nivlisen ice front, Princesse Astrid Kyst, Dronning Maud Land
70°43'S, 11°40'E. Plaque erected at the temporary Indian station Dakshin
Gangotri listing the names of the members of the First Indian Antarctic Expedition
which landed nearby on 9 January 1982.

45. Metchnikoff Point, Brabant Island, Antarctic Peninsula
64°02'S, 62°34'W. Plaque mounted at a height of 70 m on the crest of the moraine
separating Metchnikoff Point from the glacier, erected by members of the Joint
Services Expedition 1983-85 to commemorate the first landing on Brabant Island
by the Belgian Antarctic Expedition 1897-99 led by Adrien de Gerlache.

46. Port Martin, Terre Adélie
66°49'S, 141°23'E. All buildings and installations of Port Martin base constructed
in 1950 by the 3rd French expedition and partly destroyed by fire during the night
of 23-24 January 1952.

47. Ile des Pétrels, Terre Adélie
66°41'S, 140°01'E. Wooden building Base Marret where seven men under the
command of Mario Marret wintered in 1952 following a fire at Port Martin base.

48. Ile des Pétrels, Terre Adélie
66°41'S, 140°01'E. Cross erected on the north-east headland of the island in
memory of André Prudhomme, chief meteorologist of the 3rd French International
Geophysical Year expedition, who disappeared during a storm on 7 January 1959.

49. Bunger Hills, Queen Mary Land
66°16'18"S, 100°45'E. Concrete pillar erected by the First Polish Antarctic
Expedition at Dobrowolski station in January 1959 for gravity measurements.
26
50. Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
62°12'S, 59°01'W. Plaque mounted on a sea cliff south-west of the Chilean station 
in memory of Professors Siedlecki and Tazar, members of the first Polish Antarctic 
maritime research expeditions, who landed here in February 1976.

51. Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
62°10'S, 58°28'W. Grave of Wlodzimierz Puchalski, surmounted by an iron cross, 
on a hill south of Arctowski station. Puchalski was an artist and producer of 
documentary nature films who died on 19 January 1979.

52. Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
62°13'S, 58°58'W. Monolith erected to commemorate the establishment of the 
Chinese Great Wall Station on 20 February 1985.

53. Elephant Island, South Shetland Islands
61°06'S, 54°50'W. Monolith and plaque commemorating the rescue of survivors 
of the British ship Endurance by the Chilean navy cutter Yelcho on 30 August 
1916. Replicas are sited at the Chilean bases Arturo Prat (62°30'S, 59°49'W) and 
Rodolfo Marsh (62°12'S, 62°12'W).

54. McMurdo Station, Ross Island
77°51'S, 166°40'E. Bronze bust on black marble commemorating the polar 
achievements of R E Byrd, erected in 1965.

55. Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
68°11'S, 67°00'W. Buildings and artefacts at and near East Base of US Antarctic 
Service Expedition 1940-41 and Ronne Antarctic Research Expedition 1947-48.

56. Waterboat Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
64°49'S, 62°51'W. The remains and immediate environs of the Waterboat Point 
hut, situated close to the unoccupied Chilean station Presidente Gabriel Gonzales 
Videla. Only the base of the boat, roots of doorposts and an outline of the hut and 
extension still exist. It was occupied by the UK two-man expedition of Bagshawe 
and Lester in 1921-22.

57. Commemorative plaque at Yankee Bay, MacFarlane Strait, Greenwich 
Island, South Shetland Islands
Near a Chilean refuge at 62°32'S, 59°45'W. Erected to the memory of Captain 
Robert MacFarlane, who in 1820 explored the Antarctic Peninsula area in the 
brigantine Dragon.

58. Cairn with memorial plaque at Whalers Bay, Deception Island, South 
Shetland Islands
62°59'S, 60°33'W. In the vicinity of the whaler's cemetery (HM No.31). Erected 
to honour captain Adolfus Amandus Andresen, Antarctic pioneer, who was first to 
establish a whaling operation on Deception Island in 1906.

27
59. Cairn on Half Moon Beach, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
62°28'S, 60°46'W. Commemorating the officers, soldiers and seamen on board
San Telmo which sank in September 1819; possibly the first people to die in
Antarctica.

60. Wooden plaque and rock cairn at "Penguins Bay," Seymour Island
64°16'S, 50°39'W. Commemorating where the Argentine Corvette Uruguay gave assistance to the Swedish Antarctic Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjold on 10
November 1903.

61. Port Lockroy, Base A, Goudier Island, off Wiencke Island, Antarctic Peninsula
64°49'S,63°29'W. Of historic importance as an Operation Tabarin base and for
scientific research.

62. Argentine Islands, Base F (Wordie House), Winter Island, Argentine Islands
65°15'S, 64°16'W. On the south-west corner of Winter Island. Of historic
importance as an example of an early British scientific base.

63. Horseshoe Island, Base Y, Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land
67°48'S, 67°18'W. Noteworthy as a relatively unaltered and completely equipped
British scientific base of the late 1950s. Blaiklock, the refuge hut nearby, is taken
to be an integral part of the base.

64. Stonington Island, Base E, Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, West Graham Land
68°11'S, 67°00'W. Of historical importance in the early period of exploration and
later British Antarctic Survey (BAS) history of the 1960s and 1970s.

65. Message post, Svend Foyn Island
71°56'S, 171°05'E. A pole with a box attached was placed on 16 January 1895
during the whaling expedition of Henryk Bull and Captain Leonard Kristensen of
the ship Antarctic. It was examined and found intact by the British Antarctic
Expedition of 1898-1900 and then sighted from the beach by the USS Edisto in
1956 and USCGC Glacier in 1965.

66. Prestud's cairn, Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexandra Mountains
77°11'S, 154°32'W. At the foot of the main bluff on the north side of the
nunataks. Erected by Lieut K Prestud on 3 December 1911 during the Norwegian
Antarctic Expedition of 1910-12.

67. Rock shelter "Granite House", Cape Geology, Granite Harbour
77°00'S, 162°32'E. Constructed as a field kitchen by Taylor's second geological
excursion during the British Antarctic Expedition 1910-13. It was enclosed on
three sides by granite boulder walls and used a sledge to support a roof.
Inspections in 1981 and 1990 report the sledge disintegrating.

68. Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay
74°52'S, 163°50'E. An emergency depot consisting of a sledge loaded with
28
supplies and equipment placed on 25 January 1913 by the British Antarctic 
Expedition 1910-1913. The sledge and supplies were removed in 1994 in order to 
stabilize their deteriorating condition.

69.	Message post, Cape Crozier, Ross Island
77°27'S, 169°16'E. Erected on 22 January 1902 by Captain Robert F Scott's 
Discovery Expedition of 1901-04. It was to provide information for the 
expedition's relief ships, and held a metal message cylinder which has been 
removed.

70.	Message post, Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island
73°19'S, 169°47'E. A metal cylinder nailed to a red pole 8 m above sea level 
placed by Captain R F Scott on 15 January 1902. He painted the rocks behind the 
post red and white to make it more conspicuous.

71.	Whaling station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island
62°59'S, 60°33'W. Ruins of the Norwegian Whaling station established in 1912.

 
                  29
Table 3: List of Historic Sites and Monuments in Antarctica

1.    South Pole
2.    Ongul Island, Prins Harald Kyst
3.    Proclamation Island, Enderby Land
4.    Pole of Inaccessibility
5.    Cape Bruce, Mac. Robertson Land
6.    Walkabout Rocks, Vestfold Hills, Princess Elizabeth land
7.    Mabus Point, Queen Mary Land
8.    Mabus Point, Queen Mary Land
9.    Buromskiy Island, Queen Mary Land
10.   Bunger Hills, Queen Mary Land
11.   Vostok Station
12.   Cape Denison, George V Land
13.   Cape Denison, George V Land
14.   Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay, Scott Coast
15.   Cape Royds, Ross Island
16.   Cape Evans, Ross Island
17.   Cape Evans, Ross Island
18.   Hut Point, Ross Island
19.   Hut Point, Ross Island
20.   Observation Point, Ross Island
21.   Cape Crozier, Ross Island
22.   Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
23.   Cape Adare, Borchgrevink Coast
24.   Mount Betty, Queen Maud Range
25.   Framnesodden, Peter I 0y
26.   Barry Island, Debenham Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
27.   Megalestris Hill, Petermann Island, Antarctic Peninsula
28.   Port Charcot, Booth Island, Antarctic Peninsula
29.   Lambda Island, Melchior Islands, Antarctic Peninsula
30.   Paradise Harbour, Danco Coast, Antarctic Pensinsula
31.   Whalers Bay, Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
32.   Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
33.   Arturo Prat Base, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
34.   Arturo Prat Base, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
35.   Arturo Prat Base, Greenwich Island, South Shetland Islands
36.   Potter Cove, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
37.   General Bernardo O'Higgins Base, Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula
38.   Snow Hill Island, Antarctic Peninsula
39.   Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula
40.   Hope Bay, Trinity Peninsula, Antarctic Peninsula
41.   Paulet Island, Antarctic Peninsula
42.   Scotia Bay, Laurie Island, South Orkney Islands
43.   Filchner Ice Front, Weddell Sea
44.   Nivlisen ice front, Princess Astrid Kyst, Dronning Maud Land
45.   Metchnifoff Point, Brabant Island, Antarctic Peninsula
46.   Port Martin, Terre Adélie
47.   Ile des Pétrels, Terre Adélie
30
48.  Ile de Pétrels, Terre Adélie
49.  Bunger Hills, Queen Mary Land
50.  Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
51.  Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
52.  Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South Shetland Islands
53.  Elephant Island, South Shetland Islands
54.  McMurdo Station, Ross Island
55.  Stonington Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
56.  Waterboat Point, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
57.  Commemorative plaque at Yankee Bay, MacFarlane Strait, Greenwich Island
58.  Cairn with memorial plaque at Whalers Bay, Deception Island
59.  Cairn on Half Moon Beach, Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island
60.  Wooden plaque and rock cairn at "Penguins Bay", Seymour Island
61.  Port Lockroy, Base A, on Goudier Island, off Wiencke Island
62.  Argentine Islands, Base F (Wordie House), Winter Island
63.  Horseshoe Island, Base Y, Marguerite Bay
64.  Stonington Island, Base E, Marguerite Bay
65.  Message post, Foyn Island
66.  Prestud's cairn, Scott Nunataks, Queen Alexander Mountains
67.  Rock shelter, Cape Geology, Granite Harbour
68.  Depot, Hells Gate Moraine, Inexpressible Island, Terra Nova Bay
69.  Message post at Cape Crozier, Ross Island
70.  Message post at Cape Wadworth, Coulman Island
71.  Whaling station, Whalers Bay, Deception Island

31
90°W


Map 1


Map 2


Map 3


Map 4





N


N


N


N


Map 1


Map 2


Map 3


Map 4


HISTORIC SITES
AND
MONUMENTS

Sarah King, MAGIC, 18.1.96


32
5. Other Protected Areas Designated under the Antarctic Treaty System

5.1 Specially Reserved Areas

5.1.1 Purpose

The purpose of SRAs is to protect representative examples of the major 
geological, glaciological and geomorphological features of Antarctica; and 
representative examples of areas of outstanding aesthetic, scenic, and wilderness 
value. A management plan for each SRA should distinguish between activities that 
would jeopardize, and other activities that would not jeopardize, the special values 
to be protected. Entry into SRAs is prohibited except for purposes identified in 
the approved management plan or in accordance with a permit. SPA No. 23 lies 
within the area of SRA No. 1. SRAs will be superseded by Annex V of the 
Protocol, when it enters into force. The designation has not been formally 
approved by the ATCPs, who have agreed to abide voluntarily by the Management 
Plans developed for SRA No. 1.

1. North Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains
This SRA lies north of the mountain crest from 82°36'S, 53°30'W (Brown 
Nunataks) on the west to 82°26'S, 50°36'W (Cox Nunatak) on the east to 
a line from Cox Nunatak to a point on the snow surface 1 km north of the 
north edge of Forlidas Ridge to Brown Nunataks. The length is 48 km and 
the width is about 10 km. Designation on the grounds that the area 
contains outstanding geological, geomorphological, aesthetic, scenic, and 
wilderness values. It is presently in a pristine condition and it is important 
to protect these values while allowing permitted access to scientists and 
others.

5.2 Multiple-use Planning Areas

5.2.1 Purpose

The purpose of MPAs is to assist in coordinating human activities in areas where 
such activities pose identified risks of mutual interference or cumulative 
environmental impacts. Each MPA develops a management plan to identify 
environmental characteristics threatened by current or planned activities, and 
agrees specific measures to avoid or minimize harmful and cumulative impacts. 
MPAs will be superseded by Annex V of the Protocol when it enters into force. 
The designation has not been formally approved by the ATCPs, who have agreed 
to abide voluntarily by the Management Plan developed for MPA No. 1.

1. South-west Anvers Island and vicinity
This MPA lies between 64°41'30"S and 65°S, and between 63°40'W and 
64°35'W, encompassing about 1535 km^(2). Palmer Station (USA) is within 
the MPA, as are many island groups. The area includes SPA No.17 
(Litchfield Island) and SSSI No.20 (Biscoe Point). Designation on the 
grounds that the area, because of its diverse environmental features and 
scientific history, will become increasingly important for long-term studies 
of the natural variability in Antarctic ecosystems, the impact of humans on 
33
Antarctic communities, and the possible effect of global change on the
Antarctic environment and on the physiology and behaviour of its plants
and animals.

5.3     Tomb

77°25'30"S, 167°27'30"E. Site on the northern slopes of Mount Erebus where an
Air New Zealand DC-10 aircraft crashed on 28 November 1979 with the lost of
257 lives. ATCM XI declared the site "a tomb" to be "left in peace."



 
                                                                             34
Table 4: List of the Specially Reserved Area , Multiple Use Planning Area and 
Tomb in Antarctica.

Specially Reserved Area: North Dufek Massif, Pensacola Mountains

Multiple-use Planning Area: South-west Anvers Island and vicinity

Tomb: Northern slopes of Mount Erebus, Ross Island

 
                                                                             35
Multiple-use
Planning Area

Specially
Reserved
Area

Tomb

90°W
90°E

180°

Scale
1:35 000 000

SPECIALLY RESERVED AREA , MULTIPLE-USE PLANNING AREA
AND TOMB IN ANTARCTICA

38

Sarah King, MAGIC, 18.1.96
6. CCAS Seal Reserves

6.1 Purpose

Seal Reserves were designated under the Convention on the Conservation of 
Antarctic Seals (CCAS) to protect sites which are seal breeding areas or the site of 
scientific research. The killing or capturing of seals in these reserves is prohibited.

6.2 List of Seal Reserves

(a)	The area around the South Orkney Islands between 60°20'S and 60°56'S, 
      44°05'W and 46°25'W.

(b)	The area of the south-western Ross Sea south of 76°S and west of 170°E.

(c)	The area of Edisto Inlet south and west of a line drawn between Cape 
      Hallett (72°19'S, 170°18'E) and Helm Point (72°11'S, 170°00'E).

7. CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) Sites

7.1 Purpose

The purpose of CEMP sites is to preserve from disturbance representative samples 
of an ecosystem to meet the objectives of the Convention on the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources. (CCAMLR) Entry is prohibited without a 
permit. Permits can only be issued by an appropriate authority for its own 
nationals.

7.2 List of CEMP Sites

1.	Seal Islands, South Shetland Islands
      60°59'S, 55°23'W. Small islands and skerries 7 km north of the northwest 
      corner of Elephant Island. The Site includes all island and rocks within 5.5 
      km of the highest point on the largest island in the group.

2.	Cape Shirreff and Telmo Island, South Shetland Islands
      62°29'S, 60°48'W. A low ice-free peninsula towards the western end of 
      the north coast of Livingston Island, between Barclay Bay and Hero Bay. 
      Cape Shirreff is 3 km from north to south and 0.5 km to 1.2 km from east 
      to west. The southern boundary of the site is at the ice cap margin. Telmo 
      Island is the largest of a small group of ice-free islets 2 km west of Cape 
      Shirreff. A critical site because of its Antarctic fur seal and penguin 
      breeding colonies. Krill fisheries are within the foraging range of these 
      species.
90°W
a
CCAS SEAL RESERVES
b
c
Scale
1:35 000 000
Sarah King, MAGIC, 18.1.96
39
Table 5. List of Seal Reserves in Antarctica

Seal Reserves
    (A) South Orkney Islands
    (B) South-western Ross Sea
    (C) Edisto Inlet

 
                                                                             38
Table 6. List of CEMP Sites in Antarctica

CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme sites
1. Seal Islands, South Shetland Islands
2. Cape Shirreff and Telmo Island, South Shetland Islands

 
                                                                 40
Map 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Scale
 1:35 000 000

CCAMLR ECOSYSTEM
MONITORING PROGRAMME
(CEMP) SITES

 
Sarah King, MAGIC, 18.1.96
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41
