X     UTRECHT     X
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING       XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]CTIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 109
                                    (Part 1)
                                  May 1996
                                  Original: English

DRAFT CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGY:
  - NEW ZEALAND
  - SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

(Agenda item 20)

(submitted by New Zealand)
CONSERVATION 
MANAGEMENT 
STRATEGY

 
● Subantarctic Islands





Department of Conservation 
Te Papa Atawhai
DRAFT CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGY FOR NEW ZEALAND SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

(Agenda item 20)

NEW ZEALAND

The attached Draft Conservation Management Strategy (CMS) has been circulated for public examination and comment for the past several months. In light of comments received on this draft, a final CMS is presently being prepared.

This document, and the process of which it is a part, deals with all five New Zealand Subantarctic island groups: Antipodes Islands, Auckland Islands, Bounty Islands, Campbell Island and Snares Islands. These groups are presently managed according to Management Plans elaborated during the early to mid 1980s. The Final Subantarctic Islands CMS will replace these management plans.

With due recognition that the document presented here is a draft, New Zealand hopes that Parties will find some interest in it not only as indicative of the directions of present thinking, but in terms of the processes employed to reach agreement on the integrated management of a significant fraction of the world's Subantarctic islands.
Draft

Conservation
Management
Strategy

Subantarctic Islands

ISBN: 0-478-01769-3
ISSN: 1171-3526
Southland Conservancy Conservation Management Planning Series No. 6

Published by:
Department of Conservation
P.O. Box 743
Invercargill
New Zealand
December 1995

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
Foreword

New Zealand’s five Subantarctic Island groups - the Auckland, Campbell, Antipodes, 
Snares and Bounty Islands - are some of the country’s most remote protected natural areas. 
Being the only land masses in a vast expanse of the southern ocean, these islands are 
important habitats for marine mammals, penguins and countless numbers of seabirds, as 
well as some special terrestrial birds and plants. The southern ocean is the habitat of a 
diverse range of marine life, and a vast feeding ground for the wildlife which inhabits the 
Subantarctic Islands.

Oceanic islands are among the last bastions of nature in a world beset by massive and 
rapid change through human activity. New Zealand’s Subantarctic Islands are among 
some of the least human-modified environments anywhere on the globe. Protection of 
these oceanic island and marine ecosystems in their natural state is of immense value to 
global conservation and science. They are of international significance.

The Subantarctic Islands also have a rich human history of exploration, shipwrecks, 
sealing and whaling, failed settlement, and wartime coastwatching. Today they are 
becoming increasingly attractive for tourism.

The islands have all been given the highest form of protection available in New Zealand 
law - they have the status of national nature reserves under the Reserves Act 1977. 
During the early 1980s, a separate management plan was prepared for each nature 
reserve (or island group). Those five management plans are now to be replaced with this 
Conservation Management Strategy (CMS) - it is an opportune time to review the 
management policies contained in the plans, most of which have been operative for over 
ten years. The CMS is also required to address marine habitats and resources in the 
surrounding southern ocean, and the vital connections between land and sea.

There will be 17 CMSs prepared to cover the whole of New Zealand and the surrounding 
sea out to the extent of the Exclusive Economic Zone. The Subantarctic Islands, like the 
Chatham Islands, are covered by a specific CMS - recognising the distinct natural values 
and international significance of the Subantarctic region.

This Draft CMS has been prepared in consultation with the Southland Conservation Board 
and a number of experienced scientists, wildlife managers, tour operators and others 
familiar with the Subantarctic Islands. While some differing viewpoints are discussed in 
this Draft CMS, the proposed management strategies are those adopted by the 
Department of Conservation. They are now open for public scrutiny.

Following the time period for public comment (see following pages), the Department and 
the Southland Conservation Board will consider all submissions carefully and make any 
changes considered necessary to this Draft CMS. The revised Draft will then be sent to 
the New Zealand Conservation Authority for approval.

I welcome your comments on this Draft Conservation Management Strategy for the 
Subantarctic Islands and surrounding ocean.

Bill Mansfield
Director-General of Conservation

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                         December 1995
Acknowledgements

Many people have made significant contributions to this draft conservation management strategy (CMS).

Special thanks go to the participants at a CMS Workshop held during June 1994 - this Draft CMS has incorporated their contributions:

Brian Bell                            Southland Conservation Board
Ewan Cameron                          )
Colin Meurk                           )
Andrew Penniket                       )
Rodney Russ                           )
Rowley Taylor                         )
Rod Morris                            )
Derek Angus                           )
Sue Bennett                           )
Bill Gordon                           )
Roger Sutton                          )
Rangi Te Maiharoa                     )

Andy Cox                              Department of Conservation
Paul Dingwall                         )
Phil Doole                            )
Wendy Evans                           )
Pete McClelland                       )
Colin Miskelly                       )*
Hamish Rennie                         )
Lou Sanson                            )

* Sent written contributions

Thanks also to other staff of the Southland Conservancy and Head Office, Department of Conservation, who have put so much of their valuable time into this project.

Thanks to Sherryl McCammon who created the artwork for the cover; and to Chris Rance who persevered with the Tables.

Kerry Mawhinney
Regional Conservator
Southland Conservancy

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                   December 1995
Submissions

Information on Submissions

Submissions on this Draft Conservation Management Strategy are welcomed.

Submissions must be received by Friday 26th April 1996.

Address your submission to:

Subantarctic Islands CMS
Department of Conservation
P O Box 743
INVERCARGILL

Submissions should include the following information:

*   Your name, address and phone number
*   Whether you are commenting as an individual or on behalf of an organisation
*   Special interests/affiliations (if applicable)
*   The specific part (or parts) of the CMS to which your comments refer
*   Whether you support, oppose, or seek change(s)
*   Your views and reasons for them
*   A recommended change (where applicable); and
*   If you wish to present your opinions by any other medium (verbal or video).

This will help us in analysing the submissions. Should you want to make a submission by any medium other than writing, you will need to register that intent - please send a brief letter setting out what you want to do. Everyone who asks to be heard in support of their comments will be given a reasonable opportunity to do so at a meeting of representatives of the the Director-General of Conservation and the Southland Conservation Board. Any such meetings required will most likely to held during May/June 1996.

After all submissions have been made, a summary of them will be prepared. The Department will then revise the draft CMS and present it to the Southland Conservation Board for consideration.

For further information, please contact the Department of Conservation office at Invercargill:

Address:     State insurance Building, Don Street, Invercargill
Phone:       03-214 4589          Fax:    03-214 4486

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
Contents

Foreword ............................................................................................ 1

Part 1: Introduction ....................................................................... 1

1.1     What is a Conservation Management Strategy? ....................... 1
1.2     Subantarctic Islands - The Setting ............................................ 3
1.3     Kaupapa Maori ........................................................................ 16
1.4     Conservation Significance ....................................................... 17
1.5     The Future ............................................................................... 21
1.6     Statutory Basis For Management ............................................... 22

Part 2: Ecosystems Management .................................................... 29

2.1     Rationale ................................................................................. 29
2.2     Island Management Objectives ................................................. 31
2.3     Terrestrial Ecosystems Management .......................................... 32
        2.3.1   Restoration .................................................................... 32
        2.3.2   Pest Animals .................................................................. 33
        2.3.3   Pest Plants .................................................................... 39
        2.3.4   Fire Control .................................................................. 42
2.4     Marine Ecosystems .................................................................. 43
2.5     Indigenous Species ................................................................. 47
        2.5.1   Indigenous Species other than Marine Mammals ............... 47
        2.5.2   Marine Mammals ............................................................. 50
2.6     Survey, Monitoring and Research .............................................. 52
2.7     Taking of Plants and Animals .................................................... 55

Part 3: Historic Resource Management ........................................... 57

3.1     Rationale ................................................................................. 57
3.2     Threats to Historic Places ......................................................... 57
3.3     Present Management and Priorities ............................................ 57
3.4     Kaupapa Maori ........................................................................ 60
3.5     Visitor Use of Historic Places .................................................... 60
3.6     Strategic Direction ................................................................... 61

Part 4: Conservation Awareness ..................................................... 63

4.1     Rationale ................................................................................. 63
4.2     Information and Awareness Review ........................................... 63
4.3     Strategic Direction ................................................................... 64

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                         December 1996
Part 5: Visitor Impacts Management ....................................................... 65

5.1    Rationale .................................................................................... 65
5.2    Review of Visitation .................................................................... 66
5.3    Impact Management Strategies .................................................... 71
       5.3.1    Island Visits ........................................................................ 71
       5.3.2    Disturbance of Wildlife .......................................................... 75
       5.3.3    Marine Mammal Viewing ........................................................ 76
       5.3.4    Facilities and Site Management .............................................. 77
       5.3.5    Use of Aircraft .................................................................... 80
       5.3.6    Logistics and Surveillance ...................................................... 81
                .................................................................................................... 82

Part 6: Resource Use and Estate Management ....................................... 83

6.1    Resource Development ................................................................ 83
6.2    Telecommunication Facilities ........................................................ 84
6.3    Mining (Prospecting, Exploration and Mining) ................................ 85

Glossary ................................................................................................ 87

Index ...................................................................................................... 94

Tables 1      Geographical and Historical Details of NZ Subantarctic 
             Islands ........................................................................................ opp 17
       2      Conservation Status of Islands in the Southern Oceans .............. 18
       3      Island Management Categories ................................................ after 32
       4      Categorisation of NZ Subantarctic Islands ............................... after 32
       5      Threatened Species of NZ Subantarctic Islands ........................ after 48
       6      Conservation Science and Research Themes of the 
             NZ Subantarctic Islands and Southern Ocean .............................. 53
       7      Historic Places Selected for Active Management .......................... 59

Maps   1      Conservation Management Strategy Areas ............................ after 2
       2      Bounty Islands, Snares Islands, Antipodes Islands ) ................. after 16
       3      Auckland Islands                                   )
       4      Campbell Island                                    )

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS          December 1995
Part 1: Introduction

1.1 What is a Conservation Management Strategy?

The purpose of a Conservation Management Strategy (CMS) is to provide for consistent,
integrated policy-making and management of the protected natural areas, wildlife and
resources administered by the Department of Conservation in accordance with New
Zealand laws.

A CMS is a statutory document which implements general policies and establishes
objectives for the integrated management of natural resources (including land and species)
and historic resources. The conduct of some activities on lands administered by the
Department of Conservation can only take place by and in accordance with the CMS.
Those preparing regional and district plans in accordance with the Resource Management
Act 1991 must have regard to any relevant CMS. It must be noted, however, that a CMS
is generally a statement of intent and does not override the provisions of legislation,
general policy and agreements.

The key concept is integrated management - to provide a more holistic approach
recognising the linkages among things and their inter-dependence and/or independence.
Before CMSs were required, separate management plans were prepared for individual
protected areas, and policies for some management functions were developed in isolation
from the management planning process. The CMS will avoid this by presenting a broad
overview of issues and responsibilities, by providing long-term integrated strategies which
set management directions for protected natural areas managed by the Department, and
by advocating conservation of other natural and historic resources generally.

The area covered by this Draft "Subantarctic Islands" CMS is shown on the map overleaf.
New Zealand's Subantarctic Islands have the status of National Nature Reserves under the
Reserves Act 1977. They are currently managed by the Department in accordance with
five separate management plans, one for each island group:

    Antipodes Islands Natures Reserve Management Plan 1983
    Auckland Islands Nature Reserve Management Plan 1987
    Bounty Islands Nature Reserve Management Plan 1982
    Campbell Island Nature Reserve Management Plan 1983
    Snares Islands Nature Reserve Management Plan 1984

The CMS will replace these five management plans. The Department has decided to
prepare one CMS to cover all five Subantarctic island groups, along with the marine
mammal sanctuary at the Auckland Islands and conservation issues for the surrounding
southern ocean (to the extent of New Zealand fisheries waters in the region).

As well as enabling a consistent and integrated approach to management decisions, the
CMS format encourages a better recognition of the connections between these islands
and the surrounding sea, the regional setting of the islands in the Southwest Pacific and
in particular the connections with Macquarie Island (Australia) and the remainder of the
New Zealand archipelago, and the hemispheric and global significance of the islands.

This Draft CMS presents the statutory basis for management, and addresses ecosystems
management, historic resource conservation, visitor management, and resource and estate
use issues. How major issues and management functions should be dealt with over the
next 10 years (and longer) is addressed, as are management priorities. While the CMS

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
2

outlines how the Department of Conservation proposes to fulfil its responsibilities during 
this period it also has wider ramifications; for example providing guidance for future 
tourism visits to the Subantarctic Island nature reserves.

The CMS will influence the Department's annual business planning process, which 
determines the appropriate allocation of available resources among the different activities 
of the Department for each business year. It is important that the objectives and 
implementation measures stated in the CMS are taken into account and followed through 
in this process.

The Department also prepares a range of operational strategies and plans which are 
intended to direct specific work programmes. They set out in more detail how the 
provisions of general policies and the CMS will be implemented. Those prepared at a 
national level will be influenced by all relevant CMSs, which collectively indicate what 
should be, or needs to be done. Local operational plans will be developed within the 
policy framework provided by the CMS. Examples of such strategies and plans include 
an Historic Resources Management Strategy and Species Recovery Plans (eg, draft 
Recovery Plan for Subantarctic Teal).

How this Draft CMS Works

The Introduction (Part 1) presents a "snap-shot" description of the Subantarctic Islands 
and wildlife of the surrounding ocean: it outlines physical and landscape characteristics, 
indigenous ecosystems, human history, today's vistors and their activities, and the 
conservation significance of the natural and historic resources in the CMS area. An 
outline of the legislation governing this CMS area is also given.

The proposed strategic directions are set out in Parts 2 to 5. Part 2 presents issues of 
ecosystems management, and proposed management objectives and actions to address 
those issues: they include a system of Island Categorisation which defines management 
objectives; pest control; fire control; freshwater fisheries; coastal and marine ecosystems; 
indigenous species; and information management. Part 3 provides direction for historic 
resouce management. Part 4 provides direction for raising public awareness of the 
islands' significant values for conservation, and Part 5 sets out proposed strategies for 
managing the potential impacts of human visitors. Other resource and estate uses are 
addressed in Part 6.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
Conservation Management Strategy Areas

West Coast CMS
Christchurch
Otago CMS
Dunedin
Invercargill
Stewart Is
Snares Is *
Auckland Is 
Campbell Is 
Outer limit of the NZ Exclusive Economic Zone
Chatham Islands CMS
Chatham Is
Bounty Is 
Antipodes Is 

0        500km

Mainland Southland - West Otago
Stewart Island
Subantarctic Islands
Bounty Islands
Main Group
Skua Rock      Spider I
Depot I        Proclamation I    Tunnel I       Lion I
Penguin I      Ruatara I          Ranfurly I
Centre Group                  Funnel I
                              Prion I
                              Castle I
East Group
                              Molly Cap
                              North Rock
          0        1         2         3km
                  Snares Islands                                  Map 2
North East Island
Daption Rocks
North Promontory
Seal Pt
South Promontory
Broughton I
Alert Stack
          0        1         2         3km
                  Antipodes Islands
Windward Is
Orde Lees Islet
Cave Pt
Stack Bay
Mt Galloway
Mt Waterhouse
Ringdove Bay
Albatross Pt
Leeward I
Bollons Island
Perpendicular Hd
Anchorage Bay
Reef Pt
          Hut
          0        1         2         3km
                  178°45'E
Auckland Islands

Map 3

Disappointment I

Sugar Loaf Rocks

North West Cape

Black Head

North Harbour

Matheson Bay

North Pt

Enderby I

Camp (3 huts)

Rose I

Ocean I

Ewing I

Yule I

Crozier Pt

Derelict coastwatchers base

Green I

Dundas I

Kekeno Pt

Blanche Rock

Haskell Bay

Chambres Inlet

Musgrave Inlet

Norman Inlet

Hanfield Inlet

Deep Inlet

Worth Inlet

McLennan Inlet

Waterfall Inlet

Cape Bennett

Cape Farr

Gilroy Hd

Bollons Bay

Castle Pt

Fly Harbour

Cape Thomson

South Cape

Adams Island

Bristow Pt

Cape Lovitt

South West Cape

Embrasure Pt

Logan Pt

Astrolabe Pt

Fleming Plateau

Derelict castaway depot

Western Arm

Anjou Pt

The Dome

Mt D'Urvilie

Mt Raynal

Omega Pk

Smith Harbour

Cavern Pk

Musgrave Har

North Arm

Carnley Harbour

Auckland Island

--- Track
     Hut

0          5         10km
55'        05'        10'        15'        20'
166°00'S               05'        10'        15'        20'
          50°45'S
          50'
          55'
Campbell Island                                 Map 4

 
                                  Dent I

Penguin Pt        Ramp Pt   Cattle Bay     Complex Pt      Northwest
                                      Bay                                  Hut
Hook Keys                                                                 Track
                 Wasp I                                                       0     1      2      3       4      5km
Gomez I          Monowai I                                                    169°00'E         05'         10'         15'
                 Seagull Rock 
Isle de Jeanette Marie   Survey I
                        Rocky Bay
Courrejoiles Pt          Mt Paris          Mt Dumas     Fihol Pk
                                      Antarctic 
                                  Mt Azimuth      Bay         Mt Honey
                                  Mt Faye                    Six Foot 
                                                Northeast     Lake      Perseverance 
                                                Harbour                   Harbour
                                  Northeast                        De la 
Cossack Rock     Cook Pt                  Macdonald Pt     Shoal Pt     Vire Pt     Moubray Hill
                                                Smoothwater 
                                                Bay                      Erebus Pt
                                                                                    South Pt
                                  East Cape                                        Shag Pt
                                                                                    South 
                                                                                    Harbour
                                  52°30'S                                          35'
 
                                  Jaquemart I
                                       La Botte
                                  Monument 
                                  Harbour
                                   Persseus Pk
1.2 Subantarctic Islands - The Setting

New Zealand's five Subantarctic island groups are located in the southern ocean south and east of the South Island. From a biogeographical perspective, these islands occupy a cool temperate zone: they lie between the Antarctic and Subtropical Convergences, have a mean annual temperature above 5°C and, with the exception of the Bounty Islands, are well vegetated. They display biological differences from islands in the true Subantarctic zone - in the vicinity of the Antarctic Convergence - which have mean annual temperatures of 1-5°C and no trees (eg, Macquarie Island), and those in the Maritime Antarctic zone which have mean annual temperatures less than 0° and no flowering plants (eg, Bouvetoya in the South Atlantic Ocean). Sea surface temperature in the region ranges from a summer monthly mean of 12°C around The Snares to a winter monthly mean of 5.5°C at Campbell Island, hence the marine biota is also more appropriately described as cool temperate, rather than Subantarctic.

Physical Landscape

The five island groups are scattered across the Campbell Plateau and other submerged shelves of the southern New Zealand continental region. The plateau basement is granite and metamorphic rocks more than 100 million years old - similar to those in the mountains of Fiordland, Westland and Nelson in the South Island, and Marie Byrd Land in West Antarctica.

Before the south-west Pacific Ocean Basin began to form about 80 million years ago, the Campbell Plateau was connected with Antarctica as part of the Gondwanna super-continent. The tiny basement outcrops of the Subantarctic islands are therefore crucial pieces in the Gondwana jigsaw puzzle. The Great South and Campbell Basins contain thick sediments, but the protruding islands are coated with only a thin veneer of sediment. Auckland and Campbell Islands are impressive basalt shield volcanoes; and the Antipodes group is a complex of volcanic cones and vents. Volcanoes in the wider region vary in age: from between 0.1 and 5 million years old (Ma) on the Antipodes and Chatham Islands to 10 to 25 Ma on the west coast of the South Island and Auckland Island. The Auckland, Campbell and Antipodes volcanoes formed sequentially over a single magmatic zone in the earths crust, so the islands are important for unravelling the pattern of continental drift and the volcanic history of the South West Pacific Basin. In contrast, the Snares and Bounty Islands are granite masses, which reveal the character of the continental basement rocks making up the Campbell Plateau.

Campbell and Auckland Islands are extensive and high enough to show Quaternary glacial features such as cirques, steep-walled glaciated valleys and fiords, moraines and periglacial sediments on raised beaches. All the island groups except for the Bounty Islands are mantled by peaty soils which have evolved over thousands of years under a cool, moist climate. The soils are "organic" (ie, peats composed almost entirely of plant remains), and mineral matter is a significant component only in small areas such as the sand dunes of Enderby Island, or where peat is shallow. Peat thickness is strongly influenced by slope, and flat or gently sloping areas may be blanketed by up to 5 metres of peat. The 1-2 metres of peat developed on steep slopes is prone to landsliding, as is readily seen on Campbell Island. The Bounty Islands are devoid of soil.

Climate

"Cold, wet and windy" is a succinct description of Subantarctic weather. However, this rather bleak tag belies the fact that occasional days of clear, calm weather are experienced on the islands. The oceanic climate is dominated by persistent westerly winds and the frequent passage of cold fronts - this is the reason why the region is known as the "Roaring Forties" and "Furious Fifties". These westerly winds increase in intensity

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
December 1965                                         Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS

 
· Perseverance Harbour, Courrejolles point, (both Campbell Island)

 
· 

with unseasonal 'northerly' winds. The weather was from 
the other extreme with calm seas and annual sea 
temperatures (35K) on 1/12/83 (souks 09) hr/wk96 to 
occur on 1/2/100 (s?ots K LL) hr/wk?3 in?obe si 
pe?dspu!wim 
excess u! s!sng 'Jeal Jed sKep 08Z ino?e uo Jnoco (s?ouk SE) 
u!/?k?9 Jo sse?e? u! s!sng 
pum le?e Moys pueIsI pe?qwe?d uo J?u!od uem?e? Je uo!JeJs 
J?e?ne?ek e?e Je s?u!e?e?u?ee? 
M 
'epn?Je? bu!s?e?cu! u?ew 
suoseas Je?Io u?e? bu!u?ds bu!np Juenbe?f e?ow e?e pue
5

Cloud cover increases markedly south of New Zealand, and the annual sunshine total on 
Campbell Island is about 600 hours (16% of the possible amount). On mainland New 
Zealand, Invercargill can expect about 1620 hours, Christchurch about 2000 hours, and 
Auckland about 2100 hours annually.

Rainfall occurs on the islands in excess of 300 days per year, yet the average annual total 
of 1360mm recorded at Campbell Island is only 200-300mm more than is recorded in 
Wellington and Auckland. Annual rainfall varies considerably among the five groups - the 
Auckland Islands have about double the amount of rain that falls on the Antipodes. Light 
snowfalls are common during the colder seasons at the Auckland and Campbell Islands.

Terrestrial Vegetation

The summer climate of the Subantarctic islands is as cool and windy as that of sub-alpine 
and alpine zones of the mainland. This and the maritime influence are the major factors 
affecting vegetation patterns. The peaty, acidic, waterlogged soils reflect the cool, humid 
climate. Seabirds and other wildlife have an important effect on vegetation, through 
trampling, burrowing and nutrient enrichment.

Only four of the five island groups are substantially vegetated. On the barren Bounty 
Islands only algae and lichens survive. Forest cover is restricted to the Snares and 
Auckland Islands. Shrublands are found in sheltered parts of Campbell Island. Generally, 
maritime and upland areas are dominated by one or more of the tussock species. d 
Shrublands and herb moor (a mixture of stunted shrubs, cushion plants, tussocks and 
herbs) are also widespread. The highest peaks support alpine rushlands, cushion bogs and 
fellfields. There is generally a marked altitudinal zonation, although on Campbell Island 
this has been modified or obscured to some extent by 120 years of stock grazing.

The Auckland Islands, which have the largest land mass of the five island groups, also 
have the widest latitudinal and altitudinal ranges. These factors contribute to the 
presence of a comparatively rich flora, among the richest floral assemblages of any island 
group in the southern ocean. There are 233 taxa of vascular plant (196 indigenous), 
including three species of Pleurophyllum - a genus endemic to the New Zealand 
Subantarctic islands and Australia's Macquarie Island. Of the vascular plants, Campbell 
Island has 228 taxa recorded (143 indigenous); the Antipodes have 71 taxa (68 
indigenous) and the Snares have 22 taxa (20 indigenous).

The subantarctic flora has four biogeographical elements:
-   plants which are also found on the New Zealand mainland or beyond;
-   plants which are found throughout the Subantarctic zone (ie, circumpolar species);
-   species, and genera such as Pleurophyllum and Damnamenia, which are endemic 
to the New Zealand Subantarctic islands (and Macquarie Island); and
-   several species which are endemic to individual island groups.

Although basic descriptive and taxonomic work has been done for higher plants, the 
cryptogamic flora (including bryophytes, lichens and algae) is still relatively poorly known.

There are two special features of the Subantarctic flora compared to that of mainland New 
Zealand: Subantarctic plants tend to have larger leaves and/or flowers, and they exhibit 
a greater diversity of colour. These features are shown in the "megaherbs" such as the 
large rhubarb-like punui (Stilbocarpa polaris and S. robusta) and the large-leaved, brightly-

Draft : Subantarctic islands CMS                                  December 1995
6

flowered endemic daisies (Pleurophyllum criniferum, P. hookeri and P. speciosum, and
Damnamenia). Large foliage is thought to be an adaptive response to the cloudy, humid
conditions and cool air temperatures. Mainland New Zealand flowers are typically pale
(usually white) and small, but endemic Subantarctic flowers show a range of colours: from
pink through mauve to red in Pleurophyllum, Anisotome, Gentiana and rata; blue in forget-
me-not (Myosotis) and Hebe benthamii; and yellow in Bulbinella rossii ("Maori onion") and
tree daisy (Brachyglottis stewartiae). The reason for this diversity of flower colour is
uncertain, but it may be to attract pollinators and/or to increase flower warmth and hence
speed flower/seed development.


Stilbocarpa polaris


The islands' terrestrial biota are a culmination of a long history of geographic isolation,
species dispersal, climatic factors and community interaction - until very recently without
human interference. The evolution of the islands' biota is of great international taxonomic
and ecological interest. All the vegetated island groups have many significant plants
including endemic species (to one or more islands) uncommon or nationally threatened.
The distinctive island vegetation includes some of the southern-most forests in the world,
species which are at the limit of their ecological tolerance, and many vascular plants found
nowhere else (endemics). Adams and Disappointment Islands in the Auckland group, and
the whole Snares group are among the last substantial land masses of the world
harbouring vegetation essentially unmodified by people and alien animals.

Invertebrates

The invertebrate fauna of the islands are still poorly understood. The bleak, windswept,
misty climate of the Subantarctic Islands favours a concealed life - within host plants, turf,
the forest floor, tussock bases, or under piles of seaweed.

Many insect species are smaller than their counterparts on mainland New Zealand, and
have evolved towards flightlessness. Flightlessness is associated with gigantism in two
groups - the kelp fly Baeopterus and the weevil genus Oclandius - both at least three times

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                  December 1995
the size of their nearest relatives.

Between 220 and 280 species of insect are thought to live on the Auckland Islands, with 
thirty percent endemic to the group. The presence of introduced house mice on Auckland, 
Enderby and Antipodes Islands has reduced populations of larger insects.

 
Forty percent of the 275 insect species described from Campbell Island are thought to be 
endemic. The introduction of sheep and Norway rats to this island has had a significant 
detrimental effect on some insect species: The 25mm long weevil Oclandius laeviusculus 
(also on the Auckland Islands) is found only on Dent, Jacquemart and Monowai Islands, 
where rats are absent. Past sheep grazing affected insect populations, particularly where 
host plant species were eaten out.

Forty percent of the total insect fauna of Auckland and Campbell Islands is common to 
both island groups. The entomology of the Antipodes and Bounty Islands is less well-
known than that of other island groups. The black and white, day-flying magpie moth is 
a conspicuous resident of the Antipodes, the hairy larvae of which feed on Senecio 
antipodus. A feature of the Antipodes insect fauna is the high percentage of species 
which are found around, or are restricted to, the colonies of nesting birds. The enriched 
soil supports host plants, and feathers and detritus provide food and habitat for insects. 
The presence of mice on the main Antipodes Island may explain the apparent absence of 
large ground-dwelling insects. A preliminary study of spiders on Antipodes Island 
suggests many parallels to the spider fauna of the mainland subalpine habitat - a 
predominance of small jumping spiders, rather than web-laying species - perhaps a 
reflection of the windy conditions.

There has been only spasmodic collecting of insects on the Bounty Islands. Of note are 
a large spider Rubrius nummosus, a giant Bountya ground beetle, and a weta; all endemic. 
The presence of an endemic weta on the tiny Bounty Islands poses interesting questions 
about the biogeographical history of that island group.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS          December 1995
8

The Subantarctic Islands have a small land molluscan fauna that is best developed on the larger islands, Campbell and Auckland. The Snares fauna is most closely related to that of southern New Zealand and Stewart Island. The other groups and Macquarie Island have similar fauna, with a small number of species endemic to each group. The land snails are generally small (less than 1cm) and inhabit grasslands, herbfields and forest from coastal to upland sites.

Birds

More than 120 species of birds have been observed on the Subantarctic Islands and in the surrounding ocean. The New Zealand Subantarctic region supports the most diverse community of breeding seabirds in the southern ocean - some 10-15% of the world's seabird species breed here. This diversity of nesting seabirds and the marked endemism in the landbirds are recurring themes. The special character of these remote islands is epitomised by the co-occurrence of parakeets and penguins on the Antipodes and Auckland Islands.

Because land masses are few and far between in the southern ocean, these islands are vital breeding grounds for many species of seabirds. Each year the urge to breed brings seabirds of 41 species to the islands in their millions. Many of these birds would not have

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
9

touched land since the previous breeding season. Young albatrosses and petrels spend 
up to three years away from land, gliding over the southern ocean, until the desire for a 
mate draws them back to their birthplace. It can be a further five years before they start 
breeding.

Most seabirds return to their island of origin, many even to the same colony. Some 
species will, however, colonise new areas. One example is the small breeding population 
of southern royal albatross on Enderby Island. This population was decimated during the 
sealing and castaway era, but has now re-established and is slowly growing.

Eleven species of penguin have been recorded on the islands. Four of these species are 
regular breeders, including the solitary nesting yellow-eyed penguin which is considered 
the world's most endangered penguin. By contrast, the other three species (all of which 
are crested penguins) form large colonies. The Snares crested penguin is found only on 
the island group from which it takes its name. Erect-crested penguins are now confined 
to the Bounty and Antipodes Islands, while rockhopper penguins breed on Antipodes, 
Auckland and Campbell Islands, as well as other islands in the southern ocean.

The diversity of landbirds and freshwater birds on each island is largely determined by the 
size of the island and the range of habitats available. Some mainland New Zealand 
species reach their southern limit at the Snares Islands. Climate and isolation play a role 
in what species can become established. The Auckland Islands have the greatest diversity 
of landbirds, with at least 13 species including New Zealand falcon and two species of 
honey eater (tui and bellbird). By contrast, the barren Bounty islands and the Western 
Chain islets of the Snares Islands are totally lacking in landbirds.

The Auckland Islands also have the most endemic species of landbirds, with a teal, a rail, 
a plover, a snipe, a pipit and a tomtit. All four native Antipodes Island landbirds are 
endemic - two parakeets, a snipe and a pipit. The Snares Islands have three endemics - 
a snipe, a fernbird and a tomtit; while the Campbell Islands have an endemic teal, now 
confined to outlying Dent Island. The small teals of Auckland and Campbell Islands are 
of particular interest as they have independently evolved into flightless forms.

All of the landbirds are presumed to have flown (or been blown) to the islands from 
mainland New Zealand or Australia, and this process is continuing. Between 1977 and 
1982 South island fantails colonised the Snares Islands, presumably from Stewart Island, 
and now have a large breeding population there. Also, at least 10 species of introduced 
landbirds have successfully colonised one or more of the island groups.

Although the small size and isolation of the islands has largely protected them from human 
colonisation and development, the largest islands (Auckland and Campbell) have suffered 
from introductions of mammalian predators. Feral cats and pigs on Auckland Island and 
Norway rats and feral cats on Campbell Island have confined many smaller seabirds and 
endemic landbirds to the out-lying islands within each group. It is on these small islands, 
plus the less disturbed Snares, Antipodes and Bounty Islands that the abundance, variety 
and tameness of Subantarctic wildlife can be truly appreciated.

Other Native Fauna

Little is known of the freshwater fauna of the New Zealand Subantarctic islands. On the 
larger islands the arthropod fauna appears diverse. Only the small native fish Koaro 
(Galaxias brevipinnis) has been found in streams on Campbell Island and the Auckland 
Islands.

There are no reptiles or amphibians known on any of the islands.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
10

Marine Mammals

The Auckland Islands and surrounding territorial sea are one of New Zealand’s two marine
mammal sanctuaries. This is the principal breeding ground of two of the world’s rarest
marine mammals - the New Zealand sea lion (Phocarctos hookeri), which is one of the
rarest and the most endangered of the five species of sea lion in the world, and the
southern right whale (Eubalaena australis), which also breed at Campbell Island. Both
species were hunted to the brink of extinction by whalers and sealers during the 1800s.

The leopard seal Hydrurga leptonyx is a regular visitor to all the New Zealand Subantarctic
islands in small numbers. Leopard seals mate at sea and do not form colonies, therefore
relatively little is known about them and their life cycle. Also found in the Subantarctic
are southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina). Once abundant in this area, elephant
seals were heavily exploited for their oil during the 1800s. Over the past 40 years,
populations in the New Zealand Subantarctic region have declined for unknown reasons.
The New Zealand fur seal (Arctocephalus forsteri) breeds throughout the Subantarctic.
The largest colony is found on the Bounty Islands. Smaller colonies are found on the other
island groups. The Subantarctic fur seal (A. tropicalis) is a very occasional visitor having
been recorded on Auckland, Antipodes and Snares Islands.

A whate sanctuary has been declared over the southern ocean, south of 40 degrees
latitude in New Zealand waters. New Zealand and its Subantarctic Islands straddle the
north-south migratory routes of many whales found in the South Pacific Ocean. As well
as the southern right species, other baleen whales (fin, sei, blue and humpback whales)
and toothed whales (sperm and orca, and southern bottlenose and dusky dolphins) are
sometimes seen around the New Zealand Subantarctic Islands. Two small cetaceans, the
hourglass dolphin and the very rare spectacled porpoise are restricted to these latitudes
and are occasionally seen in New Zealand Subantarctic waters.

Other Marine Life

Each island group has its own unique assemblage of seaweeds, invertebrates and fish.
Each assemblage has a reasonable level of endemism and is as distinctive as the terrestrial
flora and fauna. The marine biota of each island group fall into three categories: the
largest comprises species that are also found, or have close relatives, around the New
Zealand mainland; a smaller group comprises circum-Subantarctic species; and thirdly,
each island group supports a small endemic element.

One feature common to all the islands is a relatively low diversity of seaweeds and marine
invertebrates compared with the New Zealand mainland. Absent are many of the common
New Zealand seaweeds in all three phyla: red, brown and green. Some, however, do
reach their southern limit at the Snares Islands. The same applies to many common
marine mainland invertebrates and fish.

The most conspicuous seaweed on all of the islands is the massive bull kelp Durvillaea
antarctica. Where wave action is reduced, the brown strapweed Xiphophora sp grows
abundantly - particularly in the harbours of Auckland and Campbell Islands. In the
intertidal zone are species of red seaweed, including slippery beds of Porphyra columbina.

The common intertidal invertebrates vary from island to island. At Auckland and Campbell
Islands there are low intertidal bands of the blue mussel Mytilus edulis aoteanus and the
ribbed mussel Aulacomya ater maoriana. The Antipodes Islands have no mussels in the
intertidal or shallow subtidal zones. Limpets are important on all of the islands. Chitons,
however, are relatively sparse. The Subantarctic whelk genus Pareuthria is represented
on Campbell and Antipodes Islands; whereas zone-forming barnacles - so common on the
mainland - appear to be relatively uncommon on the islands.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
Subtidally, immediately below the kelp band, much of the rock surface is covered with calcareous red algae, particularly encrusting forms. With the exception of the steep-sided Bounty Islands, the subtidal zone down to about 10 metres is dominated by various large brown algae - including the giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera (inexplicitly absent from the Snares Islands) and, at Antipodes Island, a massive undescribed species of Durvillaea. Encrusting sponges and tunicates are scarce in this zone. The largest mollusc in the subtidal zone on all the islands is the small paua Haliotis virginea. The crab Jacquinotia edwardsi is the largest crustacean - it has a carapace over 150mm wide and is exceedingly abundant around Auckland and Campbell Islands from the deep water up to the intertidal zone.

The deep water life of the southern ocean comprises large fisheries and provides food for the seabirds, penguins and marine mammals. There is generally a poor level of knowledge of marine species in the subtidal zones, including the abundance of various species and the structure of food webs.

Human History and Historic Places

Oral traditions of Kai Tahu say that the islands in the Southern ocean, together with their associated fisheries, were visited since ancient times and were used for their mahinga kai (food sources). Kai Tahu sealing and whaling gangs made frequent visits to Motumaha (Auckland Islands) during the early 1800s, but did not inhabit the islands continuously for any extended periods. In 1842 a group of Ngati Mutunga and Moriori moved from the Chatham Islands to Port Ross, where they lasted 14 years before abandoning the settlement. There are several recorded Maori occupation/findspot sites in the Auckland Island group.

The Subantarctic Islands have a European history extending over 200 years including discovery, sealing, whaling, scientific exploration, colonisation and settlement, farming, shipwrecks of the sailing era, wartime coastwatching, research and meteorology. All of these activities have left their mark and are of some historic interest. Most have had the effect of modifying the island and/or marine ecosystems to some degree. With human presence came alien animals: rodents, rabbits, cats, pigs, sheep, goats and cattle. Settlement also involved some clearance of the vegetation by fire and the sowing of introduced plants. The effects were largely limited to a few islands. Intensive commercial fishing in the surrounding ocean has been a more recent development.

The five island groups were discovered by Europeans over a period of 21 years: 1788-1810 (refer Table 1). Following each discovery, there was a rush of sealers who all but exterminated the resident seal populations.

Antarctic explorers also visited the Subantarctic Islands. In 1839 Balleny and Freeman provisioned at Campbell Island. During 1840 three explorers visited Port Ross at Auckland Island; the first being the American Charles Wilkes. Then only two days after Wilkes, Dumont D'Urville's French expedition arrived. By far the most significant of the visits was that of an English naval expedition commanded by Captain (later Sir) John Ross. This expedition collected and described many plant species not previously recorded, undertook a hydrographic survey of the harbour, and released several animals and planted several varieties of fruit and vegetables as food for castaways.

As a result of Ross's report on the Port Ross harbour and its suitability as a whaling base for the whole southern region, an attempt to establish such a base was made by Charles Enderby. His British settlers arrived in December 1849. They found the land already occupied by the Ngati Mutunga and Moriori group, many of whom became employed as boatmen, gardeners or labourers. The settlement was named Hardwicke. Things soon began to go wrong. Vegetables and crops failed to grow in the acid peaty soil, and too

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
Draft : Subantarctic Islands Scientific Cruise : DSIR 


100 lost on Antipodes Island the result of 'spues!s! podap!un Ant!podes Island on the 1st - 15th of December 1985. Several skc?ewd!tsh!p!d rescues were accomplished by the crew of the expedition the 'era bu!l!es eqt bu!np pe?unccso . 'Ave snuev Cove


ssaccacnus e u!on!d!exped!t!on the crew made the expedition to Antipodes Island one of the most comprehensive biological surveys of a subantarctic island. Three brick a b!g 'transit the time of a crucial the release of the cold pno!c the!ut u! kycn! e?e?m pue!s!pue!cknq bu!unp snuev ?eue!d the islets of the Antipodes Island group were also obsereved. The Germans on bu!v!esqo ue e?e?m 'pue!s! l!eqdwe3 o1 uo!n!padxe l?e!t luesuc! the French the Cove at the entrance to Anchorage Bay. 'npodneq e?eue?epe?ed u! e?eC sun?eV le ped!q!d!este?ed established a time of 1874.


Hardwicke Cemetery


[image content not transcribed]


12


found in the area in 1981 and 1985. Motor followed the remains of the settlement to the site at Hardwicke Cemetery Erebus Cove. The Maori and European sailors were already there by 1287. 'b!n!qec e?e?ew se?e?m we?


12
eight, involving the loss of over 100 lives. Particularly notable shipwrecks were: the Grafton driven aground in Carnley Harbour during a storm in 1864; the Invergauld wrecked on the western cliffs of Auckland Island in 1864; the General Grant also lost on the western cliffs during 1866; the Derry Castle driven onto the northern coast of Enderby Island in 1887; and the Dundonald wrecked on Disappointment Island during 1907. How survivors eked out an existence in cold inhospitable conditions until rescued (in some cases more than two years later), are stories of remarkable human endurance.

Following the earlier of these shipwrecks, castaway depots were established on all of the five island groups. These were serviced by Goverment ships until 1923. The oldest of these depots still standing is the Stella Hut at Sandy Bay on Enderby Island which was built in 1880 to replace an earlier hut destroyed by fire. Survivors of the Dundonald wreck eventually constructed a flimsy coracle in which they were able to reach a castaway depot at Erebus Cove.

Despite the failure of the Hardwicke settlement, several attempts were made between to establish pastoral farming on the Auckland Islands between 1861 and 1934. None were successful. Stock were landed on Campbell Island and Antipodes Island as part of the efforts to provide for castaways, but none of these animals survived for very long. A pastoral lease was granted for Antipodes Island in 1985 for a 21 year period but no stock were ever taken to the island by the lessees. The first pastoral lease for Campbell Island was taken up in 1895; sheep farming continued until 1931 when 4000 sheep and some cattle were abandoned on the island. Extreme isolation and transport difficulties were the downfall of the enterprise. The site of the homestead and woolshed is still evident today at Tucker Cove in Perseverance Harbour.

A small whaling station was established at Northwest Bay on Campbell Island during 1909 by whalers recruited to do farm work. Thirteen whales were caught in the first winter season using an open whale boat, and whaling continued until 1916 when the entire complement of whalers volunteered to fight in the First World War. Remains of the capstan used to haul the whales ashore can still be seen at Capstan Cove.

Several naturalists made visits to various islands through the late 1800s and early 1900s. Notably, L Cockayne visited Antipodes Island in the winter of 1903 and produced a thorough account of the vegetation. In 1907, the Philosophical Institute of Canterbury Subantarctic Islands Expedition visited the Bounty Islands, and also spent eight days on Campbell Island. This was the first scientific group to record the effects of sheep grazing on the vegetation.  Another scientific party lead by Dr W R B Oliver, botanist to the Dominion Museum, visited the islands during 1927 on the Government steamer. Also on board was Guthrie-Smith, a well known conservationist. The party was less than approving of the farming activity on Campbell Island, and this visit was to herald the end of pastoral efforts on the islands, albeit not for several years.

Adams Island had been excluded from the Auckland Islands lease and declared a flora and fauna reserve in 1910. Opposition to farming on Campbell Island surfaced about 1919. By 1927 such feelings had grown stronger and gained the support of people like Guthrie-Smith. However, the pastoral runs were let until 1934 for Auckland Island, and until 1937 for Campbell Island. When the Auckland Island lease expired, the whole island group was reserved for the preservation of flora and fauna.

Scientists also participated in the "Cape Expedition" which was sent to coastwatch on the Auckland and Campbell Islands during the Second World War. Warned that war was imminent, a German steamer named Erlangen slipped out of Dunedin harbour on mainland New Zealand in late August 1939. Having only five days fuel the Erlangen headed for the Auckland Islands where the crew cut and loaded aboard rata logs in Carnley Harbour so enabling them to take the ship to South America. The New Zealand Government, alerted

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
14

by other reports that the Subantarctic islands were being visited by enemy ships, decided 
to establish coastwatching outposts - two on the Auckland islands (at Ranui Cove and 
Tagua Bay) and one on Campbell Island (at Tucker Cove in Perseverance Harbour). The 
volunteer personnel undertook meteorological observations and investigations of the 
biology and geology of the islands, in addition to their military duties.

When the coastwatching was abandoned at the end of the war, radio meteorological 
activities continued at Tucker Cove. In 1957 a new base was constructed a short 
distance away at Beeman Cove. The old base is now derelict. The meteorological station 
was permanently staffed, but switched to automatic operations in October 1995.

Perseverence Harbour, Campbell Island

The Campbell Islands were declared a flora and fauna reserve in 1953. Similar action was 
taken for the Antipodes, Bounty and Snares islands during 1961 (all became nature 
reserves in 1978). As reserves, the islands continued to be administered by the 
Department of Lands and Survey which was assisted by the Outlying Islands Reserves 
Committee. This committee comprised representatives of 10 Government agencies having 
an interest in management of the islands. It continued acting in an advisory role up until 
1987 when major restructuring of Government departments took place. A management 
plan was prepared for each island reserve during the 1980s (refer 1.1).

Expeditions to various islands for management and/or scientific purposes were undertaken 
by the New Zealand Wildlife Service, the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(Ecology and Botany Divisions, and Oceanographic Institute), the Department of Lands and 
Survey, as well as other scientists. In 1961 the University of Canterbury established a 
biological station at the Snares Islands. Research parties then visited the station almost 
every summer season up to 1977. Major scientific expeditions were made to the 
Auckland Islands and Bounty Islands in 1972/73 and 1978, respectively. Another notable 
project was the erection of a dividing fence across Campbell Island during 1969/70, in 
order to exclude sheep from half of the island and monitor the vegetation. Several small 
huts have been erected to support management and scientific work on various islands.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                  December 1995
15

Recent Management and Visitor Activities

Landings on the islands have been restricted in terms of the Reserves Act 1977 and the current management plans. Since the Department of Conservation was established in 1987, the major management effort has been removal of introduced animals (refer 2.3.2 for details). Investigations are underway to trial further removal operations. Science has continued to be one of the prime reasons for visits to the islands in the recent past. Over the 1994/95 season, for example, three small teams undertook research and population monitoring of the New Zealand sea lion at the Auckland Islands, and on Wandering albatross at the Auckland Islands and Antipodes Islands.

The Department strongly endorses the promotion of information exchange among island management agencies and scientists. A close working relationship has been established with the Tasmanian Department of Parks, Wildlife and Heritage and two staff exchanges have occurred to encourage the sharing of management information between Macquarie Island and New Zealand's subantarctic islands. These two government agencies also liaised closely on devising guidelines for Subantarctic tourism. An exchange is currently being promoted with the Falkland Islands to assist conservation management there using New Zealand expertise in island management and pest eradication in particular.

The first cruise ship to visit the islands purely for tourism purposes was the Magga Dan which included the Subantarctic region as part of the first tourist cruises to Antarctica in 1968. Subsequently, visits were infrequent, but became regular from the 1979/80 season. In recent years there have been about 10 ship visits to the islands each summer, carrying 500-600 tourists. Tourism visits have been formalised in the management plans for Campbell and Auckland Islands since 1983 and 1987, respectively. They are allowed subject to strict controls and provided they do not compromise in any way the primary management objective of the preservation of the natural values of the islands. Currently a maximum of 600 tourism visitors are allowed to land during each summer season.

Tucker Cove fenceline, Campbell Island

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                         December 1995
16

There has been a major growth in tourism demand over the last five years, compared to 
the previous twenty years. The attraction for tourism is not difficult to identify. The 
remoteness of these rugged windswept islands set amongst some of the wildest oceans 
in the world combined with superb wildlife viewing opportunities are key attractions for 
tourists seeking remote destinations with a focus on nature tourism (eco-tourism).

Key elements in the raising of public awareness are television documentaries, the "Roaring 
Forties" displays being developed at the Southland Museum and Art Gallery in Invercargill, 
and other initiatives such as the 1990 "Arts in the Subantarctic" Exhibition. Such 
experiences offer people a taste of the remarkable character of these islands, and reduce 
the risks that are associated with human visits.

Recent development of commercial fisheries in the Subantarctic region has brought issues 
of marine mammal and seabird bycatch, which led to establishment of a marine mammal 
sanctuary over and around the Auckland Islands in 1993. Investigation of the interactions 
between sea lions and squid trawlers in fishing grounds near the Auckland Islands is a high 
priority research programme for the Department. Work also continues on reducing the 
seabird bycatch, and advocating for sustainable management of fisheries in the region.

1.3 Kaupapa Maori

The Kai Tahu whanui (the extended family of Kai Tahu) represents the three principal 
tribes of Te Waipounamu (South Island) and Rakiura (Stewart island): Waitaha, Kati 
Mamoe and Kai Tahu who, in succession, occupied those lands before the arrival of 
Europeans. Kai Tahu established their control of the rohe (tribal area) by intermarriage, 
diplomacy and warfare with Waitaha and Kati Mamoe, so that today Kai Tahu is the iwi 
that holds manawhenua in southern New Zealand.

Kai Tahu have established their right under the Treaty of Waitangi to a reasonable share 
of the sea fisheries off their rohe within the 200 mile economic exclusion zone. Kai Tahu 
also claim traditional mana regarding the southern islands which are said to have been 
known to, and used by expeditions seeking food and other natural resources prior to the 
arrival of Europeans.

The Ngati Mutunga iwi, and the Moriori people of the Chatham Islands also have links with 
the Auckland Islands, specifically through the attempt to settle the Port Ross area in the 
period 1842-56.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
Auckland Islands Nature Reserve

 
North Arm, Carnley Harbour


Enderby Island
The Auckland Islands lie 460 km south of the South Island of New Zealand. These islands are the eroded 
remains of cones of two basaltic volcanoes over basement granites. They have been subject to several 
periods of glaciation. The west coast of Auckland Island consists of an almost continuous line of steep cliffs, 
which include possibly the thickest exposed sequence of lava flows in New Zealand. The highest point is Mt 
Dick on Adams Island (667 m).

On the main island, southern rata forest dominates to an altitude of 50 m. Above this, a broad belt of scrub 
occurs. Bogs of cushion sedge are common. Above 300 m, tussock grassland predominates, giving way to 
herbfield (or bryophytes, mosses, lichens, sedges) at around 500 m. This basic vegetation pattern varies 
among the islands, largely depending on the extent of modification by man and introduced animals. Adams 
Island is the least disturbed, and is known internationally for its herbaceous flora. The flora of the Auckland 
group includes 44 fern species, and the occurrence of Cyathea smithii on Auckland Island represents the 
southern limit of tree ferns in the world.

The islands have a rich avifauna, with at least 46 species of breeding birds present. Rockhopper penguins are 
abundant, with erect-crested penguin and yellow-eyed penguin common. The islands are the among the 
major breeding grounds in the world of wandering and shy albatross. Southern royal albatross and light-
mantled sooty albatross occur. Sooty shearwater, Auckland Island prion, white-headed petrel, white-chinned 
petrel, common diving petrel, Antarctic tern, southern skua and Auckland Island shag are common. Indig-
enous landbirds such as bellbird, Auckland Island pipit and Auckland Island tomtit, are abundant.

Eight endemic bird species are present: Auckland Island prion, shag, teal, rail, banded dotterel, snipe, pipit 
and tomtit.

White capped mollymawk colony, Disappointment Island
Campbell Islands Nature Reserve

 
 Campbell Island

 
 Dent Island
The Campbell Islands lie 700 km south of the South Island of New Zealand. Campbell Island is a remnant of
a dissected volcanic dome. Marine erosion has removed most of the western section, and the east coast has
fiord-like inlets formed by the "drowning" of lower reaches of radial valleys. The oldest basement rocks are
schist. The highest point is Mt Honey (567 m).

Three vegetation types predominate on Campbell Island: tussock grassland, shrubland and herbfield. In
coastal areas, the moss Muelleriella crassifolia is common, along with several herbs. In sheltered areas,
dwarf forest with woody shrubs and ferns occurs. Above this, the vegetation is dominated by tussock grass-
land. Above 300 m, herb Bulbinella rossii and the rush Marsippospermum gracile dominate an underturf of
grasses, forbs, lichens and bryophytes. Areas of sphagnum bog, peat moors and cushion bog also occur. The
offshore islets, which have not been modified by human activities, have dominant associations of tussock
grasses and herbs. There are no endemic plant species and no indigenous trees.

Twenty-nine species of birds breed on the islands. Rockhopper penguins are very abundant, with erect-
crested penguin and yellow-eyed penguin also breeding. Southern royal albatross, black-browed albatross,
and grey-headed albatross are common, with northern giant petrel, Cape pigeon, southern skua, Campbell
Island shag, Antarctic tern, and pipit also notable.

Black-browed albatross breed only on Campbell and Antipodes Islands, and Campbell Island is the major
breeding site for southern royal and grey-headed albatross. Campbell Island shag are endemic. Dent Island
has the only wild population of the rare, endemic, Campbell Island teal. Dent and Jacquemart Islands sup-
port large numbers of petrels and prions, which are rare on the main island.

Bull Rock mollymawk colony, Campbell Island
Antipodes Islands Nature Reserve

North Plains, Antipodes Island and Bollons Island

Orde Lees Island
The Antipodes Islands lie 850 km south-east of the South Island of New Zealand. The islands are of 
volcanic origin, remnants of the upper portion of an extensive submerged volcanic pile. Composi-
tion is of basaltic lava with pyroclastic debris. The highest point in Mt Galloway (402 m).
Predominant vegetation in coastal areas is tussock grassland of Poa litorosa, up to 1.5 m high. Inland, the 
fern Polystichum vestitum is common. On higher sheltered slopes, and in gullies, Coprosma ciliata shrub 
occurs with ferns and the herb Stilbocarpa polaris. Scattered bogs with sedge and herbs occur. In upper 
areas, mosses and lichens are prominent. The only woody plants are four species of Coprosma.

Twenty-five species of bird breed on these islands. Erect-crested penguin and rockhopper penguin are very 
abundant, with wandering albatross and light-mantled sooty albatross, northern giant petrel, white-headed 
petrel, grey petrel, white-chinned petrel, and southern skua common.

Four endemic bird species are present: Antipodes Island snipe, pipit, parakeet and red-crowned parakeet.

Snares Islands Nature Reserve

Biological Station, North East Island

The Snares Islands lie some 200 km south-west of the South Island of New Zealand. They comprise two 
distinct groups: North East Island and islets, and the Western Chain. The islands are composed of jointed 
granite, and are probably 
part of a large batholith including areas of Stewart Island, formed about 120 MYs ago and subsequently 
eroded.

Vegetation is dominated by forests of Olearia Lyallii, with some Senecio Stewartiae. Ferns occur in the sub-
canopy and in gullies. In open area in the forest, the herb Stilbocarpa robusta occurs. Dense scrub of Hebe 
elliptica is present on forest margins. Grassland of Poa tennantiana and Poa astonii, with the herb 
Colobanthus muscoldes, predominates in coastal areas of North East Island between the cliffs and forest, as 
well as over much of Broughton Island. Islets of the Western Chain are largely devoid of vegetation.
Twenty-three species of bird breed on these islands. There are large populations of the endemic Snares crested penguin, and Salvin's mollymawk, Buller's mollymawk, mottled petrel, fairy prion, fulmar prion, and common diving petrel. Sooty shearwater are the most abundant birds, with the population on North East Island estimated at 2.75 million burrow-holding pairs (1982). Three land birds are endemic: Snares tomtit, Snares fernbird and Snares Island snipe.

Sink Hole Flat, North East Island

Bounty Islands Nature Reserve

The Bounty Islands lie 700 km east-south-east of the South Island of New Zealand. They comprise over 20 small islands, islets and rocks in three groups: Main, Centre and East. They are of granite composition. They are bare and spray-swept. Guano deposits accumulate in summer. No terrestrial vegetation has been described, although lichens and green algae reportedly occur on a few sheltered rock faces.

The Bounty Islands support the largest known breeding population of New Zealand fur seal. The total population numbered about 16,000 in 1980 and is increasing. Seven species of bird breed on the islands. Erect-crested penguin are very abundant, as are Salvin's mollymawk which are endemic to the Bounty and Snares Islands. The Bounty Island shag, and a race of fulmar prion are endemic to this island group. Antarctic tern, Cape pigeon and southern black-backed gull breed, with possibly also the rockhopper penguin.
Islet of the Bounty Islands group

TABLE 1: GEOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL DETAILS OF NZ SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS


|| ISLAND GROUPS: | AUCKLAND IS | CAMPBELL IS | ANTIPODES IS | SNARES IS | BOUNTY IS |
| Area | 62,564ha | 11,331ha | 2,100ha | 328ha | 135ha |
| Rainfall/yr | 1500-2000mm | 1450mm | 1000-1500mm | 1200mm | 1000-1500mm |
| Mean annual temp | 8°C | 6°C | 8°C | 11°C | 10°C |
| Latitude | 50°44'S | 52°33'S | 49°41'S | 48°02'S | 47°45'S |
| Distance from New Zealand | 460km | 700km | 850km | 200km | 700km |
| Year of Euro. Discovery | 1806 | 1810 | 1800 | 1791 | 1788 |
| Year reserved | 1934 1910 (Adams) | 1954 | 1961 | 1961 | 1961 |

Reference:

These notes on the five island nature reserves have been adapted from Clark, MR and PR Dingwall (1985): Conservation Islands in the Southern Ocean. A review of the protected areas of Insulantarctica. Discusion document prepared for IUCN's Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (Reprinted 1990).
1.4 Conservation Significance

The Subantarctic Islands are among New Zealand's most remote and vulnerable nature reserves. They are significant island refuges for a range of plants and animals found nowhere else in the world. They are important breeding grounds for countless seabirds, penguins and marine mammals, and the habitat of some special plants. The southern ocean is equally important as habitat and vast feeding ground for wildlife. Significant natural features of the New Zealand Subantartic region include:

    •   the endemic New Zealand sea lion which has its principal breeding ground at Auckland Islands

    •   among the greatest diversity of penguin species found in the world, comprising four breeding species (two endemic - Snares crested, erect crested, plus the Yellow-eyed and rockhopper) and seven transient species

    •   the world's only breeding populations of southern royal albatross; and the world's largest populations of wandering albatross, white-capped mollymawk and Salvin's mollymawk

    •   over six million (estimated) breeding seabirds on the 328 hectare Snares Islands

    •   the world's rarest cormorant, duck and penguin species (Bounty Island shag, Campbell Island teal, and Yellow-eyed penguin respectively)

    •   fourteen endemic species or sub-species of land birds

    •   120 species of birds and 200 species of indigenous vascular plants

    •   a high level of endemic species of vascular plants (including some also found elsewhere only on Macquarie Island)

    •   the spectacular Subantarctic megaherbs including the daisy genus Pleurophyllum which is endemic to the New Zealand biological region

    •   the colourful rata forests and southernmost tree ferns in the world on the Auckland Islands

    •   one of the world's largest islands free of introduced mammals (Adams Island: 9896 hectares)

    •   eleven geological sites and landforms of national and regional importance, including granite (Tertiary dikes and sills), and volcanic features (columnar jointing, lava flows, an intrusive plug, a gabbro, scoria cones and a rare occurrence of peralkaline rhyolite)

    •   a fascinating human history of exploration, shipwrecks, sealing, whaling, farming and early scientific expeditions

In recognition of their rich assemblage of landforms, flora and wildlife, and the vulnerability of these ecosystems, the islands have been given the highest form of protection available in New Zealand law - the status of National Nature Reserves under the Reserves Act 1977. The Subantarctic Islands together comprise only 76,458ha in land area. But despite their small size, these islands are important - because of their isolation. Isolation has enabled retention of their many natural features and abundant wildlife, which has not been the case for so much of the remainder of New Zealand.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
TABLE 2 - CONSERVATION STATUS OF ISLANDS IN THE SOUTHERN OCEANS

                                                                                
 Island              |Area (ha)  |Degree of modification                     |Habitation                                 |Exploitation of indigenous fauna|Introduced flora|Introduced fauna|Number of introduced mammal species|
---------------------|-----------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------|----------------|-------------------------------|
Falkland Islands     |1300000    |all levels from unaffected by humans to significant modification|permanent settlement           |current                         |present         |present         |11                             |
Kerguelen Islands    |700000     |from little modification to significant modification|Met or scientific station staffed year round|current                         |present         |present         |7                              |
South Shetland Islands|470000     |from little modification to localised modification|Met or scientific station staffed year round|past only                       |absent          |absent          |0                              |
South Georgia        |375000     |from little modification to significant modification|Met or scientific station staffed year round|past only                       |present         |present         |3                              |
Auckland Islands     |62564      |from little modification to significant modification|seasonal scientific/management visits|past only                       |present         |present         |3                              |
South Orkney Islands |62000      |from little modification to localised modification|Met or scientific station staffed all year round|past only                       |present         |absent          |0                              |
Crozet Island        |50000      |from little modification to significant modification|Met or scientific station staffed all year round|past only                       |present         |present         |6                              |
Heard Island         |38000      |little modification                        |periodic scientific/management visits|past only                       |absent          |absent          |0                              |
South Sandwich Islands|31000      |from little modification to localised modification|Met or scientific station staffed year round|past only                       |absent          |absent          |0                              |
Marion Island        |30000      |significant modification                   |Met or scientific station staffed all year round|past only                       |present         |present         |2                              |
Macquarie Island     |12785      |significant modification                   |Met or scientific station staffed all year round|past only                       |present         |present         |4                              |
Campbell Islands     |11331      |from little modification to significant modification|Met or scientific station staffed all year round until October 1995. Seasonal scientific/management visits|past only                       |present         |present         |2                              |
Tristan da Cunha Islands|11100   |from little modification to significant modification|permanent human settlement     |current                         |present         |present         |8                              |
Gough Island         |6500       |localised modification                     |Met or scientific station staffed all year round|past only                       |present         |present         |1                              |
Island Amsterdam     |5500       |high level of modification                 |Met or scientific station staffed all year round|past only                       |present         |present         |4                              |
Bouvetoya            |5000       |little modification                        |uninhabited                     |past only                       |absent          |absent          |0                              |
Prince Edward Island |4400       |little modification                        |uninhabited                     |past only                       |present         |absent          |0                              |
Antipodes Islands    |2100       |little modification                        |scientific hut staffed periodically|past only                       |present         |present         |1                              |
Island Saint-Paul    |700        |high level of modification                 |uninhabited                     |past only                       |present         |present         |4                              |
Snares Islands       |328        |little modification                        |scientific hut staffed periodically|past only                       |present         |absent          |0                              |
MacDonald Islands    |260        |unaffected by humans                       |uninhabited                     |no exploitation                 |absent          |absent          |0                              |
Bounty Islands       |135        |little modification                        |uninhabited                     |past only                       |absent          |absent          |0                              |
Total area (all)     |3179301    |                                           |                                   |                                |                |                |                               |
Area (NZ Islands)    |76456      |                                           |                                   |                                |                |                |                               |
Updated from Clark and Dingwall (1985)                                                                                                                                                                

                                                                               Table 2: Conservation Status of Islands in the Southern Oceans
18
New Zealand's Offshore and Outlying Islands

Islands are among the most important areas for nature conservation in New Zealand. Over 
100 of the 300 offshore islands listed in Atkinson and Taylor (1992) are located around 
the southern coast. These are islands less than 50 km from the mainland shore.

The outlying islands are those more than 50km from a mainland shore. New Zealand's 
Subantarctic Islands comprise five of the eight outlying island groups of the New Zealand 
archipelago (the others being the Chatham Is, Kermadec Is and Three Kings Is). As 
islands, they are part of a special conservation asset in southern New Zealand. Because 
these islands have retained both their indigenous flora and fauna and the conditions to 
maintain them, they can offer better prospects for success of conservation management 
actions (such as pest eradication) than mainland sites. Remote islands have the added 
advantage that re-invasion by eradicated organisms is unlikely because of the great 
distance to be travelled.

A significant feature of the Subantarctic Islands is the absence of possums and deer - 
alien mammals which were introduced to mainland New Zealand. Absence of predators 
(such as rats and cats which prey on birds, reptiles and insects) from many islands off the 
New Zealand mainland is another significant reason why islands are regarded as especially 
important for nature conservation. While about a quarter of New Zealand's islands are 
predator free, these account for only 1% of the area of the total island resource and about 
half of them are within swimming distance of stoats and rats from the mainland. 
Consequently the outlying islands, for which achievable barriers to predator invasion can 
be maintained, are of essential importance, although it needs to be recognised that few 
replicate mainland ecosystems. Because of their remote position and rugged topography, 
they are extremely difficult sites on which to undertake conservation management 
initiatives.

Resource uses such as fishing, mineral and oil exploration, and tourism give cause for 
concern because of their potential threat to the Islands' indigenous fauna and flora. Such 
threats include the depletion of essential food resources such as krill, squid and fish, the 
incidental netting of sea lions, killing of seabirds, oil spills, waste disposal and the 
introduction of rodents.

The Global Network of Subantarctic Islands

New Zealand's Subantarctic Island groups share close biogeographic connections with 
Australia's Macquarie Island, and are part of a hemispheric chain of 22 island groups in 
the southern oceans lying between the Sub-tropical and Antarctic convergences (see 
Table 2).

New Zealand's Subantarctic Islands amount to about 2.5% of the combined area of all 
island groups in the Southern Ocean in Subantarctic latitudes. Auckland Islands group is 
the fifth largest in the southern oceans, after the Falkland Islands, Is Kerguelen, South 
Shetlands and South Georgia. Campbell Islands group is ranked twelth directly after 
Macquarie Is (they are of similar size). Antipodes, Snares and Bounty Islands rank in the 
smallest five of the 22 island groups.

However, in terms of modification, New Zealand's Subantarctic Islands rank amongst the 
most pristine - three in the top eight that are least modified and, excluding the main 
islands of the Auckland and Campbell groups, these islands rank amongst the least 
modified island groups in the world.

Oceanic islands are among the last bastions of nature in a world beset by massive and 
rapid change because of human activity. New Zealand's Subantarctic Islands are some

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
20

of the least human-modified environments anywhere on the globe. Maintenance of these 
island ecosystems in their natural state is of immense value to global conservation and 
science. Experience has shown that plants and animals which have evolved on oceanic 
islands in the absence of terrestrial mammals are highly vulnerable and sensitive to 
disturbance. They are readily destroyed, but are virtually impossible to replace.

The Ocean Connection

Further, the Subantarctic Islands do not represent discrete ecological systems but are in 
fact an integral part of the larger Subantarctic oceanic ecosystem. The islands, together 
with the adjoining off shore waters, provide important habitat, including major breeding
- nd feeding grounds, essential for the well being of many marine-dependent species of 
u. digenous fauna.

The islands are vital breeding grounds for seabirds, penguins and seals that spend most 
of their life at sea (feeding) but return to the islands for brief periods to breed. Thus, there 
is an inextricable link between terrestrial and marine realms in the life cycles of these 
animals. Conservation of seabirds, penguins and seals cannot rest solely on island 
protection (whereas plant conservation can) - there must also be conservation of the 
surrounding oceans, from which these animals find their food. While the CMS cannot 
directly influence use and conservation of marine resources outside of the nature reserve 
boundaries, it can highlight the conservation significance of the marine environment, 
which sustains life on the islands.

Light-mantled sooty albatross

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
1.5 The Future

All of the Subantarctic Islands are amongst the highest-valued conservation assets in New Zealand and the world, and should be managed on this basis, in perpetuity.

The values of these natural assets are such as to require those responsible for their management to lead rather than follow public opinion. Managers and decision-takers, and the wider community, have to be courageous in setting out and maintaining clear positions on matters of protection, or the islands will not, in 50 years or more, be the exceptional natural places they are today. They demand a dedicated philosophy of protection management that recognises these are not places for risk-taking and compromise. Damage, if it occurs (through rodent invasion, for example), is likely to be irreparable.

The central issue to recognise in the management of sites as close to pristine as are many of these Subantarctic Islands, is that human visits collectively pose the single biggest risk -especially with their associated transport and likely travelling companions (eg, rats, other rodents or pest organisms). Management of these island reserves is firstly about minimising the risks of adverse effects on the environment caused by people, which may be equated - to an extent - with minimising visits. In setting access policies and assessing applications for visits there must be a balance struck between degree of risk and degree of benefit. All proposals - whether for tourism, science or management purposes - should be assessed consistently against stringent environmental standards. No special privilege should be given to any proposed visit other than that which is merited by the particular contribution of the proposal to the preservation of nature, which is the primary purpose of the reserve status and classification.

Only a small number of people will be able to visit the islands directly (ie, go ashore). But because some people will try to and can exert influence against this precautionary approach, the policies regarding visitation have to be strong. However, a full awareness of the value and special character of the Subantarctic Islands by a wide spectrum of the international and national community is a vital element to their preservation in perpetuity. One means of achieving this, and increasing the opportunity for people to appreciate the islands, is by the development of off-site interpretation opportunities. The more people that can enjoy the islands from a distance the better, to bolster political support for their protection; this includes taking strong positions to reduce the risks inherent in visitation.

Threats still exist on many of the islands in the form of introduced predators. The long-term goals, regardless of whether eradication and restoration are currently achievable with existing techniques or resources, are to
*   hold the line by preventing further introductions of alien species, and
*   remove entirely the populations of introduced mammals and plants in order to restore natural ecosystems.

We succeed toward these goals if we are able to leave these islands at the end of each management period in the same, if not better, condition than they were in when it started. This principle is very important when considering the increasing pressure for access to remote places for tourism, but also when considering access for science and management purposes. In some cases the best management will be the "hands-off" approach, although survey, monitoring and research is needed to assess ecosystem condition and trends.

It is also essential that the islands be managed with due consideration to the connections between the islands and their surrounding ocean areas. The goal is to minimise the threats to marine mammals and wildlife caused by human activities in the southern ocean.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
22

1.6 Statutory Basis For Management

Overview

The Conservation Act 1987 determines a structure for management of the protected natural and historic rescurces of New Zealand, including the public lands commonly referred to collectively as lands administered by the Department of Conservation - 
reserves, sanctuaries, conservation areas and national parks. The Act provides for the New Zealand Conservation Auth:rity and regional conservation boards to advise the Department and approve Conservation Management Strategies and Plans.

The purpose of a Conservation Management Strategy (CMS) is to:

    implement general policies and establish objectives for the integrated management 
    of natural and historic resources, including any species, managed by the 
    Department under the Wildlife Act 1953, the Marine Reserves Act 1971, the 
    Reserves Act 1977, the Wild Animal Control Act 1977, the Marine Mammals 
    Protection Act 1978, the National Parks Act 1980, the New Zealand Walkways 
    Act 1990, or this Act, or any of them, and for recreation, tourism, and other 
    conservation purposes.
    (Conservation Act 1987: s.17D)

The key role of a CMS is to achieve an integrated management approach meshing, where and when appropriate, all the various management principles, aims, requirements and functions set out in the relevant governing legislation as listed above. (Note: the National Parks Act 1980 and New Zealand Walkways Act 1990 are not relevant to the Subantarctic Islands).

Wildlife Act 1953

The Wildlife Act 1953 declares that most indigenous wildlife, including penguins and seabirds, is to be absolutely protected throughout New Zealand. Sanctuaries, refuges or management reserves may be established to assist in the protection of wildlife. The jurisdiction of this Act extends to New Zealand's territorial waters.

Marine Reserves Act 1971

The Marine Reserves Act 1971 provides for the establishment and management of areas of the sea and foreshore as marine reserves for the purpose of preserving them in their natural state as the habitat of marine life for scientific study. Marine reserves are to be administered and maintained so that:

-   they are preserved as far as possible in their natural state:
-   the marine life within reserves shall as far as possible be protected and reserved:
-   the value of the reserves as the natural habitat of marine life shall as far as possible be maintained:

-   subject to the provisions of the Act and to the imposition of such conditions and restrictions as may be necessary for the preservation of the marine life or for the welfare in general of the reserves, the public shall have freedom of access and entry to the reserves, so that they may enjoy in full measure the opportunity to study, observe, and record marine life in its natural habitat.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
23

The Act also provides that recreational fishing may be authorised in marine reserves if 
such use will not compromise these management aims.

Currently there are no marine reserves within the Subantarctic Islands CMS area.

Reserves Act 1977

The Reserves Act 1977 sets out broad principles for the management of reserve lands. 
The Act provides for seven different classes of reserve: recreation, historic, scenic, nature, 
scientific, government purpose and local purpose, with specific purposes set out for each 
classification. Further, the Act provides for reserves to be declared National reserves in 
order to protect values of national or international importance.

All of the five Subantarctic island groups are classified as nature reserves, and all have 
been declared National reserves. They are to be managed for the purpose of:

    protecting and preserving in perpetuity indigenous flora and fauna or natural 
    features that are of such rarity, scientific interest or importance, or so unique that 
    their protection and preservation is in the public interest.
    (Reserves Act 1977: s.20)

and, further:

    when a reserve has been declared...to be a National reserve [it] shall...be 
    administered...in order to provide for the application of management policies to 
    protect [its] values of national or international significance.
    (Reserves Act 1977: s.13(5))

One of the effects of the national reserve declarations is that the nature reserve 
classification can only be changed by Act of Parliament. Having regard to the general 
purpose of nature reserves, they are to be managed so that:

-   they shall be preserved as far as possible in its natural state:

-   except where the Minister of Conservation otherwise determines, the indigenous 
    flora and fauna, ecological associations, and natural environment shall as far as 
    possible be preserved and the exotic flora and fauna as far as possible be 
    exterminated:

-   for the better protection and preservation of the flora and fauna in its natural 
    state, no person shall enter the reserves, except under the authority of a 
    permit....and the expression "enter the reserve" shall....be deemed to include any 
    physical contact with the land by a boat; and for this purpose any physical 
    contact with the land shall be deemed to include the attaching (by rope or 
    otherwise) of a boat to a reserves or to a wharf constructed on or partly on a 
    reserve:
    [the foreshores around the islands are included in the nature reserves - hence the 
    reserve boundaries follow the line of Mean Low Water)

-   where scenic, historic, archaeological, biological, geological, or other scientific 
    features are present on the reserves, those features shall be managed and 
    protected to the extent compatible with the principal or primary purpose of the 
    reserves:

    Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall authorise the doing of anything with 
    respect to fauna that would contravene any provision of the Wildlife Act 1953 or

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
24

any regulations or Proclamation or notification under that Act, or the doing of 
anything with respect to archaeological features in any reserve that would 
contravene any provision of the Historic Places Act 1993;

-   to the extent compatible with the principal or primary purpose of the reserves, 
their value as soil, water, and forest conservation areas shall be maintained. 
(Reserves Act: s.20)

Wild Animal Control Act 1977

The Wild Animal Control Act 1977 seeks to achieve effective control of harmful species 
of introduced wild animals - deer (including wapiti or moose), chamois, thar, wallabies, 
possums, wild pigs and wild goats. The Act is to be administered by the Department of 
Conservation so as to:

-   ensure concerted action against the damaging effects of wild animals on 
vegetation, soils, waters, and wildlife; and

-   achieve coordination of hunting measures; and

-   provide for the regulation of recreational hunting and wild animal recovery.

The only animals currently on the Subantarctic Islands subject to this Act are wild pigs on 
Auckland Island.

Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978

The Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978 provides for the protection, conservation, and 
management of marine mammals within New Zealand and New Zealand fisheries waters 
(EEZ). The Act places restrictions on the taking of marine mammals from their natural 
habitat, and provides for the establishment of marine mammal sanctuaries.

A marine mammal sanctuary has been established around the Auckland Islands with the 
aim of giving better protection to the New Zealand sea lion. This sanctuary extends out 
12 miles to the limit of New Zealand's territorial sea.

Conservation Act 1987

The Conservation Act 1987 sets out broad principles for the management of conservation 
areas, indigenous freshwater fisheries, and other natural or historic resources. The 
functions of the Department of Conservation under this Act include:

-   advocating the conservation of natural and historic resources generally; and

-   promoting the benefits to present and future generations of the conservation of 
natural and historic resources of New Zealand's subantarctic islands. 
(Conservation Act 1987: s.6)

Conservation, in the context of advocating for conservation purposes, means:
the preservation and protection of natural and historic resources for the purposes 
of maintaining their intrinsic values, providing for their appreciation and 
recreational enjoyment by the public, and safeguarding the options for future 
generations.
(Conservation Act 1897: s.2)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                     December 1995
25

Treaty of Waitangi

The Department of Conservation, in carrying out its functions, must give effect to the 
principles of the Treaty of Waitangi.

A set of principles in relation to the Department's responsibilities under the Treaty of 
Waitangi can be derived from a decision of the Court of Appeal. They are as follows:

.    Act reasonably and in good faith (the partnership principle)
.    Make informed decisions
.    Actively protect Maori taoka to the fullest extent practicable (the principle of 
     active protection)
.    Avoid action which will prevent the redress of claims
.    Government must be able to govern

The Department acknowledges the Kai Tahu association with islands in the Southern 
Ocean (and claim of manawhenua); and the whanaungatanga interest that Ngati Mutunga 
and Moriori have with the Auckland Islands.

The Department, Southland Conservation Board and New Zealand Conservation Authority 
have statutory responsibilities for lands administered by the Department, with an 
obligation to have regard for and protect Maori interests. Management planning can assist 
in the caretaking role by recognising wahi taonga and incorporating iwi perspectives.

General Policies

The Conservation Act 1987 provides for general policies to be prepared at the national 
level for guiding management of lands and resources administered by the Department of 
Conservation. To date only one general policy - the Concessions Policy - has been 
approved.

A range of other national policies is currently being developed. The draft policies have 
been taken into account, where applicable, in this Draft CMS.

Departmental Policies and Procedures

The Department of Conservation has developed operational policies and procedures to help 
ensure that it executes its functions in an effective and consistent way. These policies 
or procedures must be in accord with legislation, general policies, and conservation 
management strategies and plans.

Other Legislation and Constraints

While the Subantarctic Islands are lands administered by the Department of Conservation 
in accordance with the Reserves Act 1977, activities on or around the islands are subject 
to a variety of other New Zealand laws. Some of these (eg, Historic Places Act 1993; 
Crown Minerals Act 1991) are referred to in more detail in the appropriate sections of this 
CMS. Other statutes of general relevance to management of resources in the 
Subantarctic region are:

Local Government Act 1974
This Act gives the Minister of Conservation the powers, functions and duties of both a 
regional and district council under the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA), as they 
pertain to the Subantarctic Islands and the coastal marine areas (CMAs) surrounding them.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                                    December 1995
26

Resource Management Act 1991

The purpose of this Act is to promote sustainable management of New Zealand’s natural 
and physical resources. Activities on land are deemed to be permitted unless they 
contravene a rule in a district plan. Currently there is no district plan for the Subantarctic 
islands, and none is envisaged, so there are no constraints on land activities in terms of 
this Act. However, discharges into water or air do require resource consents. Activities 
other than the normal passage of shipping in the CMA (defined by the line of Mean High 
Water Springs out to the 12 mile territorial limit) also require resource consents, unless 
they are specifically permitted by a rule in a regional coastal plan. There is no regional 
coastal plan for the Subantarctic CMAs, so resource consents are required.

The New Zealand Coastal Policy Statement prepared under the RMA is a statutory policy 
which is administered by the Minister of Conservation.

The RMA also provides for the Minister for the Environment to make regulations for 
control of discharges from vessels and dumping of waste within the territorial sea. These 
regulations will be the mechanism through which MARPOL and other international 
conventions (see below) addressing pollution of the marine environment will be 
implemented in New Zealand law. Intentional dumping of waste will not be allowed 
except when authorised by a resource consent; and a legal code will control discharges 
of harmful substances and contaminants from ships, including disposal from ships of 
sewage, garbage, oil and oily mixtures.

Maritime Transport Act 1994

This Act provides for oil spill management and response within the Exclusive Economic 
Zone. The Maritime Safety Authority and the Department of Conservation have agreed 
to cooperate in contingency planning for oil spills in Subantarctic waters.

Fisheries Act 1983

Allocation of access to fisheries is the responsibility of the Minister of Fisheries. All 
marine life, both plant and animal, is subject to this Act, except within marine reserves. 
However the Fisheries Act is currently being reviewed with proposals for some marine 
species to be covered by the Wildlife Act 1953 (see above).

Building Act 1991

This Act applies to the erection, maintenance and demolition of structures on the 
Subantarctic Islands.

Foreshore and Seabed Endowment Revesting Act 1991

Foreshore and seabed is a separate category of land of the Crown, vested in the Minister 
of Conservation (the foreshores around the Subantarctic Islands are included in the nature 
reserves).

Other Constraints

Management options can also be limited by other factors such as the provisions of leases 
or licences.

International Conventions

There are a number of international conventions that have a bearing on how resources in 
this CMS area are to be managed. Those considered to be most relevant are:

Convention on Biological Diversity

The New Zealand Government ratified this convention in 1993. The principles of this 
convention are centred around maintaining natural biodiversity (refer 2.1).

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                                    December 1995
27

Convention for the Regulation of Whaling
This convention established the International Whaling Commission (IWC) which can adopt regulations on, among other matters, whale catch quotas, the protection of certain whale species, and whaling techniques.

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)
New Zaaland's obligations under this convention are implemented through the Trade in Endangered Species Act.

Convention on the Conservation of Marine Living Antarctic Resources (CCMLAR)
Many species breeding on the Subantarctic Islands or visiting the region are subjects of this convention.

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol)
New Zealand ratified this Protocol in 1994 and it is implemented through the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994. This Protocol establishes a system of environmental evaluations for human activities in Antarctica which can also be applied to the Subantarctic (refer 5.3.1 and 5.3.4).

Convention for the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage
There is interest in seeing the Subantarctic Islands nominated for inclusion in the World Heritage List.

Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (London Convention)
New Zealand ratified this convention in 1975 (refer 2.4).

Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 1973 and amending Protocol of 1978 (MARPOL)
New Zealand has not signed this convention, but it will be implemented through the Resource Management Act 1991 and Maritime Transport Act 1994 (refer 2.4).

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]CTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 109
(Part 2-6)
May 1996
Original: English


DRAFT CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT STRATEGY:
NEW ZEALAND
SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS

(Agenda item 20)

(submitted by New Zealand)
Part 2: Ecosystems Management

2.1 Rationale

The management goals are essentially to preserve the island nature reserves as far as possible in their natural state, and to protect wildlife and marine mammals on, or in the surrounding ocean (refer 1.6).

Priorities for protection of natural values are influenced by a number of external factors. Of the number of international conventions to which New Zealand is a signatory, the most significant for ecosystems management is the Convention on Biological Diversity. Preparation of a National Biodiversity Strategy for New Zealand should have considerable benefits for protection of the Subantarctic islands and the surrounding ocean.

Biodiversity encompasses all species of plants, animals, micro-organisms, their genetic diversity and the ecosystems and ecological processes of which they are part. Biodiversity provides us with our natural heritage. All nations possess their own unique complement of native species, habitats and ecosystems, and isolated nations like New Zealand have species which are found nowhere else in the world.

The loss of biodiversity is a manifestly complex issue. It is important to make the distinction between naturally occurring losses and extinctions and those which have been caused by human actions. New Zealand has had an exceptional rate of extinctions since human occupation with the diversity and number of species and ecosystems disappearing at an alarming rate.

All ecosystems undergo modification as part of natural processes. However changes related to the introduction of species and habitat destruction occur at a much greater rate than natural processes, and have generally had more devastating consequences. Habitats have been destroyed or degraded through predators and competitors, fires and over-harvesting, or they may have been fragmented so they can no longer support a viable population of key species.

In comparison to the remainder of the New Zealand archipelago, the Subantarctic Islands have been subject to only minimal modification. This lack of modification in addition to their original range of remarkable biota, makes these islands significant for the preservation of biodiversity and as benchmarks for conservation. Many of the indigenous species and communities cannot tolerate introduced mammals or invasive weeds. The impacts of human occupation have included introductions of alien mammals and weeds, as well as the direct effects of farming and harvesting (eg, burning, disturbance of wildlife, sealing).

In the marine environment, the relatively low diversity of various marine animals and seaweeds suggests that any selective harvesting of one species could have major ecological implications, particularly for feeding grounds around the smaller islands.

It is important that the interface between terrestrial ecosystems and marine ecosystems is emphasised. What happens in one area affects the other. This is a situation uniquely paramount in the case of oceanic islands.

An important role of ecosystems management is to protect the natural diversity and vitality of the Subantarctic islands and surrounding ocean. Management activities that assist in maintaining biodiversity and the protection of ecosystems involve species management through relocation, fire control, animal and plant pest control and restoration,

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
30

and protection of the marine environment. Improving scientific knowledge of the terrestrial and marine ecosystems through survey, monitoring and research, is vital to the successful achievement of management goals.

The Department establishes national priorities, plans and procedures for ecosystems management. For example, there are national recovery plans, either operative or in draft, for a number of threatened species found in the New Zealand Subantarctic region, including the Yellow-eyed penguin, Campbell Island teal and Auckland Island teal. The identification and prioritisation of threatened species has been reviewed nationally (Molloy and Davis 1994). This has been taken into consideration in identifying priorities for species management in the Subantarctic Islands CMS area.

Therefore, in determining priorities for ecosystems management many factors have to be taken into consideration. The general approach of this CMS is to set strategic direction for ecosystems management (within the CMS area) for the next ten years. This chapter outlines what should happen rather than how. For example the section covering Indigenous Species outlines which priority species require survey or monitoring but does not state how it will occur. The Department has or is preparing some operational plans such as the Southland Threatened Plant Plan, Southland Conservancy Pest Quarantine Plan, and the Southland Weed Control Plan. This CMS sets out the policy framework for operational plans.

Emphasis is also given to advocating particular actions or outcomes, especially regarding marine fisheries and other resources of the southern ocean. This is mainly because of the roles that other organisations and individuals have in managing those natural resources. The provisions in this Draft CMS reflect the separate responsibilities and functions determined by the relevant legislation.

Government organisations such as the Ministry of Fisheries, which is responsible for sustainable management and conservation of fisheries, and the Ministry for the Environment (MfE), which is responsible for the RMA, have just as vital a role to play. Sustainable management of natural and physical resources in the coastal marine areas around each island group, under the RMA, is an important function of the Minister of Conservation.

Non-government groups such as the Royal New Zealand Forest and Bird Protection Society, Greenpeace and the World Wide Fund For Nature (WWF) are involved in conservation initiatives. There are also many people who play vital roles through individual actions.

This Part of the CMS only addresses issues and management actions required to maintain, enhance or restore ecosystems and their many components, including control of introduced pests. It is not concerned with visitor impacts (refer Part 5). The aims or purposes of management are set out in the governing legislation: in the strategies that follow, emphasis is given to management directions designed to achieve the overall aims. While the strategies are separated into functions, they comprise an integrated approach to ecosystems management.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                                  December 1995
2.2 Island Management Objectives                                                              31

All of the Subantarctic Islands have the same legal status - National Nature Reserves, but 
they differ in terms of ecosystems condition and vulnerability to disturbance. It is helpful 
to determine varying degrees of protection management for the islands according to a set 
of categories based on management objectives.

The islands have been categorised using a system based on that proposed in "Ecological 
Restoration on Islands: Prerequisites For Success" by Atkinson and Towns (1990). The 
categories are listed in Table 3.

Table 4 lists each Subantarctic Island (some by sub-groups) under the category deemed 
to be appropriate for its future management. Most of the islands have been placed in the 
"Minimum Impact" category, with a few including the main Campbell and Auckland 
Islands being placed in the "Refuge" category. The use of only these two categories gives 
emphasis to the relative lack of modification and the international importance of the 
Subantarctic Island groups (the other three categories defined by Atkinson and Towns are 
included in Table 3 to allow readers to judge the appropriateness of using just the 
Minimum Impact and Refuge categories).

This categorisation system has been adopted to help define the differing management 
policies that apply, or should apply to different islands. It does not imply that any islands 
are of lesser value than any others as they are all classified as National Nature Reserves.

Objective

1   To manage the island nature reserves to ensure that their significant natural values 
    are maintained and, where applicable, restored.

Implementation

  1   Manage the islands in terms of the categorisations shown in Tables 3 and 4.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                              December 1995
32

2.3 Terrestrial Ecosystems Management

2.3.1 Restoration

Restoration in its widest sense encompasses a range of functions and management techniques, some of which are specifically addressed in other sections of this CMS (eg, control of pest animals and plants; translocation of indigenous species lost from an ecosystem). The principles and practices of restoration should be integrated across all management activities. The overall aim is to restore or partially restore biotic community functions and processes to promote thriving indigenous ecosystems.

Restoration actions are carried out to repair areas where natural values have been severely diminished or in some cases lost. This may have occurred because of a single event (eg, fire) or longer term degradation of ecosystems by plant and animal pests, or land use such as grazing. Restoration may also be necessary at sites of high use such as the meteorological station on Campbell Island (refer 5.3.3).

Research is required on developing methods of effective restoration. Some methods will have general applicability, but for some sites, specific methods may need to be developed.

The focus of restoration programmes for the Subantarctic Islands CMS area is dominated by rehabilitation of some islands through the removal of pest animals (refer 2.3.2) and pest plants (refer 2.3.3). None of the Subantarctic Islands has been modified or degraded to an extent to warrant categorisation as a "Restoration" island (refer 2.2 and Table 3).

Objective

1    To restore, where necessary, ecological processes and biotic communities that maintain the biological diversity and ecological integrity of the Subantarctic Islands.

Implementation

1    Identify sites or areas on the islands where restoration is required via a Conservancy Restoration Plan. When assessing whether restoration is desirable the following questions will be asked:
     -   Is the viability of the ecosystem under threat without restoration measures?
     -   Will restoration repair damage to sensitive areas, sites of high ecological value, or high use sites?
     -   What are the constraints to the success of a restoration project?
     -   Do any risks associated with the project outweigh the benefits?

2    Use only species of local genetic stock or the next most appropriate stock in restoration programmes (refer Table 3).

3    Encourage associate or interest groups to participate in restoration projects when and where practicable.

4    Monitor the effectiveness of any restoration project and provide for the on-going management of restored areas.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
TABLE 3 - ISLAND MANAGEMENT CATEGORIES


                                          
| Minimum Impact | Refuge | Restoration | Open Sanctuary | Multiple Use (1)
-------------------------------------------------------------
Primary Conservation Function | Protection of indigenous species and communites, particularly those distinct from mainland communities. | Protection of indigenous species and communities, both those of islands and those of the mainland. | Recovery of viable populations of threatened species and restoration of particular communities. | Protection and interpretation to the public of indigenous species and habitats, including those threatened by extinction or destruction. | Protection and enhancement of selected values.
Criteria For Recognition (2) | Presence of island endemics; freedom from introduced mammals; significant areas of indigenous habitat; high vulnerability to human intereference; all sizes of islands, both modified and largely unmodified. | Presence of mainland endemics as island survivors;introduced mammals sometimes present;significant areas of high indigenous habitat; moderate vulnerabiltiy to human intereference; all sizes of islands; all degrees of modification except those largely unmodified. | Opportunities for restoring habitats of threatened species and for restoring threatened communities, both those of islands and those of the mainland; modified and extremely modified islands of all sizes. | Opportunities for providing habitats for rare and threatened species; opportunities for public education; medium and large islands, both modified and extremely modified. | Values secondary to other uses such as farming, forestry and recreation. Mostly extremely modified islands that are sometimes farm parks or privately owned.
Protective Action For Species And Biotic Communites | Special precautions against establishement of introduced plants and animals and against illegal visits and fires (3). | Consistent precautions against establishement of introduced plants and animals (excepting certain threatened species, see below) and against illegal visits and fires. | Consistent precautions against establishement of introduced plants and animals (with certain exceptions, as below) and against illegal visits and fires. | Consistent precautions against some species of alien plants and animals (4). Special precautions against fires. | Variable approach depending on kind and extent of use.
Protective and Restorative Action For Archaeological Sites | Protection restricted to sites of outstanding archaeological value. | Protection restricted to sites of outstanding archaeological value. | Sites of archaeological value protected with restoration of selected sites (5). | Protection and interpretation of archaeological and historic sites; major restoration of such sites where appropriate. | Sites of archaeological and historic value protected whenever possible.
Restorative Action For Biotic Communities | Restricted to re-establishment of a few species in a few small areas. | Restricted to minor areas relative to size of island. | Restoration of island communities formerly present and extension of some still exisitng; Restoration of mainland communities where appropriate on islands free of limiting factors of the mainland. | Restoration of island or mainland communities according to requirements of native plant/animal species of interest. | Restoration of island or mainland communities when identified as an objective for the island.
Translocation of Species Not Natural To The Island | Excluded except as an extreme short-term measure. | Permitted for selected species of nationallly endangered animals and plants (7). Excluded for other plants except in special circumstances (6). | Island Communities: as for refuge islands excepting use of certain introduced plants as temporary cover. Mainland communities (on islands): permitted for appropriate mainland species and, in special cases, for animal taxa from the Pacific or Australia(8). | Permitted according to ecological appropriateness, educational and species conservation needs, and risk to other biota in the region. | Undertaken according to particular objectives adopted and risk to other biota in the region.
|  |Minimum Impact |Refuge |Restoration |Open Sanctuary |Multiple Use (1) |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
|Habitat Manipulation For Particular Species |Restricted to minor manipulation. |For threatened species: restricted to modified areas; should exclude major changes in composition of community. |Island Communities: choice of communities to be restored sometimes influenced by habitat requirements of threatened species; Mainland communities (on islands): major manipulation of habitats sometimes needed. |Major manipulation of plant and animal habitats. plan |Major or minor manipulation of plant and animal habitats according to particular objectives adopted. |
|Scientific Activity |Monitoring of changes; identification of biological values. |Monitoring of changes; identification of biological values; process studies not possible elsewhere. |Experimentation using carefully monitoried trials to measure progress of programme |Experimentation using carefully monitoried trials to measure progress of programme. |Monitoring of enhancement programme; identification of biological values. |
|Visitors, Education and Interpretation |Minimal activity that can only be carried out on the island and that allows people to appreciate island values through books, radio, film etc. |i) Low impact activities that cannot be done on a restoration or open sanctuary island (see min. impact islands); ii) permitted visitors to a few selected islands with interpretation/supervision by Departmental staff. |i) low impact activities not possible in an open sanctuary;  ii) permitted visitors to a few selected islands with interpretation/supervision; iii) volunteer help with restoration work on some islands. |Major function of island: open access with interpretation programmes; supervision when necessary. |Visitation and visitor movements dependent on permission from owners. |

Footnotes
1. Other islands, where there is no conservation use, as excluded from this classification
2. Only terrestrial criteria have been used. Allocation of an island to a functional category is often partly a value judgement. The criteria given can be used as a guide but it is not essential that all criteria listed for each category need to be met.
3. Introduced plants and animals include those native to New Zealand though not natural to the island in question.
4. Alien plants and animals are introduced species foreign to New Zealand (exotics).
5. Site selection would give preference to extremely modified parts of the island thus minimizing disruption to existing or restored communities.
6. Special circumstances could include planting of temporary food sources in already greatly modified parts of an island in order to secure survival of a species of nationally endangered animal. However, in these circumstances, control of the introduced plant may be necessary to ensure it did not spread to other parts of the island.
7. This assumes that a proper case for the introduction of a nationally threatened animal and plant has been made and the likely impact assessed.
8. Introduction and establishment of animal taxa from other parts of the New Zealand region, or from Australia or the Pacific, could be attempted where the forms are related to the taxa now extinct on the mainland (Atkinson 1988). Such attempts at replacing extinct species should be restricted to substantially modified islands and should be carried out as controlled experiments to measure the impact of the new introduction on the islands biota. The new introduction must be removable from the island at any time if the need should arise.

Adapted from: Ecological Restoration of New Zealand Islands (1990), Atkinson and Towns.
TABLE 4 - CATEGORISATION OF SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS                                                                 

| Island                                    | Location                | Size       | Maximum distance to land (metres) | Settlement | Extent of habitat modification | Introduced weeds | Introduced animal pests |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------|-----------------------------------|------------|--------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------|
| Minimum Impact Islands                                                                                                 |
|                                           |                         |            |                                   |            |                                |                   |                         |
| Adams Island                              | Auckland Islands        | 10119ha    | 90                                |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Alert Stack                               | Snares Islands          | 5ha        | 60                                |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Antipodes Island (includes main island and all outliers not individually mentioned) | Antipodes Islands       | 2025ha     | na                                |            | minimum                        | low               | mice present            |
| Archway Island                            | Antipodes Islands       | 5ha        | 1500                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Auckland Islands (all outliers not individually mentioned) | Auckland Islands        | <5ha total | various                           |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Bollons Island                            | Antipodes Islands       | 50ha       | 1500                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Bounty Islands (main group, centre group and east group) | Bounty Islands          | 135ha      | 1300                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Broughton Island                          | Snares Islands          | 48ha       | 100                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Campbell Island (all outliers not individually mentioned) | Campbell Islands        | <5ha total | various                           |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Cossack Rock                              | Campbell Island group   | 1ha        | 300                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Dent Island                               | Campbell Island group   | 27ha       | 1400                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Disappointment Island                     | Auckland Islands        | 566ha      | 4000                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Dundas Island                             | Auckland Islands        | 1ha        | 2500                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Ewing Island                              | Auckland Islands        | 81ha       |                                   |            | extensive                      | high              | none                    |
| Figure of Eight Island                    | Auckland Islands        | 4ha        | 500                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| French Island                             | Auckland Islands        | 1ha        | 50                                |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Friday Island                             | Auckland Islands        | 1ha        | 200                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Gomez Island                              | Campbell Island group   | 2ha        | 500                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Green Island                              | Auckland Islands        | 1ha        | 2500                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Hook Keys Island                          | Campbell Island group   | 3ha        | 1300                              |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Inner Windward Island                     | Antipodes Islands       | 5ha        | 800                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Jacquemart Island                         | Campbell Island group   | 19ha       | 550                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Jeanette-Marie Island                     | Campbell Island group   | 11ha       | 800                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Leeward Island                            | Antipodes Islands       | 6ha        | 100                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
| Monowai Island                            | Campbell Island group   | 6ha        | 300                               |            | minimum                        | low               | none                    |
Island              Location         Size    Maximum distance to land (metres) Settlement         Extent of habitat modification Introduced weeds Introduced animal pests 

Monumental Island   Auckland Islands 3ha    90                   |       minimum       low         none         
North-East Island   Snares Islands   280ha  na                 |       minimum       low         none         
(includes all outliers                                                                                               
not individually                                                                                                     
mentioned)                                                                                                           

Ocean Island        Auckland Islands 5ha    250                |Farming             moderate        medium      goats eradicated (1940) 
                                                                 settlement                                                
                                                                 abandoned                                              

Ord Lees Island     Antipodes Islands1ha    50                 |       minimum       low         none         
Outer Windward      Antipodes Islands5ha    800                |       minimum       low         none         
Island                                                                                                               

Rose Island         Auckland Islands 75ha   250                |Farming             moderate        medium      rabbits eradicated (1993)
                                                                 settlement                                                
                                                                 abandoned                                              

Shoe Island         Auckland Islands 1ha    800                |       minimum       low         none         
Snares Island       Snares Islands   8ha    4000               |       minimum       low         none         
(western chain                                                                                                       
islands)                                                                                                             

Survey Island       Campbell Island  3ha    400                |       minimum       low         none         
Wasp Island         Campbell Island  4ha    1500               |       minimum       low         none         
Yule Island         Auckland Islands 1ha    500                |       minimum       low         none         

Refuge Islands                                                                                                       

Auckland Island    Auckland Islands 50990han                   |Farming             moderate        medium      goats eradicated (1990), 
(main)                                                                                   settlement                                 pigs, cats and mice 
                                                                                         abandoned                                  present

Campbell Island    Campbell Island  11216ha na                |Farming             extensive       high        eradications of cattle 
(main)              group                       |settlement           |           |(1984), sheep (1991). 
                                                        |abandoned, Met.     |           |Cats and Norway rats 
                                                        |station staffed all |           |present 
                                                        |year round, closed  
                                                        |October 1995        

Enderby Island      Auckland Islands 710ha  300                |Farming             extensive       high        eradication of cattle and 
                                                                 settlement                                 rabbits (1993), pigs 
                                                                 abandoned                                  (date unknown). Mice 
                                                                                                            probably gone but yet to 
                                                                                                            be confirmed.

Folly Island        Campbell Island  7ha    50                 |       minimum       low         Norway rats present 
Masked Island       Auckland Islands 4ha    100                |       minimum       low         cats and mice present 

Notes:-
Introduced animal pests in the table have not included those which died out naturally unless they caused significant impacts
Settlement does not include sealing bases or castaway locations
Priorities for future eradications are: Norway rats and cats from main Campbell Island and pigs from main Auckland Island
2.3.2 Pest Animals

The Department's responsibilities for control of pest animals on the Subantarctic islands derive from the Wild Animal Control Act 1977, the Reserves Act 1977 and the Wildlife Act 1953. The Department also has some obligations under the Biosecurity Act 1993.

For the purpose of this CMS a pest animal is defined as any introduced animal whose presence or activities results in significant detrimental effects on native plants and/or animals or ecosystem processes, or which threatens them. Impacts can range from preventing regeneration or severely limiting the range of plants, to preying on or competing with native animals for food. The term "pest animal" includes any wild animal defined in the Wild Animal Control Act 1977.

The Snares Islands, Bounty Islands and most of the smaller offshore islands in the other Subantarctic Island groups are without introduced mammals of any kind. Alien mammals are a cause for concern elsewhere. The Auckland group has pigs, cats and mice remaining, while Campbell has cats and Norway rats. The Antipodes group has only the house mouse. The lack of other pests is important to species conservation because mice tend to cause less damage than other alien mammals, but their presence on the Antipodes is still of concern.

A comprehensive approach to alien mammal management was developed in the management plans for the island nature reserves. Significant progress has been made with the removal of introduced animals since 1987, and this work has absorbed the greatest management effort and resources. Sheep have been removed from Campbell Island. Goats on Auckland Island have been removed by shooting or live capture for transfer to New Zealand. Eradication of cattle and rabbits from Enderby Island appears to have been achieved, and techniques for eradicating the pigs from the main Auckland Island are now being considered.

The removal of introduced animals from the Subantarctic islands has been controversial. Many of the animal species introduced during the 1800s as a ready food supply for shipwrecked sailors became genetically isolated. This genetic isolation is important to among scientific, rare breeds and agricultural interests. Despite public consultation during preparation of the nature reserve management plans, each removal operation drew criticism.

For this reason the Department worked closely with the New Zealand Rare Breeds Conservation Society, so that action was taken to ensure continuation of the species and gene pools that have existed in isolation on the Subantarctic Islands. The Department remains firmly committed to the goal of ultimately removing all alien animals, as and when feasible, recognising the significant adverse impacts that these animals have had on the island ecosystems.

With advances in the effectiveness of poisons, and recent New Zealand successes on smaller islands, eradication of mice from Antipodes Islands, and rats and cats from Campbell Island, may become feasible in the future. It needs to be recognised, however, that eradication of these smaller alien mammals is likely to be much more difficult and time consuming, than has been the case for the larger animals.

Completed Eradication Programmes

1    Sheep remained on Campbell Island as a legacy of attempts at pastoral farming between 1874 and 1931. The last farmers left 4,000 sheep and some cattle unattended on the island. After an initial marked decline, sheep numbers increased again to about 3000 in the late 1960s. Fences were erected and the 

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
34
sheep culled from two blocks in the 1970s and 1980s. Following excellent 
recovery of the palatable megaherbs in the areas excluded from grazing, and given 
the impact that the sheep were having on rockhopper penguin colonies, a decision 
was made in 1990 to eradicate all remaining sheep. Some 1200 were shot in 
November 1990 and follow-up operations led to the last sheep being shot in 
November 1991. A monitoring programme continues to investigate the recovery 
of vegetation following the removal of sheep.


Sheep eradication, Campbell Island

2    French Blue Rabbits (Argente de Champagne) were introduced onto Enderby Island 
(Auckland Is) in 1865 as food for shipwrecked sailors. A separate liberation of 
mixed stock rabbits had been made on Rose Island in 1850. Their presence on 
the islands became inconsistent with the nature reserve status and the 
management priority for island habitat restoration. An eradication programme 
commenced on both islands in 1993. The operations were planned in close liaison 
with the New Zealand Rare Breeds Conservation Society, and included removal of 
a brood stock of rabbits for a captive management programme.

     A dual rabbit/mice eradication was considered impractical because of logistical 
requirements. However, since the rabbit eradication programme was undertaken, 
no mouse sign has been observed. Monitoring was undertaken in 1994 and 1995. 
No sign was found of any rabbits either. Further checks will be made.

3    Cattle were introduced onto Enderby Island for pastoral purposes in 1894. 
Farming was short-lived and a remnant population of 40-50 animals, with a high 
ratio of bulls, continued to roam over the island. Their presence became 
incompatible with nature reserve status, and following a four year period to allow 
interest groups to remove both live cattle and genetic material, their removal 
began in February 1991 and has since been completed.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
4       Goats were released onto Auckland Island in 1865 as a food source for ship 
        wrecked sailors. The population became confined to the Port Ross area as other 
        early liberations failed. Because of their physiologically stressful environment they 
        appeared to grow significantly larger than mainland goats. They were the most 
        southern feral goat population in the world, existing in probably the most extreme 
        climatic conditions tolerable for the species.

        In 1987 a live capture operation removed 58 goats to the New Zealand mainland 
        for further research and animal husbandry. These animals were split into two 
        populations (Te Anau and Reefton) with intentions to carry out an extensive cross 
        breeding of the species. The relocated goats had some difficulty adapting to both 
        the warmer climate and the richer pasture feed. A downturn in goat farming has 
        led to a lack of interest in further research.

        In 1989, during 37 days of ground hunting activity 107 goats were killed. Two 
        subsequent shooting operations (one on foot, one by helicopter) have resulted in 
        only one additional goat being destroyed. Eradication has probably been achieved, 
        although further checks will be made in conjunction with other visits.

Active Issues

1       Pigs introduced onto Auckland Island in the early 1800s have been responsible for 
        what is probably the most significant ecological modification, other than that 
        caused by rodents, anywhere in the Subantarctic Islands. They have considerably 
        reduced the Subantarctic megaherb flora on Auckland Island. Together with cats, 
        which are equally widespread on that island, they are responsible for the reduction 
        or absence of burrowing petrel species. Wandering and white-capped albatrosses 
        are subject to similar impacts. The pigs present a difficult, but potentially 
        achievable target for feral animal eradication.

        The pig population is estimated to be about 1,000 animals ranging over some 
        51,000 hectares of dense sub-alpine and shrubland vegetation. Over the past five 
        years, the Department has funded research into the development of a pig bait and 
        toxin capable of operating in the inclement weather conditions of Auckland Island. 
        A series of non-toxic bait tests was carried out in the Port Ross area in February 
        1991 but was inconclusive, apparently because of the low pig population present 
        there. Bait tests and development of toxic baits and dispensers are now 
        continuing on mainland pig populations, before further field testing on the island.

        The aim of any pig control operation should be eradication. Merely reducing pig 
        numbers would require an on-going campaign to maintain the smaller population. 
        This could also compromise any future attempt at eradication by "shying" the 
        animals. Eradication will not be easy in any case; it will require substantial 
        resources and commitment given the large size of Auckland Island, its 
        inaccessibility, rugged terrain and, in parts, impenetrable vegetation cover.

        Trials to date have indicated that eradication will require a combination of methods 
        to be successful, such as poison, use of pig dogs and hunters, and use of snares 
        or toxic bait stations.

2       Depredation by cats is one of the factors involved in the depletion of bird and 
        insect populations on the main Campbell and Auckland Islands. The removal of 
        cats will allow the rehabilitation of some bird species. It is unlikely that the 
        eradication of cats would trigger off a major increase in mice or rats, since the 
        cats are probably not a significant control agent for the rodent population.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
36

Field trials using pheromone cat baits were carried out on Campbell Island in 
1989, but because of a particularly low density distribution of the cat population, 
results were inconclusive. A research project continues to further develop 
pheromone baits and toxins capable of working in low density populations.

3	The Norway rat has also caused the depletion of bird and insect populations on 
Campbell Island. Removal of rats will allow the rehabilitation of some species.

Recent advances in techniques mean that eradication of rats on Campbell Island 
is probably now achievable, but the techniques need further trials on large islands.

4	Mice have probably had a considerable influence on ecosystems of the islands on 
which they occur and their eradication is desirable. Unfortunately with current 
methods the cost of eradication is prohibitive over such large areas.

5	Rodent Quarantine: the risk of accidental introduction of rodents to rodent-free 
islands and the risk of new introductions is one of the greatest threats to 
conservation values present on the Subantarctic Islands. Specifically, rats can be 
readily liberated on islands via shipwreck, ship mooring, or in landings of infested 
stores. Once ashore they are extremely destructive through predation of birds 
(particularly eggs and young) and invertebrates, and through eating seeds, fruit 
and other parts of plants. The colonisation of an island by rodents or an additional 
species of rodent could have a catastrophic effect on the island's natural values.

The primary aim of management is to provide adequate quarantine measures to 
prevent rodents reaching any island. If these fail an immediate intensive localised 
extermination campaign may prevent establishment of a viable population.

A stringent rodent contingency process applies for all visits to the islands, and this 
is reinforced strongly in visitor guidelines and entry permit requirements. Key 
measures include:

	•	provision of a rodent-proof field store in Invercargill for all expedition 
equipment
	•	compulsory use of rodent-proof plastic crates for landing stores on rodent-
free islands
	•	a rodent contingency plan for the Snares Islands with a permanent set of 
rodent bait stations located around the boat mooring area
	•	a full set of rodent bait stations available for immediate deployment from 
Invercargill in case of accidental introduction of rodents
	•	rodent control at Port Pegasus, Stewart Island, which many smaller boats 
use as an anchorage en route to or from Subantarctic waters
	•	guidelines for rodent clearance for boats visiting Subantarctic islands (ie. 
rat guard shields on mooring lines, deployment of rodent baits).
	•	rodent control around meteorological station and wharf at Campbell Island

Precautions against introductions should be tailored to meet the requirements of 
the policy as it applies to particular permit situations. They must cover the 
transport vessel (in keeping with its size and type), stores, loading and unloading 
of stores, landings, travel between islands and any other "housekeeping" 
measures which are considered necessary on board any vessel and ashore.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
37

Objectives

1   To eradicate all feral pigs from Auckland Island as soon as possible.

2   To eradicate feral cats from Campbell, Auckland and Masked Islands as soon as 
    is feasible.

3   To eradicate Norway Rats from Campbell and Folly Islands as soon as is feasible.

4   To eradicate mice from the Antipodes and Auckland Island groups as soon as is 
    feasible.

5   To prevent new introductions of any exotic animal species to any part of the 
    reserves, and prevent transfer of rodents to any of the rodent-free islands.

Implementation:

1   Feral Pigs:

    Plan in consultation with other relevant agencies for eradication of pigs and 
    implement the required operations as soon as is feasible.

    Provide other interests such as the New Zealand Rare Breeds Conservation Society 
    with the opportunity to ensure continuation of the breed and/or gene values of the 
    Auckland Island pigs through removal of sufficient animals.

2   Feral Cats:

    Encourage and assist research on the distribution and ecology of cats on Auckland 
    and Campbell Islands, and on extermination methods.

    Implement a cat extermination programme when suitable techniques and resources 
    are available.

    If required in sensitive areas, such as petrel colonies, undertake local control of 
    cats by whatever methods are deemed appropriate in terms of effectiveness and 
    environmental constraints.

3   Norway Rats:

    Encourage and assist research on the ecology and distribution of Norway Rats on 
    Campbell Island, and on eradication methods.

    Implement a rat eradication programme when suitable techniques and resources 
    are available.

    If required in sensitive areas, undertake local control of rats by whatever methods 
    are deemed appropriate in terms of effectiveness and environmental impact.

4   Mice:

    Encourage and assist research on the ecology and distribution of mice on 
    Antipodes and Auckland Islands, and on eradication methods. Implement mice 
    eradication programmes when suitable techniques and resources are available .

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS          December 1995
38

5    Feral Rabbits:

     Undertake monitoring to ensure that eradication has been achieved.

6    Prevention of Future Introductions

     Inform visitors to the island nature reserves and/or their coastal waters around the 
     reserve of the precautions to be taken to prevent new introductions of animal 
     pests. Ensure such precautions are conditions on all entry permits. Ensure strict 
     enforcement by the Departmental representatives (refer 5.3.1).

     Establish and maintain rodent poison bait stations in the vicinity of permanent huts 
     while the huts are occupied.

     Maintain a pest quarantine and contingency plan to reduce the risk of new 
     introductions, and to enable the department to respond rapidly to confirmed 
     introductions or events which may have caused an introduction. Continually 
     review precautions.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
2.3.3 Pest Plants

Control of introduced plants is an important management task (refer 1.6). The Department also has obligations under the Biosecurity Act 1993, which requires control of noxious plants listed in national or regional pest plant management strategies.

Among the islands, only the main Campbell and Auckland Islands have considerable numbers of alien plants (85 species and 37 species, respectively). Usually, introduced plants have been successful only on artificially disturbed ground, and they eventually succumb to competition from indigenous plants. However, several species have become well established and will probably continue to spread. Climatic change or habitat disturbance may favour the spread of some of these species. Those that have potential to overtop or out-compete indigenous vegetation are of particular concern.

Fortunately, only a few of the alien species currently present such a threat. In particular, Lotus pedunculatus (birdsfoot trefoil) and gorse and broom need to be monitored or watched for. Arrhenatherum elatius (tall oat grass), and possibly Trifolium repens (white clover) and dandelion, on Campbell Island should also be checked - eradication may be possible. Poa pratensis (meadow grass) may be gaining a foothold in maritime surf communities on Campbell Island.

Active Issues

1    Olearia lyallii (tree daisy) is naturally present on the Snares group but is thought to have reached the Auckland group less than 200 years ago, well within the time of human contact with the islands. It is now dominant on Ewing Island and is also established on the shores of Port Ross. This species could have been introduced by human activity, or it may have reached Auckland Island through natural immigration. Although timing suggests human influence is more probable, there is no evidence to substantiate either possibility, so posing a dilemma as to whether Olearia lyallii should be regarded as an alien species on the Auckland group.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
40

Could Olearia lyallii have immigrated by natural means? Yes. Even if it was actually introduced by human activity, would it have immigrated naturally in due course? Probably. Is it a legitimate member of the biogeographic zone? Yes, given its success on the Aucklandlands and its occurrence on the landmass immediately to the north. What are the consequences of trying to limit its range on the Aucklandlands? Being locked into a perpetual control of the spread of seedlings - which is not sustainable - with continual disruption to the soil providing entry opportunities for other weeds, or eliminating the seed source population - an expensive and highly disruptive exercise. What are the consequences of non-control? It will gradually spread around the island shore between the rata forest and the coastal tussock and scrub thereby narrowing the zone of the tussock-scrub-herbfield community, especially on leeward coasts, and it is likely to become a stunted member of the shrub-tussock community immediately above the rata forest zone. It will not completely displace rata forest but establish a new equilibrium in the vegetation equivalent to the mosaic of rata and Olearia on Big South Cape Island (off Stewart Island). Likewise, tussock, scrub and herbfield will survive in exposed or disturbed places as they do on the Snares Islands. This is a natural process of immigration and establishment - an interesting phenomenon in its own right.

The management plan for the Auckland Islands Nature Reserve takes a precautionary response to the Olearia lyallii issue: limited control of the species is to be carried out on the shores of main Auckland Island to contain its spread, but not on Ewing Island. Control work was undertaken on the other islands of Port Ross in 1989, and on Auckland Island in 1993. Containment of the species is not considered to be a feasible option for the long-term, although this policy could be re-confirmed for action over the next 10 years or longer, if the ultimate aim is eradication when resources are available. The options are either to seek total eradication, or to accept the presence of Olearia lyallii on the Auckland Islands along with the probable changes it will make to the current vegetation patterns. The latter option is adopted in this Draft CMS.

2    A more certain introduction of a New Zealand indigenous species is the presence of New Zealand flax (phormium tenax), found on the Campbell and Auckland groups. No seedlings have ever been observed - all spread is vegetative and this is extremely slow, although there are fairly robust stands at Ranui Cove, Auckland Island, and Perseverance Harbour, Campbell Island. No control measures are considered necessary, unless viable seed begins to show. The flax has historical value, as does the single sitka spruce tree on Campbell island. The sitka spruce has not produced seed.

3    Vigilance is essential to secure these islands against further introductions of plants, particularly through transport of seeds.

Emphasis continues to be placed on plant quarantine measures for all visits to the Subantarctic islands to ensure that new introductions of alien plants are avoided. These include inspection of clothing for seeds; washing of footwear between islands; and inspection and proper packing of stores. Efforts have been increased with the recent upsurge in tourism activity in and around the islands. The presence of Departmental representatives on each tourist cruise has been instrumental in ensuring that visitors are well aware of the plant quarantine measures adopted to ensure the protection of the islands from new introductions.

4    A control programme was initiated to eradicate the only two known introduced plants on the Snares Islands: Stellaria media (chickweed) and Poa annua (annual grass). Plants of these species are found around the base indicating their 

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
accidental introduction by visitors to the islands. However, recent expeditions to 
the Snares have not been able to implement this control programme and it is 
currently on hold.

5    Attempts could be made to remove Lotus pedunculatus from the Tucker Cove area 
on Campbell Island. This is the only known location of this species on that island.

Although there are numerous other exotic plant species present in the nature reserves, 
none appears to pose any significant threat to indigenous ecosystems.  Practical 
considerations dictate that selective management only is possible. Such management is 
consistent with the objective of maintaining the reserves in a natural state. Management 
must be achieved without undue disturbance to indigenous species and communities.

Objectives

1    To eradicate exotic plants wherever feasible.

2    To prevent the further introduction and/or establishment of exotic plant species 
on the Subantarctic Islands.

Implementation

1    Implement quarantine procedures to halt seed and exotic plant introductions.

2    Require that visitors take precautions against the further spread of exotic plant 
species when travelling within, and between island groups.

3    Inform visitors to the nature reserves of the need and reasons for precautions to 
be taken to prevent plant introductions.

4    Remove any new exotic plant species (ie, any found which is not on current 
species lists) before it can become established or spread further.

5    Monitor distribution of Olearia lyallii on the Auckland Islands.

6    Eradicate Poa annua and Stellaria media from Snares Island if and when feasible 
control programmes can be implemented.

7    Keep plant control techniques under review so that opportunities can be taken, as 
they arise, to implement further eradication programmes.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
42

2.3.4 Fire Control

Responsibilities for fire control are determined by the Forest and Rural Fires Act 1977 and 
the Forest and Rural Fires Regulations 1979. The Minister of Conservation is the Fire 
Authority for lands administered by the Department. The Department must abide by the 
above Act and Regulations and the Fire Service Act 1975, and it has adopted the Rural 
Fire Management Code of Practice.

While the fire control function is governed by the Forest and Rural Fires Act 1977 and 
therefore falls outside the scope of this CMS, the Reserves Act (refer 1.6) does require 
consideration of fire, as a threat to the reserves or as a tool to assist management.

A restricted fire season applies year-round over the island nature reserves. Permits issued 
by the Department are generally required for the lighting of fires in the open air (eg, for 
rubbish disposal).

Although weather conditions may appear to preclude any danger, fires could quickly 
devastate ecosystems. Fire is a particularly significant issue for the tussock islands. 
Should vegetation be damaged by fire, regeneration would probably be slow because of 
the rigorous climate. Many animals and their habitats would also be destroyed. Once 
alight, peat can smoulder underground for many years, often at great depths, and flare up 
to start surface fires in dry weather.

Potential causes of fires are: visitors generally, scientific or management operations, and 
vessel or aircraft mishaps. Because of the remoteness of the islands, fire control 
operations would be difficult and probably unachievable in some circumstances. 
Consequently, management provisions are concerned primarily with preventing fires from 
occurring.

Objectives

1     To prevent fire damage to the island nature reserves.

2     If fire occurs, to minimise damage to the island nature reserves.

Implementation

1     Give nighest priority to the control and suppression of fires in accordance with the 
      provisions of the Forest and Rural Fires Act 1977 and other legislation, except 
      where the risk to fire-fighters would be unacceptable.

2     Restrict the lighting of all fires in the open except for rubbish disposal purposes. 
      Prior authorization will be required from the Department for any rubbish fires.

3     Inform visitors of fire prevention requirements in the entry permit, including a ban 
      on smoking, and ensure they take adequate fire extinguishers for use at all huts 
      they intend to use.

4     Stipulate that visitors shall be required to do whatever they practicably can, or 
      what is necessary, to extinguish any wild fire that occurs as a result of human 
      actions during their presence on an island.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
2.4 Marine Ecosystems

Marine mammals and wildlife species are protected under the Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978 (to 200 miles offshore) and the Wildlife Act 1953 (to 12 miles offshore). But their ocean habitat and food sources are generally not protected, except for a marine mammal sanctuary around the Auckland Islands.

The marine mammal sanctuary was declared in 1993, over and around the Auckland Islands including the surrounding sea to 12 nautical miles out from the low water mark. Commercial fishing is prohibited within the sanctuary, which has been established to help protect the New Zealand sea lion population (refer 2.5.2).

In 1994 the International Whaling Commission declared a sanctuary for all whale species in the southern ocean. The boundary of this sanctuary follows latitude 40 degrees south in New Zealand waters. It will improve the conservation prospects of several species of whales, but adds little to the existing protection given by the Marine Mammals Protection Act in New Zealand fisheries waters.

In addition to the two Acts mentioned above, means of protecting ocean and inshore coastal habitats are provided by the Marine Reserves Act 1971, the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA), and the Reserves Act 1977 (the foreshores around the islands are included in the nature reserve status). Opportunities also exist under other legislation with which the Department has some involvement (refer 1.6).

The coastal marine areas around the Subantarctic Islands warrant protection to ensure their values are not reduced or lost. The RMA provides the primary means of achieving protection, within the principles of sustainable management (refer 1.6 and Glossary).

Using mechanisms in the Marine Mammals Act, Marine Reserves Act and/or Wildlife Act, and/or achieving protection under the RMA would protect some habitats. However, cooperation with the Ministry of Fisheries (MFish), commercial fishers and other resource users is required to ensure protection or conservation of the wider marine environment.

Commercial fishing developments in the vicinity of the southern islands are of concern because of (among other things) their potential to adversely affect marine mammals and seabirds. Incidental catches of marine mammals are supposed to be recorded and reported by fishers. Since April 1986, an on-board fisheries observer scheme has been operated by MFish. Observers have the task of verifying catch composition of trawls. They collect data on bycatch of protected species when practicable, but this is not sufficient to verify bycatch across the fisheries.

Protection of the marine environment from pollution associated with shipping and offshore installations will be strengthened markedly when provisions of the Maritime Transport Act 1994 and the RMA come into operation. Rules made under the RMA will apply within the 12 mile limit; rules made under the Maritime Transport Act will control discharge, dumping or incineration of waste outside the 12 mile limit. Oil spill management and response is covered by the Maritime Transport Act within and outside the 12 mile limit. These laws are consistent with MARPOL 73/78, an international convention which regulates marine pollution from ships (refer 1.6).

Issues

1    Geological exploration has indicated the possibility of large oil reserves in the Great South Basin. Any future development of oil rigs, service vessels and other infra-structure would raise the potential for pollution including oil spills.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
44

2   Other potential sources of pollution from marine sources would be the wrecking, 
    grounding or sheltering of vessels along the Subantarctic Island coasts. 
    Accidental or intentional release of pollutants, especially into the sheltered coastal 
    inlets on Auckland and Campbell Islands could have disastrous consequences for 
    marine life, including flightless birds. A major concern would be the release of 
    heavy fuel oil. Deposition of plastics and other water-borne litter resulting from 
    human activities is generally slight on the Subantarctic Islands. The adoption of 
    good house-keeping practices on fishing vessels will continue to assist in avoiding 
    any increase in water-borne rubbish.

3   Ballast waters in shipping have been found to contain a wide range of organisms 
    including viruses, plankton, molluscs, crabs, starfish and/or other fish species, as 
    well as other types of pollutants. Introduction of foreign organisms could alter the 
    composition of the Subantarctic marine ecosystems. Discharges of contaminated 
    ballast water can potentially occur during fishing operations, or when cargo is off-
    loaded or transferred between vessels.

4   Marine mammal bycatch. A major trawl fishery for squid developed around the 
    Auckland Islands in 1979-80. At that time, a large bycatch of New Zealand sea 
    lions was cause for concern and a programme of research was instigated to 
    assess the current status, distribution and biology of the species, and the impact 
    of the fishery on it. The results of this research suggest the population at one 
    rookery, at least, has been stable for the past decade. However, the sea lion 
    population is still vulnerable and continues to be threatened by fishing. There is 
    also a significant bycatch of fur seals and other marine mammals across the 
    fisheries in Subantarctic waters. The Department is working with MFish and the 
    fishing industry to improve population estimates and to minimise the incidental 
    bycatch of marine mammals.


Russian trawler

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
5       Seabird bycatch. Albatrosses, mollymawks and petrels are incidentally killed in 
        fishing operations when the seabirds take baited hooks, or collide or get caught 
        up in nets or vessel structures (netsonde monitor cables were banned in 1992 and 
        are not an issue now; however, birds do crash into trawl warps or get caught in 
        nets and are killed by being dragged under water). The Department is working 
        closely with MFish and the commercial fishing industry to reduce seabird bycatch, 
        particularly in longline tuna fishing by advocating codes of practice (eg, night 
        netting, use of thawed baits) and the regulation of tori lines.

        Considerable effort has been put into inventory and monitoring of key seabird 
        populations (eg, white-capped and black-browed mollymawks, wandering 
        albatross and Buller's mollymawk) with the establishment of base counts at the 
        Snares, Campbell, Auckland and Antipodes Islands over the past four years.

6       Proposals were made in 1989 and 1991 to take the Yellow foot paua shellfish 
        (Haliotis virginea) from inshore areas of the Bounty and Antipodes Island groups. 
        The Department has advocated for a closed fishery around these islands prior to 
        investigations for marine reserves, as any large scale removal of paua from the 
        subtidal zone could have a devastating effect on the near shore marine ecology 
        of the islands. Currently, fishing quota for yellow foot paua has been allocated 
        but no fishing permits have been issued. There is continued commercial interest.

7       A significant scampi (Metanephros challengeri) fishery was discovered off the 
        Auckland Islands over the 1990/91 and 1991/92 summers. Two tonnes were 
        taken from Subantarctic waters in 1990/91 rising to 200 tonnes over the 1991/92 
        summer. A 300 tonne limit was set for the 1992/93 year. Little is known of the 
        sustainability of the scampi fishery, or the interactions it has with other marine life 
        and wildlife in and around the Subantarctic Islands.

        The average size of the scampi trawlers is small, and these boats regularly seek 
        shelter at Auckland Island anchorages. Unauthorised landings or shipwreck pose 
        further threats of accidental introduction of rodents. The New Zealand 
        Conservation Authority has sought a moratorium on scampi trawling around the 
        Auckland Islands so that potential threats to the islands can be assessed.

8       A rock lobster fishery continues to be exploited at the Snares Islands. Following 
        the introduction of a system of non-transferrable mooring permits in 1983, only 
        two permits are now renewed annually and the fishers work closely with the 
        Department in rodent contingency planning. These moorings will eventually be 
        phased out, although the lobster fishing is likely to continue indefinitely.

9       There was renewed interest in the establishment of a fishery for Auckland Island 
        crab (Jacquinotia edwardsii) over the 1991/92 summer, the first such attempt 
        since 1982. After exploratory operations it appears that interest has once again 
        lapsed because of the low meat content of the crabs, despite their large size.

        The Department has and will continue to work closely with MFish in advocating for 
        conservation of marine ecosystems and species in the control and granting of permits for 
        commercial fishing. With continuing interest in developing fisheries in Subantarctic 
        waters, there will always be a risk of damage to the islands through unauthorised 
        landings, near shore visits or shipwrecks.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
46

Objectives

1    To promote adequate protection of marine ecosystems and conservation of marine 
     resources around the Subantarctic Islands as part of New Zealand’s obligations under 
     the Convention on Biological Diversity.

2    To achieve protection of marine mammal and seabird species from adverse impacts of 
     human activities.

3    To obtain a greater knowledge of the biological processes involved in the marine 
     environment, and the impacts of human activities on those processes.

4    To ensure continued liaison and cooperation with all agencies and interested parties 
     that have a role in management of the marine environment.

5    To encourage a fully integrated approach to management of land and sea in the 
     Subantarctic Islands CMS area.

Implementation

1    Raise public awareness of the actual and potential impacts of resource uses and/or 
     development on the natural values of the islands and surrounding ocean.

2    Raise public and industry awareness of the potential problems of contaminants and/or 
     exotic species being released in ballast water discharges from shipping.

3    Continue consultation and liaison with Ministry of Fisheries, Ministry of Transport, 
     Maritime Safety Authority and industry groups.

4    Advocate for protection of wildlife, marine mammals and the significant natural values 
     of the Subantarctic Islands and Southern Ocean in any relevant statutory or non-statutory 
     processes.

5    Assess the need for, or desirability of further protected marine areas around the 
     Subantarctic Islands, and progress worthwhile proposals using the procedures set out 
     in the Marine Reserves Act 1971, Wildlife Act 1953 and/or Marine Mammals Act 1978.

6    Arrange for vessels to be notified of the access restrictions that apply to the island 
     nature reserves and the reasons for these restrictions.

7    Cooperate with the Maritime Safety Authority in contingency planning for oil spills 
     in Subantarctic waters.

8    Encourage and where appropriate, assist marine research within the territorial sea 
     and New Zealand fisheries waters around the Subantarctic Islands.

9    Provide for effective surveillance and management of the Auckland Islands Marine 
     Mammal Sanctuary.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
2.5   Indigenous Species

2.5.1  Species Other Than Marine Mammals

The Department's responsibilities include protection of New Zealand's native animals and 
protection of their habitats within areas that it manages. Animals include freshwater fish. 
Native animals are protected under the Wildlife Act 1953. Native plants on the 
Subantarctic Islands are protected by the nature reserve status and other provisions of the 
Reserves Act 1977.

Protection of indigenous species in a remote and essentially unmodified environment like 
the Subantarctic islands is largely a matter of protecting their habitat - terrestrial and 
marine. But at times habitat protection is not sufficient and more intensive management 
is required for threatened species. In such cases, a Species Recovery Programme is 
usually developed, setting goals, objectives and actions for conservation of the species.

Intensive management is being undertaken for only one Subantarctic species, the 
Campbell Island teal - a flightless bird. With a remnant population estimated at less than 
100 birds present on Dent Island, in a small habitat area vulnerable to landslips, the 
decision was made in 1990 to relocate seven birds to a captive breeding programme at 
the National Wildlife Centre on the New Zealand mainland. Captive breeding first occurred 
in the 1994/95 season, when four young were raised. It is intended to establish a second 
wild population of Campbell Island teal elsewhere in New Zealand using this captive stock. 
Ultimately the goal is to return Campbell Island teal to main Campbell Island but this will 
only be possible when rats and cats have been eradicated there (refer 2.3.1).

Other Subantarctic species to which special attention has been directed are the Auckland 
Island rail and the Auckland Island teal - another flightless bird. Previcusly known from 
only three specimens and less than 10 sightings, the rail had not been seen since 1966 
but was rediscovered on Adams Island during 1989. The current population of rails on 
Adams Island is estimated to be several hundred, spread over a range of habitats. A 
second population of rail has also been confirmed on Disappointment Island. The rail has 
not been found on any island where it might have been eliminated by cats and/or mice. 
Eradication of rabbits and possibly mice from Enderby Island in 1993 should allow 
reintroduction of Auckland Island rail to the Port Ross area.

Auckland Island teal are found on 10 islands in the Auckland Islands group. They do not 
currently occur on the main Auckland Island because of mammalian predation. A long 
term goal is to re-establish them there. Interim management of this species will 
concentrate on protection of the existing wild populations.

The Department has set national priorities for the protection of threatened species based 
on their distinctiveness, status, threats, vulnerability and the human values attached to 
each. The threatened species have been divided into priority categories. Priorities have 
recently been reassessed (Molloy and Davis 1994). Table 5 lists threatened species 
known to be present on or around the Subantarctic Islands.

The Department is preparing a Seabird Conservation Strategy to set management priorities 
for seabird species. If threatened species have needs other than habitat protection, those 
needs are best addressed through the species recovery planning process, or seabird 
conservation strategy. The CMS, however, should set out principles or parameters for 
integration of species management with habitat or ecosystems management.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
48

Issues

The management category assigned to each individual Subantarctic Island (refer 2.2)
provides a policy framework for habitat management within which species management
decisions should be made. Issues include ex-situ management of species (ie, managing
species in captivity or at sites outside their natural range) and introductions of species
requiring refuges.

In the context of the Subantarctic islands, ex-situ management primarily concerns species
vulnerable to rat predation. Animal species that exist at only one site are the most
vulnerable as they could face extinction as the result of just one rat invasion event. This
applies to all three land birds and possibly also the chafer beetle Prodontría longitarsus on
the Snares Islands (regarded as one site), and the Campbell Island teal on Dent Island.
The risk would be substantially reduced if breeding populations of these species could be
established elsewhere. Having at least two populations of such vulnerable species would
provide the best prospects for their survival. The World Conservation Union (IUCN) has
long recommended that no species of endangered animal should be left in a single habitat.

Ex-situ management could involve holding populations of animal species on other islands
serving as refuges. An added benefit of this might be that Subantarctic bird species could
fill "gaps" in other island ecosystems where an extinction has occurred (eg, translocate
Snares Island fernbird to Mangere Island (in the Chatham Islands group) both to replace
the extinct Chatham Island fernbird and to reduce the threat to the Snares species).

Translocation of threatened bird species may also be possible among the Subantarctic
Island groups, and within the groups. Significant opportunities to restore species to their
original habitat would result if the main Auckland and Campbell Islands could be cleared
of cats and rodents, although some species would probably recolonise the main islands
naturally (from their current habitats on the small islands). Translocations of plant species
could also be made for the same reason (eg, assist dispersal of Pleurophyllum seed on
Enderby Island, rather than waiting for it to re-establish naturally).

A further potential source of introductions of species to some islands would be proposals
to provide refuges for non-Subantarctic species, or to bring in species from elsewhere to
replace "lost" species. Introductions of "eco-equivalent" species (eg, Red-breasted
merganser to replace extinct Auckland Island mergansers) may be acceptable if rigorous
assessment can confirm compatibility with the receiving ecosystem. But there are many
potential pit-falls and issues regarding compatibility and defining of "eco-equivalent
species.

A more open approach suggested for the "Refuge" islands has been considered.
Specifically, other Subantarctic bird species which may have been present in the past
could be introduced to one or more of the refuge islands, so they could be viewed by
visitors (eg, parakeets and snipe being introduced to Campbell Island if the cats and rats
can be eradicated). However, such introductions would interfere with natural processes.
Each island group should be treated as a separate entity, allowing introductions only of
those species appropriate for that group. In any case, introductions for the primary
purpose of visitor viewing would be contrary to the management aims of these island
nature reserves (refer 1.6).

The following principles are proposed to guide species translocation proposals or options:

-   Re-introductions of any species for which there is convincing evidence that the
species was once present in an ecosystem, should generally be acceptable.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
TABLE 5 - THREATENED SPECIES OF N.Z. SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS


                                          
| Habitat Type        | Island Location          | National Status                  | Southland Management Priority | Recovery Plan        | Management Required          |
| ------------------- | ------------------------ | -------------------------------- | ----------------------------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------- |
|                     |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| CATEGORY A SPECIES  |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| BIRDS               |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| Anas aucklandica    | Tussock, herbfield,      | Dem Island                       | Endangered, Campbell Islands | High                 | Recovery plan                | Establish back-up population, rat and cat eradication on main Campbell Island |
| nesiotis (Campbell  | wetland                  |                                  | endemic                      |                      |                              |
| Island teal)        |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
|                     |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| CATEGORY B SPECIES  |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| PLANTS              |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| Fissidens strictus  | Rocks in streams         | Auckland Island                  | Rare                          | Low                  | No recovery plan     | Database                     |
| (a moss)            |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| Lepidium oleraceum  | Coastal tussock          | Snares, Antipodes,               | Endangered, endemic          | Medium               | Southland Threatened | Database                     |
| (Cook's scurvy grass| and herbfield            | Auckland Islands                 |                               |                      | Plant Conservation   |                              |
| , nau)              |                          |                                  |                               |                      | Plan                 |                              |
| Pachyschistochila   | Peaty soil               | Auckland Island                  | Endemic                       | Low                  | No recovery plan     | Database                     |
| latiloba (a liverwort)|                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| BIRDS               |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                              |
| Coenocorypha        | Olearia forest,          | Snares Islands                   | Local, endemic to Snares      | Medium               | No recovery plan     | Pest quarantine, establishment of second population |
| aucklandica huegeli | tussock                  |                                  | Islands                       |                      |                      |                              |
| (Snares Island snipe|                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| , tutukiwi)         |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| Diomedea            | Coastal tussock,         | Campbell Island                  | Vulnerable                    | Medium               | No recovery plan     | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
| chrysostoma         | herbfield                |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| (grey-headed        |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| mollymawk)          |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| Diomedea            | Tussock uplands          | Campbell Island,                 | Rare, endemic to NZ          | High                 | No recovery plan     | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
| epomophora          |                          | Auckland Island                  | subantarctic                 |                      |                      |                              |
| (southern royal     |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| albatross, toroa)   |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| Diomedea exulans    | Tussock uplands          | Auckland Islands                 | Vulnerable, subspecies       | High                 | No recovery plan     | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
| gibsoni (Gibsons    |                          |                                  | endemic to Auckland Islands  |                      |                      |                              |
| albatross)          |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| Diomedea            | Cliff ledges and         | Campbell Island                  | Vulnerable, subspecies       | Medium               | No recovery plan     | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
| melanophrys         | cliff tops               |                                  | endemic to Campbell Island   |                      |                      |                              |
| impavida (NZ black- |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| browed mollymawk)   |                          |                                  |                               |                      |                      |                              |
| Eudyptes sclateri   | Coastal breeding         | Bounty,                          | Rare, endemic to NZ          | Medium               | No recovery plan     | Monitoring                   |
| (erect-crested      | colonies                 | Antip
|              | Habitat Type        | Island Location                              | National Status                | Southland Management Priority | Recovery Plan          | Management Required                |
|--------------|---------------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| MAMMALS      |                     |                                              |                                |                                |                        |                                     |
| Phocarctos hookeri (NZ sealion, Hooker's sealion) | Marine, coastal     | Breeds Auckland, Campbell, Snares Islands    | Vulnerable, endemic            | Medium                         | Recovery plan in preparation | Advocacy, monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
| CATEGORY C SPECIES |                     |                                              |                                |                                |                        |                                     |
| INVERTEBRATES |                     |                                              |                                |                                |                        |                                     |
| Oclandius laeviusculus (a flightless weevil) | Pleurophyllum herbfield | Adams island , Auckland Island, islets off Campbell Island. | Vulnerable                     | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Database, rodent eradication on Campbell and Auckland Island |
| FRESHWATER FISH |                     |                                              |                                |                                |                        |                                     |
| Galaxias brevipinnis (koaro) | Freshwater          | Campbell, Auckland Island                   | Rare*, endemic                 | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Database                            |
| BIRDS        |                     |                                              |                                |                                |                        |                                     |
| Bowdleria punctata caudata (Snares Island fernbird, karoi) | Olearia forest, tussock, herbfield | Snares Islands                   | Local, subs ecies endemic to Snares Islands | Medium                         | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine, establish back-up population |
| Charadrius bicinctus exilis (Auckland Island banded dotterel) | Coast and tussock/moor uplands | Auckland Islands                 | Vulnerable, subspecies endemic to Auckland Islands | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine                    |
| Coenocorypha aucklandica aucklandica (Auckland Island snipe) | Tussock, herbfields, forest | Auckland Islands                 | Local, Vulnerable, subspecies endemic to Auckland Islands | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine                    |
| Coenocorypha aucklandica meinertzhagenae (Antipodes Island snipe, tutukiwi) | Tussock, herbfield  | Antipodes Islands                | Local, Vulnerable, subspecies endemic to Antipodes Islands | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine                    |
| Cyanoramphus auriceps auriceps (yellow-crowned parakeet, kakariki) | Forest, tussock and coastal | Auckland Islands                 | Rare, endemic                  | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine                    |
| Cyanoramphus novaezelandiae hochstetteri (Reischek's parakeet) | Tussock and coastal | Antipodes Islands                | Local, subspecies endemic to Antipodes Islands | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine                    |
| Cyanoramphus unicolor (Antipodes Island parakeet) | Tussock and coastal | Antipodes Islands                | Local, endemic to Antipodes Islands | Low                            | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine                    |
| Diomedea exulans antipodensis (Antipodes wandering albatross) | Tussock uplands     | Antipodes Islands                | Vulnerable, subspecies endemic to Antipodes Islands | Medium                         | No recovery plan       | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
| Diomedea bulleri bulleri (southern Buller's mollymawk) | Coastal slopes      | Snares Islands, Solander Island  | Vulnerable, sub species        | Medium                         | No recovery plan       | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species) |
|                  | Habitat Type        | Island Location                  | National Status                         | Southland Management Priority | Recovery Plan      | Management Required              |
|------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------|
| Diomedea cauta salvini (Salvin's mollymawk) | Coastal rock        | Bounty and Snares Islands        | Rare                                    | Medium                        | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Diomedea cauta steadi (NZ white-capped (shy) mollymawk) | Steeper tussock slopes | Auckland Islands, Antipodes Islands | Rare                                    | Medium                        | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Eudyptes robustus (Snares crested penguin) | Coastal             | Snares Islands                   | Local, endemic to Snares Islands        | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Leucocarbo campbelli (Campbell Island shag) | Coastal             | Campbell Islands                 | Local, endemic to Campbell Islands      | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Leucocarbo colensoi (Auckland Island shag) | Coastal             | Auckland Islands                 | Local, endemic to Auckland Islands      | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Leucocarbo ranfurlyi (Bounty Island shag) | Coastal             | Bounty Islands                   | Local, endemic to Bounty Islands        | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Macronectes halli (northern giant petrel) | Coastal tussock     | Antipodes, Campbell and Auckland Islands | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Monitoring                       |
| Petroica macrocephala dannefaerdi (Snares Island tit) | Olearia forest, coastal tussock | Snares Islands                   | Local, subspecies endemic to Snares Islands | Medium                        | No recovery plan   | Pest quarantine, establish back-up population |
| Petroica macrocephala marrineri (Auckland Island tit) | Olearia forest, coastal tussock | Auckland Islands                 | Local, subspecies endemic to Auckland Islands | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Pest quarantine                 |
| Sterna striata (white-fronted tern) | Coastal             | Auckland Islands                 | Rare, endemic                           | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
|                  |                     |                                  |                                         |                               |                    |                                  |
| CATEGORY I SPECIES (LITTLE INFORMATION; BUT CONSIDERED THREATENED) |                     |                                  |                                         |                               |                    |                                  |
| PLANTS           |                     |                                  |                                         |                               |                    |                                  |
| Blindia contecta (a moss) | Wet rock faces beside waterfalls | Campbell, Adams Island          | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
| Blindia seppeltii (a moss) | Wet rock, lakes and seepages | Auckland, Campbell Island        | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
| Crosbya nervosa (a moss) | Rata forest on branches and trunks | Auckland, Campbell Island        | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
| Ditrichum austro-georgicum (a moss) | Steep soil banks    | Campbell Island                  | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
| Muelleriella angustifolia (a moss) | Coastal rocks       | Campbell Island                  | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
| Muelleriella aucklandica (a moss) | Coastal rocks       | Auckland, Adams Island           | Rare                                    | Low                           | No recovery plan   | Database                         |
|                  | Habitat Type                | Island Location                        | National Status | Southland Management Priority | Recovery Plan          | Management Required                          |
|------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------|-----------------|-------------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Trichostomum     | Cliff faces on              | Campbell Island                        | Rare            | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Database                                     |
| imshaugii (a     | exposed ridge               |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| moss)            |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Willia calobolax | Coastal rocks               | Antipodes Islands                      | Rare            | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Database                                     |
| (a moss)         | and tree trunks             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
|                  |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| CATEGORY 0 SPECIES (THREATENED IN NEW ZEALAND BUT SECURE ELSEWHERE IN THEIR RANGE) |
| BIRDS            |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Eudyptes         | Coastal                     | Campbell,                              | Rare            | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Monitoring                                   |
| chrysocome       |                             | Auckland and                           |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| filholi (eastern |                             | Antipodes Islands                      |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| rockhopper       |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| penguin)         |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Procellaria      | Tussock                     | Antipodes and                          | Vulnerable      | Medium                        | No recovery plan       | Monitoring (fishing by-catch species), rat/cat|
| cinerea (grey    |                             | Campbell Islands                       |                 |                               |                        | eradication from Campbell Island            |
| petrel)          |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| MAMMALS          |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Eubalaena        | Marine                      | Breeds around                          | Rare            | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Database                                     |
| australis        |                             | Auckland and                           |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| (southern right  |                             | Campbell Islands                       |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| whale)           |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Mirounga         | Marine,                     | Campbell,                              | Rare            | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Database                                     |
| leonina (elephant| coastline                   | Antipodes Islands                      |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| seal)            |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
|                  |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| CATEGORY N SPECIES (NOT LISTED IN PREVIOUS LISTS BUT CONSIDERED THREATENED) |
| PLANTS           |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Anisotome        | Coastal tussock             | Snares Island                          | Local, endemic  | Medium                        | Southland Threatened   | Monitoring, database                         |
| acutifolia (herb)|                             |                                        | to Snares Islands|                               | Plant Conservation Plan|                                              |
| Gentiana         | Tussock                     | Antipodes Islands                      | Local, endemic  | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Nil                                          |
| antipoda (gentian|                             |                                        | to Antipodes    |                               |                        |                                              |
| )                |                             |                                        | Islands         |                               |                        |                                              |
| Puccinella       | Coastal tussock             | Antipodes Islands                      | Local, endemic  | Low                           | No recovery plan       | Nil                                          |
| antipoda         |                             |                                        | to Antipodes    |                               |                        |                                              |
|                  |                             |                                        | Islands         |                               |                        |                                              |
| Stilbocarpa      | Herbfield                   | Snares                                 | Local, endemic  | Low                           | No recovery Plan       | Database                                     |
| robusta (large   |                             |                                        | to Snares       |                               |                        |                                              |
| herb)            |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| BIRDS            |                             |                                        |                 |                               |                        |                                              |
| Rallus           | Herbfield                   | Auckland Islands                       | Local, subspecies| Low                           | No recovery plan       | Pest quarantine, reintroduce to Enderby      |
| pectoralis       |                             |                                        | endemic to      |                               |                        | Island                                       |
| muelleri         |                             |                                        | Auckland Islands|                               |                        |                                              |

Definitions for Table:-
Department of Conservation Molloy and Davis * (1994) Categories:-
Category A - highest priority threatened species
Category B - second priority threatened species
Category C - third priority threatened species
Category I - species about which little information exists, but on existing evidence, are condidered threatened
Category O - species which are threatened in New Zealand but are known to be secure outside New Zealand
Category N - species not listed in previous lists but considered threatened

International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) definitions:-
Endangered - a plant or animal in danger of extinction and whose survival is unlikely if the causal factors continue operating
Vulnerable - a plant or animal believed likely to move into the "endangered" category in the near future if causal factors continue operating
Indeterminate - a plant or animal known to be "extinct", "endangered", "vulnerable" or "rare", but where there is not enough information to say which of the four categories is appropriate
Rare - species with small world populations that are not at present "endangered" or "vulnerable" but are at risk
Local - indicates island endemic species which, because of their restricted distributions, render them highly vulnerable to catastrophes such as rodent invasion.

Management action definitions:-
Database - entry of distribution records and other information onto establishes databases. Priorities should be given to entries onto Biosite database and the island database
Pest quarantine - measure put in place to prevent animal and plant pests and pathogens colonising islands or remote habitats
Advocacy - to promote improvements in the status of species through public awareness
Animal pest eradication - the eradication of animal pests from a particular site
Monitoring - recording trends over time in identified populations/habitats
Establish back-up population - the establishment of additional populations on other islands
Recovery Plan - development of a detailed national species recovery plan for one of two taxa. They have a five year term

*Setting priorities for the conservation of New Zealand's threatened plants and animals. Second edition October 1994. First edition (1992) prepared by Molloy and Davis, second edition collated by Tisdall. Department of Conservation.
-       Introductions of other species (including any that may have been present in the past but for which no convincing evidence exists) should not be allowed. Exceptions can be made if there are no other feasible options for ex-situ management of a species and it is compatible with the receiving ecosystem.

These principles reflect the primary purpose of the nature reserve status which is also emphasised by the proposed island management categories (ie, minimum impact, and refuge).

Species translocations do involve risks in themselves, a significant one being the potential to transfer or introduce diseases. National Translocation Guidelines have been established. Ex-situ management of a second population of a species may also be suspect if the holding site is in a different climatic zone from the home site - the two populations may evolve differently in the long-term. These aspects of intensive management must be taken into account during assessment of species recovery options.

Objectives

1     To maintain the diversity of indigenous species by preventing, where possible, any further loss of indigenous species from habitats where they are currently known to exist.

2     To restore the diversity of indigenous species in all Subantarctic ecosystems to a range similar to that existing before human disturbance occurred, and to ensure that species are self-sustaining with minimal management input.

Implementation

1     Set priorities for threatened species management having regard to national priorities, requirements of species recovery plans, and locally identified threats. Keep those priorities under review.

2     Allow the introduction of indigenous plant and animal species which are actually occurring or once occurred in each island group, provided the risks of disease or other negative impacts have been thoroughly assessed.

3     Allow removal of any plant or animal population (in whole or part) where this is necessary for species or subspecies survival and where there is no threat to the survival of other taxa.

4     Encourage the ex-situ propagation or breeding of endangered species if ecological restoration is feasible and other conditions are favourable. Such propagation or breeding programme is to occur only in accordance with a restoration plan or species recovery plan.

ubantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
50

2.5.2 Marine Mammals

The Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978 provides for the protection, conservation and management of all marine mammals such as whales, dolphins, seals and sea lions within New Zealand and within New Zealand fisheries waters. The Marine Mammal Protection Regulations 1992 are intended to prevent harassment and harm by controlling human contact with marine mammals and prescribing appropriate behaviour around them. They also require commercial marine mammal watching ventures to have permits (refer 5.3.3).

Orca whales

Most incidents involving distressed marine mammals are natural events. The remoteness of the Subantarctic Islands means that strandings of whales or dolphins, or the presence of injured or sick sea lions or seals, is unlikely to be detected; and if they are, rescue or rehabilitation will probably not be logistically possible.

The Department has sole responsibility for the taking of material from marine mammal carcases, whether for cultural or scientific purposes (refer 2.7).

A Recovery Plan for the New Zealand sea lion is now operative. The principal actions to be undertaken are: assessment of population; investigation of fisheries interactions; development of techniques to mitigate bycatch; assessment of foraging ecology; and other research that will assist management.

Objectives

1    To protect and conserve marine mammals.

2    To increase understanding of marine mammal behaviour, ecology and the effects on them of human activities.

antarctic islands CMS                                                    December 1995
51                                         December 1995

Implementation

1      Attempt to assist stranded or injured marine mammals observed on or around the
       Subantarctic islands is practicable and reasonable, recognising logistical difficulties.
       Greater priority will be given to events involving threatened species.

2      Encourage and where appropriate, assist research on marine mammal behaviour,
       and the effects of human activities on them, in Subantarctic waters.

3      Increase the knowledge of whale species distribution patterns by recording all
       sightings observed at or around the Subantarctic Islands (refer 2.4 and 2.7 also).

                                  New Zealand sea lions on Enderby Island

                                                    1
                                                    subantarctic islands CMS
52

2.6 Survey, Monitoring and Research

An understanding of natural processes and human influences in and adjacent to the
reserves is necessary for effective management.

Since 1 March 1987 about 50 entry permits for scientific research purposes have been
issued for the Subantarctic Islands. Preference has been given to scientific research
which will significantly enhance scientific knowledge and effective management of the
islands. A permit procedure system provides that research is carried out in a manner that
ensures protection of the natural ecosystems without any lasting ecological modification.
The strategic importance of the Subantarctic islands for global and pure research (eg,
plate tectonics, climatic change) has also been recognised and accommodated where ever
possible. Some of the more significant research projects are:

*   A ten-year study based on Enderby Island investigating the population dynamics
    and ecology of the New Zealand sea lion Phocarctos hookeri.

*   A study of the Auckland Island flightless teal on the islands of the Port Ross area,
    specifically appraising the population structure, distribution and productivity of teal
    on Ewing Island.

*   Census work on Rockhopper penguins over the 1987/88 summer indicating an
    apparent decline to a current breeding population of 103,000 birds, representing
    a reduction of 94% from estimates of 1,700,000 birds made in 1944.

*   A long-term programme to establish the changes in Campbell Island vegetation
    patterns and species dynamics following removal of feral sheep.

*   A study to establish the significance of the Campbell and Auckland Island Yellow-
    eyed penguin populations for the total world population of this species, and to
    determine through DNA analysis if these populations mix with mainland New
    Zealand populations.

*   A study to determine the species and numbers of subantarctic seabirds that are
    being caught or entangled in the southern ocean tuna and squid fisheries around
    New Zealand's Subantarctic islands. Research efforts are involved at sea as well
    as on indicator populations at Snares, Auckland, Campbell and Antipodes Islands.

*   Population counts and study of breeding success of black-browed and grey-
    headed mollymawk on Campbell Island.

*   Continuing development of a toxic polymer bait and method of application capable
    of operating effectively in low pig densities and inclement weather.

*   The first biannual count of Royal albatross on Campbell Island was carried out
    over the 1991/92 and 92/93 summers.

A "Subantarctic database" has been established in the Department of Conservation office
in Invercargill to improve the availability of research and management information
concerning the islands, to anyone requiring access to this material.

Rationale

There is a need to develop a science and research strategy for the Subantartic Islands and
species of the southern ocean. A draft Seabird Conservation Strategy (in preparation) will
set out monitoring and research requirements for the priority species found in the
53

TABLE 6 :   CONSERVATION SCIENCE AND RESEARCH THEMES FOR THE 
             SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS AND SOUTHERN OCEAN


SEABIRDS                                  |Establishing population                        |Albatrosses and mollymawks (southern royal     
                                          |size and distribution                          |albatross; all Campbell Is. mollymawks; Wandering 
(refer Draft Seabird                      |(comprehensive                                |albatross including the Antipodes subspecies;     
Conservation Strategy                     |quantitative surveys of                        |Salvin's mollymawk; Light-mantled sooty albatross; 
for important or key                     |all breeding colonies;                         |NZ Black-browed mollymawk; and Grey-headed        
species for research                      |systematic mapping of                          |mollymawk)                                        
and monitoring)                          |seabirds at sea)                               |Burrowing seabirds (all species)                  
                                          |                                               |Penguins (Yellow-eyed, Erect-crested, Rockhopper) 
                                          |                                               |Shags (three endemic Subantarctic shags)          

                                          |Breeding biology,                              |Instigate more systematic and detailed studies of 
                                          |population dynamics                            |population dynamics; comprehensive demographic   
                                          |and demograhics                                |studies of petrel species (lacking to date)       

                                          |Feeding Ecology                                |Foraging range and diet of key species; competition 
                                          |                                               |for food; changes in sea temperatures and prey    
                                          |                                               |distribution; impacts of fisheries on feeding     
                                          |                                               |ecology, including bycatch                        

(ditto)                                   |Behaviour                                      |Vulnerability and sensitivity to increasing human 
                                          |                                               |presence and contact on islands                   

MARINE MAMMALS                            |New Zealand                                    |Population size and status                        
                                          |(Hooker's) sea lion                            |Fisheries inter-action and bycatch, techniques to 
                                          |                                               |mitigate bycatch, behaviour around fishing vessels
                                          |                                               |Feeding ecology (foraging areas and behaviour, diet 
                                          |                                               |and energetics)                                   
                                          |                                               |Human impacts (especially tourism)                

                                          |New Zealand fur seal                          |Population size, status and distribution; breeding 
                                          |and Southern elephant                         |biology; feeding ecology; human interactions and  
                                          |seal                                          |impacts including from fisheries                  

PLANTS/                                   |Continued monitoring                           |Sheep (Campbell Island)                           
VEGETATION                                |of vegetation                                  |Cattle (Campbell and Enderby Island)              
                                          |regeneration following                         |Goats (Auckland Island)                           
                                          |eradication of                                 |Rabbits and mice (Enderby Island)                 
                                          |introduced animals                             |                                                  

                                          |Ecology of endemic                            |eg, Pleurophyllum                                 
                                          |plants genera                                 |                                                  

                                          |Plant/invertebrate                            |                                                  
                                          |associations                                   |                                                  

                                          |Phenology of key plant                        |Monitor impacts on plants of climate changes such 
                                          |species                                        |as atmospheric warming, ozone depletion and      
                                          |                                               |increased UV radiation                           

IMPACTS OF                                |Ecology of Impacts                            |Cats and pigs on Auckland Island                  
INTRODUCED SPECIES                        |                                               |Mice on Antipodes Island                          

OCEANIC STUDIES                           |Promote research and                           |eg, changes in sea temperatures, ocean currents,  
                                          |monitoring of the                              |surface plankton distribution, potential impacts on
                                          |southern ocean                                 |food chains from any marked changes in species   
                                          |environment                                    |composition, abundance, and/or distribution.     

HISTORY AND                               |                                               |On-going site survey, inventory of artifacts,     
ARCHAEOLOGY                               |                                               |mapping and research in support of Protection Plan 
                                          |                                               |and Conservation plans.                           

VISITORS                                  |Research and                                   |eg, tourist profiles, tourist attitudes and behaviour,
                                          |monitoring of tourism                          |tourism impacts, tourist advocacy, tour operators 
                                          |and its impacts                                |and concessionaires.                              


             Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
54

Subantarctic region. Monitoring is being undertaken on Campbell Island (for several 
species) and on some other islands. The desirable extent of monitoring of threatened 
species is shown on Table 5.

Science and monitoring should serve the broader purpose of protection and be targeted 
to provide key information for management. Strategic directions for the future of science 
in the Subantarctic region are:

-   Long-term monitoring
-   Scientific investigations to guide management.

Records of biological and physical changes are essential for establishing the status, 
condition and trend of resources and ecosystems, and are vital for assessing management 
programmes and procedures.

Objectives

1   To establish and maintain as far as is practicable an ongoing programme to 
monitor changes in the natural ecosystems of the island nature reserves and 
species inhabiting the surrounding ocean.

2   To arrange, facilitate and support a programme of scientific research to assist 
management of the islands and species inhabiting the surrounding ocean.

Implementation:

1   Develop and encourage implementation of a comprehensive science and research 
strategy based on the themes set out in Table 6.

2   Foster international cooperative research, especially among scientists working on 
other Subantarctic Islands (refer Table 2).

3   Encourage all visitors to the islands to report to the department any observations 
made which indicate ecological changes, for example, unusual numbers of dead 
plants and animals, or physical changes.

4   Vet all survey, monitoring and research proposals to ensure they are relevant and 
meet rigorous scientific standards. Science teams must be able to demonstrate 
that they are suitably qualified and have the necessary credentials.

5   Require science activities to be carried out in such a manner that:
    -   protection of the natural ecosystems is ensured, and
    -   they will cause no lasting changes in indigenous plant or animal 
populations or community relationships, and
    -   they do not conflict with essential management operations.

6   Encourage the completion of approved science projects, and require that research 
including observations, data and results is fully reported to the Department.

(refer Part 5 also).

subantarctic islands CMS        December 1995
2.7  Taking of Plants and Animals                                                      55

The Reserves Act 1977 (sections 42 and 49) controls taking of plants from reserve lands.
There is no specific reference in this Acts to taking for traditional Maori purposes. The
essential purposes for collection are scientific research and education. The law is silent
on commercial aspects.

The Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978 protects all marine mammals. The Wildlife Act
1953 gives native animals absolute protection, although there are some exceptions and
in various legislation fish are treated differently from land animals.

Under the Freshwater Fisheries Regulations 1983 it is unlawful to kill or destroy any
species of indigenous fish except for human consumption or scientific research. Any
indigenous fish can be taken for human consumption and scientific research, though
harvesting of whitebait species (ie, koaro) is regulated. (Commercial harvesting of
freshwater fish from within reserves is illegal under section 50 of the Reserves Act 1977.

At present the Department issues authorities or permits in accordance with this legislation
(or relevant regulations) for:

    -   the collection of native plants and animals, rock samples and other natural
        materials from the reserves
    -   the catching, collection, or holding of fully or partly protected wildlife or game
    -   the catching, collection, holding or disturbance of marine mammals or their
        remains

The purposes for which these materials can be taken include:
    -   Maori cultural uses (eg, medicines, carving, food source).
    -   scientific research, monitoring or inventory

Objective

1   To ensure that the taking of plants, animals and other natural materials for
    appropriate purposes is in accord with the general aim of protecting those
    resources.

Implementation

1   The taking of plants and animals which are threatened or locally uncommon is
    considered inappropriate unless it is essential for management or research
    purposes, and is consistent with national policy on access to New Zealand's
    indigenous genetic resources. In the absence of national policy, restrictions will
    be applied to the registration of intellectual policy rights, ability to transfer material
    to third parties and commercial use.

2   Identification and gathering of cultural materials will only be authorised in co-
    operation with appropriate iwi authorities, and traditional conservation techniques
    of gathering will be applied, in the interests of conserving the resource.

3   Taking of plants or dead animals (or parts thereof) for scientific or educational
    purposes will generally be limited to species which are abundant, and only minimal
    takes will be approved.

                                                    December 1995
56

4	People will be encouraged to send dead specimens of indigenous species found 
        in Subantarctic waters to the Museum of New Zealand - Te Papa Tongarewa, 
        particularly frozen dead animals for inclusion in the frozen tissue register where 
        appropriate.

5	Dead plants and animals found within the nature reserves (including the inter-tidal 
        zones) must be left in-situ unless authorization has been given by the Department 
        for removal.

6	Liaise with museums on the allocation and storage of dead specimens of protected 
        species. Maintain information on institutions holding dead specimens.

7	Monitor the impacts of taking plant, animal or other natural materials to ensure 
        conditions of permits have been complied with and the level of taking is 
        sustainable.

8	Increase visitor awareness of the legislative requirements relating to the protection 
        of natural materials and the need for a permit before material can be taken.

 
subantarctic islands CMS                                       December 1995
Part 3: Historic Resource Conservation

3.1 Rationale

The Reserves Act 1977 provides for historic and archaeological features present on the island nature reserves to be managed and protected, provided this is compatible with the primary purpose of the reserve (refer 1.6).

The term "historic place" is defined in the Historic Places Act 1993 as "any land, site, building, or structure, or combination thereof, that forms part of the historical and cultural heritage of New Zealand, including anything that is fixed to such land".

3.2 Threats to Historic Places

Despite being legally protected, all historic places have their existence threatened in some way. Four categories of threat to historic resources on the Subantarctic Islands have been identified:

-   Natural processes such as corrosion, rotting and weathering may continually degrade the integrity of historic resources. Disturbance by wildlife is also a threat to some historic places on the islands (eg, sea lions damaging historic structures).

-   Visitors to historic places can pose significant threats directly to the sites through the removal of artefacts as souvenirs or to sell, destructive acts of vandalism, or impacts such as trampling over archaeological sites or climbing on structures.

-   Management decisions and informal staff actions pose a threat through unjustified or unwarranted demolition, generally as a result of ignorance or lack of appreciation of historic places. Inappropriate restoration and maintenance on historic places can seriously degrade integrity.

-   Historic information contributes to planning authentic historic conservation work and advancing public understanding of heritage. Loss of such information is therefore a considerable threat which can occur in a variety of ways. Significant losses occur when people die without having recorded their knowledge.

These threats could cause historic sites to be obscured, modified, destroyed or undervalued. Protection must be ensured where this is compatible with protection of natural features. Some historic places need active conservation management to remedy threats or help with preservation. Wherever practicable, protection of historic objects should be undertaken on site, but if removal is deemed necessary, such objects should be placed in an appropriate institution on mainland New Zealand.

3.3 Present Management and Priorities

The Department has developed an Historic Resources Strategy for Southland Conservancy which sets goals and provides guidance over the next five years for management of historic resources on lands administered by the Department in the region. It is an

subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
58

operational plan, not a statutory or formal policy document; therefore, it has not been 
through a public consultation process. This Draft CMS provides an opportunity to canvass 
public comment on policy and priorities.

Priorities for Active Management

All the known historic places, except for some of European origin recently located on 
Campbell Island, have been assessed in order to select sites for active management which 
best represent the human history of the Subantarctic Islands. Significant aspects of that 
history are depicted by the following themes: Maori (3 historic places), European 
Discovery/Exploration (2), Sealers/Whalers (6), Early European Settlements (4), Natural 
Resource Use (4), Shipwrecks/Castaways and Coastwatchers (43). The following criteria 
were used for the selection process:

-   local and national historic significance (using Historic Places trust criteria)
-   the need to mitigate immediate threats to the place (such as deterioration)
-   the demands for and potential impacts of public visitation
-   interpretation value (ability to convey historic meaning with minimal interpretation)
-   representativeness (whether an individual site adequately represents its type, and 
    whether the sites together adequately represent the range of historic themes)

Table 7 lists 15 historic places on the Subantarctic Islands that have been selected for 
active management, plus the Campbell Island meteorological station (see below). The 
table shows the place, name or description and whether the place is recorded with the 
New Zealand Archaeological Association (NZAA). It shows if there has been any 
conservation work done on the place, if there are existing visitor facilities or if these 
facilities need to be provided. This Table also lists significance ratings which indicate 
whether a site represents historic events of local, national or international significance.

In selecting the sites to be actively managed, emphasis has generally been placed on 
historic places having some appreciable physical remains. These sites rate more highly 
for interpretation and education although it is recognised that threats are increased with 
the accessibility of the place.

Some of the historic places included in the list of sites to be actively managed represent 
quite recent history - the coastwatchers lookouts. These sites are relatively accessible. 
The abandoned accommodation buildings associated with the coastwatch lookouts were 
not built of materials that can withstand the Subantarctic climate for very long, and no 
attempts will be made to conserve these structures.

Most of the recognised historic sites existed well before the islands were given the status 
of nature reserves. Activities after the coastwatchers era, current and future, will in time 
be regarded as historic. In keeping with the nature reserve status it is considered (as a 
general principle) that any facilities or structures built on the islands since the end of 
World War II should be totally removed, along with any associated equipment, when they 
are no longer needed. However, in accordance with policies of the Historic Places Trust, 
all historic places over 30 years old should be assessed for historic values in the context 
of the primary aims of the nature reserve status.

Some structures at the Campbell Island meteorological station may warrant conservation 
for their historic values, particularly the wharf and associated boat sheds. Whether these 
structures should be retained must also be considered in terms of the threat or security 
risk they might become by attracting unauthorised visitors (refer 5.2 and 5.3.3).

ibantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
TABLE 7 : HISTORIC PLACES SELECTED FOR ACTIVE MANAGEMENT


|| Name of Historic Place        | Special Protection | Significance Rating | Historic Conservation | Visitor Facilities ||
||-------------------------------|--------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|--------------------||
||                               |                    |                     |                       |                    ||
|| Stella Hut, Enderby Island    | A                  | **                  | Y (fence)             | Y (boardwalk)      ||
|| Derry Castle Grave Site, Enderby Island | A              | *                   | Y (marker)            | R                  ||
|| Enderby Boatshed              | A                  | *                   | Y                     | R                  ||
|| Finger Posts (several locations) | A                | *                   | Y                     | R                  ||
|| Hardwicke Settlement and Cemetery, Erebus Cove | A         | **                  | Y (fence)             | Y (boardwalk)      ||
|| Ranui Coastwatchers Lookout Hut | A                | **                  | Y                     | Y (track)          ||
|| German Scientific Expedition Site - Terra Cove | A         | ***                 | Y                     | Y (keep site clear)||
|| Grafton (Wreck) site of "Epigwaitt" Carnley Harbour (North Arm) | A | **                  | N                     | R                  ||
|| Carnley Harbour Coastwatchers Lookout Hut | A             | **                  | Y                     | Y (track)          ||
|| Maori Occupation Sites, Davis Bay & Enderby Island | A       | **                  | N                     | R                  ||
|| Tuckers Farm House/Woolshed Remains, Campbell Island | A      | **                  | N                     | R                  ||
|| Camp Cove, Sod Hut, Campbell Island | A               | *                   | N                     | R                  ||
|| North-East Harbour - Whaling Station, Campbell Island | A    | *                   | Y                     | R                  ||
|| Antipodes Island, Castaway Depot | *?              | **                  | Y                     | R                  ||
|| Snares Island, Castaway Depot  |                    | **                  | Y                     | R                  ||
|| Campbell Island Met Station - Wharf and Boatsheds | ?       | ?                   |                       |                    ||
||                               |                    |                     |                       |                    ||

KEY -
  A     Recorded archaeological site
  Y     Yes, some work done
  N     No work done
  R     No work required
        Further work required (see Protection Plan or Historic Resources Strategy for details)
 ***    International importance
 **     National importance
 *      Local importance

Note: all sites will require on-going maintenance.

                    Antarctic Islands CMS          December 1995
60

Management Process

A protection plan (or inventory) has been prepared for all recorded historic places on the Subantarctic Islands. This database will be updated as changes to sites are identified. This information can then be sent to the local filekeeper for updating of the NZAA records.

Once the decision has been made to actively manage a historic place, a conservation plan is prepared, guided by ICOMOS principles and standards. The plan includes a detailed site history, description, significance, records, and a prescription for remedial work and long-term maintenance. Requirements for visitor impact management are also assessed.

3.4 Kaupapa Maori

The Subantarctic Islands are of cultural and spiritual significance to Maori. Liaison with, and involvement of Kai Tahu and Ngati Mutunga iwi, and the Moriori people will be essential for sites of interest to them to determine appropriate approaches to conservation and interpretation for wahi tapu.

Wahi tapu can be actively managed if approval from iwi is gained. Iwi may be interested in managing these places themselves. This will be encouraged. To allow the monitoring of disturbance or degradation and conservation work performed, the historic places managed by iwi should be listed and conservation plans prepared. Any activities proposed to be undertaken within the vicinity of places significant to iwi will require consultation with iwi before proceeding with the activity.

3.5 Visitor Use Of Historic Places

Currently, two places of high historical significance - the Stella hut on Enderby Island, and the Hardwicke Settlement and Cemetery at Port Ross, Auckland Island - are being managed for larger groups of tourists to visit. The other places listed in Table 7 which are on the Auckland or Campbell Islands can be visited by small guided groups (refer 5.3.1).

It must be emphasised that while visits to historic places may be permitted, the most important consideration is ensuring their protection and conservation. Each unmodified site will require on-going monitoring to check for any deterioration. If a site shows deterioration which is not acceptable, it should be closed to group visits until the desirability and cost of site conservation, and its effect on the overall significance of the site, can be assessed.

Each place selected for active conservation should be identified on-site with a cast disk or similar marker, positioned so it is seen but is not obtrusive to the place. The significance of the markers should be well publicised. This approach has seen some success in reducing human interference and damage at historic places on mainland New Zealand. Sites of maori origin should only be marked in ways acceptable to iwi.

No on-site interpretation should be put in place at sites which are very isolated and where visitation is mainly by guided groups - this principle applies to all historic places on the Subantarctic Islands. Most visitors who travel to the remote sites generally have a genuine interest and there is good published information available on the history of most sites. Concessionaires should make quality resources available to their clients.

subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
3.6 Strategic Direction

Objectives

1    To attain an understanding sufficient for management purposes of the values of 
     historic resources on the island nature reserves, and the threats they face.

2    To protect historic resources on the islands from damage.

3    To identify and actively manage historic places which provide the best possible 
     balanced representation of the history of the islands.

4    To avoid further accumulation of structures and relics from current or future 
     human activities on the island nature reserves.

5    To promote off-site conservation of artefacts originating from the islands at 
     suitable museums in New Zealand.

Implementation

1    Undertake thematic studies, area surveys and site appraisals. Record 
     archaeological remains or items or sites of cultural significance which have been, 
     or may be, discovered. Prepare and maintain an Archaeological Resource 
     Statement.

2    Maintain an inventory (protection plan) of all known historical places on the 
     Subantarctic Islands. Assess historic values using criteria set out in the Historic 
     Places Act 1993.

Coastwatch lookout, Carnley Harbour, Auckland Islands

santarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
62
3   Actively manage only those historic places listed on Table 7.

4   Prepare and implement a conservation plan for each historic place to be actively 
    managed, guided by ICOMOS principles and meeting ICOMOS standards. These 
    conservation plans shall provide for both remedial work and long-term 
    maintenance.

5   Prepare Historic Places Trust registration proposals as required for actively 
    managed sites. Seek expert advice on any disturbance of or proposal to disturb 
    archaeological sites, with a view to remedial action, avoidance or, if this is a 
    condition of Trust consent under the Historic Places Act 1993, appropriate 
    scientific investigation.

6   Prevent degradation or deterioration of all historic places from the actions of 
    people or animals.

7   Consult iwi on protection, conservation and interpretation of any wahi tapu or 
    associated wahi taonga.

8   Leave antiquities and relics dating from before 1946 in their original locations, 
    unless an item is of such significance as to warrant custody by an appropriate 
    museum on the New Zealand mainland, and is able to be shifted without damage 
    and be preserved, or if likely damage or pillaging is placing the relic at risk (the 
    Secretary for Internal Affairs may direct otherwise in terms of powers under the 
    Antiquities Act 1975 relating to Maori artifacts).

9   Encourage the holders of any relic or antiquity from a reserve to register them 
    under an appropriate national recording scheme.

10  Provide a small marker sign at each of the actively managed historic places 
    identifying them as managed sites and their significance. The Maori sites are only 
    to be marked in ways acceptable to iwi.

11  Allow grave sites to be identified with appropriate markers including those not 
    having original headstones.

12  Inform visitors of their obligations, and the need for their assistance, in protecting 
    historical sites, antiquities and relics.

13  Provide visitor facilities at actively managed sites in accordance with conservation 
    plans only where there is a need to protect the historic resources and/or improve 
    visitor access to and appreciation of the place (refer Table 7 and 5.3.3). Visitor 
    facilities must not adversely conflict with the significance of the place or the 
    remote setting of the islands. No on-site interpretation will be provided (refer 
    4.3), except that interpretive panel displays may be placed in the boatsheds on 
    the wharf at Campbell Island if that site is confirmed for active management.

14  Monitor those historic places which are accessed by visitors to the islands, to 
    check for any deterioration.

15  Require all structures and equipment placed on the island nature reserves since 
    1945 to be removed when no longer needed; unless there will no adverse effects 
    on natural values and an assessment of historic values provides sufficient grounds 
    to over-rule this policy in the interests of historic resource protection.

subantarctic islands CMS                                         December 1995
Part 4: Conservation Awareness

4.1 Rationale

The primary goal is protection of the Subantarctic Island nature reserves in perpetuity. 
Public awareness programmes which enhance public appreciation and recognition, and 
support for this management goal without requiring visits to the islands have become a 
key strategy. Visiting the islands can be one means of developing support for their 
protection, but visits are also the greatest threat to the islands. Consequently, the 
primary source of awareness should be the "off-site" experience.

4.2 Information & Awareness Review

A number of initiatives have been taken during recent years to increase awareness of the 
islands. In view of the increased national and international exposure that the New Zealand 
Subantarctic Islands have been gaining, the Department has given priority to the majority 
of people who will probably never visit the islands. In addition to the high cost of 
Subantarctic tours, the fragile nature of the islands means that the carrying capacity for 
tourism purposes will be very limited.

With these factors in mind, the Department worked closely with the Southland Museum 
and Art Gallery and the New Zealand Tourism Department in promoting the concept of a 
Roaring Forties Subantarctic Experience within the Southland Museum at Invercargill. The 
objective is to provide a Subantarctic experience as close as possible to what one could 
gain from actually visiting the islands. An audio visual presentation has recently been 
completed. An interpretation gallery is scheduled to open in 1996 and a range of live 
plant and animal displays are to be established in Queens Park immediately adjacent to the 
museum. This will be the only Subantarctic Island interpretation centre in the world. It 
is seen as a key additional attraction for cruise ships using the Port of Bluff in connection 
with Subantarctic and Antarctic tourism, as well as for the wider public. It is also seen 
as being complimentary to the visitor experience and interpretation gained in the Antarctic 
Visitor Centre at Christchurch.

Since few people will ever visit the islands, it is extremely important that the Department 
promotes a public awareness programme which provides information about the islands and 
their history; highlights their national and international ecological importance; documents 
the threats to these resources and the management measures used to combat them; and 
explains the reasons for restricting public entry.

This information should be communicated through all appropriate media and forwarded 
also, through appropriate channels, to local and foreign fishermen and seafarers likely to 
encounter the islands or their wildlife. Information material that is prepared for potential 
intruders (eg, fishing boats, cruising yachts) should be readily available, comprehensive 
and clear regarding the restrictions on landings and entry to the nature reserves.

Interpretation should be limited to printed material provided to permitted visitors. On-site 
interpretation facilities are not appropriate on these remote islands.

It is acknowledged that much of the publicity and educational material will be provided by 
commercial media interests, who will need access to the islands to gather suitable 
material. However, there has been a marked increase in applications for entry permits in

bantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
64

recent years, raising questions as to whether all of them can be justified. Maximum use 
should be made of existing material and the results of any further visits for filming.

4.3 Strategic direction

Objectives

1    To enhance public awareness and appreciation of the natural and historic features 
of the islands and their ecological significance.

2    To emphasise the risks inherent in human visitation and to develop opportunities 
for "off-site" experiences, thereby diverting demand for visits to the islands.

Implementation

1    Develop "Roaring Forties" displays in conjunction with Southland Museum and Art 
Gallery.

2    Contribute when possible, to international and national forums on management of 
the Subantarctic Islands and southern oceans.

3    Prepare interpretive literature or other media illustrating, documenting and 
promoting natural and historical features of the islands and surrounding ocean, and 
actively ensure its widespread distribution.

4    Have available and promote informative material for potential and permitted 
visitors which explains the rules of visitation and other restrictions on use of the 
island nature reserves, and the reasons for them.

5    Keep the island nature reserves free of on-site interpretation facilities (except refer 
3.6(10)).

6    Publicise significant interesting changes and events associated with the 
Subantarctic Islands and southern ocean.

7    Occasionally permit media visits onto the island reserves to prepare general 
educational material or to film or document an expedition. Such visits will not be 
permitted if material can be obtained from existing sources. Media visits to 
Minimum Impact islands (refer 2.2) will only be permitted in conjunction with 
other authorised activities to avoid separate visits. All media visits are to be 
supervised by a Departmental representative. Copies of material may be required 
for Departmental use.

Applications for media visits will be subject to similar rigorous scrutiny as applies 
to science and management proposals, particularly in the case of requests to visit 
Minimum Impact islands (refer 5.3.1).

subantarctic islands CMS                                                  December 1995
Part 5: Visitor Impacts Management

### 5.1 Rationale

Visitor impact management applies to all visitors to the island nature reserves, and includes human interaction with marine mammals on land or at sea.

Managers must be forthright in their approach to requests for access to the islands. The islands are unquestionably of international significance. Managers must act in the interests of the natural assets and the global community. All visits - whether for management, scientific, tourism, information or manawhenua interest - involve risks and potential impacts. Therefore the frequency and level of visitation should be restricted.

Emphasis is given to managing visits so as to avoid risk rather than damage, and closer attention to the effects of human disturbance. Because of the exceptional values at stake in the Subantarctic Islands a precautionary approach is essential. (The problem with policies that seek to avoid "measurable damage" is that damage is frequently difficult to measure. Also, the damage must be done in order to measure it. Consequently, that type of policy has an implicit bias against a precautionary or risk-avoidance approach.)

Future strategy should focus on the risk deriving from visits and disturbance, especially as it relates to rodent introductions. In such a remote and vulnerable area, where vigilance is extremely difficult to maintain, it is essential to take all steps to keep landings to a minimum. The results of one of the very few long-term seabird monitoring programmes (at Taiaroa Heads on mainland New Zealand) show how subtle the long-term effects of disturbance can be, and this has implications, albeit indirect, for management practices in the Subantarctic Islands.

The features of New Zealand's Subantarctic Islands that justify their status as National Nature Reserves also make them some of the most desirable areas in New Zealand, and indeed internationally, for the development of wildlife-based nature tourism. Unfortunately some of the areas considered most desirable for visits by ecotours are also the most ecologically or physically sensitive. The accidental introduction of a new plant or rodent species to these sites could have a devastating effect on the entire island ecosystem. Other potential impacts include disturbance of wildlife or their habitat, and physical impacts such as trampling and soil disturbance or pugging of tracks in the peaty ground.

Tourism is a valid human activity, but is not necessarily compatible with the protection of these islands. Because of economic and political pressure, there can be temptations to dispense with caution in order to realise financial benefits to individuals or the nation. Ethical questions arise as to how appropriate it is for one country or individual to put at risk something of global value. Where a difference of judgement arises between tour operators and managers, the decisions should be made on a precautionary basis.

A similar principle should apply to the approval of scientific and management projects. In general, judgements regarding these activities should be strongly precautionary in favour of protection. Science activities involving high potential or actual risks should only be approved where a species or ecosystem is in definite threat of loss or damage. Similar standards to tourism visits should be applied to scientific and management expeditions, while acknowledging different requirements such as use of hut facilities.

Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
66

5.2 Review of Visitation

Tourism

Tourists gain access to the islands in three principal ways: on cruise ships, tour boats, and 
private yachts. Each poses a different potential impact. The large cruise ships tend to 
concentrate a large number of people (100 plus) at a small number of visitor sites, and on 
a relatively small area at those sites. Tour boats often visit more sites with a smaller 
number of people and increase the risks of accidental plant or rodent introductions to a 
larger number of sites. Private yachts are potentially the most difficult tourist operation 
to regulate, given the isolation of the islands and the ability of these boats to move easily 
among islands undetected.

Steady growth in Antarctic tourism set the scene for a number of visits to the 
Subantarctic Islands by Linblad Travel and Society Expeditions between 1968 and 1987. 
These were stops enroute to and from the Ross Sea, Antarctica. Trips were infrequent 
with a maximum of two ship visits of up to 100 persons each time during a summer 
season, and there were also periods of no visits for up to four years (eg, 1974-1978). 
Lyttelton and Bluff were used equally as gateway ports during this period. Infrequent 
visits were also made by private yachts.

In December 1988 the first of the New Zealand based tourism operations began to focus 
exclusively on the attractions of the Subantarctic islands, using the sail ship Tradewinds. 
Discovery Charters South Seas marketed adventure type nature tours for small groups of 
people (20 passengers maximum). By the 1989/90 season, a further two New Zealand 
based operations Southern Heritage Tours (Acheron and Pacific Ruby) and Pegasus Dive 
Charters (Pegasus II) were marketing Subantarctic Island nature tours, in addition to the 
international cruise ship operators.

Cruise vessel in Perseverence Harbour

bantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
67

The larger cruises plus some of the New Zealand operations usually have a clear focus on 
environmental education. They attempt to enhance visitor experiences through use of 
guest lecturers, guides and interpretation material. By 1988 virtually all tours were using 
the Port of Bluff as their gateway port, because of the need for rapid turn around and to 
avoid the increased sea voyage to Lyttelton or Dunedin. Joint Antarctic/Subantarctic 
expedition tourist cruises had also established a pattern of voyages Bluff to Hobart and 
vice versa.

During the twenty year period 1968-1988, only 1300 tourists visited the Subantarctic 
Island nature reserves. All the New Zealand Government reports expressed a favourable 
reaction to the level and type of tourism activity, and the ability of the islands to 
withstand this level of tourism activity. By way of contrast, in the period 1988-1993 
there was a significant increase in tourism activity with a further 1550 tourists going 
ashore in a period of only five years.

In 1988 the Department received advance notice of the intentions of both Salen Linblad 
Cruising (Frontier Spirit) and Society Expeditions (World Discoverer) to operate a series of 
Antarctic and Subantarctic Island cruises over the 1990/91 summer season, in addition 
to the recently established New Zealand based cruise operations. By November 1989, a 
total of 16 applications for entry permits totalling 1500 passengers had been lodged for 
the 1990/91 summer cruise season.

The challenge for the Department was to manage this increased demand, protecting the 
experience that these tourists were seeking and most importantly of all to ensuring the 
longer term protection of the islands. A limit was set of 600 visitors per season. Some 
protection of visitor sites was carried out, notably the construction of a boardwalk on 
Campbell Island. Tourists have not been allowed to stay ashore overnight on any of the 
islands. It is important to recognise that the Department was not developing the island 
sites for tourism; rather it was responding to the sudden increase in demand for existing, 
and approved, tourism operations.

Tourism landings have been restricted to main Auckland Island, Enderby Island and main 
Campbell Island, and some permits were issued for tourist landings on the Bounty Islands 
up until the 1990/91 season. The management plan for the Bounty Islands does not 
explicitly mention tourism, but it does indicate that landings would be inappropriate 
particularly during the seal breeding season. This proved to be the case from the 
Department's viewpoint, so no landing permits have been issued since 1990/91.

The continued existence of the natural ecosystems of the Subantarctic Islands is 
considered to be the principal benefit people receive. Tourism visits can have benefits in 
the form of increased awareness and can lead to worldwide support and sympathy for 
conservation of our outlying islands. Though strict adherence to IUCN criteria for 
management of nature reserves would require a prohibition on tourist entry, controlled 
landings by tour groups on less vulnerable islands can achieve positive benefits while 
minimising risk to natural values - provided visits are limited in number, the landings are 
supervised by a representative of the Department, are under strict conditions, and are of 
short duration. Tourist ships also are required to have a current de-ratting exemption 
certificate as part of the permit to land on the islands. Cruising expeditions must have a 
genuine educational or inspirational purpose relating to a better appreciation of nature. 
Often the most spectacular sight-seeing is obtained from the sea, and this activity is not 
restricted.

Issues for management of tourism visits are:
-   Increasing demand
-   Requests to visit vulnerable islands or sites

subantarctic islands CMS                                                    December 1995
68

-   Visit management (eg, visitor guidelines, Department representatives)
-   Site management and facilities including boardwalks, signage and shelter.
-   Quality of experience - desire of visitors to preserve the exclusive, wilderness 
    quality of their experience
-   Attitudes of operators

Science and Management

A summary of the more significant science projects undertaken on or around the 
Subantarctic Islands since 1987, is listed in 2.6. Science programmes can have a range 
of effects on the environment, which can include disturbance of wildlife through presence 
of humans, banding, tagging and handling of wildlife, and marking out of breeding areas. 
Considerations in assessing applications for scientific research include the resulting 
benefits to protection of the islands and/or wildlife; whether the work can be conducted 
elsewhere; a limitation to ensure the minimum number of people required to do the work; 
and a requirement for visit lengths to be as short as possible.

A further issue is "science tourism", which involves tour operators requesting entry to the 
nature reserves to do research and thereby gain access to islands or sites which are 
otherwise off-limits to tourist visitors. These requests must be assessed in the same way 
as all other science activities to ensure that the proposed visits have a sound justification.

Management activities (other than science) undertaken over the past 10 years are 
described in Parts 2 and 3. Management issues include the requirement to ensure 
surveillance, to maintain a "presence" both for law enforement and to monitor ecological 
change or damage. Presence enables monitoring but in practice problems often come to 
notice through informal observation and formal monitoring is then implemented.

Hut Facilities

Huts are located on North East Island (Snares Islands), Antipodes Island, Enderby Island, 
and the main Auckland and Campbell Islands (refer maps). The hut at Deas Head, Port 
Ross, Auckland Island was erected in 1989 to support goat and pig eradication 
programmes there.

Providing hut facilities can be the best solution for minimising impacts of science and 
management expeditons. They can enable better control on the conduct of visitors, but 
they also tend to increase the number of illegal visitors by being an attraction in 
themselves. They can also create additional issues including the effects of sewage 
disposal, servicing vessels, the presence of staff for limited or extended periods, and risks 
of rodent and weed introduction. The environmental impact of hut facilities on the islands 
continues to be closely monitored.

Temporary camps can be desirable when they entails less risk of accidental introductions 
of species than repeated visits from other islands where huts are located.

Campbell Island Meteorological Station

Up until October 1995, this was the only continuously staffed facility on the Subantarctic 
Islands. The officer in charge acted as a honourary ranger for the Campbell Island nature 
reserve. The meterological field programme was reduced in scale following installation of 
an automatic weather station (AWS) in 1990. More recently the New Zealand 
Meteorological Service decided to move to a fully automated operation at Campbell Island. 
The station is now unstaffed.

subantarctic islands CMS                                         December 1995
69

Meteorological station, Campbell Island

The Department considers that retention of the full station facilities is not warranted for 
management or research activities associated with the island's natural or historic 
resources. Only basic facilities are required to provide shelter for expeditions, similar to 
the huts on Enderby Island or Antipodes Island. Use of the station facilities by tourist 
operators is not considered acceptable in terms of the nature reserve status and the 
remote experience that the islands offer visitors, even those on the larger cruise ships. 
All facilities not required for operation and servicing of the AWS, or for science and 
management purposes, should be removed, unless any are of significant historical value 
(refer Parts 3 and 6); otherwise they are likely to become an attraction for unauthorised 
visitors.

Automatic Weather Station - Auckland Islands

A new automatic weather station was established on Enderby Island in 1991. It transmits 
readings of wind, precipitation, temperature, barometric pressure and humidity hourly via 
satellite to Wellington on the New Zealand mainland (refer Part 6).

Access and Logistics

All entry to the island reserves is by permit only and individual permits stipulate the 
conditions applicable to each visit.

Logistical arrangements for transport of science and management expeditions to and from 
the islands are worked closely with the Royal New Zealand Navy (RNZN), Ministry of 
Fisheries, New Zealand Meteorological Service, and New Zealand Antarctic Programme, all 
of which are involved in some way in shipping movements in the southern ocean. 
Transport tends to be opportunistic and irregular - the annual servicing of the Campbell 
Island meteorological station each October has been the only regular transport opportunity 
to any of the islands. Since 1987 the RNZN has supplied most logistical support (ships 
plus helicopters) to the eleven multi-disciplinary expeditions that have been organised to

ibantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
70

the Subantarctic Islands. A number of smaller opportunistic visits have also occurred for 
management purposes. Transport arrangements for science and management staff are 
also made with tourist cruise operators.

Surveillance and Security

The isolation of the islands and potential for unauthorised landings pose a very real 
dilemma for protection. The Department relies very heavily on the surveillance carried out 
by the Royal New Zealand Airforce P3 Orion aircraft and the RNZN frigates and support 
ships. Recent defence cutbacks in New Zealand have reduced operational surveillance 
capability in the southern ocean and on the Subantarctic islands, at the same time that 
human activity such as commercial tourism and fishing have increased.

Wharves and Moorings

Wharf facilities and shore moorings greatly increase the chances of new rodent species 
getting ashore. This would have disastrous consequences on the flora and fauna of the 
islands and must be closely guarded against. This concerns applies mainly to transport 
vessels and fishing trawlers. Shore mooring of dinghies used by land-based parties does 
not increase the rodent risk and is acceptable.

The existing wharf and mooring at Campbell Island were provided to service the 
meteorological station. The wharf is no longer required for that purpose. It is of historical 
interest, but its future is dependent on the degree of risk it presents in attracting 
unauthorised landings (refer Part 3 also).

The mooring at North East Island in the Snares Islands group is unusual in that it is 
extremely confined and it is not possible to moor offshore. This mooring is regulated by 
permit pursuant to a 1986 agreement between the Crown and the Stewart Island 
Fishermen's association. Strict operating controls guard against the possibility of rodent 
introduction, and reduce the risks compared to uncontrolled near-shore mooring.

Helicopter Air Transport

A trial helicopter flight by Aerospatiale Squirrel helicopter was carried out from Invercargill 
to Campbell Island via Auckland Island in 1991 to evaluate a system for emergency 
evacuation of staff working on Campbell Island. The helicopter was fitted with long range 
fuel tanks. Fuel is stored at the Campbell Island meteorological station. A fuel storage 
site has recently been established on Enderby Island to facilitate any emergency 
evacuation. These fuel dumps will need replacing periodically.

Issues for science and management visits are:

-   Logistics and surveillance
-   Facilities
-   Landings with risks of rodent introductions
-   "Science tourism"
-   Disturbance of wildlife

December 1995
5.3 Impact Management Strategies

5.3.1 Visits to Islands

Proposals to visit an island or site should be assessed by balancing the benefits to be gained by permitting a visit against the risk and disturbance which may occur. The more pristine the island or vulnerable the site, the greater the justification needs to be for allowing visits. Human activities must always remain secondary to and compatible with preservation. Continued monitoring of effects of human use on the environment and wildlife is essential.

Generally, the outcome is to impose the greatest restrictions on visits to the most pristine islands (ie, Minimum Impact islands), and provide limited opportunities for visits at the more modified islands or sites (ie, Refuge islands) - refer Table 3.

There will always be some pressure from tourists, scientists and managers to visit the "most interesting or special sites" on the islands - these tend to be the least modified and consequently amongst the most ecologically valuable. The island management categories provide clear direction for tourist visits, and science and management activities should be confined to well justified visits only. Protection should be further ensured by excluding any vulnerable sites (landscape features, sensitive habitats, breeding sites) from entry permits, except when access is required for essential scientific or management purposes.

Tourism Visitor Sites

The primary measure for minimising the potential impacts of tourist visitors is through limiting the sites available for visits to the Refuge islands only. At those sites further controls can be used to reduce risk of disturbance or impact:

    limiting time and/or seasons
    limiting number of visits, and frequency over a season
    limiting number of visitors (group size or annual quota, or both)
    limiting some activities, or place other constraints on visitor behaviour

The last of these controls is probably the most important. Any limits set will be arbitrary - it is difficult to precisely quantify the visitor threshold beyond which risk or impacts are unacceptable. The threshold number for some sites may vary because of changing factors such as breeding cycles and/or weather patterns.

A visitor quota, while being somewhat arbitrary, is an effective protection measure. A precautionary approach is appropriate. The current limit of tourist 600 visitors per year appears to be reasonable in terms of the precautionary principle. An adaptive approach based on monitoring effects will complement this initial setting of a visitor quota.

Sites available for tourist visits on the Refuge islands can be classed as large or small in terms of the visitor numbers they can handle. There are only three sites that are considered to be sufficiently robust to be regarded as a large site. They are Enderby Island, Hardwicke Settlement and Cemetery site in Port Ross (both Auckland Island), and the Beeman/Lyal-Col Saddle boardwalk on Campbell Island.

Enderby Island is generally robust, except that the Yellow-eyed penguin, sea lion and albatross populations have experienced some minor disturbance during tourist visits. This has occurred when large groups are ashore with inadequate supervision. The current visitor quota of 600 maximum per season should remain, but no more than 100 tourist visitors, including ship crews, should be landed on any one day. Visitors should be

subantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
72
supervised by sufficient guides (at least 1:20) and not left to wander at will. The Hardwicke site does not require any specific restrictions: tourist visits to this site will generally be limited in practice by the quota for Enderby Island.

[Image of Tourism visit to Enderby Island]

Tourism visit to Enderby Island

A precautionary approach is required at the main Campbell Island site to avoid or minimise impacts on the albatross nesting area at the Lyal-Col saddle. The quota of 600 visitors per year is seen to be acceptable but restrictions may be required on daily group sizes.

Several other sites on the main Auckland and Campbell Islands are visited by the smaller tour operations. There are short tracks at the two historic coastwatching sites and to Lake Hinemoa on Auckland Island, and tracks on Campbell Island between Perseverance Harbour and Northwest Bay (see Map 4). Visits are also made to other sites such as the shy mollymawk colony at South West Cape, which has experienced little human impact to date. However, all these sites are fragile and vulnerable to physical impacts of over-use; and this applies generally to the whole of the two main islands except along the shorelines. It is proposed that all potential landing sites on these two islands be treated as small sites (except for the large sites and shoreline sites which can handle higher numbers within the 600 seasonal quota). Small sites should be restricted to a maximum of 150 tourist visitors per year. As well as minimising disturbance to wildlife, this reduced quota proposed for small sites should prevent trampling or pugging of the peaty ground, thereby avoiding the need for facilities (eg, boardwalks) which would impact on the remote character of these sites.

Suggestions have been made to allow limited tourism entry onto the Bounty Islands and Antipodes Island. They are categorised in this Draft CMS as Minimum Impact Islands, which excludes tourism visits. The argument against tourism or science tourism landings on these islands is that they are currently rodent-free, except for mice on the Antipodes Islands, and every effort should be made to avoid the risk of introductions. In addition, the tiny Bounty Islands are occupied almost entirely by dense colonies of seals, penguins and seabirds.

Subantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
73

Supervision and Departmental Representation

Visitor guidelines have been established, including a Minimum Impact Code, to help avoid visitor impacts. A Departmental representative accompanies all expeditions to the islands and has a key role in ensuring (through the tour operator) that all visitors understand the reasons for the adoption of the code and comply with its principles. The risks associated with visits are so great that having representatives to ensure compliance, is regarded as essential. The roles of representatives are to enforce animal and plant quarantine procedures, compliance with Reserves Act requirements and permits, explanation of policy and management to visitors, and check compliance with visitor guidelines. The use of a Departmental representative is part of the quality control process on reserve management.

Emergency Entry

It is accepted that certain emergencies may lead to, or necessitate entry to one or other of the island nature reserves without prior authorization.

Objectives

1    To maintain visitor numbers and the manner in which those numbers are managed on-shore, at a level at which long-term protection of the islands is assured.

Implementation

1    Permit entry for scientific, management and other legitimate purposes consistent with the classification of nature reserve and in accordance with the management category assigned to each island (refer Tables 3 and 4). When possible or practicable, all visits must be ship-based and landings restricted to day-visits only.

2    Limit access to Minimum Impact islands to work small teams engaged in:
   
-    essential management tasks;
   
-    approved scientific activities that are likely to enhance effective management of those islands or assist protection of the wildlife present on them, or cannot be done elsewhere;
   
-    and/or the preparation of interpretive material for a wide audience.

     Generally the size of these work teams must be the minimum required to undertake the work in a safe manner. They must only stay for the minimum time required to complete the approved work.

3    Permit visits by tourists to Refuge Islands only under such controls as deemed necessary to ensure protection of their natural features, ecosystems and cultural values. Exclude any vulnerable sites from entry permits.

     Tourist visitor quotas for Refuge islands shall be allocated in accordance with the following criteria:
   
-    Only one ship visit to be permitted per day at any landing site.
   
-    Maximum 600 visitors to be permitted each year for Enderby Island, Hardwicke Settlement and Beeman Point/Col Saddle (Campbell Island).

santarelle Islands CMS                                         December 1995
74

-   Maximum 150 visitors to be permitted each year for all other acceptable landing sites on the main Auckland and Campbell Islands; except that additional numbers may be permitted for visits to shoreline sites only.

-   Visitor numbers may be reduced at any site, or sites excluded from entry permits if adverse impacts are deemed to exceed acceptable limits.

-   Daily visitor quotas and other restrictions may be set for sites within the yearly quota that applies, on a case by case basis.

    Tourism must be ship-based: no overnight stays are to be permitted for the island nature reserves.

    Commercial operators require concessions from the Department to authorise their business activity within the reserves. Entry permit quotas will be allocated on a year-by-year basis to concessionaires, and may be allocated up to five years ahead to enable forvard planning (subject to any requirements to reduce visitor quotas or exclude sites from landing permits).

4   Maintain and implement Visitor Guidelines and a Minimum Impact Code for all landings, including strict quarantine measures and procedures to avoid the risks of marine pollution and fire in the reserves (refer 2.3.3 also). Inform visitors of the reasons for these restrictions.

5   Require official supervision of all entry permits to the reserves by accredited Departmental representatives.

6   Keep the effectiveness of the entry permit system under review and undertake visitor impact monitoring at key landing sites.

7   Maintain liaison with the New Zealand Antarctic Programme and cruising expedition organisers.

8   Ensure tour operators recognise the special values of the Subantarctic Islands and have adequate, quality interpretation services available for their clients.

9   Encourage expedition organisers to prepare environmental evaluations of their operations, to a standard similar to that required by the Protocol on Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty (refer 1.6).

(refer 2.3.4, 5.3.2, 5.3.4 and 5.3.5 also)

antarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
5.3.2 Disturbance of Wildlife                                             75

The long-term effects of disturbing wildlife are often subtle and go undetected. However,
the small number of long-term studies have shown adverse effects. Wildlife can be 
disturbed by human presence (eg, tourists), by facilities but also by management and 
research activities - banding, handling and close observation.

Objective

1   To ensure that indigenous wildlife is not subject to disturbance which may have 
    adverse effects on behaviour, distribution or breeding.

Implementation

1   Exclude vulnerable wildlife sites from entry permits, except for essential research 
    or management activities.

2   Enforce guidelines on wildlife disturbance with the precautionary principle 
    paramount. Require visitors carrying out science or management activities to 
    abide by the Visitor Guidelines, except when their approved tasks require 
    otherwise.

3   Monitor effects of visitors, and management and research activities whenever 
    possible.

(refer 5.3.3 also)

antarctic islands CMS                                         December 1995
76

5.3.3 Marine Mammal Viewing

All entry permits for the island nature reserves contain specific conditions as to how visitors are to behave when encountering marine mammals ashore (eg, New Zealand fur seals, elephant seals, and New Zealand sea lion).

Interest in interacting with marine mammals, either by viewing or swimming with them, is increasing. The Marine Mammal Protection Regulations 1992 have been established to manage commercial marine mammal encounters and/or viewing activities. Commercial tour operators require permits which set out specific conditions as to how such encounters with whales, dolphins and seals are to be conducted.

The 1992 Regulations set out criteria for determining what, if any, viewing activities should occur. The commercial operation should not have any significant adverse effect on the behavioural patterns of the marine mammals, and it should be in the interests of the conservation, management or protection of them that a permit be issued.

No current permits exist for marine mammal viewing in the Subantarctic region. A potential tourism opportunity is recognised in the viewing of Southern right whales at Port Ross (Auckland Islands) and Campbell Island. A significant population migrates to these sheltered waters each winter for calving and breeding. The number of whales is increasing. However, it is considered that given the low population of Southern right whales and the relatively restricted waters which comprise the calving and breeding sites, that it would be in the interests of conserving or protecting the species that no permits be issued in the immediate future. There is potential for significant impact on this population.

Any review of this stance towards viewing of Southern right whales in the Subantarctic region should be made on the basis of research, a significant increase in the population and ability to provide on-site supervision of viewing activities.

Objective

1   To protect marine mammals from visitor harassment by ensuring that no human interactions impact upon or cause changes to their behaviour.

Implementation

1   Maintain and implement Visitor Guidelines to avoid or minimise visitor disturbance of marine mammals ashore on the island nature reserves, and during non-commercial marine mammal viewing activities.

2   Implement a moratorium on issuing permits for commercial viewing of Southern right whales and other whale species around the Subantarctic Islands until such time as it can be demonstrated that the risks associated with viewing activities are acceptable.

3   Restrict the issuing of permits for commercial viewing of seal species on water to small-boat activities only; and on land to the holders of concession permits only (refer 5.3.1(3)).

4   Facilitate research to establish baseline behaviour, and establish on-going monitoring of any marine mammal viewing operations on or around the Subantarctic Islands.

subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
5.3.4 Facilities and Site Management

A summary of existing facilities on the Subantarctic Islands is given in 5.2. A minimum 
of on-site facilities should be developed within the island nature reserves. However, some 
facilities are required to minimise the effects of visitor impacts (eg, huts, boardwalks).

Boardwalk to Lyall-Col Saddle, Campbell Island

All on-shore facilities should be brought into line with the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which has been adopted for facilities in the Antarctic 
region (refer 1.6), except for those aspects of the Protocol which are clearly not applicable 
to Subantarctic conditions or are over-ridden by specific provisions in this CMS.

Occasionally dogs have been used for locating rare birds and this use may be allowed in 
the reserve by permit; similarly, use of dogs during pest eradication or control operations 
may be permitted. Domestic poultry has been kept at the meteorological station in the 
past, with a risk of pathogen introduction or an outbreak of a disease not already present 
on Campbell Island. De-staffing of the station in October 1995 enabled removal of the 
poultry.

Objectives

1   To allow a minimum of on-shore facilities essential for management requirements, 
    while protecting the natural values of the island nature reserves.

2   To remove all non-biodegradable waste materials from the islands and dispose of 
    biodegradable waste in ways which do not endanger or modify the natural 
    ecosystems.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
78

Implementation

1   Require facilities on the islands to conform with relevant provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty by 1999.

2   Restrict facilities onshore for tourist visitors to tracks, boardwalks and/or signs at a limited number of sites (refer Implementation 7).

3   Maintain a register of all on-site work and disturbance (including research study sites and equipment), and require sites to be cleaned up as a condition of approval.

4   Maintain existing facilities, buildings and structures which have an on-going use or function.

5   Remove facilities and structures that are no longer required from the islands, unless they have historical values and will have no adverse effects on natural values (refer 3.5 also).

6   Allow the erection of buildings, structures or facilities where their establishment can be justified and there is minimal impact on natural features of the island reserves, provided all such facilities can be completely removed when no longer required.

    Assess the environmental impact of any proposed new facilities. Their location and form shall follow these criteria:

    -   The form and design of the building, structure or facility will be such that impact on vegetation, topography and other natural features, and disturbance to wildlife will be minimal.

    -   Materials must be sensitive to the natural surroundings, and in keeping with nearby or associated buildings, structures or facilities to be retained.

    -   Facilities must not degrade the visually unmodified landscape form, except where the development of boardwalk is consistent with the objective of protecting natural soil and moisture conditions (refer 7), and huts may need to be brightly coloured for safety reasons.

7   Tracks will only be established and maintained for approved management activities or long-term occupation of the reserves. Tracks will be maintained to the minimum required standard with the need for each track kept under review. To minimise damage at Large sites for tourist visits (refer 5.3.1), the existing tracks may be upgraded and maintained at a higher standard; these sites are Erebus Cove (Auckland Island), Enderby Island and Beeman Point/Col-Lyal Saddle (Campbell Island).

8   Prohibit establishment of new wharf and/or shore mooring facilities within the reserves (refer Part 6 also).

9   Allow use of vehicles within the confines of the meteorological station on Campbell Island only until such time when the expected reduction in facilities resulting from the decision to de-staff the station has been completed.

10   Prohibit the keeping of pets or other domestic animals in the reserves, except as approved for management purposes.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
11   Apply the following rules for waste disposal:

-   All non-biodegradable materials are to be removed from the reserves and 
     preferably returned to mainland New Zealand.

-   Rubbish may be burnt but not in pits or in contact with peat or in any 
     other unsafe place.

-   Biodegradable rubbish may be buried if it can not be conveniently 
     removed from the reserve but at such a depth as to ensure seeds or 
     vegetables cannot germinate or sprout. All human solid wastes are to be 
     buried or removed. Visitors will be encouraged to use portable toilets 
     whenever this is practicable.

(refer 2.3.4 and 2.7 also)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                 December 1995
80

5.3.5 Use of Aircraft

Low flying over breeding colonies in particular may result in death or disturbance of 
animals.

Objectives

1   To avoid any unnecessary disturbance to wildlife from aircraft operations over or 
    near to the Subantarctic Islands.

Implementation

1   Limit helicopter landings in the island nature reserves to the environs of huts or 
    such other points as the departmental representative prescribes.

2   Prohibit helicopter landings except where necessary for the collection of scientific 
    information, for search and rescue or for other purposes which have been 
    authorised in accordance with this CMS and the Reserves Act 1977, and provided 
    all precautions are taken against endangering or unduly disturbing plant and animal 
    life in the process.

3   Prohibit helicopter landings and discourage low level flying within 200m of any 
    bird or seal colony during the breeding season.

4   Seek to have restrictions imposed for low flying over or close to the Subantarctic 
    island groups.

5   Apply adequate rodent precautions when stores are flown onto any of the islands.

6   Prohibit permanent aviation facilities within the nature reserves, except for the 
    emergency fuel dumps on Enderby Island and Campbell Island.

7   Apply the following provisions to aircraft use in emergencies:
    -   The department is to be notified of all emergency landings, as soon as 
        possible, outlining the circumstances and details of the incident.
    -   Helicopters may be used to rescue sick and injured persons.
    -   Should the need arise to search for a lost or injured person, searchers are 
        to make every effort to avoid disturbing the animals and vegetation.

7   Liaise with aircraft operators to ensure understanding of the reasons for these 
    restrictions, and to seek support for them.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                                  December 1995
5.3.6 Logistics and Surveillance                            81

Rationale

The Department does not have staff permanently resident on the Subantarctic Islands and 
has no ships of its own for patrolling the reserves. The New Zealand Defence Force 
assists with logistical support for management activities on the Subantarctic Islands. The 
Royal New Zealand Navy provides transport for expeditions and assisted with work 
programmes. The Royal New Zealand Airforce performs a range of monitoring tasks using 
aerial photography, and provides a crucial surveillance function. Both forces assist with 
fisheries surveillance, search and rescue and other emergency operations.

Officers in command of New Zealand naval vessels have powers of arrest and of stopping 
and searching vessels (section 100 of the Reserves Act 1977).

Objectives

1    To use the services of other Government agencies in the surveillance, enforcement 
     and support aspects of reserve management.

Implementation

1    Written agreements which take account of reserve management objectives already 
     exist between the Secretary of Defence and the Director-General of Conservation 
     for landings and other aspects of the role that the Ministry of Defence fulfils in 
     surveillance and servicing of New Zealand's out-lying islands.


RNZN Wasp on HMNZS Wellington

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS     December 1996
Part 6: Resource Use and Estate Management
                                          83

6.1 Resource Development and Facilities

The island nature reserves may, from time to time, be subject to proposals to exploit their 
natural resources or to provide base facilities for fishing or off-shore developments. For 
example, development of potential oil reserves in the Great South Basin may lead to 
proposals to site associated facilities at Campbell Island.

Management of the reserves must give effect to the primary purposes of the nature 
reserve classification and the national reserve status (refer 1.6). The islands must be 
regarded as fully protected natural areas.

The Reserves Act 1977 only allows for facilities such as buildings and structures which 
are necessary and desirable for the proper and beneficial management of the reserves. 
Authority can be given for conducting a trade, business or occupation on a nature reserve; 
but generally not for occupying part of the land, harvesting resources or developing 
facilities for tourism or other commercial purposes. An exception is telecommunication 
stations (refer 6.2), and mining activity is subject to separate legislation (refer 6.3).

Objective

1   To maintain the island nature reserves free of resource uses and facilities 
    development in accordance with the primary purpose of protecting and preserving 
    their natural values.

Implementation

1   Decline all proposals for resource uses and/or facilities development on the 
    reserves which are not necessary or desirable for their proper and beneficial 
    management.

(Refer 2.4, 5.3.1, 5.3.4, 6.2 and 6.3 also)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
84

6.2 Telecommunication Facilities

Modern communication facilities (radio and television repeaters, cellular and microwave 
phone systems, VHF radio repeaters etc) generally require geographically strategic sites 
for maximum efficiency.

Section 48A of the Reserves Act 1977 allows for telecommunications stations to be sited 
on nature reserves if they cannot readily be sited elsewhere. Currently there are two 
communications facilities sited on Subantarctic Islands (Campbell Island and Enderby 
Islands).

Additional telecommunication facilities should only be permitted on the island nature 
reserves if it can be demonstrated that there is a proven need. The appropriateness of 
existing facilities should also be reviewed periodically. Potential issues are:

-    Visual and aesthetic impacts
-    Modification of the local environment
-    Increase in helicopter use for facility servicing
-    Proliferation of facilities

Objective

1    To avoid adverse effects of telecommunications equipment on landscape features 
     and other natural values.

s
Implementation

1    Proposals to site additional telecommunications equipment on the island nature 
     reserves will be declined if they would detract from the natural setting, or threaten 
     the survival of any species of indigenous flora or faunat; or would materially alter 
     or permanently damage other features of the reserve.

2    New telecommunications facilities will be required to co-locate at one of the 
     existing facility sites, if applicable, unless there is a proven need to occupy an 
     alternative site.

3    Environmental impacts will be strictly limited by permitting only those facilities 
     essential for operating the telecommunications station. Site disturbance will be 
     minimised by enforcing strict requirements concerning design, site works, 
     landscaping and maintenance. Telecommunications facilities will be sited away 
     from prominent skylines to minimise visual impacts. Facilities will also be required 
     to blend into the surrounding environment.

4    No telecommunication facilities will be allowed on areas which have been 
     identified as having significant Maori spiritual and cultural values which would be 
     desecrated by the location of such facilities.

5    When a telecommunications site permit expires or the facility ceases to be used, 
     the permittee will be required to remove all structures and materials associated 
     with the facility and to restore the site to a natural state.

6    Any telecommunications facilities required for management of the reserves shall 
     comply with Implementation 1-5 above, as applicable.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
6.3  Mining (Prospecting, Exploration and Mining)

Mining activity in New Zealand is controlled by the Crown Minerals Act 1991 and the Resource Management Act 1991. The Crown Minerals Act requires that mineral permits to be obtained from the Ministry of Commerce for the prospecting, exploration or mining of any Crown-owned minerals. Resource consents under the Resource Management Act for water and land use may also be required for mining activities.

Access Agreements

In the case of land administered by the Department, including nature reserves, an applicant must seek consent for access from the Minister of Conservation. Section 61 of the Crown Minerals Act states that the Minister shall have regard to the objectives of the relevant legislation under which land is held, the purpose of the lands status, any management strategies or plans, and safeguards against potential adverse effects of the proposed mining work; and such other matters as the Minister considers relevant. This application is considered after the applicant has obtained a minerals permit from the Ministry of Commerce.

Major mining activities would generally be inappropriate in high-use areas and areas of high scenic, scientific, natural or cultural value, due to the potential effects of mining on those values. Effects created by prospecting, exploration and some mining may be acceptable, however, if impacts can be avoided, or mitigated to acceptable environmental levels. The environmental impact assessment report should demonstrate that the impacts of the mining and associated infrastructures will be minimal and that the land and water habitat values and recreational and historic values of the area will not be compromised.

Land status has a significant bearing on any application for a mining access arrangement.

Access arrangements should not be granted in areas of outstanding scenic, historic, cultural or scientific value or of high public use or potential high public use. The Crown Minerals Act allows for land to be closed to mining through an Order in Council, with the consent of the Minister of Energy.

Any access arrangements require approval of a work plan for each stage of the proposal. This approval depends on the selected sites and their cumulative impact.

The Crown Minerals Act allows the Minister to negotiate appropriate compensation under any access arrangement. Compensation will be based on the loss of natural features or attributes of value to conservation and the market value of the land.

Mining operations require regular monitoring while they are being worked. For effective monitoring, conditions must be relevant and clearly stated while liaison with other consent agencies ensures that conditions are consistent and enforceable. The mining operator should be aware that the Department will prosecute if conditions are breached.

On the completion of mining all land administered by the Department used in conjunction with the mining operation will be landscaped and revegetated and restored to a natural state.

Access for mining is governed by the Crown Minerals Act and the Minister of Conservation cannot be bound by this CMS in exercising his/her functions under that Act. The following provisions set out matters that the Minister should have regard to when considering any application for access.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS        December 1995
86

Objectives

1   To ensure that any mineral prospecting or exploration activity has no adverse 
    effects on the natural environment of the island nature reserves.

2   To ensure that any proposed mining activity is properly assessed, to demonstrate 
    that any potential adverse impacts on the significant natural values of the island 
    nature reserves can be avoided, remedied or mitigated.

3   To enable track maintenance to be carried out using suitable local materials where 
    appropriate.

Implementation

1   Access arrangements should only be granted for the island nature reserves, if it 
    can be shown that the proposed mining activity will have no adverse effects.

2   Use of local rock for track maintenance purposes has advantages in that it avoids 
    potential weedy infestation from other material sources outside the area. Careful 
    selection and supervision of extraction sites is required to ensure environmental 
    impacts are kept to a minimum.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
Glossary                                                              87

Advocacy         The collective term for work done to promote conservation to the 
                 public and outside agencies by the Department of Conservation, 
                 Conservation boards and the New Zealand Conservation Authority. 
                 Advocacy work includes taking part in resource management planning 
                 processes and using a range to inform and educate the 
                 public and visitors on conservation issues.

Amend            In relation to conservation management strategies, conservation 
                 management plans, freshwater fisheries management plans and 
                 sports fish and game management plans, means any change that does 
                 not affect the objective of the strategy or plan. Such a changes may 
                 not require a full public process. (Conservation Act 1987).

Archaeological site
                 Any place in New Zealand, that either was associated with human 
                 activity that occured before 1900; and is or may be able through 
                 investigation by archeological methods to provide evidence relating 
                 to the history of New Zealand. (Historic Places Act 1983).

Biodiversity/biological
Diversity         The variability among living organisms from all sources including 
                 terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological 
                 complexes of which they are part. This includes diversity within 
                 species and of ecosystems. (United Nations Convention on Biological 
                 Diversity 1992)

Biota            Life or living things.

Biotic           Relating to life or living things (Oxford dictionary)

Bryophytes       Liverworts, hornworts and mosses.

CITES            The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild 
                 fauna and flora applies to the import, export and re-export of 
                 specimens, parts and derivatives of plants and animals which are 
                 listed in the three appendices to the convention.

Concession       A lease, easement, licence or permit granted to enable the carrying 
                 on of a trade or business on areas managed by the department. 
                 (Concessions Policy)

                 Where concession is referred to in the Recreation and Tourism 
                 chapter it is defined as:

                 Predominant purpose of facilitating recreation or tourism use and 
                 enjoyment of natural or historic resources by the operators' clients 
                 and customers. (Concessions Policy)

Conservation     Means the preservation and protection of natural and historic 
                 resources for the purpose of maintaining the intrinsic values, 
                 providing for their appreciation and recreational enjoyment by the 
                 public, safeguarding the options for future generations. (Conservation 
                 Act 1987)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                  December 1995
88

Conservation Board
        There are 17 regional conservation boards, each comprising 12
appointed members. Their functions include overseeing the
preparation of the conservation management strategies and national
park management plans for their area, approval of conservation
management plans (eg Conservation Parks), advising the New
Zealand Conservation Authority or Director-General of the
Department of Conservation on regional conservation matters and
advising on new walkways in the region. (Conservation Act 1987
s6M)

Consultation
        A genuine invitation to give advice and genuine consideration of that
advice. To achieve consultation, sufficient information must be
supplied and sufficient tine allowed by the consulting party to the
consulted to enable it to tender helpful advice. It involves an
ongoing dialogue. (Adapted from McGrehan decision in Air New
Zealand -v- Wellington International Airport - CP403/91, 6 anuary
1992)

Department, the      Department of Conservation.

Ecology             The study of organisms in relation to one another and their
surroundings. (NZ Pocket Oxford Dictionary)

Ecosystem           A biological system comprising a community of living organisms and
their environment involved together in the process of living. There is
a continuous flow of energy and matter through the system. The
concept implies process and interaction. Ecosystems may be small
or large, simple or complex. They range in size from small freshwater
ponds or pools in the earth itself.

Endangered          A plant or animal in danger of extinction and whose survival is
unlikely if the casual factors continue. (Red Data Book of New
Zealand 1981)

Endemic             Refers to a species of plants and animals which are unique to New
Zealand or animals which may migrate but breed only in New
Zealand. (Red Data Book of New Zealand 1981)

Environment         Includes ecosystems and their constituent parts, all natural resources,
physical resources and the social, economic, aesthetic and cultural
conditions which affect the environment or which are affected by the
environment. (Environment Act 1986)

Extinct             Species no longer known to exist in the wild.

Fauna               Animal life in a given place or time (Collins Concise Dictionary(

Fishery             One or more species of freshwater fish that can be treated as a unit
for the purposes of conservation management. (Conservation Act
1987)

Flora               Plant life of a given place or time. (Collins Concise Dictionary)

Freshwater fish     Species of finfish (classes Agnatha and Osteichthyes) and shellfish
(classes Mollusca and Crustacea) that spend all or part of their life
histories in freshwater. (Conservation Act)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
General policy    A guide for decisions based on general approaches. General policy 
                 is used to mean a statement, directive or guide adopted by the 
                 Minister of Conservation, or the NZCA following a statutory process.

                 Statements of General Policy are prepared pursuant to the 
                 Conservation Act, National Parks Act, Reserves Act, Wildlife Act, 
                 Marine Reserves Act, Wild Animals control Act, Marine Mammals 
                 Protection Act and the New Zealand Walkways Act. Statement of 
                 General Policy are signed by the minister of Conservation (or by the 
                 NZCA in the case of National Parks) and are binding on the 
                 Department of Conservation. CMSs are required to implement 
                 statements of General Policy. (Management Planning Guidelines, 
                 Department of Conservation)

                 Sites and features needing protection because of their value to earth 
                 science.

Habitat          The environment in which a particular species of a groups of species 
                 lives. It includes the physical and biotic characteristics that are 
                 relevant to the species concerned. For example, the habitat of the 
                 blue duck consists of swift water with an abundance of freshwater 
                 insects.

Historic place   Any, land building or structure that forms part of the historical and 
                 cultural heritage of New Zealand and is within the territorial limits of 
                 New Zealand. Includes anything fixed to this land. (Historic Places 
                 Act 1993)

ICOMOS           International Commission on Monuments and Sites; this is the leading 
                 international organisation responsible for developing principles and 
                 processes for historic conservation. The ICOMOS New Zealand 
                 Charter was produced in 1993 to guide historic conservation in this 
                 country. It is anticipated that the Department of conservation will 
                 adopt this Charter.

Implementation provisions
                 Specific statements on how objectives are to be achieved. These 
                 may include criteria for assessment. (Management Planning 
                 Guidelines, Department of Conservation)

Indeterminate   Species known to be extinct, endangered, vulnerable or rare but 
                 where there is not enough information to say which of the four 
                 categories is appropriate.

Indigenous species
                 Species of genetic variants of plants and animals found naturally in 
                 New Zealand and its territorial waters, including migrant species 
                 visiting New Zealand on a regular or irregular basis.

Integrated management
                 The management of activities, existing or potential, in a manner 
                 which ensures that each is in harmony with the other and that 
                 priorities are clear.

IUCN             International Union of Nature and Natural Resources. The World 
                 Conservation Union founded to influence, encourage and assist 
                 societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity 
                 of nature and to ensure any use of natural resources is equitable and 
                 ecologically sustainable.

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS                                         December 1995
90

Interpretation
Conveying information about the origin, meaning or values of national 
or cultural heritage via live, interactive or static media. Occurs in the 
vicinity of the subject and is designed to stimulate visitor interest, 
increase understanding and promote support for conservation.

Invertebrate
Animal lacking a bone (Collins Concise Dictionary).

Iwi
Tribe, people.

Kaitiaki
Guardian

Land administered by 
the Department

All land held, managed or administered under theConservation Act 
and other acts administered by the Department (refer first schedule 
of the Conservation Act 1987)

Landscape
The landscape is a result of natural and cultural processes.

Landscape character
The visual expression of the elements which comprise the landscape 
and give it identity and distinctiveness.

Landscape feature
A clearly distinct and spatially restricted piece of landscape, normally 
experienced from beyond its boundaries.

Lease

An agreement which gives the which gives the lessee the right to 
exclusive use of the land with the intention of conferring an interest 
in land as opposed to give a personal privilege.

A lease of lands managed by the Department is appropriate only 
when:

a) It is essential to grant the legal right of exclusive use of land, (eg, 
as the site for a building); and

b) It is intended to grant an interest in the land and not just a 
personal privilege to use the land.

Leases may be associated with easements (eg, to cover access to the 
lease area). (Concessions Policy 1994)

Licence

A permission given by one person to another allowing the other to do 
some act which would otherwise be unlawful.

A licence (or permit) is appropriate where:

a) the concessionaire does not require the right of exclusive 
possession of part or all the land for a trade or business; or

b) The Department intends to grant a personal privilege; and

c) May include building sites within the area.

Locally endemic
Species or variety of plants and animals with distribution naturally 
restricted to a particular region or location.

MARPOL
International Convention for the prevention of pollution from ships, 
1973. (The "MARPOL" Convention). (A guideline of New Zealand's 
International obligations affecting  the coastal environment, 
Department of Conservation)

Mahika kai
Traditional food gathering area.

Draft : Subantarctic islands CMS                                         December 1995
Management planning 
The process of setting and confirming objective for the management 
of natural and historic resources, and recreation, tourism and other 
conservation purposes, and specifying the actions and resources 
necessary to achieve those objectives. (Management Planning 
guidelines, Department of Conservation).

Mineral

When used with respect to mining legislation this term includes 
naturally occurring inorganic substances beneath or at the surface of 
the Earth, metallic and non-metallic minerals, fossil fuels, precious 
stones, industrial rocks and building stones. (Resource Management 
Act 1991)

Monitoring

Repeated surveys by standard or directly comparable network at 
identical or comparable places.

Natural and physical 
resources

Includes land, water, air, soil, minerals and energy, all forms of plants 
and animals and all structures. (Resource Management Act 1991)

Natural character

The expression of the relationship between elements which are a 
result of natural processes.

Natural landscape

Landscape not defined or influenced by humans and based in 
ecosystem, geological/physiographic features, ephemeral 
characteristics, climate etc.

Natural resources

Include plants and animals and their habitats, landscape and 
landforms, geological features, and systems of interaction living 
organisms, and their environment. (Conservation Act 1987)

Nature conservation

The preservation and protection of the natural resources of New 
Zealand having regard to their intrinsic values and having special 
regard to indigenous flora and fauna, natural ecosystems and 
landscape.

New Zealand Conservation 
Authority

A national body of 12 appointed members formed in 1990. It took 
over the functions of several non-government organisations such as 
the former National Parks and Reserves Authority, Nature 
Conservation Council and New Zealand Walkways Commission. Its 
statutory functions include approving general policy, conservation 
management strategies, plans and national park management plans; 
advising the Minister of Conservation; reviewing and reporting on 
DOC's management and budget priorities. It also considers proposed 
changes to land classification or status for areas of national and 
international importance eg, creation of national parks. (Conservation 
Act 1987 s6A).

Objective

Statements of intended results. These can be broad or narrow in 
scope and should be accompanied by provisions of implementation. 
(Management Planning Guidelines, Department of Conservation)

Permit

A written order giving permission to act, especially for entry into a 
place. (Concessions Policy 1994)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
92
Protection
In relation to are resource, means its maintenance, as far as is 
practicable, in its current state but includes restoration to some 
former state and augmentation, enhancement or expansion.

Rare
Species with small world populations that are not at present 
endangered or vulnerable but are at risk. (Setting priorities for the 
Conservation of New Zealand’s Threatened Plants and Animals, 
Department of Conservation)

Research
Systematic investigation, analysis and interpretation of information.

Restoration/rehabilitation
Means returning a place as nearly as possible to a known earlier state 
by reassembly, reinstatement and/or the removal of extraneous 
additions. (ICOMOS 1993)

Review
In relation to cms's and management plans means to reconsider all 
objectives and policies of those parts under review and following a 
process of public comment to approve a new strategy or plan, having 
regard to increased knowledge or changed circumstances. 
(Conservation Act 1987)

Runaka
Assembly, council.

Species recovery plan
A plan of action intended to halt the decline of a threatened species 
and increase its population.

Survey
Single measurements and assessment of condition at a defined place 
in defined time span.

Sustainability, ecological
The use of the components of an ecosystem in ways that allow for 
the perpetuation of the character and natural processes of that 
ecosystem.

Sustainable management
Managing the use, development and protection of natural and 
physical resources in a way or at a rate, which enables people and 
communities to provide for their social, economic and cultural well-
being and for their health and safety while:
a) sustaining the potential of natural and physical resources 
(excluding mineral) to meet the reasonably foreseeable needs of 
future generations;

b) safe-guarding the life-supporting capacity of air, water, soil and 
ecosystems, and

c) avoiding, remedying, or initiating any adverse effects of activities 
on the environment.
(Resource Management Act 1991)

In practice sustainable management means; not wasting resources, 
taking care of land, water and air, looking at the needs of future 
generations, avoiding or fixing any harmful effects, considering the 
long-term impacts of our decisions.

Taking
In relation to plants this includes breaking, cutting, destroying, 
digging up, gathering, plucking, pulling up and removing of the plant. 
In relation to fish it means fishing. (Conservation Act 1987)

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS
December 1995
Threatened, (species)     A term used to mean vulnerable or more loosely used to include rare,
                           vulnerable and endangered species.

Urupa                      Cemetery, burial ground.

Vulnerable                 A plant or animal believed likely to move into the endangered
                           category in the near future if the casual factors continue. Red Data
                           Book of New Zealand 1981)

Wetland                    Permanent or intermittently wet land , shallow water and land-water
                           margins. Wetlands may be fresh, brackish or saline, and are
                           characterised in their natural state by plants or animals that area
                           adapted to living in wet conditions. They include swamps, bogs,
                           estuaries, braided rivers, and lake margins.

●                          Wild animal              Deer, chamois, thar, wallaby, possum, goats and pigs that are living
                                                   in a wild state. Except for deer kept in captivity for farming, does
                                                   not include animlas kept in captivity or rats, mice, rabbits, stoats,
                                                   ferrets or weasels. Refer to Act for legal definition.

●

Draft : Subantarctic Islands CMS         December 1995
Index

-A-

Adams 6, 13, 17, 47
Adams Island 13, 17, 47
advocacy 53, 87
aircraft 8, 42, 70, 80, 82
animal control 22, 24, 33
animal pests 32, 38
Antipodes Island 7, 9, 11, 13, 45, 53, 59, 
68, 69, 72
archaeological 23, 24, 57-59, 61, 62, 87
Auckland Island 3, 9, 11-13, 24, 30, 33, 
35, 37, 39, 40, 45, 47, 48, 52, 53, 60, 
67, 68, 70-72, 78
Auckland Island teal 30, 47
Auckland Islands 8, 1, 3, 5, 7-17, 19, 24, 
25, 31, 35, 37, 39-41, 43-47, 61, 69, 
76
automatic weather station 68, 69

-B-

Beeman Point 4, 73, 78
biodiversity 26, 29, 87
Biological diversity 26, 29, 32, 46, 87
Biosecurity Act 33, 39
Bounty Island 17
Bounty Islands 3, 8, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9-11, 
13, 14, 19, 33, 67, 72
Bouvetoya 3
Building Act 26
by-catch 53

-C-

Campbell Island 8, 1, 3-5, 7, 9-15, 17, 30, 
32-34, 36, 37, 39-41, 47, 48, 52-54, 
58, 59, 62, 67-73, 76-78, 80, 83, 84
Campbell Island teal 17, 30, 47, 48
Campbell Islands 3, 5, 7, 9-11, 13, 14, 19, 
37, 44, 48, 60, 68, 72, 73
Campbell Plateau 3
cats 9, 11, 19, 33, 35, 37, 47, 48, 53
Cattle 11, 13, 33, 34, 53
Chatham Island 48
Chatham Islands 3, 11, 16, 48
CITES 27, 87
Climate 3, 5, 6, 9, 35, 42, 53, 58, 91
Col-Lyal Saddle 78
Commercial 11, 16, 43, 45, 50, 55, 63, 
70, 74, 76, 83
commercial use 55
communications 84
compliance 73
concessionaires 53, 60, 74
concessions 25, 74, 87, 90, 91

Conservation Act 22, 24, 25, 87-92
Conservation Authority 3, 22, 25, 45, 87, 
88, 91
Conservation Board 3-5, 25, 88
conservation management plans 87, 88
Convention on Biological Diversity 26, 29, 
46, 87
Crown Minerals Act 25, 85
cultural 27, 50, 55, 57, 60, 61, 73, 84, 
85, 88-90, 92

-D-

Dent Island 9, 47, 48
Department of Conservation 1, 3-5, 1, 2, 
15, 22, 24-26, 52, 82, 87-92
Disappointment 6, 13, 47
Disappointment Island 13, 47
disposal 19, 26, 42, 68, 79
dogs 35, 77
duck 17, 89

-E-

ecological management 7
ecology 14, 37, 45, 50, 52, 53, 88
endangered species 27, 49, 87, 93
endemic 5-10
83, 92
flora 5, 10, 13, 14, 17, 19, 23, 35, 70, 
84, 87, 88, 91                                  leases 26, 90
French Blue Rabbits 34                          liaison 34, 46, 60, 74, 85
freshwater 2, 9, 24, 47, 55, 87-89              licences 26
                                                    litter 44
                        -G-
                                                    -M-
General Policy 1, 25, 89, 91                    Macquarie Island 1, 3, 5, 8, 15, 17, 19
genetic diversity 29                            Madrid Protocol 27
geological 17, 23, 43, 91                       mana 16
geology 14                                      management plan 3, 1, 14, 40, 67
Glossary 8, 43, 87                              management priorities 1, 47
Goats 11, 24, 33, 35, 53, 93                    Maori 7, 6, 11, 12, 16, 25, 55, 58-60, 62, 
Gondwana 3                                          84
guidelines 15, 36, 49, 68, 73-76, 89, 91        marine 3, 7, 8, 1-3, 10, 11, 16, 17, 
                                                    20-27, 29, 30, 43-47, 50, 51, 53, 55, 
                       -H-                          65, 74, 76, 87, 89
                                                    marine biota 3, 10
habitat 3, 7, 17, 20, 22, 24, 29, 34, 39,       marine ecosystems 3, 7, 2, 11, 29, 30, 
43, 47, 48, 65, 85, 89                             43-46
Hardwicke Settlement 13, 59, 60, 71, 73         marine environment 20, 26, 29, 30, 43, 46
helicopter 35, 70, 80, 84                       marine mammals 3, 7, 10, 11, 17, 21, 22, 
historic conservation 57, 89                       24, 29, 43, 44, 46, 47, 50, 51, 53, 55, 
historic place 57, 59, 60, 62, 89                  65, 76, 89
Historic Places Act 24, 25, 57, 61, 62, 87,     Marine Mammals Protection Act 22, 24, 
89                                                  43, 50, 55, 89
historic resource 7, 1, 57, 62                  Marine Reserves Act 22, 43, 46, 89
hut 12, 13, 59, 60, 65, 68                      Maritime Antarctic Zone 3
                                                    MARPOL 26, 27, 43, 90
                        -I-                         media 40, 41, 63, 64, 90
                                                    mice 7, 33-37, 47, 53, 72, 93
ICOMOS 60, 62, 89, 92                           military use 82
insects 7, 19, 89                               mineral 3, 19, 85, 86, 91, 92
international significance 3, 23, 58, 65        minerals 25, 85, 91
interpretation 21, 58, 60, 62-64, 67, 74,      mining 8, 83, 85, 86, 91
90, 92                                          Minister of Conservation 23, 25, 26, 30, 
introduced species 53                              42, 85, 89, 91
inventory 45, 53, 55, 60, 61                    Ministry for the Environment 30
Invertebrates 6, 10, 36                         Ministry of Commerce 85
IUCN 48, 67, 89                                 Ministry of Defence 81
iwi 16, 25, 55, 60, 62, 90                      Ministry of Transport 46
                                                    monitor 14, 32, 41, 
43, 47, 49, 58, 68, 69, 73, 83             sign 12, 34, 62
New Zealand Coastal Policy 26          signs 78
New Zealand Defence Force 81, 82        sitka spruce 40
Ngati Mutunga 11, 16, 25, 60            Snares Island 41, 48, 59
Norway rats 7, 9, 33, 37                Snares Islands 8, 1, 9-11, 14, 17, 33, 36,
                                         40, 45, 48, 68, 70
                -O-                      Southern Ocean 3, 8, 1, 3, 5, 8-11, 17,
                                         19, 21, 25, 30, 43, 46, 52, 53, 64, 69,
Oclandius 6, 7                           70
oil 10, 19, 26, 43, 44, 46, 83           Southland Museum and Art Gallery 16, 63,
oil spill 26, 43                         64
Olearia 39-41                            species 7, 8, 1, 2, 5-11, 17, 20-22, 24,
operational plans 2, 30                  26, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35-37, 39-41,
                                         43, 44, 45-49, 51-56, 65, 68, 70, 76,
                -P-                      84, 87-90, 92, 93
pest 7, 2, 15, 19, 21, 29, 30, 32, 33, 38,Stewart Island 8, 9, 16, 36, 40, 70
       39, 77                                structures 26, 45, 57, 58, 61, 62, 78, 83,
pest control 2, 29                       84, 91
pest quarantine 30, 38                  survey 7, 11, 14, 21, 30, 52-54, 92
petrel 35, 37, 53                        
pigs 9, 11, 24, 33, 35, 37, 53, 93       -T-
plant pest control 29                   
Pleurophyllum 5, 6, 17, 48, 53           taking 7, 21, 24, 50, 55, 56, 87, 92
policies 3, 1, 2, 21-23, 25, 31, 58, 65, taonga 25, 62
       92                                    Te Waipounamu 16
pollution 26, 27, 43, 44, 74, 90         telecommunication 8, 83, 84
Port Pegasus 36                          Terra Cove 59
Port Ross 11, 16, 35, 39, 40, 47, 52, 60,threatened species 8, 30, 47, 49, 51, 54,
       68, 71, 76                            92
public awareness 2, 16, 46, 63, 64       tourism 3, 2, 15, 16, 19, 21, 22, 40, 53,
public use 85                            63, 65-68, 70-72, 74, 76, 83, 87, 91
radio 14, 84                             tourist 15, 40, 53, 66-73, 78
Rakiura 16                               tracks 65, 72, 78
rat 36, 37, 48                           translocation 32, 48, 49
rata 6, 12, 13, 17, 40                   Treaty of Waitangi 16, 25
recovery 2, 24, 30, 34, 47, 49, 50, 92   
recreation 22, 23, 87, 91                -V-
regulations 24, 26, 27, 42, 50, 55, 76   
Reserves Act 3, 1, 15; 17, 22-25, 33, 42,vessels 26, 
wild animals 24, 89
wildlife 3, 8, 1, 2, 5, 9, 14-17, 21-24, 26, 
29, 33, 43, 45-47, 55, 57, 63, 65, 68, 
70, 71-73, 75, 78, 80, 89
Wildlife Act 22, 23, 26, 33, 43, 46, 47, 
55, 89
wildlife viewing 16

Draft : Subhashethic le[?]nds CMS 
December 1995
