ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                  XX ATCM/INF 39
                                                  April, 1996
                                                  Original: English

TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN ANTARCTICA
OPERATIONAL CONCERNS

(Agenda item 9)

(Submitted by COMNAP)
Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica
Operational Concerns
An Information Paper submitted to XX ATCM for Agenda Topic 9
by COMNAP

1 April 1996

At the COMNAP annual meeting in 1995, members discussed several issues of importance to
national programs as well as to non-governmental operators and individuals operating in or
visiting Antarctica. These issues include adequacy of medial facilities and response to injury or
illness, safety procedures when taking passengers ashore, communications with national
operators and contingency planning.

The remoteness of Antarctica and large distances between stations create an operating
environment where co-operation between all operators (government and non-government) is
essential for response to emergencies.

ADEQUACY OF MEDICAL FACILITIES

Recent experiences discussed by the national operators indicate that there are ships and yachts
operating in Antarctica with inadequate medical facilities. This situation, when coupled with
insufficient attention to minimum standards of health and fitness, has led to tour operators
transferring ill and injured individuals to national stations for care. In some cases, due to the
financial impact of interrupting or abandoning a cruise, and the limited medical facilities and
supplies at most research stations, individuals have been evacuated by national operators. There
are also situations where medical staff are being asked to respond to medical situations beyond
what they have been equipped for by the national programs, and beyond their insurance cover.

Medical evacuation utilizes resources which have been allocated to other logistics or science
support needs, disrupting the management of these resources and impacting support for science.

SAFETY

National programs managers and their staff have been involved in or have contact with various
official observer procedures in conjunction with the Antarctic tourism industry. They have also
accumulated direct knowledge of tourism operations at various sites and stations.

Some tour operators have inadequate safety backup in aspects that could potentially result in risk
to passengers' lives and calls for assistance from other operators. These include lack of survival
equipment in zodiacs and helicopters; inadequate safety and contingency information provided to
passengers; failure to provide backup for ship-based helicopter operations; inadequate clothing

1
for conditions ashore and for contingencies; and concerns about numbers, ability, training and 
knowledge of zodiac drivers and guides (e.g., boat handling, first aid, snowcraft).

CONTINGENCY PLANNING FOR MAJOR MISHAPS

During the last decade, the level of non-governmental activity has markedly increased from 2 
tour ships in 1986 to 15 operating today. The total number of tourists has increased from 
approximately two to three thousand to more than 8000 in 1996 (compared with approximately 
3850 national program personnel). This has been accompanied with an increase in the average 
number of passengers per vessel with a maximum of 500. Privately owned yachts are not 
included in these statistics.

Of concern to COMNAP is the very limited response capability of national operators in the event 
of a major casualty or sinking of a ship. Generally research stations do not have boating facilities 
to mount or assist with an effective rescue operation. Where there are small craft, they are 
generally restricted, for safety reasons, to a few kilometers from shore. Most research stations 
would have difficulty offering adequate shelter or medical support for large numbers of 
survivors, and rescue personnel could be placed at risk to their own safety.

The national operators are generally and increasingly concerned about the risk of a tourism 
related major mishap. To minimize the risk consideration should be given to standards for ship 
classification, for qualification and training of ships officers and crew, for preparedness of 
passengers, equipment, etc. Most importantly, there must be contingency planning.

COMMUNICATION WITH NATIONAL OPERATORS

Both national program operators and tour operators have shown a willingness to render 
assistance to other operators in the case of an emergency. The remoteness and sparsity of 
habitation of the Antarctic calls for good communications for effective response. This applies 
both to the development and communication of contingency plans, and the provision of 
information on visit schedules.

National program operators are often a contact point for tour operators planning site visits. Some 
national operators put representatives on board tour ships and are called on to report to their 
governments on the level of compliance with Antarctic Treaty requirements.

In the context of the above responsibilities, a single format for prior notifications and post visit 
reporting would be beneficial. This would limit the burden of reporting obligations while 
assuring the essential information is uniformly reported and available for easy collection and 
analysis.

2
CONCLUSION

This paper, based on the discussions and information shared at the 1995 COMNAP meeting, has outlined some operational problems and concerns related to tourism and non-governmental activities, their actual and potential impact on Government science operations and the national programs' capabilities to provide assistance. The sheer size of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean at 14 million and 36 million square kilometers respectively, requires a high degree of self sufficiency and good contingency planning, as well as a recognition of the responsibilities associated with the provision of support under the principles of humanitarian aid and environmental protection.

COMNAP puts these issues to the Consultative Parties for consideration of a way forward. It is suggested this include an examination of the obligations contained in Article 15 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and in Article 10 of its Annex IV. In particular, the forthcoming need (once the Protocol is ratified) to provide permits for all Antarctic operators would allow consideration of how key features of medical provision, safety and contingency planning are intended to be met before permit for Antarctic activity is issued.

The issues also highlight the value of adoption of a single format, based on Attachment A to ATCM Recommendation XVIII and on Resolution 3 (1995), for use by tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic.

 
                                                                                           3
