X UTRECHT X
294.476 - 102.376


ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 81
April, 1996
Original: English


LIABILITY ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

(Agenda item 6b)

(Submitted by Germany)
504-390.20 SB 5

Information Paper

(submitted by Germany)

Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
(No. 6 b of the preliminary agenda)

Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty obliges the
Parties to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from
activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol.

The XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (7-18 October 1991 in Bonn) discussed
the need for early consideration of an Annex on Liability and considered that the XVIIth
ATCM should decide when and how this matter should be addressed (Final Report of the
XVIth ATCM (33).

The XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (11-20 November 1992 in Venice)
agreed to convene a meeting of legal experts under German chairmanship.

The German Government designated Prof. Dr. Rüdiger Wolfrum, Director of the Max-
Planck-Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law in Heidelberg, as
chairman of this meeting and entrusted him with the legal preparation for it.

After adequate preparation through diplomatic channels a first meeting of legal experts took
place form 18-20 November 1993 in Heidelberg.

The XIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (8-19 May 1995, Seoul) extended, in
accordance with Recommendation IV-24, the mandate of the Meeting of Legal Experts. It
agreed to convene another legal experts meeting before the XXth Consultative Meeting and
a further legal experts meeting at the XXth Meeting. The first one took place from
27-30 November 1995 in Brussels/Belgium. The second one is scheduled for 29 April -
3 May 1996 in Utrecht.

In January 1996 the German Foreign Office transmitted the transcripts of Prof. Wolfrum’s
summary of the Meeting in Brussels to the Parties of the Antarctic Treaty (see Annex 1). In
February 1996 the German Foreign Office transmitted to the Parties the Chairman’s Fifth
Offering based on the suggestions of the previous meetings (see Annex 2).
Annex 1

PROF. DR. RÜDIGER WOLFRUM
DIREKTOR AM MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT
FÜR AUSLÄNDISCHES ÖFFENTLICHES RECHT
UND VÖLKERRECHT

D-69120 HEIDELBERG
BERLINER STRASSE 48
TELEFON 06221/482-1
Durchwahl 06221/482 255/256
TELEFAX 06221/482288

January 17, 1996

Dear Colleagues,

Enclosed you find the summary on the Meeting of Legal Experts (27 to 30 November 1995).
As indicated in the summary, I am preparing a Fifth Offering which is meant to be sent to you
by 15 February. May I encourage you to send me your suggestions which I would include into 
the Fifth Offering.

With all my best regards for a happy and successful 1996.

Yours sincerely,

Rüdiger Wolfrum

Encl.
Summary on the Meeting of Legal Experts

1. The Working Group of Legal Experts met from 27 to 30 November 1995 in Palais Egmont, Brussels. The summary, which I promised to circulate as usual, is based upon the oral summing up.

2. The working method of the meeting of Legal Experts differed significantly from the previous ones. Those in Heidelberg and in Kyoto discussed liability for environmental damage on the basis of the Chairman's Offerings. In Seoul small groups drafted texts which were included into the Fourth Offering whereas at Brussels delegations submitted drafts for various articles. These drafts were one essential structural element of the discussions.

3. The Meeting agreed to leave aside article 1 of the Fourth Offering and to start with a discussion on the scope of the future Annex (article 2). Article 1 was thought by some to be unnecessary and by some to be over-complicated. It was the common feeling that it would only be possible to decide on a preamble or article 1 after the whole picture of the Annex had emerged. It is my assessment of the Legal Working Group's meeting at Brussels that new problems concerning the Annex on liability for environmental damage have surfaced and the Legal Working Group will have to deal with these issues before returning to article 1.

4. As to article 2, the Fourth Offering provided for two different alternatives for paragraph 1 and I had received, as you can see from the Offering, further suggestions in writing. At the Brussels meeting two papers were tabled, papers No. 1 and 2. Paper No. 1 deals with
alternative B and paper No. 2 with alternative A. Further, paper No. 11 is 
relevant for this issue. Paper No. 11 (President of CCAMLR) deals with 
the relationship of a future Liability Annex with CCAMLR. Paper No. 9 
(Netherlands) was designed to provide a compromise formula and, finally, 
paper No. 14 was an attempt to amalgamate the two approaches.

Summarizing the discussion perhaps in a nutshell, it is my view that we 
should try to work in the future on the basis of paper No. 14 which 
received favourable comments. In the next Offering I will therefore not 
provide two different alternatives, but rather one based upon paper 14. 
This one will need further consideration.

However, as far as the substance of this article is concerned, The Legal 
Working Group seemed to have found common ground. It was 
emphasized that the Liability Annex should not infringe upon the 
competences of either the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources or the other bodies governing the other 
agreements such as the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Seals or the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling.

Everything which comes under the mandate of these Commissions or is 
governed by the respective Conventions, and - I would like to highlight - 
this does not only embrace harvesting but also conservation measures, 
will not come under the scope of the Liability Annex. However, this does 
not preclude the application of this Annex to environmental damage 
caused in connection with acts or events covered by those Conventions if 
such damage itself does not come under the scope of these Conventions.

5. Article 3 deals with definitions and the definition of the notion of 
damage is, as indicated earlier, the most crucial one. 
                                                                                          2
The Fourth Offering provided two definitions for the notion of damage,
the one dealing with damage to the Antarctic environment including
dependent and associated ecosystems, the other one with environmental
damage and damage to life, health, property, etc. caused by environmental
damage. Although the position of the delegations favouring the one or the
other solution does not have changed, there was no objection in the Legal
Working Group that - as a matter of priority - it should concentrate on
regulating the liability for environmental damage.

As far as the notion of damage is concerned, one fundamental problem
exists, namely whether damage should be defined in connection with the
environmental impact assessment procedure or not. That was one major
issue and the Legal Working Group spent a considerable time discussing
it.

Apart from that, there was a further one. Some members indicated that
they would prefer to have the words "and the intrinsic value of Antarctica
including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its value as an area for
the conduct of scientific research" deleted. In particular the first two of
the three sets were favoured for deletion, but also the third one. Others
objected pointing out that these words were enshrined in the Protocol
and that deleting them might be taken as an attempt to change its
standards. This needs further deliberation. In the Fifth Offering I will put
the words "and the intrinsic value of Antarctica including its wilderness
and aesthethic values" into brackets.

As far as the definition of damage and its relation to the environmental
impact assessment procedure is concerned, the following objections were
                                                   3
raised: It was said that apart from the comprehensive environmental 
impact assessment procedure, the environmental impact assessment 
procedure was of a national nature and hence it was not possible to use 
this as a threshold for the definition of damage. Therefore, several 
delegations made the suggestion to introduce a clause, providing for a so-
called "objection procedure" or "notification procedure", through which 
"other consultative parties" or "the consultative parties" would have the 
right to reassess the result of the comprehensive environmental evaluation 
procedure. In this respect attention is to be drawn to paper No. 3 and 
paper No. 7 (both from the Netherlands). Reference is also to be made to 
paper No. 8 (New Zealand and Sweden) which did not refer to an 
objection procedure, but rather referred to "negative comments", to paper 
No. 12 (U.K. and U.S.), to paper No. 15 (Brazil), and to paper No. 16 
(Chairman).

The latter, No. 16, had the following features: First of all, it identified 
damage as    

"any impact on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems" and put the words "intrinsic value of Antarctica including its 
wilderness and its aesthetic values" into brackets, as suggested by some 
delegations. However, it left outside of the brackets the words "its value 
as an area for the conduct of scientific research" for the reason that 
scientific research was one of the privileged activities under the Protocol, 
an aspect which was stressed quite frequently during the deliberations. In 
qualifying the impact as damage two approaches were offered: one used 
the words "is of a more than minor or transitory nature", the other referred 
to "results in significant and lasting harm", as suggested by the 
Netherlands. In a second paragraph, this paper made a reference not only 
to the comprehensive environmental evaluation, but also to the 
4
environmental impact assessment procedure while referring to article 8 of 
the Protocol to the Annex I. It ruled that everything which was judged 
acceptable within these procedures would not be regarded as damage. In 
a third paragraph the paper dealt with those impacts "exceeding the ones 
foreseen in the Environmental Impact Assessment Procedure". Those 
were to be assessed by an "international expert body".

This paper received different reactions. Some regarded it as the right step 
forward, others did not. In particular it was felt that paragraph 2 did not 
fully include what had been suggested in the papers by the Netherlands' or 
New Zealand and Swedish delegations. I promised that in the next 
Offering I would include as an alternative these papers, including the 
U.S./U.K. one.

As far as paragraph 3 was concerned, it was regarded as too narrow in its 
approach since it only referred to "impacts exceeding the ones foreseen" 
and the creation of another expert body was looked upon critically. It was 
argued that such a role could be appropriately played by the Committee 
for the Protection of the Environment (CEP). This will be taken into 
consideration when drafting the Fifth Offering.

As far as article 3 is concerned, paper No. 22 (U.K.) has also to be taken 
into consideration. It emphasizes that the notion of damage does not 
include consequential harm which could not have been reasonably 
foreseen. The necessity of a causal link between an activity and the 
damage needs to be spelled out, probably in article 3. However, an 
appropriate definition of what is a causal link still has to be developed. It 
is doubtful whether the foreseeability is the right criterium.

                                                           5
Finally, paper No. 17 should be taken into consideration, submitted by Australia. It deals with the origins of the words "minor and transitory".

6. The next aspect on definitions was the notion of "operator". In this respect, two papers, No. 5 (Netherlands) and No. 6 (U.K) were submitted. Both papers were discussed in quite some detail. One member wanted to have the notion of "operation and control" included, others wanted to make sure that the relationship of defining the term "operator" with residual State liability was not overlooked. It was emphasized that by phrasing the notion of operator one should be very careful not to give incentives for flagging out. It was further argued that in practice it was nearly impossible to control activities of citizens which were not living within one's own territory and therefore one should not ask the impossible of States Parties. This has to be taken into consideration in the Fifth Offering and one should consider - and this again was advocated by some delegations - if one could not find a much easier, less complicated definition of the term operator than the one used in the Fourth Offering or in the two papers referred to.

7. The Protocoll as well as the Fourth Offering very often uses the term "reasonable" without properly defining it. It was pointed out by several delegations that this was a significant lacuna. First attempts in this regard were made by paper No. 10 (France) and paper No. 13 (U.S.). It is perhaps possible to have these papers combined and one should consider where to place the respective definition.

8. As far as article 4 is concerned, the Fourth Offering contained two alternatives concerning articles 4 and 5 paragraph 1. One alternative, the outcome of a small working group in Seoul, described the obligations of
an operator with respect to the first reaction towards an incident whereas 
the other alternative suggested to delete article 4 completely and rather 
have parts of it reflected in article 5 paragraph 1. This was discussed quite 
intensively. The reason for the controversy is the following. It is not 
evident for everyone why a Liability Annex should contain an obligation 
of operators to take response action. It is obviously necessary to further 
assess and to clarify the relationship between response action and 
compensation. The papers No. 18 (France) and 19 (Italy) are an attempt 
to clarify this point. They should be reflected in the Fifth Offering and further discussed.

However, there is another problem involved, namely, which response 
actions may be undertaken without further damaging the Antarctic 
environment? The same question arises with respect to remedial 
measures. This is basically an issue which needs further discussion from 
scientists. The scientists and managers of scientific research in Antarctica 
who were present have submitted a paper in this respect which will be 
included into the Fifth Offering.

Theoretically there are a couple of ways how to establish the link between 
scientific expertise and regulations needed in this respect. One could 
envisage referring to guidelines to be accepted by the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings upon scientific advice. Under such an approach it 
would be up to the Consultative Meetings to decide on the standards 
response actions or remedial measures have to meet. Another option 
would be involving scientists in the decision on concrete response actions. 
This may, however, cause delays where a quick reaction may be needed. 
As far as I understand the discussion so far, there is a certain tendency to 
involve scientists in the decision making process of the Antarctic Treaty 
                                                  7
Consultative Meeting concerning guidelines on appropriate response 
action or remedial measure. Only such approach will ensure that under the 
guise of response action or remedial measure nothing is done which is 
harmful to the environment.

9. As far as irreparable damage is concerned - article 5 paragraph 2 of the 
Fourth Offering - the dicussion was a brief one. As I see the discussion, 
so far, there is a general tendency to accept that a operator having 
caused irreparable damage will be held liable although it is impossible to 
calculate the compensation on the basis of response actions undertaken by 
another entity. However, in spite of this general tendency some problems 
need to be solved. Firstly, how does one calculate the compensation owed 
in these cases? Secondly, care is to be taken not to establish a punitive 
system or a system with punitive elements which would create 
constitutional problems for several member States. Thirdly, to provide for 
compensation for irreparable damage seems to be acceptable only if the 
Annex provides for limits. Fourthly, account has to be taken in this 
respect of the definition of the notion of damage. If a broad term is used, 
more cases of damage and thus of irreparable damage may come up. In 
such cases the question of limits is more relevant than in the case the 
Annex proceeds from a limited notion of damage.

The crucial issue in this respect is finding an appropriate decision-making 
process for deciding upon the amount of compensation owed. In this 
respect I would like to refer to paper No. 21 (Australia). Further, it should 
be borne in mind that this issue is closely connected with the Fund issue 
which the Legal Working Group had again no time to deal with. Apart 
from that the Legal Working Group had a fairly thorough discussion on 
the suggestion made by India reflected in the Fourth Offering. 
                                                               8
10. As far as exemptions (article 6) are concerned two divergent philosophies exist. One argued that liability was not tantamount with illegality. Hence, activities undertaken under exemption clauses of the other Annexes were perfectly legal, however, it they caused damage to the environment, the respective operator would be held liable. There was another opinion arguing if something was exempt from the scope of the Annexes (Annex II and the others), then this should not be covered by the Liability Annex.

It was not possible to find a solution at the Brussels meeting. It seems to be reasonable to first evaluate every single exemption. For that reason I have tabled paper No. 25. Apart from that, the suggestion was made orally that one should consider the following: Article 2 refers to "activities covered ...". Those activities which come under one or the other exemption might not be considered to be "covered" by the Protocol and its Annexes. Therefore we may not need any provision dealing with exemptions under the Annexes of the Protocol.

This, however, may raise another problem which deserves further consideration. Is mining "covered" by the Protocol since it is prohibited? It should be common understanding that mining activities would give rise to liability.

11. The Working Group discussed article 7 of the Fourth Offering on residual liablity of States Parties. Although this issue was discussed quite in detail in previous meetings, the Legal Working Group gave it a thorough discussion again. Many were in favour of returning, more or less, to the wording of CRAMRA, and in this respect the proposal No. 26
(U.S.) explains how this wording could look like. Apart from that, 
however, further suggestions were made in papers No. 23 (Netherlands) 
and No. 24 (Belgium).

One has to distinguish clearly between the following aspects: Firstly, 
liability of the State acting as an operator, secondly liability of an 
operator, thirdly liability of a State for not properly implementing the 
Protocol and its Annexes, implementing meaning to provide for the 
appropriate legislation and have it properly administered. In the case the 
legislation was not adequate or not properly administered, it was argued 
that this was in violation of the Protocol, and therefore could result in 
State liability. It was further argued that this already flowed from 
customary international law. Hence, all what was needed in a Liability 
Annex was to reconfirm the applicability of customary law. However, 
there was also the view put forward that the Liability Annex should create 
a new residual liability which would result in the State being liable for 
private operators' activities. This approach was discussed very 
controversially

12. Finally, the Legal Working Group had the first in-depth discussion on 
limits since the deliberations were started. There were some delegations 
who were in favour of limits. Asked how one should then cover the 
amount exceeding the limit, reference was made towards the Fund, which 
makes the Fund even more important.

There were other delegations arguing that response action, remedial 
measures and even compensation for irreparable damage already 
contained inherent limits in the reference that such action had to be 
"reasonable". The counter argument to that was that one should look into
State practice and should accept that there is an unlikeliness of States to 
subscribe to a regime providing for unlimited liability. At least it should 
be taken into account that conventions applying to the area under 
discussion provided for limits as far as liability is concerned.

● It seems mandatory to more closely look into these Conventions, in force 
or not in force. Those members of the Working Group particularly 
involved in the drafting of these conventions were called upon to provide 
the Working Group with the respective information, most favourably in 
writing.

13. The Summary certainly does not mention every single aspect, but I 
have taken very careful notes and therefore I hope I will be able to reflect 
the various initiatives, interests and arguments in the Fifth Offering.

Let me point out how I intend to proceed: As indicated earlier, I will draft 
a Fifth Offering based upon the Fourth Offering and the modifications 
suggested in Brussels. In this respect I am very grateful to you that you 
have produced so many papers which at the same time will make my task 
easier and much more difficult. I intend to send you the Fifth Offering 
over diplomatic channels as well as on a private basis by the mid of 
February, so that you have time enough to prepare for Utrecht. May I 
encourage everybody to file written remarks, as previously. If received 
before 15 of February, they will be properly included in the Fifth Offering.

● I have taken notice of the advice to draft the Fifth Offering differently, so 
as to make it more readable. I will put the footnotes at the end and will 
provide, as I did this time, also an Offering with explanations, so that you
have two copies, one which only has the text and the other one giving 
some guidance how the discussion has developed.
``` 

```
PROF. DR. RÜDIGER WOLFRUM
DIREKTOR AM MAX-PLANCK-INSTITUT
FÜR AUSLÄNDISCHES ÖFFENTLICHES RECHT
UND VÖLKERRECHT

D-69120 HEIDELBERG
BERLINER STRASSE 48
TELEFON 06221/482-1
Durchwahl 06221/482255/256
TELEFAX 06221/482288

February 19, 1996

Dear Colleagues,

Enclosed please find the text of the Fifth Offering, as promised. As recommended by you, I 
have made the attempt to restructure the text so that it is easier to read. You will find some 
explanations in the Notes, not, however, the usual description of how the respective draft 
provision was developed. I will send you a commented version in six weeks in which I will 
include, as previously, all suggestions received by then.

With all my best regards,

Yours sincerely,

Rü[?]iger Wolfrum

Encl.
Chairman's Fifth Offering

Annex on Environmental Liability

[Article 1] or [Preamble]
Purpose

Alternative A:
The purpose of this Annex is, consistent with the objective and
environmental principles of the Protocol, to promote the
prevention, minimization and reparation of damage to the
Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems,
and to provide for adequate compensation for damage [as well as
for costs of response action or remedial measures].

Alternative B:

Reaffirming the Parties' commitment to the comprehensive
protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and
associated ecosystems and the designation of Antarctica as a
natural reserve, devoted to peace and science, the Parties agree
that the purpose of this Annex is, consistent with environmental
principles of the Protocol, to promote the prevention,
minimization and reparation of damage to the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and to
provide for [adequate] compensation for damage.1

Article 2
Scope

(1) This Annex shall apply to damage arising from activities
taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the
Protocol).

(2) No responsibility is incurred under the present Annex from
damage arising from activities covered by the Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, including its
conservation measures, or the Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals, or the International Convention for the
Regulation of Whaling. This does not, however, preclude the
application of this Annex to damage caused by acts done in
connection with activities covered by those Conventions, but
which are not subject to regulation by those Conventions.

(3) Nothing shall be interpreted as derogating from rights and
obligations of Parties under the Convention on the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals and the International Convention
for the Regulation of Whaling or international instruments
concerning environmental protection applicable in the Antarctic
Treaty area.

1
Article 3
Definitions

For the purpose of this Annex,

(1) (a) "Damage"2 means any impact on the Antarctic environment 
and dependent and associated ecosystems [and the intrinsic value 
of Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values] and 
its value as an area for the conduct of scientific research,
caused by human conduct in Antarctica and is of a more than minor 
and transitory nature.3

(b) Damage does not include an impact, which was assessed in 
accordance with the procedure for Environmental Impact Assessment 
in article 8 of, or Annex I to, the Protocol and judged 
acceptable in accordance with such procedure.

(c) Any impact exceeding the one foreseen in the Environmental 
Impact Assessment procedure applied will be assessed by the 
Committee for Environmental Protection so as to determine whether 
such impact is to be considered a damage in the meaning of this 
Annex.

(d) Damage does not include consequential impacts which result 
from a remote causality.

(2) "Irreparable damage" means any impact in accordance with 
paragraph 1 when response action or remedial measure cannot be 
taken for one of the following reasons:
- response action or remedial measure is physically or 
technically not feasible;
- response action or remedial measure although theoretically 
being feasible would be economically unreasonable;
- response action or remedial measure might cause even greater 
damage.

(3) "Operator" means:

(a) Any State Party or national of a State Party or person which 
organizes or undertakes activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;
(b) any State or person (of whatever nationality) which organises 
expeditions in or proceeding from the territory of a State Party.

(c) "National" means a person with the nationality of a State 
Party.

(d) "Person" means any juridical or natural person.

(4) "Reasonable" as referred to in the definition of "response 
action" and "remedial measures" includes notions of risk to the 
environment, the rate of natural recovery of the environment, 
risk to human life and safety, technological feasibility and 
proportionality as far as the costs are concerned.4
2
(5) "Response action" means any [reasonable] measures taken to 
reduce or minimize or to prevent further damage.

(6) "Remedial measures" means any [reasonable] measures taken, 
or to be undertaken, to eliminate or mitigate damage.5


Article 46
Preparedness, Response Action and Remedial Measures

(1) Any operator undertaking or organising activities in 
Antarctica shall ensure preparedness, including training and 
contingency plans, to prevent, as far as possible, all kinds of 
foreseeable incidents.

(2) When an activity organised or undertaken by an operator 
results, or threatens to result, in damage to the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems that operator 
shall take all necessary and timely response action in accordance 
with its preparatory planning as referred to in paragraph 1 
above.7

(3) If damage has nevertheless occurred to the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, the operator 
shall undertake [reasonable] remedial measures after 
[consultation with the Committee on Environmental Protection.] 
[a respective decision has been taken by the ATCM upon 
recommendations of the Committee for Environmental Protection.]

(4) Where an operator does not take [reasonable] response action 
[or remedial measures as recommended in accordance with paragraph 
3 above] any State Party, without prejudice to article 15 of the 
Protocol, may take such response action [or remedial measure]. 
Other entities or persons may take such action [or measure] only 
after having been autorized accordingly by the State Party 
responsible for undertaking the procedure set out in Annex I of 
the Protocol for the respective activity.

Article 5
Liability

Alternative A:
(1) Operators shall be strictly liable for the reimbursement of 
the reasonable costs of [reasonable] response action and/or 
[reasonable] remedial measures undertaken in accordance with 
article 4.8

(2) Where the damage is attributable to more than one operator, 
the operators will be jointly [and severally] liable.

3
Alternative B 
(1) Operators shall be strictly liable for the reimbursement of 
the reasonable costs incurred by any State or persons authorized 
by it in taking:

(a) appropriate and reasonable measures to contain, minimize or 
clean up damage; and

(b) appropriate measures aimed at restoring damaged or destroyed 
components of the Antarctic environment, provided the measures 
are environmentally advisable and economically reasonable.

(2) If damage is attributable to more than one operator, the 
operators concerned shall be jointly and severally liable.

(3) The obligation to make reimbursement does not absolve Parties 
from their obligation under article 15 of the Protocol regarding 
the taking of prompt and effective response action [and Annex 
on response action and remedial measures].

Article 5bis
Irreparable Damage

(1) Without prejudice to the obligations set forth in article 4 
with regard to response action, the operator having caused 
irreparable environmental damage shall [be under an obligation 
to] provide compensation in the form of a lump sum payment to the 
Fund.

(2) The amount of such compensation shall be determined by taking 
into consideration the nature and and significance of the damage 
[including the loss of or impairment to potential future uses and 
impairment of Antarctica's aesthetic and wilderness values] [as 
well as all other circumstances of the action or omission that 
caused or contribut[ed] to cause of the damage.]

(3) With a view to facilitating the determination of the 
appropriate amount to be contributed, the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting may propose the adoption of guidelines to 
be developed by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

(4) When no contribution has been paid by the operator within six 
months after it has been decided by the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting that such obligation exists or the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties are not satisfied with the amount 
deposited into the Fund, consultations shall be undertaken with 
a view to agreeing upon the appropriate amount. [The necessary 
decisions will be taken by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting by consensus, the State or States concerned not 
participating in the vote.]

(5) If no agreement can be reached by the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting, the case may be submitted - [by any of] 
[by two or more of] its members - to abritration pursuant to the 
schedule of the Protocol. [The arbitration shall take into 
4
account experts' advice in the determination of the amount to be
contributed to the Fund].

                                  Article 6
                                  Exemptions10

(1) An operator will not be liable pursuant to article 5 above
if he proves that the damage was caused by an activity which was
governed by article 12 of Annex III, article 3 or 7 of Annex IV
or article 11 of Annex V.

An operator shall further not be liable pursuant to article 5 if
he proves that the damage has been caused directly by, and to the
extent that it has been directly caused by:

        (a) an act necessary for the safety of human life; or

        (b) [an irresistible and unforseeable natural event] an event
constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural
disaster [of an exceptional character] [which could not have been
reasonably foreseen] [generally or in the particular case]
provided that all reasonable safety measures have been taken to
prevent the damage.

        (c) armed conflict [to which it is not a party] should it occur
notwithstanding to Antarctic Treaty, or an act of terrorism
directed against the activities of the operator against which no
reasonable measures could have been effective.

(2) If an operator proves that damage has been caused totally or
in part by an intentional or grossly negligent act or omission
of the party seeking redress, that operator may be relieved
totally or in part from its obligation to pay compensation in
respect of the damage suffered by such party.

(3) Paragraph 1 is not to be interpreted to detract from the
obligation under article 4, paragraph 2, first sentence, as far
as technically or financially feasible.

                                  Article 7
                                  Residual Liability of State Parties

(1) A State Party shall not be liable merely for the reason that
damage has been caused by an operator.

(2) Damage of the kind referred to in article 3 of this Annex,
however, which would not have occured or continued if a State
Party had carried out its obligations under the Protocol and its
Annexes with respect to an operator shall, in accordance with
international law, entail liability of that State Party. Such
liability shall be limited to that portion of liability not
satisfied by the operator or otherwise.

5
(3) Nothing in paragraph (2) shall affect the application of existing rules of international law concerning State responsibility and the development, in accordance with international law, of further such rules in the event that damage, not referred to in that paragraph, would not have occurred or continued if the State Party had carried out its obligations under the Protocol and its Annexes with respect to the operator.11

(4) Nothing in this article or in the Protocol shall be construed as to affect the right of an operator incurring liability to seek redress from another party which caused or contributed to the damage in question.

Article 8
Compulsory Insurance or Other Financial Security

Each Party shall ensure taking due account of the nature and the risks of the activities undertaken, that non-State operators conducting activities in the Antarctic Treaty area be required to have and maintain insurance or an equivalent up to a limit to cover the liability under this Annex. For the purpose of fixing the limit the costs of undertaking response action should be the guiding factor.

Article 9
Limits

(1) Costs for remedial measures shall not exceed....
(2) Payment for irreparable damage shall not exceed ....

Article 10
Environmental Protection Fund

(1) An Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established with the following aims:

(a) to provide compensation for damage to the Antarctic environment to the extent that the protection afforded under articles 4 and 5 was proved to be inadequate;

(b) to provide for compensation, on an interim basis, in case a response action has to be undertaken on an emergency basis.

(2) For the purpose of fulfilling its functions under paragraph 1 the Fund shall pay compensation to those having undertaken response action,

(a) because no liability arises under the Protocol;

(b) the cause of the damage cannot be established.

(3) The Fund shall provide for the necessary financial means
6
expeditiously with a view to enabling timely action under article 
15 of the Protocol.

(4) Contributions to the Fund shall be made:

(a) in accordance with article 5bis;

(b) on the basis of fees levied on the departure of ships or 
aircraft other than for scientific purposes for Antarctica. These 
fees shall be collected by the State Party in which the 
environmental assessment procedure has been undertaken and shall 
be transferred to the Fund.

(5) The Fund has the right to receive voluntary contributions.

          Article 11
Claims Tribunals

(1) Disputes between States Parties concerning the obligation to 
pay compensation shall be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal 
constituted under the Schedule to the Protocol.

(2) If such disputes involve private entities or persons, the 
State Party in which the Environmental Impact Assessment in 
accordance with article 8 Protocol and Annex I has been 
undertaken or should have been undertaken shall represent the 
private person or entity in the proceedings. This State shall 
ensure that the arguments of the private entity or of persons 
concerned are properly introduced into the proceedings.

          Article 12
Amendment or Modification

(1) This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted 
in accordance with article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless 
the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification 
shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become 
effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more 
of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the 
Depositary, within that period, that it wishes an extension of 
that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

(2) Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes 
effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter 
become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval 
by it has been received by the Depositary.

7
Notes:

1. It was well understood that this article shall be reconsidered 
after full agreement on the content of the Annex has been 
reached. In this context it has been emphasized that the Annex 
should concentrate on the implementation of article 15 of the 
Protocol. However, it has equally been pointed out that the scope 
of this Annex should be broader than just implementing article 
15. Reference has also been made to the possibility of having 
more than one Annex on liability. The other Annex or Annexes may 
deal with damage to life, health, property and lost interests and 
remedial measures, respectively.

2. Based upon the proposal of the Chairman - Doc. 16.

The proposal of the delegations of New Zealand and Sweden (Doc.8) 
suggested the following wording:

(1) "Damage" means, any harmful impact on the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and the 
intrinsic value of Antarctica, including its wilderness and 
aesthetic values and its. value as an area for the conduct of 
scientific research, caused by human conduct in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area, which is of a more than minor or transitory nature.

(2) "Damage" does not include an impact which has been identified 
as an unavoidable impact of an activity in a Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation in accordance with article 3, paragraph 
2 (h) of Annex I of the Protocol [,and the impact identified did 
not receive negative comments by any other Consultative Party 
pursuant to paragraphs 3 or 5 of article 3 of Annex I to the 
Protocol] [and is found acceptable in accordance with the 
procedures laid down in article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol].

The wording of the proposal of the U.K. and the US delegations 
(Doc. 12) read as follows:

(1) "Damage" means an impact on the Antarctic environment and 
dependent and associated ecosystems and the intrinsic value of 
Antarctica, including its wilderness and aesthetic values and its 
value as an area for the conduct of scientific research, caused 
by human conduct in Antarctica and which results in significant 
and lasting harm.

(2) It does not include harm which was considered and judged 
acceptable in accordance with the procedure for environmental 
impact assessment in article 8 of, or Annex I to, the Protocol.

3. It has been pointed out that the notion of damage should also 
include loss of or impairment to an established use and loss of 
or damage to property of a third party or loss of life or 
personal injury arising directly out of damage to the Antarctic 
environment. At the meeting in Brussels there was no objection 
to the recommendation of the Chair to postpone consideration of 
                                                               8
this aspect until an agreement on a regime on liability for 
environmental damage has been reached.

4. The wording is based upon the proposals made by the delegation 
of France. - Doc. 10 and of the U.S. delegation - Doc. 13.

5. It has been suggested to introduce such definitions into 
article 4.

The definitions have been modified taking into consideration the 
discussion at the Brussels meeting.

6. It was suggested to delete article 4.

7. Paragraph 1 and 2 a drafted on the basis of the proposal of 
the French delegation - Doc. 18 and of the Italian delegation - 
Doc. 19.

8.The reference to "reasonable" response action or "reasonable" 
remedial measure should show up only once, either in the article 
defining such terms or in article 5.

9. Based upon the deletion of article 4.

10. It has been argued that no provision on exemptions might be 
needed since the Annex would only apply to activities regulated 
or prohibited under the Protocol or its Annexes. Article 2 of the 
draft Annex provides that it applies to damage arising from 
activities "covered" by the Protocol. If an activity falls within 
an exemption in the Protocol or its Annexes one might argue that 
it is not "covered". Before further embarking on lengthy debates 
on article 6 one should consider whether this is not the most 
elegant way to solve the problem.

11. The wording is based upon a proposal of the U.S. delegation - 
Doc. 26 and of the delegation of Belgium.

9
