ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                 ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/INF 83
                                 April, 1996
                                 Original: English

THE PROJECT OF THE SUBGLACIAL LAKE VOSTOK
(Agenda item 13)

(Submitted by Russia)
THE PROJECT OF THE SUBGLACIAL LAKE VOSTOK

The studies of Russian glaciologists performed in the 1960s have shown a theoretical possibility for continuous melting under the glacial dome of Antarctica in its central area. In the hollows of the confirmed in the data of radio-echo sounding of the bedrock of the glacial cover and glacier drilling in the vicinity of the US station Byrd. An analysis of ERS-1 measurements of the subglacial relief in the central regions of Antarctica has shown the presence of a large (230x50 km) relatively level lower surface of the ice sheet in the region of the Russian inland station Vostok. A comparison of these data with the results of seismic soundings performed by the Russian scientist Andrey Kapitsa during the seasons 1958-1959 and 1963-1964 allowed him to suggest a hypothesis about the existence of a large subglacial lake in this region which he called the Vostok lake. The report about this hypothesis presented by the Academician A. Kapitsa at the 24th SCAR session in Rome in 1994 was of great interest to the world scientific community. The session of the WG of the Project "Vostok Lake" held in May 1995 in Cambridge (Great Britain) outlined the plans for scientific and expedition works for fulfilling the project.

During the season of 1995-1996 the Russian Antarctic Expedition commenced practical implementation of these plans. Special seismic soundings of the ice sheet and the underlying surface were performed at Vostok. In addition to the problems of the lake, data of these studies were also of applied importance, as the project of deep-drilling of the ice sheet at Vostok station is close to being completed (in January 1996 a depth of 3350 m was reached) and a random unprepared penetration to the relict waters of such a lake whose proposed age is 1 million years, can have catastrophic implications.

In spite of a short period of these studies and serious methodological problems of seismic soundings of a snow-firn pillow several tens of meters thick, quite interesting results were obtained. The studies were carried out by means of the method of reflected waves using a two-component (y, z) array of seismic receivers for recording the longitudinal and transverse waves. The total length of the recording line was 550 m with a spatial interval of 50 m. The observation system of the wave field consisted of 10 surface explosion points and 12 explosions from the drill-holes 220, 185 and 130 m deep. Processing and analysis of the seismic soundings performed using the reflected and refracted wave methods allowed the velocities of wave propagation in media of different density to be calculated and the spatial position of the boundaries to be determined. The depths of the boundaries of snow and firn, firn and ice, ice and water (or sedimentary rocks) were clearly delineated. Based on data of the method of the reflected waves the lower glacier boundary is actually horizontal and is located at a depth of 3750±50 m. It is impossible to determine the depth more accurately due to the absence of evidence on mean velocities of the waves propagated up to it. One more boundary is traced below in the form of separate reflecting sites. It has a curvilinear form with the incidence angles approximately equal to 25°, decreasing in the north-eastern direction basically to zero degrees in the central part of the section. The substance which composes the layer filling the space under the glacier, has definitely a different density and hence the velocity different from those in the glacier. If this layer is filled with water which is indirectly indicated by a level horizontal surface of the lower part of the glacier then. The thickness of such a water layer is approximately equal to 700 m. Assuming this layer to be filled with sedimentary rocks, its thickness will be equal to 500–1700 m. In this case the angle of bedding of this boundary also slightly changes.
2

Thus it is found that the lower boundary of the glacier is 250±50 m below the level of the ocean washing Antarctica. There is a giant water basin or a basin of sedimentary rocks under it which is, obviously, of oceanic, rather than of continental origin.

One more indirect evidence of the existence of the subglacial lake in the vicinity of the Vostok station is found in the data of the radar survey of the subice relief performed in 1987 by Russian specialists from board the Il-18 aircraft which was making a research flight along the route Molodezhnaya-Vostok-Molodezhnaya. The aircraft has precisely passed over Vostok twice (the flight courses of 270° and 90° ), recording the position of the drill-hole by its radar. In the vicinity of the Vostok station a horizontal boundary 8–10 km long was recorded at a depth of 3700 m which is typical of reflection from the water surface. At the adjacent segments of the route no return signals were received. Thus the substance underlying the lower edge of the glacier in the vicinity of Vostok has a dielectric permeability coefficient much higher, as compared to the mountain rocks. The fact of the presence of the extended horizontal boundary with such a reflection signal confirms a possibility for the existence of a large water reservoir in the region of the station.

The studies conducted in the last Antarctic season (1995-1996) and an analysis of archived data confirm in our opinion the hypothesis of the existence of a large subglacial lake in the vicinity of Vostok. The Russian Antarctic expedition plans to continue studies of this lake by means of the methods of remote sensing (radio-echo sounding and seismic sounding) for determining its horizontal boundaries, a possible depth and the upper boundary position. Probably, there are similar subglacial lakes in the other regions of Antarctica, however, a suitable location of the Vostok station  relative to the lake, creates good preconditions for logistic support of the project.

A complete implementation of the project with penetration to the water column of the lake and sampling of water and soil will be obviously possible only in the next century. This will require development of new sterile methods for deep drilling, samplers and equipment for measuring hydrophysical, hydrochemical and hydrobiological parameters, etc. Hence the implementation of the entire project will be possible only if based on international co-operation.
DIAGRAM OF SEISMIC PROFILE POSITION AT VOSTOK STATION

ep 1                                       ep 11
+-----------------------------------------+
|                                         |
|  drill-hole                             |
|  600m                                   |
|  ep 6                                  |
+-----------------------------------------+
N

SEISMIC SECTION { REFLECTED WAVE METHOD } IN VICINITY OF VOSTOK
STATION

Horisontal scale 1 : 20000
Vertical scale   1 : 25000

         ep 1   ep 2   ep 3   ep 4   ep 5   ep 6   ep 7   ep 8   ep 9   ep 10  ep 11
         |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
-3000   +------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
         0      1000   2000   3000   4000
         L, m

         ICE
         Vpl=3800m/s
         --------------------------------
         WATER
         SEDIMENTARY ROCK

         DISIGNATIONS
         
         seismic reiciver array
ep       explosion point and its No at the profi
1        reflecting boudary constructed assuming
         the presence of water layer
2        assiuming the absence
V        stratum velocity in the ice laver ( m/s )
-8      -4       0        4        8  Distance, km
Ice Surface
st. Vostok
500
1000
1500
2000
ICE
2500
3000
3500
3700 m
Water
