ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


XX ATCM/INF 3
March, 1996
Original: English


NEW ZEALAND EXPERIENCE AND PRACTICE
IN RELATION TO PRELIMINARY STAGE ASSESSMENT
UNDER ARTICLE 1, ANNEX I OF THE PROTOCOL

(Agenda item 18)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
DRAFT 2 Information Paper XX ATCM / ADH / 15 February 1996

NEW ZEALAND EXPERIENCE AND PRACTICE
IN RELATION TO PRELIMINARY STAGE ASSESSMENT
UNDER ARTICLE 1, ANNEX I OF THE PROTOCOL

Preliminary Agenda Item 17 - Application and Implementation of EIA Procedures
New Zealand

1. INTRODUCTION

Since 1990, New Zealand has required what it terms Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) of each proposal for scientific activity in Antarctica. From 1994, this PEE scheme has also been extended to cover non-science activities. Although the commencement of this level of evaluation pre-dates the completion of the Protocol - and was in the first instance a response to the obligations following from Recommendation XIV-2 of 1987 - New Zealand has, since the signing of the Protocol in 1991, employed it to meet its obligations to "Preliminary Stage" EIA under Article 1, Annex I of the Protocol.

Article 1 requires that the environmental effects of proposed activities shall, before their commencement, be considered in accordance with appropriate national procedures. If an activity is determined as having less than a minor or transitory impact, the activity may proceed.

Under New Zealand's Protocol implementing legislation - the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994 - the concept of Preliminary Environmental Evaluation has now been formalised. Further, Section 17 of the Act specifies what the PEE shall contain (Appendix 1).

On the basis of over 300 science activity PEEs conducted across a total of seven Antarctic seasons (covering the Antarctic seasons 1990-91 to 1996-97), some examination of the functioning of this national procedure has now been possible. Since PEE has only been employed with non-science proposals for two seasons, review of its functioning is considered premature and has not been attempted here. During 1996 several changes to New Zealand's Antarctic agencies will occur, but it is expected that the broad outlines of the present system of environmental evaluation and assessment will remain unchanged.

It is hoped that the New Zealand experience may be of general interest to other Parties.

1
2. REVIEW OF NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC PROPOSALS

Hitherto, all proposals to conduct scientific research programmes in Antarctica have been 
submitted to the Ross Dependency Research Committee (RDRC), a body charged with 
oversight of New Zealand national activities in Antarctica. Other bodies may be invclved as 
funding agencies, but RDRC scrutiny has been the common feature. The Ross Dependency 
Research Committee has reviewed research proposals for their scientific merit, consistent 
with the national priorities for Antarctic research, which it and other agencies have 
developed. Scrutiny of individual proposals has been carried out by specialist scientific sub-
committees and peer review. Since 1990, at the same time as research proposals have been 
referred for scientific review, they have been referred to an additional subcommittee for 
assessment of their environmental implications.

The Environmental Assessment and Review Panel (the name has changed several times) 
comprises four members, appointed by RDRC, an Executive Officer (a part-time position, 
most recently met by an officer of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade) and ex officio 
an officer of the New Zealand Antarctic Programme (since appointment in 1994, that 
organisation's Environmental Officer). Members of the Panel have been drawn from 
universities, government research organisations, the Department of Conservation and private 
consultancies, although members are appointed in their private capacity. All have had 
Antarctic experience, and all but one (a former head of New Zealand's Antarctic programme) 
have been scientifically trained. Members are required to declare their interest, and disqualify 
themselves from review, where proposals in which they may be seen to have a vested interest 
come before the Panel.

Although the focus of this paper is the application of Preliminary Environmental Evaluation 
and its assessment, the Panel has had a wider brief. It has revicwed and made assessments 
of the IEEs and single CEE produced by New Zealand and has examined generic issues such 
as approaches to cumulative impact, programmic impacts across NZAP and research which 
underpins New Zealand ability to meet Protocol commitments. In addition, the Panel has 
contributed to the pool of people who may be drawn on to comment on IEEs or CEEs 
produced and circulated by other operators.

3. THE PROCESS OF REVIEW

Each year, the New Zealand science community is invited to make application for inclusion 
in the New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme. Application and subsequent review 
commence some 18 months prior to the target Antarctic season. A Call for Applications and 
standard Application Form are employed (Appendix 2). The completed application addresses 
inter alia the proposal's scientific rationale, objectives, staffing, funding, support 
requirements and - as Appendix One - Preliminary Environmental Evaluation.

Completed applications are distributed by RDRC to its specialist subcommittees. In practice, 
members of the Environmental Assessment and Review Panel receive copies of all 
applications in August. Two-four weeks later, the panel meets as a body, and each proposal 
is discussed in turn. Since 1994, as noted above, a Preliminary Environmental Evaluation has

2
been produced for each non-science and logistic support programme contemplated by the New Zealand Antarctic Programme. These activities - particularly logistic support - are inevitably not finalised until some months prior to the season in question. Therefore, whereas scientific (and most non-science) proposals are examined a year in advance of their projected commencement, PEEs for logistic activities are examined circa three months prior to their projected commencement.

The Panel assesses each proposal to determine whether, in its judgement, the activity in question would indeed have "less than a minor or transitory impact". It may require further information about all or parts of the proposal, and it may seek further specialist advice. The Panel makes its recommendations, through its Chair, to the RDRC. (Under the new arrangements, commencing in 1996, the reconstituted Panel will advise the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which in turn advises its Minister, who is responsible for the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act which implements the Protocol.

Following each summer season, NZAP collates details of the actual activities carried out by each project in Antarctica, which is reviewed by the Panel. Thus, there is some basis for determining whether the actual activities were in accordance with what was described in the original proposal and PEE, whether the impact of the activity matches that evaluated in the PEE, and for the Panel to review its own assessment of the proposal.

4. NEW ZEALAND EXPERIENCE OF PRELIMINARY ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

Over the seven Antarctic seasons for which PEE has been applied to scientific proposals, a total of 306 PEEs have been examined - see Table 1 below:

Of these 306 proposals, 233 (76%) passed without appreciable modification and 26 (8%) required minor modification only (the issues requiring modification are reviewed below). Thus some 85% of proposals examined were unproblematical.

Only one proposal was recommended against - and did not proceed. A total of 46 proposals (15%) were identified as requiring major modification. Of these, 11 were subject to specific Antarctic Treaty system obligation - one proposal warranted a CEE, another an IEE, and 9 sought access to Protected Areas for activities outside their reason for designation or inconsistent with management plans.

3
TABLE 1:

ASSESSMENT OF NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC SCIENCE PEEs OVER 7 SEASONS

Figures in parentheses ( ) are rounded percentages


ANTARCTIC      NUMBER OF      NO            MINOR         MAJOR         PROPOSAL
SEASON         PROPOSALS      REVISION      MODIFICATION  MODIFICATION  DECLINED
               ASSESSED       REQUIRED      ONLY          REQUIRED
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
1990-91        38             33            4             1             0
                              (87)          (10)          (3)           (0)

1991-92        55             42            2             11            0
                              (76)          (4)           (20)          (0)

1992-93        68             55            3             10            0
                              (81)          (4)           (15)          (0)

1993-94        53             44            4             5             0
                              (83)          (8)           (9)           (0)

1994-95        35             23            5             6             1
                              (66)          (14)          (17)          (3)

1995-96        28             19            5             4             0
                              (67)          (18)          (14)          (0)

1996-97        29             17            3             9             0
                              (59)          (10)          (31)          (0)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
7 SEASONS      306            233           26            46            1
                              (76)          (8)           (15)          (0.3)

                                         259
                                         (85)

The aspects of proposals which required modification obviously varied with each proposal 
(and some proposals required modification for multiple reasons), but a number of classes can 
be recognised, and most problems fall into one of them. These are identified below (for 
minor or major modification) - the number of proposals falling into each class are given in

4
parentheses [ ].

Minor modification required:
* to clarify specific details in PEE - materials/methods or number of specimens sought [14]
* to confirm site details or meet minor conditions on site access (incl protected areas) [7]
* to meet recent changes in management plans or NZAP operational guidelines [2]
* to confirm ethical committee approval has been granted [2]

Major modification required:
* to address serious deficiencies in detail provided in PEE [13]
* to address concern about impact on proposed site [10]
* where proposed access to Protected Area not justified [9]
* to address concerns regarding the ethical justification of proposal and/or failure to meet obligations under Animals Protection Act 1960 [6]
* where potential collaboration / combination with another proposal would significantly reduce impact [4]
* where proposal formally requires CEE [1]
* where proposal warrants IEE [1]

Proposals are reviewed for their environmental implications at the same time as they are reviewed for other purposes - scientific merit, funding priority and logistic feasibility. Thus even proposals which appear to present no environmental problems are not guaranteed to proceed. Proposals may be declined, revised, merged or postponed for these other reasons (and the relative contribution of these reasons obviously varies from year to year). As a consequence, the ultimate fate of proposals is not considered here.

But, as a general rule, amongst the proposals that the Environmental Assessment and Review Panel recommends require major revision, those that do so because the original proposal was substantially deficient (in contrast to those which need amendment to meet other formal ATS obligations) tend to also fail scientific merit review. Whilst there is no necessary linkage, it does suggest that at least some of the poorer proposals are poor across the board - and that their failure is not due solely to failures in their PEEs.

Over the period since the establishment of the Panel, the application of PEE and its
5
H.U. & L.T. HEMMINGS                        F.

assessment has continually evolved. For all involved, from Panel members, through NZAP 
to individual scientists, it has been a process of learning - and this will continue. An 
important factor has been the avoidance of adversarial relationships. The Panel has developed 
an excellent relationship with the operational agency (NZAP) and a collegial relationship with 
the wider Antarctic community. It has made a point of commending particularly rigorous 
PEEs, not just critiquing those in need of modification.

The quality of PEE provided by proponents has improved over the period since 1990. This 
is particularly marked in the successive PEEs produced by the same scientists.

5. KEY ELEMENTS IN THE OPERATION OF PEE IN NEW ZEALAND

Two particular elements stand out:

(i) Establishment of a functionally separate Panel

The New Zealand experience has been that establishing a review body separate from the 
agencies responsible for operations or funding has been positive. The Panel is not perceived 
as having a vested interest in particular programmes or mixes of programmes, and its 
recommendations on environmental grounds are seen to be quite separate from other 
considerations.

(ii) Review for environmental effects concurrent with scientific review

By having all reviewing of proposals occur at the same time, the risk that environmental 
assessment will be seen as a "spoiling" activity is greatly reduced. Recommended changes 
to the proposal are more easily accomplished the earlier they are identified, and by reviewing 
at a time when changes may also be recommended for scientific (or logistic) reasons, the 
burden of modification is eased. A further advantage is that by being involved early in the 
consideration of proposals, identified synergisms between proposals can be exploited to 
reduce the overall footprint of activity.

6
APPENDIX 1:

PRELIMINARY ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION UNDER NEW ZEALAND LAW

17. Preliminary environmental evaluation -

(1) Any person proposing to carry out any activity in Antarctica shall prepare a preliminary 
    environmental evaluation.

(2) The preliminary environmental evaluation shall contain -
(a) A description of the proposed activity, including its purpose, location, duration, and 
    intensity; and
(b) A statement as to whether or not the person considers that the activity has less than a 
    minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic environment; and
(c) A statement as to whether or not another Contracting Party is applying, or has applied, 
    the environmental assessment procedures set out in Annex I of the Protocol to the 
    activity; and
(d) The name and contact address in New Zealand of the person; and
(e) The number of persons in the expedition likely to carry out the activity; and
(f) The date and place of final departure for Antarctica.

(3) The preliminary environmental evaluation shall be sent to the Minister for consideration.

(4) If the Minister determines that the activity is likely to have less than a minor or transitory 
    impact on the Antarctic environment, the Minister shall notify the person that the activity 
    may be carried out.

[Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.]

7
APPENDIX 2
CALL FOR APPLICATIONS and APPLICATION

8
CALL FOR APPLICATIONS
IN ANTARCTICA
R E S E A R C H

 
1996/1997 EDITION
ROSS DEPENDENCY
RESEARCH COMMITTEE

FOUNDATION FOR
RESEARCH SCIENCE
& TECHNOLOGY
CONTENTS   General Information for Applicants

Introduction                                         5
Research Strategy                                   5
Facilities Available for Research Support           5
Antarctic Treaty Obligations and Permit Requirements 7
Multi Year Funding                                  8

Instructions for Applicants

Format                                                 
Deadlines and Delivery                              11
Notification of Result                              12

Guide to the Application Form                      
1 Identification Contact Name                       13
2 Short Programme Title                             13
3 General Abstract                                  13
4 Total PGSF Requested for 1996/97
       (PGSF Applicants only)                       
       (i) Sub-contracts                                14
       (ii) 1995/96 PGSF Funding                        14
5 Cross-Out Themes (PGSF Applicants only)           14
6 Special Case Field (PGSF Applicants only)         14
7 Programme Design and Scientific Rationale         15
7A Environmental Impact                             16
8 Programme Objectives for 1996/97                  18
9 Justification for Crown Funding and/or            
   Inclusion in the New Zealand Antarctic           
   Research Programme.                              19
10 Progress and Achievements                        21
11 Collaboration                                    21
12 Subcontracting and Resources Not Available In-house 21
13 Research Personnel                                22
14 Total FTE for Financial Year                      22
15 Funding Requirements                             
       (PGSF Only)                                  22
16 Other Funding (PGSF Only)                         24
17 Ethics and Regulatory Obligations                 24
18 Confidentiality                                   24
19 Declaration by Duly Authorised Agent              25
20 Curricula Vitae (CV's)                            25
21 Ministry of Research, Science and Technology      25
22 Referees                                          25

3
INTRODUCTION

New Zealand's National Antarctic Research Programme includes multi-disciplinary 
research, embracing projects in climate processes, biodiversity, human activities 
and terrestrial evolution.

New Zealand operates a year-round Antarctic research station (Scott Base). 
Research is also conducted in the summer months at more remote sites, relying on 
surface transport or aircraft.

Long-term and short-term projects are undertaken by investigators from Crown 
Research Institutes, government departments, universities and individuals throughout 
New Zealand.

Research Guidelines
A research proposal may comprise a long or short-term project. It may also involve 
summer field work, or year-round research at or near an Antarctic station. Field 
work is normally carried out between mid-October and the end of January for 
periods up to three months.

Planning and Approval Procedure
• Researchers are annually invited to submit proposals for funding and inclusion in 
the annual research programme. Proposals which include a funding application 
to the Foundation for Research, Science and Technology are reviewed by 
FRST in association with the RDRC.
• Proposals which do not include a PGSF application for funding require 
independent financial support. Approval for inclusion in the New Zealand's 
National Antarctic Research Programme is reviewed solely by the RDRC.
• All proposals undergo a peer review by both national and international referees. 
An RDRC environmental assessment committee evaluates all proposals for 
environmental impacts. This group will make recommendations to the RDRC 
on mitigating and/or monitoring of potential impacts.
• This programme is then submitted to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
and of Research, Science and Technology for approval.
• After the Ministers' approval (which may be the whole or part of the 
recommendation submitted to them), the programme is implemented by Staff of 
the New Zealand Antarctic Programme's Headquarters (NZAP) office in 
Christchurch.

Research Strategy
The RDRC has produced a long-term research strategy for New Zealand's science 
activities in Antarctica and all those considering an application for inclusion in the 
1996/97 Antarctic Programme should read this document. The RDRC will give 
priority to well-presented quality science proposals which follow the priority 
themes contained in the strategy. A copy of the science strategy document is 
available from the Executive Officer, RDRC.

                                                                                
5
Facilities Available for Research Support

The following facilities are administered by NZAP's office in Christchurch and are available to support Foundation and RDRC approved research activities.

Huts And Bases

Scott Base     (77° 51'S, 166° 45'E)

Operates year-round and accommodates up to 68 people in the summer. The base includes a physical sciences laboratory. Also available are areas incorporating power and storage for biological and earth sciences research. In addition, there are limited wet laboratory facilities. Nearby Arrival Heights is equipped with a physical sciences recording laboratory provided with a 15kW power source and linked to Scott Base by data cabling.

Scientific Equipment:

A limited quantity of scientific equipment is available at Scott Base for laboratory use. This includes:

  • Portable power supplies
  • Incubator
  • Fridges and freezers
  • Mettler balances
  • Refrigerated centrifuge
  • IBM AT compatible microcomputers
  • Apple Macintosh microcomputers

In addition to this, a range of hand tools, soldering irons etc. is available. Further details available from NZAP's office in Christchurch.

Summer Support Facilities

Cape Bird Hut        (77° 14'S, 166° 28'E)
Cape Royds Hut      (77° 36'S, 166° 10'E)
Cape Evans Hut      (77° 38'S, 166° 24'E)
Lower Wright Hut    (77° 23'S, 162° 45'E)
Fryxell Hut         (77° 37'S, 163° 00'E)
Cape Roberts Hut    (77° 03'S, 163° 56'E)
Bratina Island Hut  (78° 02'S, 165° 33'E)

Note: Limited laboratory space is available at Cape Roberts, Bratina Island, Cape Bird and Fryxell Huts.

Field Camps

Field parties can be provided with tentage or portable huts. Field camps on the sea ice or Ross Ice Shelf are normally positioned by vehicle, while those operating in mountainous regions up to 160km from Scott Base are supported by helicopter. Field camps operating beyond 160km from Scott Base are normally supported by LC130 (ski-equipped Hercules aircraft).
Transportation

NZAP has available a limited number of the following vehicles:

- Light oversnow vehicles (toboggan, 4-wheel drive motorbike)
- Medium oversnow vehicles (ASV, Hagglunds)
- Heavy oversnow vehicles (Caterpillar D3, D5)
- 4-wheel drive light commercial vehicles.

Field parties can also be provided with a variety of sledges for transportation of equipment.

NZAP provides fixed wing and helicopter support.

Through a joint logistics agreement, the United States Antarctic Program provides NZAP with helicopter, fixed wing aircraft and icebreaker support for research and support activities.

Field Research Equipment

NZAP has available a Winkie drill for shallow rock drilling (eg. 30m depth), ice-cores, a limited number of portable generators, and other support equipment.

Non-New Zealand Facilities

New Zealand cooperates with other nations who conduct research in Antarctica. All requests for cooperative programmes or the use of other nations’ facilities must be approved by the RDRC and coordinated through NZAP’s Christchurch office.

For further information on facilities contact:

The Director
New Zealand Antarctic Programme
P O Box 14-091
CHRISTCHURCH
Telephone: (03) 358 0200
Fax:     (03) 358 0211

Antarctic Treaty Obligations and Permit Requirements

New Zealand’s Antarctic activities must comply with the various requirements of the Antarctic Treaty. These include specific Codes of Conduct, Treaty Recommendations and Agreements enacted as New Zealand Law which may require permits before some activities can be undertaken.

Specifically Protected Areas (SPA’s) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI’s)

In submitting a proposal, proposers should be aware of areas within the Ross Dependency that have been designated either as an Specially Protected Area (SPA) or a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) under the Antarctic Treaty. At the time of printing, SPA’s and SSSI’s in the Ross Dependency were:
SPA's
  • Sabrina Islet, Balleny Islands
  • Beaufort Island, Ross Sea
  • Cape Hallett, Victoria Land
  • New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island, 
    Cape Royds, Ross Island

SSSI's
  • Arrival Heights, Ross Island
  • Barwick Valley, South Victoria Land
  • Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus, Ross Island
  • Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Victoria Land
  • North-west White Island, McMurdo Sound
  • Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
  • Mt Melbourne, Terra Nova Bay, North Victoria Land

More information, including management plans for each of these areas, is available 
from NZAP staff.

Note: All SSSI's and SPA's will soon become Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, 
known as ASPA's.

Permit Requirements

Permits are required from NZAP for the following activities:

(a) Taking to Antarctica any animal, plant (including seeds), 
    micro-organism or soil.

(b) Entering a SPA or SSSI.

(c) Killing or taking any native mammal or native bird or making any attempt to 
    do so.

(d) Gathering any native plant.

(e) Disturbing any bird or seal colony, including restraining any bird or seal.

(f) Taking to Antarctica any radionuclide.

When the proposal is approved, NZAP's office in Christchurch will forward to the 
proposer a blank permit form, to be completed and returned to NZAP for 
approval.

Permits are required by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) for the 
following activities under the Antarctic Marine Living Resources Act 1981:

(a) To take, catch, kill, injure, attract, poison, tranquilise, herd, harass, disturb, 
    or possess any marine organism, whether dead or alive, from the area south 
    of the Antarctic convergence.

(b) To brand, tag, mark, or any similar act as above.

(c) To attempt to do any of (a) or (b).

A copy of this permit is to be forwarded to NZAP.

8
Importation of Samples to New Zealand

Proposers who wish to import to New Zealand any samples or specimens containing biological material must obtain a permit for this purpose from the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAFQUAL) prior to their departure for Antarctic. A copy of this permit is to be forwarded to NZAP.

Animal Experimentation

Proposers whose projects involve animal experimentation must obtain the approval of their animal ethics committee and forward the application and a copy of this approval when submitting their proposal to the Executive Officer, RDRC.

Multi Year Funding

If you have multi year funding you need only complete the environmental impact assessment (Section 7A), and the EIA checklist (Appendix One) and the Support Information Questionnaire (Appendix Two). The Support Information Questionnaire applies only to research which will be carried out in Antarctica but must be completed for each separate objective.

 
                                                                                                                                             9
Instructions
for Applicants

This instruction manual is designed to assist applicants in completing the enclosed
Application Form for both the 1995/96 Public Good Science Fund (PGSF)
Output 35, and non-PGSF proposals for Antarctic science. The form is designed to
ensure that sufficient information is provided by applicants so that the research
programme can be appraised, with no critical information being overlooked.
However, the onus is on the applicant to describe the proposed research in its full
context because material submitted in previous applications may not be available to
the Referees, Advisory Committees, the Board of the Foundation, or the Ross
Dependency Research Committee.

Every application will be appraised to determine the quality of the science, its
feasibility, and its relevance to New Zealand based on the guidelines provided by
the government and the long term research strategies on Antarctic science provided
by the RDRC and FRST. PGSF applications should refer to the eligibility criteria
in the FRST "Guide to the PGSF Assessment and Allocation Process". Contact the
Foundation for further details.

Please ensure that you read this manual before completing the Application
Form.

Format

All applications must be typewritten on the standard application form. Applications
in Maori must be accompanied by an English translation.

Where a section states a specific number of items (eg. objectives), lines, words, or
characters, please do not exceed the limits.

Deadlines and Delivery

PGSF Applications:
Please submit 20 copies of each application by 4pm, 30 June 1995.
If you have a programme for which multi-year (previously referred to as "long-
term") funding has been granted you need only submit an environmental impact
assessment and Support Information Questionnaire for each objective requiring work in
Antarctica.
Non-PGSF Applications:

Please submit 15 copies of each application by 4pm, 30 June 1995.

All applications are to be sent to:

The Executive Officer
Ross Dependency Research Committee
c/- Antarctic Policy Unit
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Private Bag 18901
WELLINGTON
Telephone: (04) 473 2076
Facsimile: (04) 472 8039

For Courier Delivery:

Ross Dependency Research Committee
c/- Antarctic Policy Unit
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Stafford House
40 The Terrace
WELLINGTON

Facsimile applications will not be accepted by the Foundation or the RDRC.

Should you wish to submit supplementary material, please send three copies with each set of applications. All supplementary material has to be adequately referenced to the application by providing the programme title, and output number. Both the RDRC and the Foundation will use this material at their discretion in the appraisal process. Supplementary material will not necessarily be kept or returned to applicants. Please keep supplementary material to a minimum.

Acknowledgment of receipt of the application will be returned to the applicants by the Executive Officer, RDRC. Please note that all PGSF applications become the property of the Foundation, and non-PGSF applications the property of the RDRC.

Notification of Result

All applicants will be notified of both the Foundation's and the RDRC's decisions relating to their applications in late December 1995.
GUIDE TO THE
APPLICATION FORM

This guide follows the same structure as the Application Form. Please read it carefully, and complete all applicable sections of the Application Form.

Applications should be stapled in the top left-hand corner. Do Not bind or cover applications.

Application

1. Identification Contact Name
Please supply the full name of the person the Foundation or RDRC should contact regarding any queries concerning the application. It is important that this person can be easily contacted.

Contracting Organisation
Please name the organisation (or in the case of an individual, the full name of the person) applying. Should the application be successful, the above-named organisation or person will be contracted to undertake the research.

Programme Leader
Please provide a name of the person leading the research within the programme.

Address
Please provide the full postal address for all correspondence regarding the application. If the address of a university is provided, please ensure that you include the name of the department within the university.

Phone and Fax
Please provide the telephone and facsimile numbers (including area codes) of the contact person.

2. Short Programme Title
Please provide a short programme title of Not More Than Five Words. The short programme title is used for quick referencing.

3. General Abstract
Please provide an abstract of Not More Than 10 Lines of Typed Text that encapsulates the goal and essence of the programme using simple scientific terminology that would be easily understood by a person who is not a specialist in the field.

Note: Sections 2 and 3 may also be used by both the Foundation and the Ross Dependency Research Committee for publicity and information purposes.

Non-PGSF Applicants go to Question 7

13
PGSF Applicants only

K e y w o r d :
Please provide five keywords that identify the area(s) of research in the application. The keywords will be incorporated into the Foundation's database on New Zealand science. The Foundation may use the keywords as a guide to selection of suitable referees for the appraisal of the programme.

4. Total PGSF Requested for 1995/96 (including GST)
Please indicate the total amount of money requested from the PGSF for this application in the 1996/97 financial year. All costings should be based on the Government's financial year (July to June) and should include all costs associated with the application, including GST and sub-contracts: This figure should agree with the total indicated in section 15 and with the sum of all the objective costs. If there are inconsistencies in figures, the lowest amount indicated will be used by the Foundation.

(i) Sub-contracts
If applicable, please indicate the cost of sub-contracts for the 1996/97 financial year. Details of sub-contracts are requested in Section 12.

(ii) 1995/96 PGSF Funding
If research in this programme was funded in 1995/96, please indicate the contract number(s) and the amount of funding the programme(s) received from the PGSF in the 1995/96 financial year. If the programme is a combination of several programmes funded in the 1995/96 financial year, please indicate the combined amount of funding.

5. Cross-Output Themes
The government has identified the following themes that traverse outputs as areas of high research priority: a) Possum/Tb, b) Climate Change, c) Land Sustainability.

(i) Where appropriate, please identify which of the above themes your proposed research addresses. Type "NA" if it is not applicable.

(ii) If you identify a theme in section 4 (i), please indicate the cost (including GST) of the work associated with the theme.

6. Special Case Field
This field should be used to indicate only the following situations where prior agreement has been reached with the Foundation:

Cross-output applications:
One application where funding is requested from more than one output.

Co-ordinated Research Programmes:
Applicants, who wish to conduct a single programme of research, but submit separate applications, each application having a separate application number.

14
If the proposed programme includes any of the above circumstances, please contact the Foundation two weeks before the application deadline for prior agreement. If agreement is reached, you will be given the format necessary to fill in this field.

7. Programme Design and Scientific Rationale

Please give an overview of the design of the proposed programme of Not More Than 3 Pages of Typed Text. The following sub-headlines, if applicable, should be used to ensure that you do not overlook critical issues that are considered during the appraisal process.

• General Overview (including scientific context)

Give an overview of the programme, stating the unifying components, its short/long-term aspirations, and the basis upon which the proposal is formulated. It should demonstrate the conceptual framework on which the proposed research is based and how it relates to work already done in this area by the applicant or others.

• Joint Research

If the application is formulated as part of a joint research programme with agencies (NZ or overseas) who are not funded from the PGSF, please describe the nature of the joint research work and the agencies involved. For the purpose of appraising the application, joint research is restricted to the situation where one or more parties work together but only one is funded from the PGSF. Consultancy work is not relevant to this category.

If the joint research is a significant part of the proposed programme, please ensure that the key individuals, research teams or scientific facilities of the other agencies are described. This information is required to ensure that the full context of the programme is recognised when considering funding.

• Long-Term Plans

Please describe your long-term plan in relation to this programme. The research direction should be apparent, especially if changes are anticipated.

PGSF Collaboration

Please describe the formulation of the proposed programme in relation to all collaborative programmes.

• Inter-Dependencies

If the proposed programme is dependent on other PGSF programmes, describe their inter-dependencies in relation to the formulation of the proposed programme. Inter-dependencies should not be confused with collaboration, which is addressed in Section 11. For example, the proposed programme may need to use the skill base or a national resource funded in another programme. It is therefore dependent on another programme even though there may not be any direct collaboration.

15
Use phrases such as:

"If Objective 5 of programme X is not funded, Objective 6 of this programme will be unable to proceed because..."

"The National insect collection funded under Objective 7 of programme X will be used in this programme."

"The new ceramics developed in this programme are related to the on-going work on ceramic materials in programme Y." In section 12, list the inter-dependent programmes to ensure that they are not overlooked.

The Programme Design & Scientific Rationale is not meant to be a repeat of the General Abstract. The justification for PGSF funding should be provided in Section 9.

7A Environmental Impact

New Zealand ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on 22 December 1994. This along with the domestic enabling legislation, the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act, implements the Protocol in New Zealand law. The Minstry of Foreign Affairs and Trade is responsible for administering this Act.

All activities by New Zealanders in the Antarctic Treaty area must now be planned and conducted so as to limit adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment and its associated and dependent ecosystems. These activities should also be planned and conducted on the basis of information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgements about, their possible impact on the Antarctic environment.

This means that applicants are now required ti complete a Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) of their research proposal to establish whether the proposed activity involves an acceptable level of environmental impact. If the proposed activity will have less than a minor or transitory impact, it may proceed. Otherwise an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), and possibly, a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) might be required.

Please contact the Executive Officer, RDRC if you require further information in this regard.

The RDRC is responsible for ensuring that satisfactory environmental assessments are made of all research plans to determine whether the planned activities are likely to have any significant environmental impact. This examination is carried out by an RDRC working group which takes into account New Zealand Antarctic Treaty obligations, and New Zealand law. The RDRC will make recommendations on how the project should proceed and may recommend monitoring and/or safeguards.

16
The following guidelines are provided to assist applicants with questions relating to 
the potential environmental impact of a proposal. Please note that a separate PEE is 
required for each objective within a Programme or Project which involves work in 
Antarctica.

• Proposals must provide a description of the proposed area of activity and include 
work and camp sites within an area of activity. Hand drawn sketches are 
acceptable for this purpose.

• Proposals for the continuation of on-going projects should state clearly if any 
changes are proposed in field methods, work prgrammes, camp sites, and timing 
from those documented in the original proposal, or subsequent modifications to 
it.

• Proposals must include descriptions of the methodology to be used. This is 
required for both new and on-going proposals.

• In making all these assessments of impact, the proposer should briefly consider 
the nature, duration ans intensity of the likely environmental effects, including 
the following:

    a) the existing environment, its variability or dynamic nature, resilience to 
    change, sensitivity to disturbance, previous disturbance, protected status;

    b) cumulative and possible indirect impacts;

    c) the probability of accidents and their environmental consequences;

    d) the adequacy of existing information and knowledge.

    e) other forms of disturbance (such as visual impact).

Proposers are expected to provide sufficient information in their answers 
to allow the RDRC to make a thorough, complete and accurate evaluation 
of the environmental impact of the project. Insufficient information will 
require follow-up action and/or may prejudice the environmental 
acceptability of the project.

Please note that any proposal involving animal experimentation is subject to particular Antarctic 
regulations. A signed, current approvalfrom the relevant animal ethics committee is a 
prerequisite and must be attached to the proposal.

8. Programme Objectives for 1996/1997

Note: All applicants should complete the Support Information Questionnaire 
(Appendix Two) for every objective which involves work in Antarctica. 
This includes objectives carrying out laboratory-only research or field work.

Objectives are statements of intended results and should be measurable. For PGSF 
applicants they will form the basis of the contract into which the Foundation enters 
with the research organisation, and should be written in a manner which reflects this.

This section is split into three separate components:

    i) Description of the objective

    ii) Method of the objective

    iii) Duration of the objective

17
Further details of each component are on the following pages.

Individual objectives will normally become separate events supported by the
New Zealand's National Antarctic Research Programme where work in
Antarctica is required.

A maximum of 10 objectives can be included in the proposal. The objectives
should relate to the Programme Design and Scientific Rationale (Section 7), and
should ideally relate to each other to form a cohesive and coherent programme. For
each objective or group of objectives, describe how you propose to communicate
the results of the research to potential users and, where applicable, how these results
feed into other objectives in the programme or other programmes.

Objectives stated in this part of the form will be expected to be completed by 30
June 1997 (ie. the end of the 1996/97 financial year), should they be funded by the
Foundation.

Objective Title
If you wish, you may provide a title for each objective of
Not More Than Five Words.

Cost/Price ($000, incl. GST) (PGSF Applicants Only)
PGSF Applicants should indicate the full cost of the objective for which
PGSF funding is being sought. It is to be in current dollar terms, inclusive
of GST. Include the cost of any sub-contracting and Information or
Technology Transfer (eg. cost of publication) undertaken as part of the
objective. Please ensure that the sum of all objective costs/prices comes to
the total funding being sought from the PGSF for the 1996/97 financial
year, as indicated in section 15.

Status
Please indicate whether the objective(s) are new, a continuation or a
modification. For the latter two, please provide the FRST contract number(s)
and the objective number(s) for reference This is required to set the current
proposal in its historical context.

Research Leader Information
Please provide the name and address plus phone and fax number of the
person responsible for overseeing the objective. If Email is an acceptable
method of communication with the research leader, please supply their
Email address also.

Key Word
Please provide five keywords that identify the areas of research in the
application. The keywords will be incorporated into the Foundation's
database on New Zealand science. The Foundation may use the keywords
as a guide to selection of suitable referees for the appraisal of the programme.

18
Description of Objective

For PGSF applicants this is the part that will eventually form the basis of the contract document should the programme be funded. However, the final form of the objective will be subject to negotiation before the contract is signed. Two examples of the first part of an objective are below:

Example 1
Identify two new methods for fruit drying in order to prevent colour loss and browning by:
    • identifying browning agents in three fruit species;
    • determining the optimum rate of dehydration in three fruit species;
    • defining the maximum amount of colour loss that is acceptable to targeted markets for three fruit species;
    • developing new procedures to optimise the potential use of these findings.

Submit a paper to Acta Horticulturae for publication.

Example 2
To determine the factors that contribute to the successful adoption of technological innovation in New Zealand firms by:
    • identifying 4 New Zealand firms that have improved their conditions of employment and economic performance through the adoption of new technologies;
    • completing case studies of the 4 firms selected with respect to major organisational and social factors thought likely to have contributed to their success;
    • establishing cause and effect relationships between the adoption of new technologies, the contributory factors identified, and indicators of employment and economic success.

Submit papers/articles to a refereed journal and a popular publication and present papers to the [name] Conference in May 1995.

For all applicants, the objective description should include:
    • the planned results for the year's work;
    • an indication as to why the research is being done;
    • an indication of the steps which will be taken to achieve the end results, how the findings of the research will be passed on.

The cost of publication, or the cost of transferring the results of the research to an end user (information/technology transfer), should normally be included in the total cost of that objective or, if common to a number of objectives, as an overhead. In the case where the costs of information/ technology transfer are identifiable and substantial, or the information/ technology transfer is the final phase of a programme spanning several

19
years, the information/technology transfer should be presented as a separate 
objective.

Duration 
State the length of time it will take to complete the objective as described.

Method 
Describe in detail the scientific method to be used to achieve the objective. 
Ideally, it should contain the following components:

    • the information on the science - an indication of the steps which will be 
      taken to achieve the objective (where appropriate this could be in the 
      form of milestones);

    • information on key resources (specialist skills and equipment) if they are 
      not available in-house (see also section 12);

    • information on technology transfer - how the findings of the research 
      will be passed on.

    • information which describes any potential environmental impact the 
      proposed research might incur. Include a description of any mitigating 
      or monitoring work proposed to overcome or alleviate potential impacts. 
      The description should also acknowledge the impact of cumulative 
      environmental damage.

Where a group of objectives has a common method, the objectives may be 
grouped together, with the description of the method following immediately 
after.

9. Justification for Crown Funding and/or inclusion in 
the New Zealand Antarctic Programme 
Provide a justification for Crown funding (PGSF) and/or inclusion in 
New Zealand's National Antarctic Research Programme.. You should 
clearly state the purpose of the proposed research in the context of 
Government outcomes and why it needs to be done in Antarctica. 
Demonstrate that:

    • the research is in New Zealand's interest because it relates to the research 
      priorities identified by the RDRC; and/or

    • the PGSF is the most appropriate source of funds because the research is 
      Public Good as the benefits cannot be captured by an individual, 
      agency, or organisation, at least in the short term; and/or

    • and the research is Public Good because time-scales for completion are 
      outside market horizons (although benefits may be able to be captured 
      after subsequent investment by others).

Include justification for any research facilities, national collections and 
databases that should be "maintained in the national interest". Please also 
refer to the section on eligibility criteria in the FRST "Guide to the PGSF 
Assessment and Allocation Process, (2nd Edition)".
 
20
The RDRC will give priority to well presented quality science proposals 
which relate to the priority research themes identified in its strategy document 
"New Zealand and Antarctica".

10. Progress and Achievements

Please provide a brief outline of the progress and achievements of the 
research team in previous related research and give reference to key 
publications, patents, etc. Stress significant results over the past two to three 
years. PGSF applicants should include other achievements related to the 
programme even if they were not part of earlier PGSF programmes.

The past performance of the research team is important in the appraisal of 
applications for funding. Information on achievement of objectives in the 
past, will be forwarded to the advisory committees.

For new applicants, achievements in related areas of research will be considered.

11. Collaboration (PGSF)

For the purpose of appraising the application for funding, "Collaboration" is 
restricted to the situation where two or more research teams work together 
to plan, execute and develop a research programme, but submit separate 
applications to the PGSF.

  • A single application to the Foundation to be undertaken by two or more 
providers is treated as sub-contracting (section 12).

If applicable, please list all PGSF collaborative programmes that should be 
appraised with the proposed programme. Please provide the short title (s) and 
the amount(s) requested. Do not list collaborative programmes that are 
multi-year funded in this section because they are not needed in the 
appraisal, but please ensure that all collaborations are justified and explained 
in section 7

12. Sub-Contracting and Resources Not Available In-
house

In cases where the research depends on purchasing skills and resources from 
other agencies, please indicate the sub-contracting arrangement(s) and attach 
letter(s) of confirmation from the sub-contractors. For each agency, list each 
objective separately, stating the dollar value, and the proportion of the 
objective cost being sub-contracted. For PGSF applicants these should be a 
breakdown of the total costs for sub-contracting stated in section 4(i).

If access to resources is via collaboration with another agency but with no 
exchange of money, indicate the agency, objective and proportion of 
objective, and replace the dollar value with "collaboration". 
21
Example:
                                                                                                                
Agency           Objective    %        ($000 (incl. GST)
ACME Research Ltd      1       10%           10
                       3        5%            5
J Bloggs Statistics Ltd    6       25%           25
All Agencies (total)                            40          (same as Sec 5(i))

Note:
i)  Not more than 30% of the requested funding can be sub-contracted to an 
    organisation that has restricted eligibility to the PGSF.
ii) Up to 60% of the value of an application to the main PGSF can be 
    subcontracted to universities.

13. Research Personnel

Key Personnel

In the matrix provided, list the people (researchers and technical staff) who 
are directly employed by the programme, and the proportion of time each 
Person will spend on each objective in the financial year. The proportion of 
each person's time must be expressed as a fraction of "Full-Time Equivalent" 
or FTE. For example, if a person employed in a full-time capacity (assuming 
40 hours per week) spends 8 hours each week for a year on one objective, 
his/her FTE for that objective is 0.2. If he/she does this for only six months, 
the FTE becomes 0.1. There is no need for either the rows or the columns 
of the matrix to add to 1.0. Please start the list with the Research Leader of 
the programme. Attach a Curriculum Vitae at the back of the form for each 
key person using the standard format outlined in Appendix Three. For key 
new appointments that are anticipated, indicate the expertise instead of the 
name (eg. metallurgist, botanist, or economist).

Sub contractor

Please include any FTEs of significance to the programme that are obtained 
through the methods of the subcontract.

New

Please indicate the anticipated FTE of new personnel not listed above (ie. 
not key personnel).

Other

Please indicate the FTE of technical and non-technical staff (eg. farmhands) 
and staff not listed under "Key Personnel" or "New" who are directly 
employed on this programme. Support staff should be costed as an overhead.
 
22
14. Total FTE for Financial Year
Please provide the total FTE for the researchers, technical personnel and others for 
the financial years 1996/97, 1997/98 and 1998/99 (ignore the latter two years if 
you are not seeking multi-year funding).

15. Funding Requirements (PGSF Applicants Only)
All programmes have to be fully costed.

Personnel
Please indicate the proportionate cost of personnel employed on the research 
proposed by the application. For the purpose of funding appraisal, the cost of 
personnel should include both the direct costs (ie. salary) and indirect costs (eg. 
superannuation, ACC and fringe benefits). Include the cost of direct management 
of the programme but exclude the cost of general management of the organisation.

General Operating Expenses
Please indicate the general operating expenses of the programme. This should 
include purchases of equipment under $5,000 that do not contribute to the capital 
base. Also include travel, although domestic or international travel can be identified 
as an extraordinary expenditure if it is a significant part of the cost.

NZAP Charges
Please indicate what the total of all NZAP charges is (please see attached Support 
Information Questionnaire).

Cost of Premises
Please indicate the annual rental cost or the depreciation cost of premises. This cost 
has to be proportional to the programme's share of the organisation's total annual 
cost or depreciation cost of premises.

Equipment Depreciation/Rental
The Foundation does not fund equipment directly but through the annual 
depreciation cost or rental. Please indicate these costs. They have to be proportional 
to the programme's share of the organisation's total annual cost of the equipment 
depreciation or rental. The cost of equipment in small programmes (projects) 
submitted from private applicants should be assigned in proportion to the expected 
life of the equipment.

Overheads
Please indicate the cost of your overheads in relation to the programme. This cost 
has to be in proportion to the programme's share of the organisation's total 
overheads. Managerial time (that is not specifically included in the programme), 
the cost of support services, the cost of financial and accounting systems, corporate 
activities and other indirect costs are regarded as overheads.

23
Extraordinary Expenditure

Please provide the costs of extraordinary items such as expensive software or 
the expenses from working in an unusual environment (e.g. research farms) 
or, if significant, the cost of a particular technology/information transfer 
process. If you use this category, you need to identify the nature of the 
expenditure in the space provided in section 16 of the Application Form.

GST

The total cost must include Goods and Services Tax.

Total

The total cost of all the objectives in section 8 should come to the same total 
as the figure indicated in this section and in section 5. All programmes have 
to be fully costed except for other support indicated in section 21.

16. Other Funding (PGSF Applicants Only)

For PGSF applicants who are seeking non-PGSF funding from other 
agencies for a related objective or work, please indicate the agencies 
involved, funding levels, and status (ie. requested, or approved). Also detail 
any support in kind that the programme may receive by replacing the $ 
values with a description.

This information is required by the Foundation to show the total extent of 
programmes, the integrated nature of objectives and the linkages that exist 
between researchers and other organisations.

State any contractual obligations relating to this programme. The Foundation 
needs to be aware of any contractual obligations relating to the proposed 
programme of research, in order to be assured that obligations do not conflict 
with government Public Good criteria, and that they do not prejudice the 
research in any way. Further information may be sought at a later date.

If commercial confidence is a concern, please give explicit reasons.

17. Ethics and Regulatory Obligations

The onus is on the applicant to ensure that all ethics and regulatory 
requirements pertaining to the proposed research are met. Outline the steps 
that have been or will be taken to obtain the approvals required for the 
research to be undertaken. Please note that the Foundation may make any 
funding dependent on obtaining these approvals. If delays are incurred 
through failure to gain or initiate these necessary approvals, funding may be 
withheld or withdrawn. The RDRC may approve an inclusion in the New 
Zealand's National Antarctic Research Programme, dependent on applicants 
obtaining the necessary ethical and regulatory approvals. There are specific 
obligations that must be met when working in Antarctica, most are detailed 
in the Call for Applications booklet.

24
18. Confidentiality
The information on the programme application may be requested under the Official Information Act.

Applicants may add their own specific reasons regarding the need for confidentiality. These may provide the Foundation and the RDRC with grounds for withholding information under the Official Information Act.

If there are special restrictions on refereeing that are desired because of commercial sensitivity or other confidential reasons, please indicate and justify in Section 22.

19. Declaration by Duly Authorised Agent
Decisions on programme funding are the responsibility of the Board of the Foundation. Communications regarding your application should be directed to the Foundation. Questions regarding non-PGSF proposals should be directed to the Executive Officer, RDRC. Please ensure that all information contained is true and accurate in every particular. A Duly Authorised Agent of the organisation is asked to sign each application agreeing to the above.

20. Curricula Vitae (CV's)
Please provide the CV's of all key persons involved in this research programme, including all research leaders, using the standard format described in Appendix 3. Please attach these to the page containing the CV's in the Application Form with the names of referees.

21. Ministry of Research, Science and Technology
Thee Ministry of Research, Science and Technology has requested that the applicants complete this question. Using the Ministry's glossary, please estimate the proportion of the programme which fits into each of its areas defined.

22. Referees
Suggest two referees whom you consider to be competent to comment on the relevance and/or scientific merit of this application. These should not be involved in the research programme proposed or working in the collaboration with the research team in related areas of research. Please indicate any relationships you have with the nominated referees.

If there are special restrictions on refereeing that are desired because of commercial sensitivity or other confidentiality reasons, please indicate and justify.

25
SUPPORT INFORMATION
QUESTIONNAIRE

This information is required from all applicants by the New Zealand Antarctic
Programme (NZAP) for planning purposes.

A completed Support Information Questionnaire must be appended to
each objective requiring work in Antarctica. This includes objectives
carrying out laboratory-only research or field work. A copy of the
questionnaire is attached as Appendix Two.

Project Duration and Dates
Indicate amount of time required in Antarctica and preferred dates.

Note: NZAP will attempt to meet this request but final duration of stay and dates
will be confirmed during 1996.

Area(s) of Operation
List all places you wish to visit and the length of stay required at each.

Personnel
Details of all personnel that will be involved in the project. Indicate participation by
students and any foreign nationals.

Risk
Indicate the level of risk in achieving your objective. Detail any specific risk.

Transport
For further information or assistance in completing this section, contact the
Operations group at NZAP's Christchurch office.

Cargo
Estimate the total weight of cargo you will have to and from the Antarctic.

Other Requirements
Detail any expected use of Scott Base laboratory or other assistance required.
Proposers must make arrangements in their funding applications to fully fund
any specialist staff employed by NZAP to enable their event to proceed safely.
Contact the Operations group at NZAP's Christchurch office to obtain
indicative costs for inclusion in funding proposals.

New Zealand Antarctic Programme Services
NZAP is the Government's agency responsible for the implementation of the
annual science programme. As a Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Trade, it is the agency responsible for the planning, training and support of all
scientific events and personnel involved in the programme. It is also responsible for
the day to day running of all New Zealand facilities in the Antarctic e.g. Scott Base.

27
NZAP's office in Christchurch offers a range of services required for the planning of science events, such as access to library facilities and reports from previous science parties.

The costs of major activities in Antarctica and some New Zealand activities are borne by NZAP. These include:
  • cost of flights (passengers and cargo) to and from Antarctica
  • living costs at Scott Base (excluding food)
  • vehicle and transport costs in Antarctic
  • field accommodation
  • some field equipment
  • communications (except data transfer)
  • some scientific equipment
  • cost of training
  • Christchurch transfers

All personnel participating in NZAP events will be charged for some goods and services provided by the programme. These charges are summarised below. GST is not payable on goods or services provided in Antarctica but is for goods and services provided in New Zealand.

**Invoicing of Charges**

Sponsoring agencies will be invoiced immediately following the return of the party from Antarctic, for other charges.

**Medical Assessments**

NZAP is required to have each medical assessed by its consulting physician. The full cost of this charge is debited to the appropriate event.

Medical Assessment        $25.00/person + GST

**Christchurch Service Charge**

Accommodation in Christchurch will be arranged by NZAP staff on request.

Although travel to and from Christchurch is the responsibility of individual Events, bookings will be made by NZAP staff on request.

Costs incurred for travel to and from Christchurch, along with any accommodation costs, will be charged to the sponsoring organisation.

The Christchurch service charge is a flat rate charge for each complete return movement between Christchurch and Antarctica, with no additional charges for turn-around or delayed flights etc.

All Events will be charged this service fee automatically unless NZAP staff are advised that the service is not required.

Christchurch Service Charge        $60.00/person + GST
28
Output Number: 35                                  Short Output Title: Antarctic                      FRST App Number: _______

 
                     FOUNDATION FOR RESEARCH,
                     SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
                     
                     
                           AND
                     
                     
                     THE ROSS DEPENDENCY
                     RESEARCH COMMITTEE
                     
                     
                     APPLICATION FOR
                     
                     RESEARCH FUNDING 1996/97 FINANCIAL YEAR
                     
                           AND/OR
                     
                     INCLUSION IN THE 1996/97 NEW ZEALAND
                     ANTARCTIC RESEARCH PROGRAMME
Output Number: 17                      Short Output Title: Antarctic                   FRST App Number: _______


FOUNDATION FOR RESEARCH, SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
AND THE ROSS DEPENDENCY RESEARCH COMMITTEE

Application for Antarctic Research Funding 1996/97 Financial Year and/or
Inclusion in the 1996/97 New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme

1. Identification
Contact Name: (Prof/Dr/Mr/Ms)
Contracting Organisation:
Address:
Phone:
Fax:
Email:
Programme Leader:

2. Short Programme Title (maximum of 5 words):

3. General Abstract (maximum of 10 lines of typed text):


Non-PGSF applicants go to Question 7

Programme Keywords (maximum of 5 words):

4. Total PGSF Requested for 1996/97 (including GST, $000):   $
   (i) Costs of sub-contracts (including GST)                 $
   (ii) 1995/96 PGSF funding (if applicable). Contract Number(s)  $

5. Cross-Output Themes
   (i) Costs associated with the NSS Possum theme ($000)      $
   (ii) Costs associated with the NSS Climate Change theme ($000)  $
   (iii) Costs associated with the Land Sustainability theme ($000)  $

6. Special Case Field (Entries into this field must be agreed by the Foundation at the time of
applying for an application number. See the guidelines for possible categories).
FRST App Number: _______

7. Programme Design and Scientific Rationale

In a maximum of 3 pages, give an overview of the design and scientific rationale of the proposed programme.
Please read the Instruction Manual, in which a list of sub-headings is provided to ensure that you do not 
overlook critical issues that are considered in the appraisal process.

7A. Environmental Impact

It is important that you indicate in this section any potential environmental impact your research may incur. A 
preliminary environmental evaluation (PEE) is provided at Appendix One for this purpose. If you answer "Yes" to 
any of the questions on the PEE, a full description of what you propose is required, along with proposals for 
mitigating or monitoring these impacts. Please refer to the Instruction Manual for more detailed information on 
completing this section.

A 4
FRST App Number _____________________________________

8. Programme Objectives for 1996/97
(Please refer to the Instruction Manual for guidance. PGSF applicants may include up to ten objectives).
NB: A Support Information Questionnaire must be completed for each objective requiring work in Antarctica.
Please see Appendix Two.

Objective No.                                         Cost ($000 incl. GST): $

Objective Title (Not more than 5 words):

Annual Cost ($000 incl. GST)                         Ranking:

Research Leader:
Address:

Phone:
Fax:
Email:

Status: If Continuing or Modified state FRST Contract No:        Objective No:

Output:

Description (maximum of 10 lines or 800 characters)


Duration: (Maximum five of keywords)

Method (Please note that a common method can apply to a group of objectives. In this case, it is not necessary to repeat the method for each objective).

*Include references to any potential environmental impact which might result from your research.

*Please note how you propose to communicate the results of your research.

- A
9. Justification For Crown Funding and/or Inclusion in the New Zealand's National Antarctic
Research Programme
Provide an explanation on the following:

a) How does the proposed research add to the development of or complement the research
priorities identified by the RDRC in its "New Zealand and Antarctica" research strategy.

b) Justify the need for Crown funding (PGSF applicants only).

c) PGSF applicants include a separate statement indicating how the proposal fulfils the requirements
of the Research Strategy for output 35 (now referred to as output 17).

 
A 6
Food in Antarctica

No distinction will be made between time spent at Scott Base or in the field. A flat 
charge is levied per person per week or part thereof.

Food     $86.50/person/week

Email and Data Transfer Charges

NZAP will charge for all costs of data transfer, including EMAIL access, to projects. 
Projects supported by NZAP laboratory technicians will also be charged for all 
outward messages and data traffic. Costs should be estimated using $1.00 per 
message up to A4 page equivalent of text and $1.00 per page equivalent for 
additional data. Scott Base and Arrival Heights laboratories are connected to the 
Internet. Contact NZAP for charges and service available.

Specialist Staff Charges

Where a project requires specialist field staff eg Field leaders/Assistants, Field 
Mechanics, Dive Supervisors, DOSLI surveyors etc, projects will be required to 
meet all costs (including salaries) associated with the employment of such people. 
Because of the varying costs, NZAP should be consulted for assistance in determining 
costs.

Clothing Hire

Antarctic clothing will be available for hire to all personnel involved with NZAP. 
To assist in planning, a summary of available clothing and hire charges is included.

It is acknowledged that some university events may wish to continue providing 
their own clothing until such time as present stocks are exhausted.

To ensure this clothing meets the required standards, event leaders are to liaise with 
NZAP Programme Support Officer prior to 31 May 1996.

Inadequate Or Unsuitable Clothing May Prevent Persons 
Being Permitted To Leave For Antarctica.

Notes: 
  1. Scales of clothing required for specific areas (e.g. Dry Valleys) are available from 
      the NZAP office in Christchurch.
  2. Charge-out rates to be per week or part thereof.
  3. The rates listed are for planning purposes only. These will be reviewed at the 
      earliest opportunity.

Clothing Hire Charges                  Charge-out Rate $/Wk./Item (excl. GST)

Anorak                                     7.00
Bag, carryall                            1.20
Balaclava, polyprop                  0.70
Balaclava, woollen                    1.90
Boots, double climbing             25.80
Boots Survival, Mukluk*            21.00

                                                                                  29
Boots, Sorel*                  11.00
Bunnysuit                     16.00
Cap, windproof*                0.90
Glove, Fleece                  1.20
Glove, Fur lined               0.90
Gloves, leather                1.50
Gloves, polyprop*              0.90
Gloves, super cold-resist      2.70
Gloves, wool                   1.10
Goggles, ski and lens          4.00
Jacket, survival*             16.00
Jacket, thermal*               6.60
Jacket, windproof*             9.25
Mitts, nosewiper               3.50
Mitts, lined windproof*        4.00
Mitts, nosewiper               4.60
Neck Gaiter                    0.70
Overalls                      No Charge
Sallopettes, windproof*        9.60
Sallopettes, survival*        12.00
Sallopettes, thermal           7.90
Shirt, woollen*                2.40
Slippers, tent                 2.30
Socks*                         0.80
Sunglasses                     4.00
Trousers, thermal*             3.30
Trousers, windproof            3.30
Underwear, wool trousers*      3.30
Underwear, wool vest           1.65
Vest, sleeveless               5.00

Complete survival work kit as   $120.00   less 15% if
marked *                                  hired for more
                                          than 4 weeks.

Maps

A range of Department of Survey and Land Information and United States 
Geologic Survey maps is available for purchase. For further details contact NZAP 
Librarian (03) 358 0200.

30
14. Total FTE for Financial Year     FTE         FTE         FTE 
                                Year One    Year Two    Year Three

Researchers (scientists/engineers):

Technical personnel

Others
Total for Year

Non-PGSF applicants to go to Question 17

15. Funding Requirements: (in 1995/96 dollar terms, $000)

                                1996/97    1997/98    1998/99

Personnel:

General Operating Expenses
(including capital purchases up to $5000):

NZAP Charges:

Cost of Premises:

Equipment Depreciation/Rental:

Overheads:

Extraordinary Expenditure:

GST

Total:

Outline expenses under "Extraordinary Expenditure" above (mandatory if category used). If you 
are requesting multi-year funding, detail variation in requirements from year to year.

16. Other Funding

Indicate if non-PGSF funds have been sought for this research programme or for related work,
and indicate the status of the applications (i.e. whether other funding has been requested, or has 
been approved).

Agency                             Objective ($000 incl. GST)         Status (req/app)


State any Contractual obligations relating to the proposed programme
17. Ethics or Regulatory Obligations
Outline steps that have been or will be taken to meet ethical or regulatory requirements.

18. Confidentiality
If you wish the information in this form to be confidential, please state reasons. Should you wish to request restrictions on refereeing this application, please state your reasons in section 22.

19. Declaration by Duly Authorised Agent
The information contained in this form is accurate and I agree to deal directly (i.e. not through a third party) with the Foundation for Research, Science and Technology, the Ross Dependency Research Committee, and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme (NZAP), on all queries related to this application.

Signature
Date

20. Curriculum Vitae
Please attach CV's for the key personnel to the page identifying referees. (See the Appendix Three for the standard CV format).

 
10
10. Progress and Achievements:
Outline the progress and achievements of the research team towards existing objectives. Include reference to key publications.

•

•
11. Collaboration (PGSF)

List PGSF funded collaborative applications that should be appraised with this application.

App. No.(s)             Short title(s)           Amount Requested ($000)

If there are other PGSF applications upon which this programme is dependent, list FRST Application Numbers. The nature of the dependencies should be explained in section 7.

12. Sub-Contracting And Resources Not Available In-House

If access to key resources not available in-house will be achieved by subcontracting, then detail below. Please attach a letter from the subcontractor confirming that arrangements have been made. If access is via collaboration, please indicate accordingly.

Agency                 Objective               %           ($000 incl. GST)

13. Research Personnel:

Starting with the Research Leader, list the summaries of key personnel involved with the programme, giving the full-time equivalent (FTE) that will be spent on each objective. Include any anticipated new appointments. For each key person, attach their CV in the standard format. For new appointments indicate the skills being sought.

                                  Objectives
Key Personnel      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10

Sub contracter

Technical & Other Staff

A 8
21. Ministry of Research, Science and Technology

The following information is requested by the Ministry of Research, Science and Technology.

Give the proportion in the applications of Research and Development related to:

Fundamental Research      ___%
Strategic Research        ___%
Applied Research         ___%
Experimental Development ___%
Technology Transfer      ___%
Total                    ___


GLOSSARY

Fundamental Research
Experimental or theoretical activities undertaken primarily to acquire new knowledge of the underlying foundation of phenomena and observable facts, without any particular application or use in view. Sometimes referred to as pure or basic research.

Strategic Research
Research activities conducted to support long-term "national needs" and directed into specific broad areas in expectation of useful discoveries, or providing broad knowledge base necessary for solution of recognised practical problems.

Applied Research
Research activities to acquire new knowledge which is directed primarily towards a specific and predetermined objective or application, and including possible uses for the findings of fundamental research.

Experimental Development
Systematic work, drawing on existing knowledge gained from research and/or practical experience that is directed to producing new materials, products or devices, to installing new processes, systems and services, or to improving substantially those already produced or installed.

Technology Transfer
Activities directed at encouraging the exploration of knowledge by a specified recipient in a different place to its origin through a range of media and means, including concepts, processes and products, with the aim of its application to social, environmental and economic areas.
FRST App Number ______________________________________

22. Referees:

(Please nominate two local or overseas independent referees that FRST or RDRC may approach concerning this 
application. The Foundation and the RDRC recommend that the applicant ensures that a person is willing to act as 
a referee before nominating him or her. Indicate any relationships that exist between the applicant and the nominated 
referee, and the referee's competence to comment on the relevance and/or scientific merit of the application. Please 
ensure that this is the last page attached to the application.)

Name (and title):                                      Tel:

Position:                                              Fax:

Postal Address:

Courier Address:

Relationship / Expertise:

Name (and title):                                      Tel:

Position:                                              Fax:

Postal Address:

Courier Address:

Relationship / Expertise:

Should you wish to request restrictions on refereeing this application, please state your reasons.

12
FRST App Number ______________________________________________________
                                                                               -A
FRST App Number _____________________________________

APPENDIX ONE

Preliminary Environmental Evaluation

Details of Activities Answer all questions only if work is to be carried out in Antarctica during 1995/96.

If you answer "Yes" to any of these questions, a full description of proposed activity, including proposals for mitigating and monitoring these impacts is required in section 7A.

It is important that you provide maps detailing the proposed research areas (hand drawn sketches are acceptable).

Will your objective:

a. Use a radionuclide?                                       Yes     No     

If Yes, complete the following.

Radionuclide      Chemical form      Quantity (µ Curies)      Half life (years)

Detail procedures you will take to ensure that no radiation will enter the Antarctic environment from use or spillage.

b. Take any chemical to Antarctica?                         Yes     No     

If Yes, complete the following.

Chemical      Formula      Quantity      Use

Unused chemicals will be:      Left at Scott Base      Returned to New Zealand
                                                                  Other

If Other, detail disposal procedure.

c. Release any chemical to the Antarctic environment?      Yes     No     

If Yes, detail why the need to release, the chemical, the amounts involved, and the location.

A14
FRST App Number _____________________________________

d. Require the use of explosives?                                 Yes      No       
If Yes, complete the following.

How will the explosives be used?

Detail any precautions taken to minimise disturbance to any wildlife or plants.

Explosive Type       Number of detonations     Charges per detonation kg     Total weight kg


e. Collect, capture, kill, restrain, tag or band any terrestrial, freshwater or marine plants or animals?       Yes      No       
If Yes, complete the following.

For each species (apart from those taken using plankton nets or trawls), estimate the proportion of the local population you will be collecting, capturing, killing, tagging or banding. If restraining, include period of restraint.

Species              Method              Number              Proportion of population (%)


For each species, indicate the proportion of the local population you will be disturbing while carrying out the above activities.

f. Enter any Protected Area?                                          Yes      No       
If Yes, complete the following.

Name of Protected Area              Duration of Visit              Total person-days


Detail why the work must be carried out within the Protected Area?
FRST App Number _____________________________________________________

g. Take to Antarctica any animal, plant (includes seeds), micro-organism or soil? Yes  No 
If Yes, complete the following.

Species                                         Quantity

Detail why these materials need to be taken to Antarctica.

Detail the quarantine procedures you will undertake to ensure that there is no release to the Antarctic environment.

h. Significantly disturb by flooding, sampling, trampling, camp operations or any other means any ice-free area (bare ground)?      Yes  No 
If Yes, complete the following.

Briefly describe any such significant disturbance.

Detail any steps you will take to minimise such disturbance.

i. Take or remove any physical specimens e.g. rocks, fossils etc?      Yes  No 
If Yes, detail the general area and types of specimens to be collected.

Location         Specimen         Type         Total Number or Weight

j. Cumulative Impacts

Occupy new or existing camp sites?      New      Old      Both old and new sites 

If New, list these sites and indicate why a previously impacted site can not be used.

16
FRST App Number ______

Will you track previously untracked ground?                   Yes      No     

If Yes, state why this is necessary.

Will you install equipment, markers, stakes, cairns etc. that will be left in the field?  Yes      No     

If Yes, detail location and type of marker, stake etc.

Location          Type

k. Do you expect your activities to have an environmental impact not covered in the above?  Yes      No     

If Yes, fully detail impacts.

l. Is the proposed activity likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact?  Yes      No     

If Yes, a CEE will be required.

The RDRC is available to assist proposers with questions relating to the potential environmental
impact of their proposals. If you require assistance, please contact the Executive Officer, RDRC.
APPENDIX TWO                                          FRST App Number ___________

Support Information Questionnaire
Complete for each objective if involves work in Antarctica.

Duration Indicate the period you prefer to be in Antarctica giving any reasons for preferred timing.

Duration in Antarctica  ___ weeks

             Arrive Antarctica         ___/19___         Depart Antarctica         ___/19___
Preferred Option
             Arrive Antarctica         ___/19___         Depart Antarctica         ___/19___
Second Option
             Arrive Antarctica         ___/19___         Depart Antarctica         ___/19___
Third Option

Reasons:

Area(s) of Operation Indicate area(s) to be visited. Include length of stay at each area or site.

Site                                                    Length of stay
                                                        From                    To

Personnel Detail all personnel that will be involved in the project, both in New Zealand and in Antarctica. Give dates when in Antarctica. Indicate proposed participation by students and foreign nationals.

In Antarctica
Name                    Organisation                Dates in Antarctica
                                                        From                    To

New Zealand Only
Name                    Organisation

Risk What chance do you have in achieving your objectives? (Tick one). Distinguish between risks imposed by logistics, untried methodologies, untried equipment or other uncertainties. Detail as required.

        High chance of success
        Medium chance of success
        Low chance of success

A18
FRST App Number ___________________________________

Major Support Requirements

Major Transport (indicate number of hours required)

        Number
     Yes     No _____________     Helicopter support (1hr per 120km)
     Yes     No _____________     Hercules support (1hr per 400km, 3 round trips required)
     Yes     No _____________     Twin Otter (1hr per 200km).
     Yes     No _____________     Ice-Breaker support (show days required)

Surface Transport (indicate number of units required)

        Number
     Yes     No _____________     Light Oversnow Vehicle (e.g. toboggan. 4-wheel drive motorbike)
     Yes     No _____________     Medium Oversnow Vehicle (e.g. Hagglunds, ASV)
     Yes     No _____________     Heavy Oversnow Vehicle (e.g. Caterpillar D3, D6 for towing heavy loads)
     Yes     No _____________     4-wheel drive light commercial vehicle (local Scott Base area)
     Yes     No _____________     Sledges. Indicate weight to be carried _____________ lbs

Moveable Huts and Wannigans (indicate number of units required)

        Number
     Yes     No _____________     Accommodation Unit
     Yes     No _____________     Laboratory Unit
     Yes     No _____________     Fish Hut
     Yes     No _____________     Dive Hut

Cargo (estimate of total weight of equipment and samples)

____________________________________________________     lbs From New Zealand to Antarctica
____________________________________________________     lbs From Antarctica to New Zealand

Other Requirements

     Yes     No _____________     Space in Arrival Heights Laboratory
     Yes     No _____________     Space in Hatherton Geo-Sciences Laboratory
     Yes     No _____________     Space in Laboratory area of Q Hut
     Yes     No _____________     Survey Assistance Required
     Yes     No _____________     Specialist staff required e.g. Field assistant, Dive Supervisor etc. (Number _____________ )
     Yes     No _____________     Other requests (list)

______________________________________________________________________
Detail any other requests for major support items you may have here.

______________________________________________________________________
FRST App Number _____________________________________

APPENDIX THREE

Curriculum Vitae (max. of 2 pages)

Full Name: (Title, given name, surname)

Years as a practising Researcher:

Academic Qualifications (degree, university, discipline):

Honours/distinctions/membership of societies, institutions, committees:

Present Position:

Professional Positions Held (years, position, institution, activity):

Present research/professional speciality:

Number of Refereed publications: Number of Patents:

Number of Significant Publications not included in the above:

Major Achievements, including important publications, during the past five years:

20
