ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO              
                                                         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA          

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                              XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ   


                                                        XX ATCM/INF 7
March, 1996
Original: English

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

Introduction

Since its report to ACTM XIX, the United Kingdom has brought 
into force the majority of its domestic legislation to 
implement the provisions of the Protocol.  It has also 
approved,  in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty, Annex V to the Protocol.

Detail

The Antarctic Act 1994, with the exception of Sections 3 to 7, 
was brought into force on 1 November 1995.  The sections now 
in force include the prohibition on United Kingdom Nationals 
doing the following unless they have a permit:

-   introducing non-native animals and plants into 
    Antarctica (Section 8);

-   entering a Specially Protected Area (Section 9);

-   harming an Antarctic Historic Site or Monument;

-   entering a CEMP site (Section 11).

The other sections now in force provide, inter alia, for 
permits, prosecution of offenders and penalties.
The United Kingdom has prepared the appropriate documentation 
required for the permits.  This has been submitted separately 
as an information paper.  The British Antarctic Survey has 
already issued one of these permits - for the introduction of 
non-native flora.

The Antarctic Regulations were also brought into force on 
1 November 1995.  These detail the procedures for applying for 
permits and the requirements for EIA.  They also schedule 
lists of SPAs and sites and monuments.

On 29 February 1996 the United Kingdom informed the United 
States as Depositary of the Antarctic Treaty of its approval, 
in accordance with Article IX of the Treaty, of Recommendation 
XVI-10 (Annex V to the Environmental Protocol).

To assist members of the public who are contemplating visiting 
Antarctica, the United Kingdom has prepared a leaflet entitled 
"Guidance for those intending to visit Antarctica".  Not 
designed to be a definitive description of the requirements of 
the Protocol, its purpose is to act as a layman's 
introduction.  A copy is attached (Annex A).  In addition the 
British Antarctic Survey has released a leaflet "Environmental 
Protection in Antarctica" for those going to Antarctica.  A 
copy is also attached (Annex B).  The final version of the 
United Kingdom's "Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment of 
Activities in Antarctica" (XIX ATCM/INFO 14) was released in 
July 1995.
Annex 1

GUIDANCE FOR THOSE INTENDING TO VISIT ANTARCTICA

Introduction
These notes are designed to help those intending to go to
Antarctica, for which a permit may now be necessary.

International Obligations
The principal objectives of the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 are:
-   To preserve Antarctica as a demilitarised area, and to
    ensure that it is used for peaceful purposes only;
-   To establish it as a nuclear free area;
-   To promote international scientific co-operation in
    Antarctica.

The United Kingdom is also bound by international conservation
agreements governing Antarctic seals and fisheries.

The 1991 Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty provides
a framework for the environmental protection of Antarctica.
Some of its main provisions are: activities in Antarctica are
to be conducted so as to limit adverse environmental impacts
(Article 3); most mineral activities are prohibited (Article
7); and environmental impact assessments are to be undertaken
(Article 8). Five Annexes to the Protocol lay down detailed
procedures for environmental impact assessment, conservation of
fauna and flora, waste disposal and management, marine pollution
and protection of special areas. A sixth Annex, dealing with
liability for environmental damage, is under discussion.

The Protocol was ratified by the United Kingdom in April 1995.

United Kingdom Legislation
The Protocol has been implemented in UK law by the Antarctic Act
1994 and the Antarctic Regulations 1995. The legislation has
been extended to the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and United
Kingdom Dependent Territories, including the Falkland Islands
and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. The 
legislation will be brought into force progressively, beginning 
in November 1995.

When the legislation enters fully into force, a number of 
activities in Antarctica will require a permit from the 
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. 
Specific guidance notes will be made available as each permit 
type is brought into use.

● Persons Requiring Permits

Permits will be required under the Antarctic Act for:

  - British expeditions to Antarctica. "British expedition" 
    encompasses all expeditions, including tourist cruises, which 
    are organised in, or depart for Antarctica from the United 
    Kingdom or other British territory. A British expedition need 
    not necessarily be composed of British nationals, and a single 
    person can constitute an expedition. "Antarctica" includes all 
    sea, land and ice shelves south of 60° South. (Section 3 of 
    the Antarctic Act)

  - A person remaining in Antarctica on a British station 
    (Section 4);

  - British registered vessels and aircraft going to Antarctica 
    (Section 5);

  - Mineral resource activities (Permits will be restricted to 
    scientific research or the use of mineral resources for certain 
    construction purposes) (Section 6).

In addition, further permits will be needed by British nationals 
for the following:

  - the taking of, or harmful interference with, fauna or flora; 
    (Section 7);

  - the introduction of non-native animals or plants (Section 8);
- entry into areas protected under the Protocol (Antarctic Specially Protected Areas) or under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) (CEMP Monitoring Sites).(Sections 9 and 11);

The Act prohibits damage, destruction or removal of Historic Sites and Monuments, which are listed in the Antarctic Regulations.

Provisions governing waste disposal and removal of waste from Antarctica will be contained in conditions attached to permits.

Prohibitions on marine pollution in Antarctic waters are already contained in existing UK Merchant Shipping legislation and are not dealt with by the Antarctic Act or Regulations.

Carrying out activities without first obtaining a permit, breach of a permit condition or breach of a prohibition is an offence punishable by up to 2 years imprisonment and/or an unlimited fine.

Permits are not required for:

    - Ships or aircraft in transit through or over the high seas to an immediate destination outside Antarctica;
    - Fishing vessels, unless they are carrying out functions related to an expedition.

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

Proposed activities will normally be subject to prior assessment of their impact on the Antarctic environment by the Polar Regions Section of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office before a permit can be issued. A preliminary assessment will be used to determine the severity of impact of an activity, which may then require an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), or a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE), to be undertaken. EIA will be a precondition for the grant of a permit for certain activities. The FCO has prepared separate detailed Guidance on EIA to assist applicants. Activities which would probably
require an EIA include:

-   Construction of, or modifications to, British research 
stations in Antarctica;
-   British expeditions to Antarctica.

Timetable for Permit Applications

Applications for permits should normally be submitted as far in 
advance as possible, and not less than 4 months before 
undertaking the proposed activities.

However, permits for proposed major activities which may 
require a CEE should be applied for at minimum 15 months in 
advance.

Prospective applicants for permits are urged to contact the 
Polar Regions Section of the FCO as early as possible to discuss 
their plans informally, before embarking on an Environmental 
Impact Assessment, which might be a time-consuming, costly and 
possibly fruitless exercise.

Obtaining Application Forms

Application forms and guidance notes for can be obtained from:

Polar Regions Section
South Atlantic and Antarctic Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
London SW1A 2AH

Telephone:  0171-270 2716
Fax:  0171-270 2086.
This guidance is intended as no more than a simple introduction 
to those planning to go to Antarctica;  it has no legal status.

Anyone considering organising or undertaking activities in 
Antarctica should study the Antarctic Act and Regulations 
carefully, and obtain a copy of the document "Guide to 
Environmental Impact Assessment of Activities in Antarctica" 
published by the FCO.  This last can be obtained free of charge 
from the address above.

                                             Final 4/1/96
ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION
INANTARCTICA

B British Antarctic Survey

B British Antarctic Survey

Take care of the science
WARNING

Take care of your waste

Take care of the environment to the care of the Antarctic Treaty

BE AWARE OF LEGISLATION WHICH PROTECTS THE
ARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
protocol on the environment agreed in
1991 by the Antarctic Treaty
nations. The UK has ratified
this protocol and is
committed to protecting
the Antarctic environment
through the Antarctic
Act 1994 and its
provisions for
environmental
management.
You have a responsibility
to protect the
environment. If you
cause damage you
may be prosecuted.
Supervisors and
colleagues are
responsible for
their actions and
those working under
their control.
Supervisees are
responsible for
their own actions.
If you have any
information or
concern contact
your local
Environment
Officer.
ENSURE YOUR ACTIVITIES HAVE MINIMUM IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
• Avoid placing oiled or dirty equipment in areas 
       where it could be damaged or lost.
     • Keep oil and other toxic materials securely 
       stored and well away from the sea.
     • Do not dump or discharge fuels, 
       chemicals or other wastes into the sea.
     • Avoid introducing non-native 
       species to the Antarctic.
     • Keep Antarctica pristine 
       by removing all rubbish and 
       discarding food scraps and 
       packaging.
     • Take care of the 
       Antarctic environment 
       by following these 
       guidelines.

TAKE CARE OF SCIENCE
Scientific endeavours in Antarctica are 
interfered with by carelessness. 
Minimise disturbance to 
equipment and 
stations by 
keeping 
away 
from 
sensitive 
areas. 
You are 
asked 
to 
follow 
instructions 
from 
your 
support 
staff 
and 
station 
workers 
and 
to 
report 
any 
damage 
to 
equipment 
or 
accidents 
to 
them.

KEEP ANTARCTICA PRISTINE
Make sure you comply with 
guidelines on 
rubbish 
disposal 
and 
litter. 
Minimise 
the 
risk 
of 
introducing 
alien 
species 
to 
Antarctica 
by 
checking 
your 
clothing 
and 
equipment 
for 
soil, 
seeds 
and 
other 
contaminants 
before 
arriving 
in 
Antarctica.

TAKE CARE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
By following a few simple 
guidelines you can help to 
protect the 
ecosystem 
and 
landscape 
of 
Antarctica. 
Litter 
and 
rubbish 
do 
not 
decompose 
and 
can 
harm 
wildlife. 
Keep 
to 
paths 
and 
avoid 
damaging 
vegetation 
or 
disturbing 
wildlife. 
Do 
not 
collect 
rocks, 
minerals, 
or 
fossils 
as 
a 
souvenir. 
Report 
any 
oil 
spills 
to 
your 
support 
staff 
immediately.

DRAFT CODE OF CONDUCT FOR SCIENCE ON THE UNIQUE CONTINENT
You are asked to follow instructions from your support staff and station workers and to report any damage to equipment or accidents to them.
Scientific endeavours in Antarctica are interfered with by carelessness. Minimise disturbance to equipment and stations by keeping away from sensitive areas.
