ANTARCTIC TREATY                                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                            XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                            ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                           XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                   XX ATCM/INF 137
                                                   May 1996
                                                   Original: English

OPENING STATEMENT BY DR. F. HANEKOM,
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF SOUTH AFRICA

(Agenda item 3)

(Submitted by South Africa)
Opening statement by Dr Francois Hanekom
Head of the Delegation of South Africa

Mr Chairman,

On behalf of the South African delegation I would like to extend our warmest congratulations to you on your election as Chairman of the XXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Through you Sir, I would like to thank the Government of the Netherlands for hosting this meeting, and for the kind hospitality extended to us by the city of Utrecht.

South Africa, as only Consultative Party on the African continent, is thankful to continue and to strengthen its role in contributing to international management of an entire continent - Antarctica. We trust that this meeting shall again demonstrate to the world, how a large group of nations has the ability to co-operate, unified in their endeavours towards environmental protection, peaceful administration, and the pursuit of scientific knowledge.

We are committed to full compliance to the objectives of the Protocol for Environmental Protection of Antarctica, and has ratified it on 3 August 1995. We firmly believe that the early entry into force of the Protocol is one of the highest priorities, and we urge those countries who have not done so, to expedite ratification. We also look forward to significant progress on the many important issues on the Agenda, for example functional use of the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) and progress within the Group of Experts on Liability and related matters. We believe that it is essential to put a Secretariat in place to ensure the effective functioning of the Protocol on the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), and trust that a solution in this regard will soon be found in the spirit of co-operation which has always been a characteristic feature of the Treaty System.

• The establishment of the Liability Annex seems to be complex and time consuming. We commend the work accomplished thus far by the Meeting of Experts. We share the view that it is important that the Annex, or Annexes, that are finally adopted, are designed for the special conditions of Antarctica. We therefore, welcome the involvement of scientific, technical and logistic experts in the discussions and we encourage the meeting to fully consider their inputs in order to ensure that realism prevails. This will further ensure that a liability regime for Antarctica can be implemented with confidence which will be essential in the future operations of the Antarctic Treaty System.

Mr Chairman, South Africa has, apart from the tragic death of a member of our summer personnel, experienced a very successful season. Good progress has been made with the SANAE IV base building process. We are confident that this station will be operational for overwintering purposes from January 1997 onwards.
South Africa, in a very special way, is committed to its Environmental, Health and 
Safety Management Policy in Antarctica. The South African National Antarctic 
Programme (SANAP) strives to achieve, in all its activities, to have no negative 
impact on the Antarctic environment. Every participant in the SANAP, as far as 
possible, shall have safe and healthy working conditions in a clean environment, 
and safety considerations shall have preference over all other activities.

The South African delegation are looking forward to a fruitful meeting and intend 
to play an active role in an attempt to achieve the goals set out for the meeting.

●
●
●
