ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                                      XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                      XX ATCM/INF 82
                                                      April, 1996
                                                      Original: English

THE DISMANTLING OF GEORG FORSTER STATION AND THE CLEAN-UP OF
SCHIRMACHER OASIS

(Agenda item 12)

(Submitted by Germany and Russia)
504-390.20 SB 5

Information Paper

(Submitted by Germany and Russia)

The Dismantling of Georg Forster Station and 
the Clean-up of Schirmacher Oasis
(No. 12 of the preliminary agenda)

In the Schirmacher Oasis in East Antarctica three winter stations have been operated, 
namely the Russian station Novolazarevskaya since 1961, the station Georg Forster of the 
German Democratic Republic since 1976 and the Indian station Maitri since 1989. The oasis 
is an ice free area of approx. 31 km2 at a maximum length of 20 km and a maximum width 
of 4 km. Surrounded by glacier ice the oasis contains many fresh water lakes covering an 
area of approx. 5 km2 totally. The Russian station Novolazarevskaya was reconstructed at a 
different place during the 1977/78 Austral summer. The old station was given up, but may 
sporadically still be used as a summer quarter.

Because of the close vicinity of Novolazarevskaya and "Georg Forster" of 1.5 km and 
because of the long distance of more than 100 km between the oasis and the ice shelf 
barrier, the transport logistics as well as the general logistical activities of both stations were 
tied together since the beginning. The annual logistical operations, exerted a considerable 
impact on the ice free territory which is consequently not to discern according to its source.

After the reunification of both German states Georg Forster Station fell under the 
responsibility of the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) in 
Bremerhaven. Because major investments would have been required to bring the 
environmental and technical standard of the station up to date, the AWI decided to 
terminate the winter operations by the end of 1992. Important observatory programmes like 
the ozone programme were transferred to AWTs winter station Neumayer and have been 
continued there since.

Georg Forster Station was still used as a base for summer activities until 1996. However, 
because of its environmental and technical standard the AWI had also to decide to dismantle 
the station and to clean up the area by the mid nineties and to remove all material and
wastes from the Treaty Area according to the requirements of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty.

Because of the close connections between the logistics of the two stations it was logical and consequent to develop a joint project between the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) and the AWI for the dismantling and clean up. A relevant Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was set up and signed in April 1993, in which the duties and responsibilities of both sides were defined. In addition to the engagement of both institutions the project was financially supported by the German Ministry of Science and Technology (1.7 Mio US $).

In spring 1993 a joint inspection team visited the Oasis to estimate the amount of material to be removed. The evaluation, which was carefully mapped, compromised the station consisting of the containerised main building, 15 partly remote huts, heavy vehicles, sledges and tanks as well as 19 waste deposit sites of various contents totalling to about 800 to 1000 tons equivalent to 4000 to 5000 cbm. The waste disposal sites contained the wastes of both stations accumulated during the past decades.

The clean-up work was started during the 1993/94 season. In this season the priority was laid on the removal of hazardous goods like batteries, fuels and other noxious goods. During the following summer seasons, the clean-up work focused on the dismantling of the buildings and the removal of the waste deposits. Most wastes were containerised; about 100 20'containers were loaded and transported by tractor trains to the annual support ship at the ice shelf barrier. The field work was performed by the winter teams of Novolazarevskaya and joint summer teams of AARI and AWI. The project was successfully brought to an end after three summer seasons in February 1996. At that time, approximately 1000 tons of building materials and other wastes were removed from the Treaty Area; the region is thoroughly cleaned.

As a consequence of the success of the fruitful cooperation, Novolazarevskaya Station has taken all necessary steps to keep the area free of wastes by retrograding all wastes after each season. AARI plans a monitoring programme to observe the recovery of the area, particularly also the recovery of the lakes.
