ANTARCTIC TREATY                                       TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                               XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                               ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                              XX консультативное совещание

                                                      XX ATCM/INF 115
                                                      May 1996
                                                      Original: English

OPENING STATEMENT BY MR PAUL O'SULLIVAN, HEAD OF THE
DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA

(Agenda Item 20)

(Submitted by Australia)
OPENING STATEMENT BY MR PAUL O'SULLIVAN

HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF AUSTRALIA

Mr Chairman,

The Australian delegation is delighted to come to The Netherlands for this Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We look forward to working with you and our colleagues in these excellent facilities in the beautiful city of Utrecht.

We come to this meeting with the 1995/96 Australian Antarctic summer program almost at its conclusion.  This season's program has been one of the most complex undertaken by my country in Antarctica. We completed the most extensive marine science program undertaken by Australia in the Southern Ocean, with 101 days devoted to marine research. This work is directly relevant to CCAMLR and will contribute to a better understanding of the Antarctic environment and global change.

All of our priority scientific and operational objectives were completed, despite a number of difficulties early in the season. Such challenges, which confront us and others active in Antarctica, help to bind us in our work. In Antarctica we have to share experiences and knowledge, cooperate with each other, and lend assistance when required. So it is in the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Now, at our twentieth meeting, with a large body of achievements behind us including the Madrid Protocol, there is a need for consolidation. Yet there is still work to do, and problems that will be best solved by working together. We look forward at this meeting to cooperating on further progress in the development of the Treaty system.

My delegation is delighted that since the nineteenth meeting four more Consultative Parties have ratified the Madrid Protocol. The objective we all share of bringing the Protocol into force is now on the horizon. Australia hopes that those countries which have yet to announce their ratification will be in a position to do so soon.

But there is other unfinished business.  Australia is keen to see progress on the liability regime to which we committed ourselves when the Protocol was adopted in 1991. Some five years later we still do not have agreement on rules for liability. Accordingly, my delegation will be looking for ways to advance this work under the excellent guidance of Professor Wolfrum. We will be pleased to explore avenues to achieve, within a reasonable time, an annex to the Protocol providing the widest possible liability for environmental damage, based on the polluter 
                                                                                                                         61
pays principle. We recognise, however, that such a regime may need to include both financial limits and limits on the extent to which a state must stand behind its operators.

Australia notes that the Antarctic tourist industry continues to grow. While relatively few of the ship-borne tourists to Antarctica are from my country, delegations will be aware that tourist overflights have once again been conducted from Australia. Over 3000 people visited Antarctica this way during the last summer, on nine Qantas flights. We believe they did so in safety and comfort, and with negligible impact on the Antarctic environment. My delegation believes that we should continue to encourage private operators in the Antarctic who meet the environmental requirements, operate safely and make little or no demands on the national programs that are conducting essential research in Antarctica.

Mr Chairman,

Since our last meeting in Seoul there has been a change of Government in Australia. Our new Government wants to take this opportunity to reiterate its commitment to the Antarctic Treaty and its principles. Our Government has confirmed that the objectives for the Australian Antarctic Program are to:
  maintain the Antarctic Treaty System;
  understand global climate change;
  undertake scientific work of practical importance; and
  protect the Antarctic environment.

Australia remains fully committed to the Treaty and looks forward to fully participating in this and future meetings.

Australia's Antarctic summer program for this year will be completed when our research vessel Aurora Australis returns to Hobart this week. But that is not the end of it - left behind in Antarctica are our winter staff at four stations who will continue to work on essential scientific and meteorological observations. They will also be preparing for the next season's activities. Sitting here in the beautiful spring of Utrecht it is easy to forget that we have our staff in the darkness of Antarctica doing work as important as that which we will tackle here.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its pleasure at meeting again with our Antarctic Treaty colleagues. We trust that our work together here will be meaningful and memorable - setting a firm foundation for the further development of the Antarctic Treaty system.

                                                                                                  62
