ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]CTIQUE     ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE       XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 60
April, 1996
Original: English


~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA
BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM
ANTARCTIC INFRASTRUCTURES, TECHNOLOGY AND OPERATIONS

(agenda item /12)

(Submitted by Brazil)
INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA
BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM

ANTARCTIC INFRASTRUCTURES, TECHNOLOGY AND OPERATIONS

Ref: Item 12 of the Provisional Agenda of the XX ATCM ( Information Paper )

1 - INFRASTRUCTURES

1.1- Antarctic Station "Comandante Ferraz" (EACF)

      On the 6th of February, 1984, the Antarctic Station "Comandante Ferraz"
(EACF) was installed on the Keller Peninsula, Admiralty Bay, King George Island,
South Shetland Islands. It was composed, at that time, of 8 modules of "containers".

      Since 1986, EACF, already with 33 modules, began to be served by two
Support Groups and scientists (Summer and Winter Teams). As from March 1996, the
Support Group will no longer alternate, but will stay in the Antarctic for 12
uninterrupted months.

      Today, EACF has 62 modules able to shelter the Support Group (10 Brazilian
Navy personnel) and scientists (up to 24 people in the summer and 7 people in the
winter). The station include cabins, a living room, a video room, a kitchen, a laundry,
workshops, a radio-station, a computer room, storehouses, a garage, an incinerator, a
library, a small sports center, an infirmary (2 beds), an emergency surgery unit,
laboratories and research modules. In 1994, a helipad was built on a plataform,
raised 1.5m above the ground, which is able to operate with up to medium size
helicopters.

1.2- Refuge-Bases

      To implement the research, mainly in Geology and Biology, four refuge-
bases in differents places of South Shetland Islands were installed: Nelson Island
(Astronomo Cruls refuge-base); Elephant Island (Emilio Goeldi and Engenheiro
Wiltgen refuge-bases) and King George Island (Padre Rambo refuge-base), during
differents expeditions .

1.3 - Oceanographic and Supply Ship (NApOc) "Ary Rongel"

      The brazilian activities in the Antarctic are supported by the Brazilian
Navy Oceanographic and Supply Ship (NApOc) "Ary Rongel".

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                            1
The NApOc "Ary Rongel" was built in 1981, in Norway, and underwent
a process of enlargement and modernization in 1986. Originally baptized "Polar 
Queen", it was projected to operate in a fragmented ice field and is catalogued as "Ice 
Class 1A1". She carries 99 people, of whom 27 are researchers. Its total length is 
75,2m and the width is 13,0m. It is propelled  by two engines and one shaft. It can 
attain the maximun speed of 15 knots, with autonomy of 60 days. It operates with two 
lightweight helicopters (AS - 355 ECUREIL), able to do the basic jobs of transportig 
people and cargo and air reconnaissance, including the ice field.

The NApOc "Ary Rongel" has the following facilities for scientific 
research:

- Dry and wet laboratories, with a modular capacity able to receive the 
equipments according to the research which will be done. The wet 
laboratory have a capacity of continuous water flow;

- An oceanographic crane with a cable length of 3000m, which can be 
used, for taking vertical samples, with the following equipment: 
closing trap, bottles for water collection, depth samplers, multiple 
information collectors with CTD and Rosette;

- An Eco-integrator able to operate in multi-frequencies and able to 
identify pelagic animals, and deep sea concentrations of plants and 
fish, without interference from the depth register; and

- Hydrographic boat which enables the collection of samples in shallow 
water and the production of nautical cartography.

The research resources will be increased by the installation of different 
scientific equipments, which will make the ship able to do oceanographic research.

1.4 - Brazilian Air Force Support

The Brazilian Air Force gives support to the Brazilian Antarctic Program 
(PROANTAR), doing seven annual flights, with aircrafts model C-130 (four flight in 
summer and three in winter) transporting equipment, material and people, thus 
permitting the rotation of the scientific teams and the support of EACF.

2 - TECHNOLOGY

A great part of the equipments and the systems of EACF are 
manufactured nationally. Independent of their origin, they are adapted to the 
environmental protection rules, established by the Madrid Protocol, seeing that, many 
of these, could be seen as "Best Available Techniques" (BATs). We can list:

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                     2
a) The waste incinerator - made in Brazil, works on a sophisticated system called "PYROLYSIS", which processes at a lower temperature than the usual combustion , 
between 4500 and 6500 C, under a reduced atmosphere, turning deffliculty the 
generation of the dioxines, halogens and furan, thus reducing, drastically, the 
factors that cause the oxidation of the hard metals contained in the residues.

The waste is collected selectively. Organic waste, together with paper 
and some cardboard is burned in the Station incinerator. The remaining waste is 
triturated or compressed, and packaged in specific containers. It is stored in an 
appropriate area that is protected from the effects of nature. It is finally transported, 
at the end of the summer, by NApOc "Ary Rongel" to Brazil to be recycled.

b) Oxicatalyctic Filters - made in Brazil for gases discharged from the diesel-generator, 
are built in steel and inside the filter there are platinum/palladium spheres, which are 
designed to work, with high efficiency, reducing up to 95% of the carbon monoxide 
emissions, 90% of the soot, 85% of the formaldehides, 50% of noise intensity and 
with no increase in NO2.

c) Flatboats for the oil fuel transportation (2) - built in Brazil, have a double bottom 
to avoid leakages.

d) "Skua" Boat - built in Brazil, is 10m long, 3,15m wide and has a draft of 0,70m. 
It is propelled by a diesel engine, which makes it able to travel at 8 knots. Its 
endurance is 270 nautical miles, and is able to transport 12 people, including its 
crew.

e) System of aeolic energy production - concerned about energy production with a 
reduced environmental impact, a system has been acquired that will be composed 
basically of a turbine with its respective tower and sealed batteries of 12 volts/54Ah, 
made in Brazil. This experimental configuration will supply the energy needs of one 
research module, being substituted by conventional power during the periods 
without wind.

f) Oil fuel storage tanks - with the intention of reducing the risks of leakage, the 
substitution of the old fuel tanks for tanks with double skins began in the summer of 
1993/94. Of the existing 17 tanks, 12 possess double skins. It is expected that all the 
tanks will have double skins by 1997

g)Treatment system of used water - this was modified in the summer of 95/96. At the 
moment, the black water originating in the toilets are separated from the gray water 
originating in the showers and washing areas.The black water collected is 
transported to four septic tanks (primary treatment), where the water undergoes a

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                     3
chlorine base process of decantation and disinfection. After the primary treatment, 
the waste water from the  septic tanks is directed to two anaerobic filters, where it 
undergoes the secondary treatment. The water flowing out of these filters, has still 
to pass through the filtration drains. The treatment system for the gray water collects 
the waste water caming from  the showers and the washing areas and  directs them 
to a box which retains solid materials. After the retainer box, the gray water passes 
through anaerobic filters and filtration drains, independently of the black water 
filters and drains.

h) With the intention of reducing fire risks, a review of all EACF electric fittings, and 
an installation of a Fire Detection System is in progress. At the moment, the 
replacement of electric heating for a radiation system is also underway.

i) INTERNET in EACF.

In January 1996, INTERNET E-MAIL was installed in EACF.

Correspodents should use the address eacf@internet, and messages will be 
received in the “Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo” (FAPESP 
- Brazil). After this, the messages will go to a BBS and, afterwards, they will be sent 
by radio (HF) to the KO - 23 satelite. When  the satelite orbit approaches, the 
messages will be relayed to a HF receiver and then to the EACF micro-computer, 
which manages the system. When the EACF sends messages, the process will be the 
reverse.

3 - ANTARCTIC OPERATIONS

At the beginning of December 1982, the Brazilian Oceanographic and Supply Ship of 
that time (NApOc “Barão de Teffé” ) left  Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), for the first time, to 
perform the Antarctic Operation I, with the basic mission of making a hydrographic, 
oceanographic and meteorogical survey of areas in the north-west sector of the 
Antarctic. This operation included visits to the Stations of Argentina, Chile, United 
States, Russia, Poland and Germany, establishing the first contact with foreign 
researchers.

Now, we are completing the  Antarctic Operation XIV, which began on 7^(th) 
of November 1995, when the NApOc “Ary Rongel” left Rio de Janeiro harbour, going 
to the Antarctic.

Seven support flights by C130 aircrafts belonging to the Brazilian Air Force 
were planned to take place during the Antarctic Operation XIV, four of them in 
summer and three in winter.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                     4
The operation in progress has seventeen scientific projects taking place,
including the research areas of PROANTAR, wich are: Life Science - 09, Earth
Science - 03, Atmosphere Science - 05.

Of the activities already developed, the International Expedition organized and
performed in the King George Island, during the period from November 1995 to
January 1996, may be emphasized. The Expedition is part of the Project 0014/93 of
PROANTAR and of the Glaciologic Program of the South Shetlands (GLASS)
supported by SCAR, 20 people from six countries participated (Germany,
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, France and Russia). The scientifc research activities included
the drilling and the attaining of four ice samples, geophysical studies of the structure
and thickness of the ice, environmental impact analysis and meteorologic observation
associated with studies about the seasonal snow melting. Further, the expedition was
an important mark for PROANTAR in the logistic area, because it was the first time a
brazilian mission over an icecap had taken place.

With the international team-spirit professed by the Antarctic Treaty, the
PROANTAR contributed to other programs in the Antarctic, establishing logistic and
scientific cooperation. This is only a modest cooperation, but we can emphasize:

- Two argentinian researchers worked in the project “Special Dynanics of
Planktonic Organisms and Biological Process in the Ocean Ecosystems in the
Occidental South Atlantic”.

- Support was given to the Bulgarian Antarctic Program, carrying two
researchers from Rio de Janeiro to São Clement Base located on Livingston Island and
then the transportation of four researchers from that base to Ushuaia; and

- The Argentian Antarctic Program used the refuge-base “Emilio Goeldi” on
Elephant Island.

The Antarctic Operation XIV involves the participation of about 230 people in
the several work fases, including researchers, technicians, support teams and ship crew.
The NApOc “Ary Rongel” returned to Brazil, arriving in Rio de Janeiro on the
30^(th) of March 1996, thus finishing its participation in Antarctic Operation XIV.

4 - SECURITY OF THE ANTARCTIC OPERATIONS - HYDROGRAPHY AND
CARTOGRAPHY

    To comply with the ATCM Rec XV - 19, Brazil takes part in the Permanent
Working Group on Cooperation in the Antarctic (PWGCA) formally created, in 1992,

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                     5
by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), with the purpose of 
contributing to the international effort and intending to promote more security and 
efficiency in the operations carried out by ships which go to the Antarctic.

    Brazil volunteered to do its works in the area located between the 
parallels 60°  45'S and 62°  05'S and the meridians 057° 45'W and 053° 30'W 
(Elephant Island vicinities). Therefore the Directory of Hydrography and Navigation 
(DHN) of the Brazilian Navy, in its survey, which was initiated in 1982, has been 
trying to make compatible the logistical necessities of PROANTAR with those 
identified by PWGCA, for the constitution of the "International Nautical Charts", in 
agreement with the plan used for IHO and endorsed by COMNAP.

    As part of the Hydrographic Survey Project of DHN, bathmetric surveys at King George Island have been made, and the Nautical Charts n° 25121, of Admiralty Bay ( 1st  ed. 1984, 2nd ed. 1992 ) and n° 25122 of Maxwell Bay ( 1st ed. 
1994) have already been issued. Besides these, in 1985, the Nautical Chart n° 2, which 
includes the area from Rio de Janeiro up to the Antarctic Peninsula was issued, 
making use of data collected by existent surveys up to 1984, destined for use in 
planning the Antarctic Operations. Models of these charts can be acquired at the 
"Diretoria de Hidrografia e Navegação (DHN), Departamento de Serviços Naúticos" 
at the following adress:

    Rua Barão de Jaceguay S/N° - Ponta da Armação
    Niterói - RJ - Brasil   - CEP 24040 - 000

    Fone: 0055-21-719-48244 - FAX: 00-55-21-620-7921

    During the summer season 95/96, the survey work in the Elephant Island 
vicinities continued and these will be continued again in the next summer of 96/97.

    The PROANTAR understands that the Nautical Charts are not  restricted only 
to navigation security, but they also constitute an important means of environmental 
protection, as they contribute to the prevention of accidents with ships that can cause 
oil spills.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program 
6
