ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 126
May 1996
Original: English

THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM AND THE INTERNATIONAL MONITORING
SYSTEM OF THE COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY

(Agenda item 24)

(Submitted by Chile)
The Antarctic "Zone of Peace"

The Antarctic Treaty, the earliest of the post World war II disarmament agreements, was signed in 1959 by 12 nations.
It is an agreement of major significance: it effectively demilitarized a continent and assured its cooperative
exploration by providing for information exchanges, advance notice of activities undertaken by the Parties, and on-the-
ground and aerial inspections. It is an example of a multi-
lateral agreement which demilitarized a whole continent in 
order to prevent tension rather than waiting to negotiate
weapons reductions or eliminations after deployment ocurred.
This preventive and precautionary approach is one of the 
outstanding characteristics of the system developed by the 
Antarctic Treaty and its complementary agreements and measures.

The peaceful use of Antarctica proved the central objective 
of both the Preparatory Committee and the Washington 
Conference of 1959. The preparatory negotiations, working on 
previous texts and on a draft prepared by Ambassador Daniel 
of the United States, had elaborated the concept of "peaceful 
use" primarily in terms of demilitarisation and scientific 
cooperation within the non-prejudicial formula advocated by 
Chile since 1948. It was not until the Washington Conference 
that a nuclear dimension relating to tests, explosions and 
waste disposal was introduced by Argentina on 19 October 1959.
Southern hemisphere delegations (Australia, Chile, New Zealand, 
South Africa) indicated support for the denuclearisation of 
a geographically proximate area; but the UK, USA and Japan 
among others felt inclined to permit nuclear explosions for 
peaceful and scientific purposes. The Soviet position was 
pivotal in these discussions: asserting that the regulation 
of nuclear issues was a function of the Geneva disarmament 
committees, the USSR initially blocked consideration of the 
proposal and subsequently advocated a "clear-cut prohibition 
of thermo-nuclear weapons test" which the USA considered 
unacceptable. The breakthrough came on 28 November when the 
text that became Article V was finalised to incorporate a ban 
of all "nuclear explosions" and radioactive waste disposal in 
Antarctica coupled with the application to Antarctica of 
any rules established in subsequent international agreements 
on nuclear questions. Conscious of the general disarmament 
negotiations conducted in Geneva and elsewhere, all the 
delegations agreed that any Antarctic provisions could be 
subsumed eventually under a wider international agreement.

Therefore Article V prohibited nuclear explosions or nuclear 
waste disposal subject to the conclusion of any international 
agreement covering these issues and pursuant to Article VI,"the 
exercise of the rights, of any state under international law 
with regard to the high seas" within Antarctic Treaty area 
of application. It is questionable if the peaceful application 
of nuclear explosions contemplated in Article V of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons would have 
invalidated the prohibition contained in Article V of the 
Antarctic Treaty in the event that all the signatories of 
the Antarctic Treaty had become Parties to the NPT. Moreover,
the recommendation adopted at the Oslo Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (1975), the preambular paragraph in the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources which affirms that it is in the interest of all mankind to preserve "the waters surrounding the Antarctic continent for peaceful purposes", and article 2 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which designates Antarctica as a "natural reserve, devoted to peace and science" have all contributed to strengthen the Antarctic "Peace Zone".

The Antarctic Treaty and Disarmament Agreements

The Outer Space Treaty, negotiated to support a UN General Assembly Resolution, was modeled on the Antarctic Treaty in that its provisions seek to prevent exploitation and international tensions before they exist by restricting certain military activities in outer space and on celestial bodies. The Seabed Treaty, following as well the Antarctic Treaty model, seeks to prevent the introduction of international conflict and nuclear weapons into an area free of them. The Open Skies Treaty provides for short-notice surveillance flights by aircraft over an area from Vancouver east to Pa-vlovskoye (Vladivostok) in ways which were totally unprecedented except for Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

The rise of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones (NWFZ) in various parts of the world was initiated by the Antarctic Treaty and continued by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and by the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Raro tonga) whose respective zones of application start at 60o South, recognizing the Antarctic Treaty northern boundary and their own division of the Pacific maritime spaces. Two other treaties establishing NWFZs in South East Asia (Treaty of Bankok, 1995) and Africa (Treaty of Cairo, 1996) do not establish areas bounded by lines but refer to the member countries Exclusive Economic Zones or to some geographical reference points. All the NWFZ treaties except Tlatelolco (Raro-tonga, Bankok, Cairo) contain a provision with the saving of high seas rights, as Article VI of the Antarctic Treaty.

Until the present time, verification regimes for multilateral disarmament treaties have stipulated confidence-building measures (CBMs) and cooperative measures including inspections. The fact that some countries have also sophisticated national technical means (NTMs) introduces a certain unbalance which hardly exists within the Antarctic Treaty system due to the fact that the environmentally-oriented nature of the system encourages all Antarctic Treaty Parties to open their data banks compiled by reconnaissance means to scrutiny under the terms of Article III.
The dual nature of scientific monitoring is important in
this contex. Information from intelligence platforms could
advance research on environmental change. Reconnaissance
aircraft take air measurements to track various types of
military activities which might reveal levels of methane,
carbon dioxide and chloroflurocarbons (CFCs); a valuable
information for the study of global warming and the depletion
of the ozone layer. Similar tracking by Navy vessels might
yield useful data about ocean pollution, ocean temperature,
sea level rise and global climate change. Satellite imagery,
both from military and civilian satellites, is probably the
most effective means of reconnaissance endowed with this
dual monitoring capacity.

Trends in Antarctic scientific research

The Antarctic Treaty regime, established after the highly
successful International Geophysical Year (1957-1958) has
provided a stable political milieu for the cooperative
development of science. Scientific cooperation on unprecedented
scale has been instrumental in consolidating peaceful
cooperation in other areas. The Madrid Protocol on
Environmental Protection wisely coupled the goals of peace
and science when it designated Antarctica as a natural reserve.
The Political Declaration of the Antarctic Treaty Parties at
the Bonn ATCM (1991) highlighted international scientific
cooperation by proclaiming the years 1991-2000 as the Decade
of Antarctic Scientific Cooperation.

The Treaty is as science-oriented as any international
instrument can be. It recognizes the substantial contribution
to scientific knowledge resulting from international
cooperation in scientific investigation in ntarctica; it
makes accession to full consultative status by a State
dependent upon the demonstation of scientific research
activity in Antarctica. It sets out in Article 3 the measures
to promote international cooperation in scientific research;
an obligation restated in a solemn declaration at the Paris
ATCM (1989) and in Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol. The
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) established
in 1958 has responded appropriately to the the challenges
of scientific investigation in Antarctica and its political
and environmental overlays.

Todays most fashionable topics such as global warming, bio-
diversity, the carbon pump, ozone depletion, are likely to
concentrate the priorities of Antarctic science for the
remainder of the Decade of Antarctic Scientific Cooperation.
Nevertheless, the future development of Antarctic science is
also going to take place against a backdrop of heightening
external pressure. Issues concerning the relationship between
monitoring environmental change and monitoring for compliance
with disarmament agreements might develop as one of these
major external pressures. The development of satellite remote
sensing, unmanned or automated observatories, miniaturization 
of electronic and mechanical systems, utilization of various 
logistic platforms and increasing sophistication of modelling 
tools will also impact Antarctic research. More likely, the 
strategic observational position of Antarctica will also be 
enhanced as the need to monitor compliance on a global scale 
with new obligations such as the proposed comprehensive 
nuclear-test-ban treaty raises the profile of the continent.

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

____________________________________________________

After more than three decades of sporadic negotiations, 
in the framework of the Conference on Disarmament, a 
comprehensive nuclcar-test-ban treaty appears within reach 
of the international community. Such treaty would ban all 
nuclear weapon tests and other nuclear explosions -including 
"peaceful nuclear explosions"- without thresholds or 
exceptions. It probably will not prohibit preparations to 
test, first use of nuclear weapons in war, computer simulated 
exercises or new types of nuclear weapons. Compliance with 
the treaty will be verified by national and international 
means, including a treaty-mandated international network of 
seismic, atmospheric radio nuclide, hydro-acoustic and 
infrasound monitoring stations. This International Monitoring 
System will be connected to an International Data Centre 
run by a small technical secretariat, linked by arrangements 
to the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna and to 
other relevant international organizations. In cases of 
suspected non-compliance, any State Party will be permitted 
to request an inspection that should be initiated as promptly 
as possible. The treaty will probably not enter into force 
before 1998, at least two years after it is opened for 
signature, and perhaps longer depending on the rate at which 
key States such as the nuclear weapon States and the so-
called "threshold States", sign and ratify it. It is expected 
to cost less than US$ 100 million annually, to be paid by a 
modified UN scale of assessments roughly proportional to 
gross national product (GNP) and making allowance for 
expenses made by the participants in the International 
Monitoring System in the upgrading of their national 
facilities.

The International Monitoring System

A protocol to the treaty shall establish the International 
Monitoring System (IMS) comprising monitoring facilities 
for seismological monitoring, radionuclide monitoring 
including certified laboratories, hydro-acoustic monitoring, 
infrasound monitoring, and respective means of communication, 
and be supported by the International Data Centre of the 
technical secretariata. The network of primary seismological 
stations shall consist of some 50 stations which fulfil the 
technical and operational requirements specified in the 
Operational Manual. An auxiliary network of approximately 120
stations meeting their own technical and operational
requirements shall supplement this effort providing data
which may be requested at any time by the International
Data Centre and made available through on-line computer
connections. A network of some 75 to 80 stations to measure
radionuclides in the atmosphere shall be supported by 12
existing laboratories certified by the technical secretariat
for performance. In addition, a network of hydroacoustic
stations , comprising an overall network of 6 hydrophone and
5 T-phase stations; and an overall network of 60 infrasound
monitoring stations shall complete the International
Monitoring System.

This broad range of capabilities will strengthen the treaty
in a number of ways. The IMS will detect attempts to test
covertly and distinguish them from other phenomena that
might resemble tests, for example, industrial explosions
associated with mining. The very existence of a vast array
of scientific and technical means of verification acts as a
deterrent to any State Party considering the option of covert
testing. The combination of sensitive national and publicly
accessible national and international means ensures
that data will be available to draw a profile of suspected
or confirmed non-compliance by any State Party. Such data is
essential to justify more intrusive verification means, such
as challenge inspections, and to envisage a collective
response to the threat of violation of the treaty. It also
contributes to create a climate of public confidence
supportive of the treaty, its effectiveness and universality.

The Antarctic Component of the IMS

The Conference on Disarmament (CD) established the Ad Hoc
Group of Scientific Experts (GSE) in July 1976 with a
mandate to consider international cooperative measures to
detect and identify seismic events so as to facilitate the
monitoring of a comprensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. Since
then, the GSE has developed several generations of data
exchange systems and conducted three Technical Tests:
GSETT 1, 2 and 3. This unprecedented global effort to conduct
operationally realistic tests of rapid data collection,
distribution and processing incorporate the most advanced
sensors, global communications, data management and data
processing technologies. GSETT 3 is presently being
conducted as the most extensive operational test of a
proposed concept for the seismic component of the IMS.

The GSE has been designing monitoring networks capable of
detecting events in all areas of the world at various
thresholds. As thresholds decrease, global monitoring
becomes more complicated. The number of earthquales increases
at lower thresholds and chemical explosions associated with
mining and other human activities also become important as
the monitoring threshold is lowered. Deployment in remote
areas is often required and automated operation remaihs
essential throughout the system.
The observed detection capabilities of the GSETT-3 primary 
network, supported by theoretical simulations, is a high of 
magnitude 4.6 in the South Atlantic Ocean region, and a low 
of magnitude 3.6 in parts of Australia, North America and 
Europe. The GSETT-3 auxiliary network of 75 stations is most 
dense in these same three regions where the location error 
ellipse area for events with body wave magnitudes above 
4.0 can in fact be reduced on average by a factor of up to 
4, when data from auxiliary stations are used. Theoretical 
simulations calibrated to GSETT 3 project an expected 
detection threshold for the 50 station primary network 
proposed for the seismic component of the IMS below magnitude 
4 in all continental areas except Antarctica.

As far as location capabilities are concerned, estimated 
capabilities for the 50-station primary network supplemented 
with a network of 30, 75, 100, 130 and 150 stations have 
been alternatively considered. Assuming their calibration 
has been performed, a 30-station auxiliary network does not 
perform appropriately in most oceans, the Southern Hemisphere 
and nearly the whole of Antarctica. A 75-station auxiliary 
network fails to perform adequately in most oceans and 
continental margins, and in Antarctica. The desired level 
of location uncertainty is not reached in significant parts 
if Antarctica and in most oceans at a level of 100 stations. 
The 130-station auxiliary network provides a satisfactory 
result only marginally improved by upgrading it to 150 
stations, except for some parts of the oceans, western 
Antarctic and the most southern part of South America, 
where the location uncertainty remains larger than 1.000 
square kilometers for magnitude 4 events.

In this context, technical and operational requirements 
contemplated throughout the GSETT-3 have indicated the 
need for a certain number of seismic stations to be located 
in the Antarctic. Within the list of seismological stations 
comprising the primary network 2 three-component stations 
are contemplated: Mawson (AUSTRALIA) 67.60 S & 62.87 E; 
and Vanda (UNITED STATES) 77.51 S & 161.85 E. Within the 
auxiliary network of seismological stations, Georg von 
Neumayer (GERMANY) 70.61 S & 8.37 W; and South Pole (UNITED 
STATES) 90.00 S & 115.00 E are considered. In addition, 
Mawson (AUSTRALIA) would also serve as a radionuclide 
station, together with Dumont d´Urville (FRANCE) 66.00 S & 
140.00 E; Halley (UNITED STATES) 76.00 S & 28.00 W; and 
Palmer (UNITED STATES) 64.46 S & 64.04 W. Finally, Mawson 
(AUSTRALIA) Georg von Neumayer (GERMANY) and South Pole 
(UNITED STATES) would be joined by two other USA bases, 
Siple Base, 75.50 S & 83.55 W, and Windless Bight, 77.50 S 
& 161.84 E as infrasound stations.
Implications for the Antarctic Treaty system

The formative elements of a regime outlawing nuclear tests in most, if yet not in all environments, already exists. 
It is rooted in a complex web of international treaties, declarations, resolutions, and other manifestations endowed 
with a measure of legal force. The relevant instruments belong to one of the following categories:

a) Multilateral and bilateral treaties prohibiting or 
restricting nuclear testing.
b) Treaties prohibiting the acquisition, manufacture or 
possession of nuclear weapons by certain countries
c) Treaties prohibiting the deployment of nuclear weapons 
in certain environments or devoting those environments 
to exclusively peaceful purposes.
d) Agreements for the elimination of nuclear weapons from 
the territories of certain countries.
e) International and regional safeguards agreements.

The Antarctic Treaty belongs to the first (a) and third (c) 
categories. Taken together with the Treaty Banning Nuclear 
Weapons in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water 
of 1963 and with the four existing Nuclear Weapon Free Zones 
(Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Cairo) and further 
considering the expanded membership of the Treaty for the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 1968, these treaties 
considerably reduce the scope for testing to underground 
tests and to the few acknowledged nuclear weapon States and to 
States not bound by the above mentioned agreements.

Theoretically, the Antarctic Treaty does not rule out 
completely nuclear explosions due to the provision safeguarding 
universal agreements contained in paragraph 2 of Article V. 
A comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty settles the argument 
in the most definitive way if, as expected, all nuclear 
weapon tests and all other nuclear explosions, including the 
so-called "peaceful nuclear explosions" are prohibited 
everywhere and forever.

The comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty would effectively 
support the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty 
as contained in its Preamble, Articles I, V, VI, VII, IX 1.a. 
and X; and the concept defined in Article 2 of its Protocol.

The Antarctic Treaty system ensures compliance with the 
Treaty, as well as continuation and enhancement of the 
demilitarised status of Antarctica, through Antarctic 
inspections, exchange of information and other cooperative 
activities. The Consultative process constitutes the broad 
umbrella sustaining the political will necesaary for the 
preservation of the "zone of Peace".

The comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty will be supported 
by a more substantial machinery, including the International 
Monitoring System, with a global network of monitoring 
stations, among them several Antarctic stations. The tasks 
asigned to Antarctic IMS stations cover zones within and
beyond the Antarctic Treaty area of application. Although these components of the IMS are to provide data for the International Data Centre of the technical secretariat of the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty, they shall perform a monitoring activity of importance to the Antarctic Treaty because:

a) monitoring possible non-compliance with the comprehensive test ban is also monitoring for compliance with Article V of the Antarctic Treaty.

b) monitoring activities within the Antarctic treaty area concern the Antarctic treaty, the Protocol on Environmenta Protection and the other components of the Antarctic Treaty system.

c) the International Monitoring System is a broad, ambitious and determined effort of the international scientific community, comparable in some ways to the IGY.

d) The International Data Centre represents a new generation of technology for automated and interactive analysis of data from a network of seismic, hydro-acoustic, radio-nuclide and infrasound stations. It is based on principles of access, transparency and cooperative endeavour which have long been sustained by the Antarctic scientific community.

e) Improvement of the IMS networks requires consultation with the participating States Parties but consultation is also contemplated with relevant international organizations, i.e. the Antarctic Treaty Parties with regard to facilitie: located in Antarctica.

A case exists for synergy and complementarity in monitoring compliance with the Antarctic Treaty (to a certain extent also with the Madrid Protocol) and compliance with the future comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty. If aerial inspection is contemplated in the new treaty, it should offer great opportunities for complementarity with on-site inspections and for interpretation of results. If it is ommitted from the new agreement, aerial inspection under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty could adequately supplement the monitoring by IMS stations located in Antarctica of any activity in contradiction with the test-ban treaty. The combination of observation by personnel in Antarctic bases, unmanned sensors, aerial reconnaissance and inspections would create in Antarctica the most water-tight system of verification for both the disarmament component of the Antarctic Treaty and the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty

It should be noted that synergy also works in the opposite direction. Systems designed and operated primarily to verify arms control agreements could also have useful non-military purposes. These include environmental monitoring, cartography, oceanographical research, plotting ice cover, search and rescue, geological and geophisical data, metereology, etc. It would be a waste of resources to confine the use of an expensive International Monitoring System to one application if it is also capable of other sensing for the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol with probably a small additional marginal cost. These aspects should be appropriately considered by the Antarctic Treaty Parties and the Parties to the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty.
