ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITE SUR L'ANTA[?]CTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  XX ATCM/INF 35
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English


EFFECTIVENESS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
MEASURES

(Agenda item 17)

(Submitted by Brazil)
FROM : SECIRM                    PHONE NO. : 061 3121338        Apr. 24 1996 06:51PM P2

INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA
BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM

EFFECTIVENESS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION MEASURES

REF.: Item 17 of the Provisional Agenda of the XX ATCM (Information Paper)

1. INTRODUCTION

The Antartic Station "Comandante Ferraz" (EACF), located in Admiralty Bay,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands, has been in operation since the 6th of 
February, 1984. At this moment, the Station has approximately 2300m2 of built up 
area; of this, 1350m2 forms the central unit, 150m2 is distributed in modules near the 
central unit and a further 800m2 comprises a helipad, which was built in summer of 
1993/94. This helipad was designed as a steel platform, raised 1.5m above the ground, 
thus there was no need to level the site. All security requirements were met, without 
unnecessarily altering the site's geography or esthetics.

The Station was designed in the form of modules; the greater part of these 
compartments are "containers" made of galvanized steel (8.0 x 2.5 x 2.5m) and are 
internally lined with layers of phenolic resin to ensure thermic insulation. Some of them 
were panelled with wood, giving the walls a better finish and providing a more pleasant 
appearance for the occupants. The modules were planned in such a way that can resist 
winds of up to 200Km/h.

Since 1986, the EACF has been operating all year round. In the summer, it can 
provide shelter for around 40 people and, in the winter, for 17. In order to provide 
living conditions and to comply with the requirements of the Madrid Protocol, the 
following points should be emphasized:
- the maneuvering of fuel oil;
- the discharge of gases from the diesel - generator groups;

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                     1
FROM : SECIRM                            PHONE NO. : 061 3121336        Apr. 24 1996  06:52PM P

- the treatment system of used waters and sewage;
- the collection and treatment of waste; and
- fire extinguish[?]ing.

2. MANEUVERING OF FUEL OIL

The EACF receives approximately 320 thousands liters of diesel oil a 
year. This is sufficient to mantain operations throughout the whole year. The oil is 
transported to Admiralty Bay by the Brazilian Navy Oceanographic Supply Ship 
(NApOC) "Ary Rongel". From there, the oil is transferred to flatboats, which are 
pushed towards the beach where they are run aground with the help of a tractor. Then, 
the oil is transferred to the Station's storage tanks.

With the intention of reducing the risks of leakage, in the summer of 1993/94, 
the substitution of the old fuel tanks for tanks with double skins beg[?]an. Of the existing 
17 tanks, 12 now possess double skins. It is expected that all the tanks will have 
double skins by 1997.

At the same time of the tank's double skins substitution, the receiving and 
transfer valves were substituted for quick shutting valves.

With the intention of reducing the risks of oil spills, the two oil fuel flatboats 
underwent structural alterations, placing a double bottom in the tank area.

3. DISCHARGE OF GASES FROM THE DIESEL-GENERATOR GROUPS

The EACF has five groups of diesel - generators, used for the eletrical energy 
production. They supply the Station and the research modules in the Station vicinities. 
Of these five groups, only two are enough to supply the necessary charge.

All of the generators possess oxicatalitic filters, where the gases are discharged. 
The filters are capable of reducing up to 95% of the carbon monoxide emissions, 90% 
of the soot, 85% of the formaldehides, 50% of noise intensity and with no increase in 
NO_(2). The filters are built in steel and inside there are platinum/palladium spheres, 
which are designed to work, with high efficiency, in regulated engines for a minimum 
of 7,000 hours.This durability is conditioned by the servicing of the spheres every

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                      2
1,000 hours. This servicing is necessary because of the accumulation of charcoal 
particles of diesel engines.

4. TREATMENT SYSTEMS OF THE USED WATERS AND SEWAGE

With the intention of improving the treatment of the used waters, the systems 
were modified in the summer of 95/96. Nowadays, the system is capable of separating 
the black waters, originating in the toilets, from the gray waters, originating in the 
showers and wash areas.

The black water collected is transported to four septic tanks (primary 
treatment), where the water undergoes a chlorine base process of decantation and 
desinfection. In this primary treatment, the waste water is purified, with the following 
results in mind:
  • 50% to 70% removal of solids in suspension;
  • 40% to 60% reduction of coliform bacteria;
  • 30% to 60% reduction of the biochemical oxygen demand; and
  • 70% to 90% removal of grease/fat.

After the primary treatment, the waste water in septic tanks is directed to two 
anaerobic filters, where it undergoes the secondary treatment, which involves the 
filtration process through gravel and further disinfection ( 6g of chlorine per liter are 
used every 30 days) . In the anaerobic filters the water is once again purified, about 
70% more than the values obtained after the septic tanks, the following results are 
expected:
  • up to 90% removal of solids in suspension;
  • up to 96% reduction of coliform bacteria; and
  • 30% to 95% reduction of the biochemical oxigen demand.

The water flowing out of these filters, also passes through the filtration drains.

The treatment system for the gray water collects the waste water originated in 
the showers and in washing areas and it directs them to a box which retains solid 
materials. After the retainer box, the gray waters pass through anaerobic filters and 
filtration drains, independently of the black water filters and drains.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                  3
FROM : SECIRM                    PHONE NO. :  061 3121336           Apr. 24 1996 06:53PM P5

5. COLLECTION AND TREATMENT OF WASTE

The EACF has a waste incinerator, which works based on a sophisticated 
system called "PYROLYSIS". This system processes in a lower temperature than the 
usual combustion , between 450° and 650° C, under a reduced atmosphere, turning 
dificulty the dioxines generation, halogens and furan, reducing, drastically,  factors 
that cause the oxidation of the hard metals contained in the residues.

     As a result of this process, a low quantity and inactive ash comes up. This ash 
can be stored in normal waste land, without causing environmental impact.

     Emphasizing the main characteristics we can list the good energetic utilization, 
the low operational cost, the unecessary qualified handwork, the low quantity of ash, 
the compact equipment, the panel with programming and temperature control and, 
especially, the fact that incineration occurs without causing pollution and without 
emiting smoke or smell.

The waste is collected selectively. Organic waste, together with paper and 
some cardboard is burned in the Station incinerator. The remaining waste is triturated 
or compressed, and packaged in specifc containers. It is stored in an appropriate area 
that is protected from the effects of nature. It is finally transported, at the end of the 
summer, by NApOc "Ary Rongel" to Brazil to be recycled.

6. FIRE EXTINGUISHING

With the intention of improving the fire extinguisher system of the EACF, an 
installation of a Fire Detection System is provided. It will be in use probably by the 
next summer (1996/97).

The Fire Detection System of the EACF will be automatic and composed by 
106 optical smoke detectors and 16 thermal smoke detectors, distributed throughout 
the Station and the research modules in the vicinity. The control will be done in a Fire 
Alarm Center located in the living room of the Station.

The Fire Alarm Center will have a synoptical panel for 50 points, 42 in use and 
8 as reserve. With the intention of improving the security of the system, it will have a 
double memory, with one memorized in the CPU of programing logical control and 
the other in its own card.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                      4
FROM : SECIRM                    PHONE NO. :  061 3121336        Apr. 24 1996  06:53PM P:


The new system will be able to operate satisfactorily, in the atmospheric 
pressure of 1 bar and 50% air humidity without any loss in  efficiency, in 
environmental conditions of -30° C a +5° C of external temperature, nor in engine 
room temperatures of about +15° C, nor in the temperature in the compartments 
between +20° C and +25° C.

 
- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                          5
