ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE                           ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 34
April, 1996
Original: English

1995-96 AUSTRALIAN TOURIST OVERFLIGHTS
OF ANTARCTICA
(Agenda item 9)
(Submitted by Australia)
1995-96 AUSTRALIAN TOURIST OVERFLIGHTS
OF ANTARCTICA

This paper describes the conduct of a series of Australian commercial
tourist overflights of Antarctica during the 1995-96 austral summer, with
special reference to Antarctic Treaty obligations.

Background

Australian overflights of Antarctica resumed in 1994-95 with the Austra-
lian company Croydon Travel Centre chartering 6 flights using Qantas
Airways Ltd aircraft. These activities were reported in ATCM XIX/INF
34. Nine flights were conducted in 1995-96.

1995-96 Flights

Qantas Airways conducted a further series of flights in the 1995-96
summer, again under charter to Croydon Travel Centre. The proposal
was subjected to a prior environmental impact assessment in accordance
with the Madrid Protocol and Australian legislation. At the conclusion of
the flights the program was reviewed for, among other things, adherence
to Treaty and Australian requirements.

Description of the activity

The program outlined in the environmental assessment called for 13
flights, but only nine flights were operated due to the lack of available
aircraft.

Table: Tourist overflights to Antarctica, 1995-96

Departed      From         Pax      Route
26.11.95      Melbourne    285      Dumont d'Urville, Mt Melbourne, C Adare
03.12.95      Sydney       294      C Adare, C Hallett, C Washington, C Hudson,
                                   Dumont d'Urville
10.12.95      Melbourne    323      Dumont d'Urville, C Hudson, Leningradskaya, C
                                   Hallett, C Adare
31.12.95      Melbourne    363      Dumont d'Urville, C Hudson, C Washington, C
                                   Hallett, C Adare
13.01.96      Melbourne    307      Dumont d'Urville, C Washington, C Hallett, C Adare
14.01.96      Sydney       326      Dumont d'Urville, C Hudson, C Washington, C
                                   Hallett, C Adare,
15.01.96      Perth        371      Casey, Dumont d'Urville
26.01.96      Melbourne    376      Dumont d'Urville, C Hudson, C Washington, C
                                   Hallett, C Adare
27.01.96      Sydney       313      Dumont d'Urville, C Hudson, C Washington, C
                                   Hallett, C Adare
Aircraft used were Boeing 747-438. This type complies with Interna-
tional Civil Aviation Organisation noise and emission standards.
All aircraft used were fitted with Quick Access Recorders accumulating
a broad range of aircraft data, mainly concerned with safety parameters
but also including an ability to monitor operational deviations and to 
monitor compliance with any special requirements.

Sixteen alternative routes were planned for the flights, mainly over King
George V Land and Victoria Land. In the event, only four of these routes
were used. The most commonly used route took in Dumont d'Urville,
Cape Hudson, Cape Washington, Cape Hallett and Cape Adare. The
average duration of flights was a little over 12 hours - the longest took 13
hours. Most flights included one or more orbits of scenic sites on the
approved routes.

The total number of passengers for the nine flights was 2958, an average
of a little over 350 for each flight. In addition, there was a total of 202 air
and cabin crew.

Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) obligations

The principal ATS obligations relevant to the flights derive from:

    the Antarctic Treaty Article XVll;
    the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (in
particular Articles 3, 6, 8 and 13 and Annexes I and II), the
provisions of which are now legally binding on Australian citizens; and

    recommendations and resolutions of various Antarctic Treaty. Consul-
tative Meetings, notably Recommendation XVIII-1 and Resolution 3
(1995).

Both the organisers of the flights and the Australian Government
authorities placed a high priority on satisfying all safety, environ-
mental, operational and information exchange obligations.

Implementation of environmental obligations

Qantas Airways prepared a preliminary environmental impact assessment
for the proposed series of flights. This was assessed by the Australian
Antarctic Division in October 1995 in accordance with Australian
environmental protection legislation giving effect to Antarctic Treaty
obligations (including the Madrid Protocol).

In the approval process, information and comment was sought from
scientists in government agencies concerned with atmospheric and
surface pollution, as well as Australian Antarctic Division scientific and
operational personnel. The approval process was concerned particularly
with the potential for disturbance of animals and possible atmospheric
and surface effects of exhaust emissions.
The flights were conducted at a minimum altitude of 10,000 ft (3050 m) 
above sea level or 2000 ft (610 m) above the highest terrain within 100 
nautical miles of the flight track, whichever was the higher. During the 
sightseeing sectors aircraft were flown at 250 knots (requiring around 28 
percent of available power) to reduce noise and exhaust emissions.

Qantas undertook that fuel dumping in the event of an emergency would 
be done above 6000 ft (1830 m); at this altitude and at the airspeed 
required for jettisoning (above 250 knots), the fuel atomises.

In approving the activity, the Australian Antarctic Division determined 
(among other things) that:

    in a global context, the flights would generate insignificant amounts of 
CO2 in the atmosphere. Exhaust emissions would be unlikely to be 
detectable at the ice sheet surface or in future ice cores;

    an area justifying further investigation was emission of oxides of 
nitrogen which may have an effect on tropospheric ozone; and

    noise levels of 65 dB or above had been observed to affect penguin 
colonies, but data provided in the Qantas EIA indicated that given the 
proposed height of the flights above colonies (10,000 ft or 3050 m), 
surface noise levels would be well below this.

The EIA was approved with the conditions that:

    there should be no direct overflights of known penguin colonies; and

    a report would be provided at the end of the activity.

No direct overflights of penguin colonies were observed. In its environ-
mental assessment Qantas reported the advice from Dumont d'Urville 
that for the five flights passing above that station in 1994-95 no impact 
was observed on the local fauna and that the noise level did not disturb 
the animals. Ground-level measurement of sound levels at Casey during 
a 1995-96 flight over the station detected no increase in maximum 
ambient noise levels. Observers at the station remarked that the flight 
would have gone unnoticed had there been cloud cover. Biologists 
reported no observable change in penguin behaviour. In addition, 
ground-to-air radio conversations with biologists at Edmonson Point 
reported no noise impact. It was therefore concluded that on current 
evidence noise is not an environmental concern for sightseeing flight 
sectors at low power at or above 10,000 feet.

Implementation of operational obligations

Operational principles for non-government activities arising from Treaty 
system obligations include the need for the activity to be safe and 
self-sufficient, not to require assistance from Parties unless previously 
agreed, and to comply with any specific Antarctic procedures on aspects
such as air traffic control. Qantas made early contact with relevant 
national operators (United States, New Zealand, Italy and France) and 
provided them with full operational details, with particular attention to 
safety and self-sufficiency. At least 24 hours' advance notice of flight 
plans was given to the national operators concerned.

Assessment of the safety precautions taken by Qantas was undertaken by 
the Australian Civil Aviation Authority, consistent with its normal 
regulatory functions. The obligation of the operator was to demonstrate a 
high level of safety planning, including appropriate plans to deal with 
incidents such as depressurisation, engine failure or fire. The final 
responsibility for ensuring adequate safety and self-sufficiency rested 
with Qantas.

Safety considerations listed in Qantas' operational advice included the 
following:

    in the event of decompression over Antarctica, there was sufficient fuel 
    for the flight to reach the return airport with fuel remaining;
    fuel reserves would more than cover demands for a return to Australia 
    in the event of a double engine failure over Antarctica;
    each aircraft was fitted with four survival beacons certified for 
    operation throughout the world;
    survival equipment included polar suits for all personnel, plus 10%;
    hourly area ionospheric prediction charts had been prepared for the 
    region to be visited by the flights during the period of their 
    duration, and the Sydney Ionospheric Prediction Service warning 
    centre would be staffed during the morning of each flight day; and
    the possibility of traffic conflicts would be minimised by advanced 
    "traffic alert and collision avoidance systems" fitted to all 
    aircraft, providing full information on any other aircraft detected in 
    the vicinity.

Detailed pre-flight briefings for aircrews paid particular attention to the 
special conditions of the Antarctic, with detailed discussions on weather 
data and in-flight communications, including those with Antarctic station 
and field personnel.

Qantas completed a post-activity report against the categories specified in 
Recommendation XVIII-1 and Resolution 3 (1995).

Official observers

The Australian Antarctic Division placed a representative aboard each of 
the flights. The representatives:
observed the flight operators' adherence to agreed parameters set in accordance with Australian legislation, with particular regard to flight route;

    provided passengers with information on the Antarctic, including its international regimes (including the Treaty and the Madrid Protocol);

    promoted the scientific and environmental work of national programs in the Antarctic.

For each flight, observers reported on aircraft departure and return times (scheduled and actual), times of arrival at designated route positions and compliance with environmental requirements. Based on the observers' responses, a more detailed pro-forma has been prepared for the 1996-97 season.

Observers participated in a debriefing meeting at the end of the series of flights. The debriefing addressed issues that could be taken into consideration in the planning and conduct of future tourist overflights to ensure that flights continue to meet environmental and other requirements.
