ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                  XX ATCM/INF 9
                                                  March, 1996
                                                  Original: English

ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
(Agenda item 15)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
MAR 11 '96  01:45PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.2

New Zealand Antarctic Programme
Environmental Education and Training

1.0  The need for education and training

An effective and successful environmental education and training programme for all
personnel involved in Antarctic activities can achieve more in terms of environmental
protection, than almost any other single initiative. Without the awarenes s and commitment of
Antarctic personnel to environmental practices and guidelines, well inte:tioned policy and
procedures documents can be ineffectual.

Environmental training is given to all programme participants. These inc ude scientists and
base staff as well as military support personnel, contractors, journalists a d special visitors.

New Zealand's commitment to comply with the Environmental Protocol  as seen the
introduction of environmental initiatives and changes to procedures. Whilst the only specific
protocol reference to training relates to waste management matters (Anr ex III, Article 10b),
training and education are considered to be the key to successfully imp ementing the protocol
and introducing personnel to the changes required in the way they car y out their activities.
The appointment of an Environmental Officer to the New Zealand Antartic Programme in
1992 has been an important factor in effective environmental education.

New Zealand's approach to educating personnel on environmental issu ss and procedures is
discussed below. It is consistent with the recommendations and guideli es for education and
training of scientists and support staff of national programmes introducec at XIX ATCM by
SCAR and IUCN (XIX ATCM/INFO82).

2.0  Pre Antarctic training

Raising awareness
A major aim of training Antarctic personnel is to create or raise a level of snvironmental
awareness. This process is made easier by the generally high level of i terest and concern for
environmental issues in New Zealand and the commitment to integratin ; operational and
environmental management. Environmental goals and priorities are ke y components of each
year's operational plan. The appointment of an Environmental Officer h s also ensured that
the level of awareness and knowledge amor.gst Christchurch based sta f has increased.

The EIA process
The environmental impact assessment process (EIA) should also be vie wed as an important
education tool. The process covers both science events and support a tivities. Its main
benefit in terms of environmental education is to prompt science leade s and support staff to
think about the potential of their activity to impact on the environment. Every project is
required to complete some level of EIA which is independently reviewe 1. Event leaders may
be asked for further information if the independent review panel is not  atisfied with the detail
provided or the results of the assessment. Greater awareness of areas of potential impacts
through this process introduces scientists and support staff to enviror mental issues before
the formal pre-season training begins.

Training courses
Prior to departing for Antarctica all personnel are required to attend a tr aining and
familiarisation course which includes environmental training. The cours e varies in duration
depending on participants' previous experience in Antarctica. For tho e going to Antarctica
for the first time the course is of five days duration. Those with previous  and recent
experience are required to attend for two days.

1
MAR 11 '96 01:45PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                  P.3

There are also several initiatives outside of the national programme whic  provide education 
for the public in general on the Antarctic, including environmental issues eg visitor displays 
and school education programmes at the International Antarctic Centre \ Visitor Centre 
(Christchurch), Kelly Tarlton's Underwater World (Auckland), and an Ant? rctic undergraduate 
paper at the University of Canterbury.

The formal introduction to environmental issues and procedures occurs hile all course 
participants are present. This approach ensures that regardless of previ us experience, all 
personnel are informed and reminded of their responsibilities each year. This "refresher" is 
particularly important when changes have been made to procedures an  guidelines. Specific 
environmental lectures focus on introducing the basis for environmenta  management ie the 
Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol and the implications for indi iduals and the 
national operator. The protection of flora and fauna, rules for protected  reas and historic 
huts, field activities, oil spill prevention and clean up and waste manager  ent are also covered.

During the course less formal training and education comprises practical reinforcement of the 
guidelines and procedures introduced during the lectures. Included are sessions on field 
preparation, field camps and fire training.

All personnel receive an NZAP "Environmental Code of Conduct". The  ode summarises 
individual responsibilities for environmental protection in Antarctica. De ailed procedures and 
guidelines are also included in a Handbook and Field Manual provided t   all personnel. The 
manuals include information on Antarctic environmental law, enforcem ent procedures, 
permits, protected areas, protection of fauna and flora, historic sites, oil  spills, minimising 
impacts in the field and waste management.

Fire and hazardous materials training
All Scott Base staff undergo intensive fire training. Members of the fire crew also make up the 
primary response teams for hazardous material spills including fuel spills. Training aims to 
equip staff with the necessary skills to respond to spills at Scott Base ar  in the field.

Briefings
Key Scott Base staff also receive additional briefings from the Environm ntal Officer prior to 
leaving for Antarctica.

3.0  In Antarctica

Upon arrival
Upon arrival in Antarctica all personnel are briefed on the specific respo isibilities which affect 
them. The briefing reinforces the pre Antarctic training. A "Welcome tc Scott Base" booklet 
includes all Scott Base procedures and reiterates environmental respo isibilities including 
identifying additional sources of information. Staff at Scott Base, who  re responsible for the 
different aspects of environmental management, for example waste ma  agement, are also 
identified.

Information at Scott Base
Copies of the NZAP "Environmental Code of Conduct" are prominently  displayed throughout 
the base. In addition, wall posters explain environmental management  and serve to further 
reinforce the environmental protection message. Waste management  signs and posters are 
displayed throughout the base and copies of NZAP's Waste Managem nt Plan and other 
policies are available in common areas.

Field preparation and training
Most personnel are required to undergo field training on arrival at Scott Base. The field 
training leaders are provided with a checklist of environmental issues  nd procedures they 
must cover during the course. The main aim is to increase awareness  of personnel of the 
ways humans can impact on the environment and what they can do as  individuals to minimise 
these impacts. Field training often includes an overnight camp and cov rs practical issues 
related to managing waste in the field, how to minimise impacts in ice f  ee areas, fuelling 
handling and spill response actions and appropriate behaviour around  wildlife.

2
MAR 11 '96  01:45PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.4

In addition, each science or support event leaving for the field undergo?s a separate briefing.
A waste management officer is appointed for each group and the NZAP "Environmental Code 
of Conduct" is reiterated. Particular emphasis is placed on ensuring that the party has any 
necessary permits, adequate equipment for waste handling and that the?  are aware of specific 
environmental precautions they need to take in the area they are visitin?.

4.0  Post Antarctic follow-up and review

Every event, whether science or support, is required to complete an en?ironmental return 
reporting on the activities including comments on compliance with the E A. Advice is given 
pre season on how to complete the forms, the information from which is to be incorporated 
into an environmental database for New Zealand activities in Antarctica.

Feedback is also encouraged on the adequacy of environmental trainin?  and education given 
to all personnel both before leaving for Scott Base, and in Antarctica. C?omments and 
feedback are taken into account when the training programme is review?d internally each 
year.

5.0  Key Components

The key elements of the New Zealand approach to environmental educ?tion and training are 
listed below:

-    recognition of training and education as key components in environ?mental management
-    integration of environmental management into all operations
-    a combination of practical and theoretical sessions for all personnel with continued 
     reinforcement of procedures and guidelines
-    provision of well written, targeted information suitable for different ?udiences
-    training as a key role for the NZAP Environmental Officer
-    provision of specialised targeted training to key personnel
-    provision of adequate opportunities for f?edback from personnel a?d an effective review 
     process

For further information contact:

E J Waterhouse
New Zealand Antarctic Programme
P O Box 14-091
Christchurch
New Zealand

3
