ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
              TRATADO ANTARTICO              
              XX REUNION CONSULTIVA              
              ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
              XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


XX ATCM/INF 119
May 1996
Original: English


OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR ZHU MANLI,
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHINA


(Agenda Item 3)


(Submitted by China)
OPENING ADDRESS BY AMBASSADOR ZHU MANLI
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CHINA

On behalf of the Chinese Delegation, I would like to congratulate
you on your election as the Chairman of the Twentieth Session of
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. We are very pleased to come
to the beautiful city of Utrecht at this lovely season of blossoming
tulips. May I take this opportunity to thank the Government of the
Netherlands for hosting this important Meeting.

The Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection has
established comprehensive principles for the protection of Antarctic
environment. Almost 5 years have passed since the signing of the
Protocol and the time is now coming  for its entry into force. The
Chinese Delegation believes that, for the  full and effective
implementation of the Protocol, further deliberation in the coming
days of the following issues is critical:
- Clarification on the criteria for evaluation of Environmental Impact
Assessment;
- Cooperation among State Parties in planning and conduct of
activities in Antarctic;
- Relationship of the Protocol with other environmental treaties.

The Chinese Government approved the Protocol in 1994.
According to China’s practice, the Protocol has automatically become
the national law on the day when it was approved. In order to further
strengthen its commitment to the protection of Antarctic environment,
China is in a process of establishing related regulations. We have 
initiated an educational and public awareness program on Antarctic 
Environmental Protection across the country. All these have shown 
our firm commitments to the effective implementation of the Protocol.

● Another important work before us is to continue our consultation 
on the Liability Annex to the Protocol. Great progress has been made 
in this regard under the very able leadership of Professor Ruddier 
Wolfrum. Once again we would like to emphasize the following point: 
as provided for in Article 2 and 3 of the Protocol, the Antarctic is 
designated as a natural reserve devoted to peace and science. The 
delicate balance between the protection of environment and scientific 
activities is underlined in the provisions of the Protocol.  This 
balance, we believe, should be reflected in the Annex on Liability as 
well.

● As the Protocol enters into force,  the administrative 
responsibilities within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty system 
will be greatly increased. The creation of a small and effective 
secretariat  becomes all the more necessary and matter of urgency. 
We hope all the Parties concerned will cooperate closely with each 
other and reach consensus at an early date.

We obviously have a lot to do at this meeting. The Chinese 
Delegation believes, under your able leadership, this meeting will be 
of a great success.
