ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                                                    
                                                                      
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 23
April, 1996
Original: English

AUTOMATIC OBSERVING SYSTEMS IN SUPPORT OF
ANTARCTIC METEOROLOGY

(Agenda item 12)

(Submitted by WMO)
+6136694548                                          BUREAU OF MET EXEC                                  F-064 T-092 P-007        APR 03 '96 11:10

AUTOMATIC OBSERVING SYSTEMS IN SUPPORT OF ANTARCTIC
METEOROLOGY

1. Antarctic Automatic Weather Stations

The Antarctic continent has an area of 13.5 million square
kilometres and an average surface elevation of about 2300m.
Surface meteorological observations in Antarctica are made at
occupied stations operated throughout the year, and by automatic
weather stations (AWS). Although approximately 30 stations were
occupied in 1994, the distribution of these across the continent
is not uniform, and not even as well-distributed as during the
International Geophysical Year (1957-58). Most stations are
located on the Antarctic coast at sites that can be reached by
ship: at present the US Amundsen-Scott Station at the South Pole
is the only year-round interior station contributing observer
measured data to the global network. In addition, the coast of
West Antarctica from 180 degrees east to 85 degrees west
longitude does not have one station with year around
observations. Automatic weather stations therefore provide an
essential contribution to the maintenance of a meaningful
meteorological network over the continent, and particularly over
the interior ice sheet.

Most automatic weather stations in Antarctica use the ARGOS Data
Collection System on the NOAA series of polar-orbiting
satellites, and contribute data to the Global Telecommunications
System (GTS). AWS using ARGOS have been in regular use since the
early 1980s and there are now more than 60 Antarctic AWS
reporting data to the GTS. Many AWS units are located in arrays
in support of specific meteorological experiments while others
have been supplied for operational purposes. AWS have operated
at some sites for more than 10 years.

The majority of the present stations, 51 in total, are maintained
by a group at University of Wisconsin (under Professor C R
Stearns) on behalf of a number of different research
investigators, with support from the United States National
Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs. These US AWS
measure pressure, temperature, wind speed, wind direction,
relative humidity and vertical temperature difference. Data are
updated at a nominal 10 minute interval and the difference
between the most recent and the four preceding measurements are
also stored, so that if successive NOAA satellite passes occur
within 50 minutes, then the AWS data are available every 10
minutes. The AWSs have low power consumption and are powered by
12 volt gel-cell batteries charged by solar panels: the batteries
provide sufficient power reserve to maintain operation throughout
the long polar night.
+6136694548       BUREAU OF MET EXEC       F-064 T-092 P-008       APR 03 '96 11:10

3

The current US network includes:
	•	9 stations along the Adelie Coast and in the hinterland to 
	      Dome C (3280 m elevation)
	      o ??????? ????????? ???????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????????? as
	      the former Byrd Station;
	•	5 stations on the Ross Ice Shelf and 7 in the Ross Island region,
	•	4 stations on islands in the Ross Sea region,
	•	9 stations on the Antarctic Peninsula,
	•	3 stations on the Reeves Glacier (Terra Nova Bay), and
	•	stations on the high polar plateau, which include 3 around 
	      the south pole and 2 in support of a Japanese ice core 
	      drilling at Dome Fuji (77.31S,39.70E).  The AWS at Dome 
	      Fuji is the highest AWS operating (3280 m elevation).

Projects supported by these stations include:
	•	barrier wind flow along the Antarctic Peninsula and the 
	      Transantarctic Mountains;
	•	katabatic wind flow;
	•	mesoscale circulation and the sensible and latent heat 
	      fluxes on the Ross Ice Shelf;
	•	climatology of Byrd and Dome C Stations;
	•	boundary layer meteorology around the South Pole;
	•	research into the Antarctic Coastal Ecosystem;
	•	long term ecological research along the Antarctic 
	      Peninsula;
	•	meteorological support for flight operations at McMurdo 
	      Station; and
	•	monitoring for possible manned station locations and 
	      aircraft landing sites.

Another sizeable AWS network of 10 stations, all on the east 
Antarctic ice sheet, is operated by the Australian Antarctic 
Division.  Six of these stations are in the hinterland of the 
Lambert Glacier Basin, between 1830 m and 2740 m elevation, and 
four are in Wilkes Land, between 1360 and 3070 m elevation.  The 
Australian stations measure pressure, temperature, wind speed, 
wind direction, global radiation and snow temperatures to 10 m 
depth.  Air temperature and wind speed are measured at 3 
different heights above the surface to provide redundancy and a 
check on data quality, as well as information on near-surface 
gradients.  Data are updated approximately every hour, and data 
from all except one station are contributed to the GTS.  These 
stations are also powered with solar-charged 12V batteries and 
the longest running stations has operated continuously for over 
11 years.  Stations closer to the coast and at lower elevations 
have a shorter lifetime because they become buried in snow 
accumulation.

Several other AWS of different design are also operated by 
Australian agencies in the region of Casey station.  In addition 
there are several other AWS systems which store data onboard, 
rather then relay them in real time, in use by several nations 
in Antarctica.
+61 36694543        BUREAU OF MET EXEC        F-064 T-092 P-009        APR 03 '96 11:11

2. The Antarctic Sea Ice Zone

Compared even to the high continental ice sheet, the 20 million square kilometre Antarctic sea ice zone, that area within the sea ice edge at its maximum extent,  is a large void for meteorological data. The World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) has established two programmes which use automatic observing systems to increase meteorological and sea ice related data from this region.

International Programme for Antarctic Buoys (IPAB)

The International Programm for Antarctic Buoys was established at a meeting in Helsinki in mid 1994 and now includes 11 organisational participants.  The objective of IPAB is to establish and maintain a network of drifting buoys in the Antarctic sea ice zone in order to:

-   support research in the region related to global processes and to global change, and, in particular, to meet research data requirements  specified  by the WCRP and other programmes;
-   meet real-time operational meteorological data requirements of the World Weather Watch (WWW) programme;
-   establish a base for ongoing monitoring of atmospheric and oceanic climate in the Antarctic sea ice zone.

The programme, whose coordinating centre is at the Antarctic Cooperative Research Centre in Hobart, Australia, builds upon cooperation among those agencies and institutions with Antarctic interests. It aims to:

1. Promote the development of an adequate Antarctic Buoy network through National antarctic programme agencies, research and operational institutions, SCAR National Committees, and other relevant bodies.
2. Coordinate the development and maintenance of an optimum observational network for near-surface meteorological and oceanographic data within the Antarctic sea ice zone, using drifting buoys and other appropriate in-situ data collection platforms.
3. Distribute in real-time over the Global Telecommunications System (GTS) the buoy position and air pressure data from the network plus relevant additional real-time data approved by the principal investigators for public dissemination;
4. Ensure that all data from the network are appropriately archived; and
5. Liaise and co-operate with other operators of Antarctic buoys and in-situ data collection platforms.

It is the the aim of IPAB to have sufficient buoy deployments to achieve and maintain a basic network with observational points spaced at about 500 km over the operational area. Position, air pressure and (for those buoys in water) sea temperature are
+6136694548                                          BUREAU OF MET EXEC                  F-064 T-092 P-010    APR 03 '96 11:12

            5

collected as basic data. Some systems are equipped to 
additionally measure other parameters such as air temperature, 
ice and/or snow temperature atmospheric pressure tendency, wind 
speed and direction, snow and sea ice properties,  and 
oceanographic variables. All buoys in the basic network should 
be equipped with transmitters to enable data to be transmitted 
in real time (synoptic and asynoptic mode). As a preferred 
approach, platforms are located and data is collected via CLS -
Service ARGOS using the TIROS-N series of satellites.

Data from the buoys are inserted by CLS ARGOS to the GTS, and all 
the basic data transmitted on the GTS are archived by the Marine 
Environmental Data Service (MEDS) in Canada, as the IOC/WMO 
Responsible National Oceanographic Data Centre for drifting buoy 
data. In addition a uniform, quality-controlled data base for 
ice motion and surface meteorology and oceanography, as required 
by the Antarctic research community, has been established at the 
coordinating centre. Periodically this data base will be 
submitted to appropriate data centres for archiving (in 
particular, to MEDS and WDC-A for Glaciology).

Nearly 20 drifting buoys deployed south of 55°S latitude 
contributed data to the programme during 1995. Some of these 
however only operated for a small part of the year. Since there 
is a generally northward divergent component to the pack ice 
drift in the Antarctic many buoys deployed at high southern 
latitudes eventually move north of the ice edge and out of a main 
region of interest. Buoy losses in the Antarctic are also higher 
than in the equivalent Arctic programme, since most ice buoys do 
not survive in open water for a long time. Hence, although 
IPAB has seen an increase in Antarctic drifting buoy activities, 
it has not yet achieved the required network density.

The IPAB programme is proposed as a long-term ongoing one; 
subsequent development will be determined after a five year 
initial phase (1994/95 - 1999/2000). The next biennial meeting 
of participants will  be held from August 1 to 3, 1996, in 
Cambridge, England.

Antarctic Ice Thickness Research Programme (AnITRP)

The seasonal and regional variability of extent, concentration, 
and particularly thickness of sea ice as simulated by numerical 
models are sensitive tests of the models' performance. But there 
are no systematic spatially distributed data sets available on 
the total, or even regional Antarctic ice thickness distribution 
against which to test model development. The WCRP established 
AnITRP to contribute to the documentation of the climatology and 
the variability of the sea ice thickness distribution in selected 
regions.  The programme is co-ordinated by Prof. P. Lemke, 
Department of Marine Meteorology, Institut fur Meereskunde, Kiel, 
Germany.

AnITRP aims to principally obtain data using upward looking sonar
+6136694548                  BUREAU OF MET EXEC                  F-064 T-092 P-011    APR 03 '96 11:12
                                                                                           6

instruments (ULS). These instruments, moored to the ocean bottom,
record the keel depth of sea ice drifting over their location
from sonar ranging measurements made every few minutes. Data is
stored onboard and not available until the instruments are
recovered. Nineteen ULS instruments have been deployed in the
Antarctic since late 1990. ULS networks have been placed across
the mouth of the Weddell Sea by Germany (from the tip of the
Antarctic Peninsula to Kap Norwegia), off the front of the
Filchner Ice Shelf by Norway, and off east Antarctica (along
108°E and 75°E longitude) by Australia. The recovery rate of
instruments with good data has not been high, with more than 50%
loss or failure, due in some cases to damage from icebergs.
However unique data on the Antarctic ice -hickness distribution
have been obtained, and the programme will continue in order to
provide critical data for improving climate models, and to
document any term trends in ice thickness.

(WMO is grateful to Dr Ian Allison for the information in this
paper).
