ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTATIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/INF 4
                                 March, 1996
                                 Original: English


INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION
Prepared for
Southern Heritage Expeditions 1995/96
Antarctic Cruise Programme
(Submitted by New Zealand)
INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL
EVALUATION

Prepared for

Southern Heritage Expeditions

1995/96

ANTARCTIC CRUISE PROGRAMME

Polar Research Vessel

AKADEMIK SHOKALSKI
INDEX

Summary                                         page 1
1   Introduction                                  page 2
2   Background                                    page 4
3   Proposed Activity, Benifits of Activity and Alternatives.  page 8
4   Initial Environmental State                  page 11
5   Nature and Significance of Impacts and Operations  page 13
6   Conclusion                                    page 19
7   Schedule of Appendix                          page 20
Summary

Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd is a New Zealand owned and operated Company, based in Christchurch. It is owned by Rodney and Shirley Russ both of who have devoted a lifetime to conservation and education.

The company has charted the Polar Research Vessel Academic Shokalski to operate a series of three expeditions to Antarctica. The vessel meets all the requirements under the Antarctica(Environmental Protection) Bill 1994.

The ship will carry 38 passengers, a European staff of eight and a Russian Crew of 26.

Of the three expeditions two will visit the Ross Sea Region and the third will visit George V land. The focus of the expeditions is to enable participants to gain a greater understanding and appreciation of Antarctica. The European Staff include 4 lectures/guides all with Antarctic experience.

The three expeditions are:

The Nature of Antarctica: Dec 29th 1995 - January 22nd 1996

South to Antarctica: January 22nd 1996 - February 19th 1996

In the Footsteps of Scott and Shackleton: February 18th 1996 - March 9th 1996.

Southern Heritage Expeditions accepts that its proposed activities will have a "minor or transitory impact" but "not more than a minor or transitory impact" and therefore has completed this Initial Environmental Evaluation of its activities as required under the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.

Rodney Russ
Joint Managing Director
Southern Heritage Expeditions
P.O.Box 22-219
Christchurch
New Zealand

1
SOUTHERN HERITAGE EXPEDITIONS LTD

INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EVALUATION

1.0  INTRODUCTION

1.1  Legal Requirements

The Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994 was passed by the New Zealand 
Government and came into law on the 1st day of February 1995. Southern Heritage 
Expeditions accepts the conditions and obligations of that Act as it relates to the 
Antarctic Cruises which it operates.

Pursuant to Clause 18(1) of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act, any 
"person" ("person" is accepted by SHEL as including SHEL) proposing to carry out 
any activity in Antarctica is required to prepare an Initial Environmental Evaluation. It 
is accepted by SHEL that the activities proposed by it within Antarctica are likely to 
have a "minor or transitory impact" on the Antarctic environment. The activities of the 
Company are not likely to have more than a minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic 
environment so a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Sections 19 and 20 of the 
Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994) would not be necessary.

1.2  SHEL is a Company domiciled in New Zealand and incorporated under New Zealand 
Law. The Company will, throughout its voyages, comply with New Zealand Law 
specifically the Antarctica Act, 1960, The Marine Mammals Protection Act 1978 and 
The Antarctic Marine Living Resources Act 1981 as well as The Antarctic (Fauna and 
Flora) Regulations 1971 and The Antarctica (Specially Protected Areas) Order 1971. 
The Company, as an employer, will also ensure that the provisions of the Health and 
Safety in Employment Act 1992 and The Accident Compensation Rehabilitation and 
Insurance Act (1992) are complied with.

1.3  SHEL also recognises and will comply with The New Zealand Government Policy on 
Tourist Private Expeditions and will complete a New Zealand Antarctic Programme 
Tourist Visitors Permission (File 16/1/1) or its equivalent noting its Schedules and 
Annexures in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty and Treaty 
Recommendations IV - 27, VI - 7, VIII - 9, X - 8, and XVIII - 1.

1.4  Subantarctic Islands

The Campbell Islands, The Snares, The Bounty Islands, the Antipodes Islands and the 
Auckland Islands Group are Nature Reserves administered by the Department of 
Conservation for the New Zealand Government and are subject to directives issued by 
the Department of Conservation. Macquarie Island is a nature Reserve administered 
for the Australian Government by the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service. 
Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd will comply with all such directives, protocols and 
regulations established from time to time by the Department of Conservation and the
                                                      2
Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service, particularly the regulations relating to landings. All landings on Subantarctic Islands are regulated by a permit system. 
SHEL holds sufficient permits to cover its 1995/96 programme.

1.5     Government Representatives.

It is the requirement of the New Zealand Government (both Department of Conservation and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme, (a programme of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade)) that Expedition Cruises taking tourists to Antarctica, or to the Sub-Antarctic Islands, have on board at all times a New Zealand Government Representative to ensure that the tour operator, and the passengers responsible to the tour operator, observe all requirements of the New Zealand Government for persons visiting Antarctica. SHEL has arranged to have a New Zealand Government Representative accompany each Cruise in its programme.

3
2.0   BACKGROUND

SOUTHERN HERITAGE EXPEDITIONS

2.1   The tour operator (the author of this Initial Environmental Evaluation) is SHEL. The 
Company is a private limited liability Company established under the New Zealand 
Companies Act, 1955 in 1988. The Company has a share capital of $30,000 divided 
into 30,000 ordinary $1.00 shares. 15,000 ordinary shares are held by Rodney Russ, 
and 15,000 shares by Shirley Russ, his wife. The principal of SHEL, Rodney Russ, or 
the companies full time employee, Simon Heppelthwaite, will maintain the position of 
Expedition Leader on all cruises operated by the Company. Over the past 10 years the 
Company has conducted more than 50 expedition type cruises within New Zealand, the 
New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands and Antarctica. The Company has been awarded 
the Air New Zealand Ecotourism Award "for high achievement in conservation and 
public education of the natural environment of New Zealand". It has also won the 
New Zealand Tourism award for best Natural History operation and has received a 
"Highly Commended" from the British Airways "Tourism for Tomorrow" Awards. In 
1994 it was finalist in the Market Development section of the NZ Tourism Award. 
Rodney Russ is a trained naturalist and historian, while Shirley Russ, is a registered 
nurse with management and office skills. Simon Heppelthwaite is a biologist and has 
been working for SHEL for 4 years, the last 12 months as a full time employee.

2.2   Environmental Policy

The objective of SHEL is to create ambassadors for the continued protection of fragile 
environments. It is appreciated that in visiting such environments passengers may have 
impacts. The objective of SHEL is to minimise those impacts by dealing with small 
groups and maintaining a guiding ratio of no more than 1:10. SHEL places great 
importance on educating its clients about possible impacts and ways of avoiding them. 
It is considered the impact is too great then the particular activity will be reviewed and 
if the activity cannot be operated without these impacts then the activity will be 
cancelled and an alternative sought.

2.3   Safety policy

SHEL appreciates the fact that it often operates in regions which are considered of 
high risk. The policy of the Company is to identify those areas where passengers, staff 
and ships crew are at greatest risk and introduce a risk management regime including 
Staff training to minimise those risks.

2.4   IAATO Membership

Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd is a member of IAATO the International 
Association of Antarctic Tour Operators. IAATO was established in 1991 by seven 
tour operators and has since been the recognised voice of Antarctic Tour Operators to 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative meetings and as a representative of the views and 
opinions for Antarctic Tour Operators generally. There are now 13 members of 
                                                  4
IAATO representing the majority of companies involved in Antarctic tourism. As part of 
of its activities IAATO has established Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctic Tour 
Operators, Guidelines for Conduct of Tour Visitors to Antarctica and By-laws to 
conduct its own operations and management. Southern Heritage Expeditions Ltd 
subscribes fully to the concept of IAATO and the regulations it has promulgated for 
management of Antarctic Tour operations. See Appendixes 1, 2, & 3 for copies of 
these.

2.5     Staff

2.5.1   Expedition Leaders/Lecturer
        Rodney Russ.
        Rodney worked for the New Zealand Wildlife Service, firstly as a trainee and than as a 
protected species officer. After eleven years with the Wildlife Service he resigned to 
pursue studies at Otago University and Knox Theological College. He completed a 
Bachelor of Theology and a degree in Pacific and New Zealand History. In 1985 
Southern Heritage Tours Limited was formed to co-ordinate an increasing number of 
Guiding/Lecturing assignments. The Company headquarters were moved to Waikari 
in North Canterbury in 1987. The company now as an office in Christchurch.

        Rodney's guiding assignments have taken him throughout New Zealand on many 
occasions, and have included numerous trips to the Chatham Islands, Stewart Island, 
Hauraki Gulf, Marlborough Sounds and the New Zealand Subantarctic Islands. He 
was guest lecturer and zodiac driver on the World Discoverer in Antarctic in 1990/91 
and more recently he was Expedition Leader on the World Explorer during a series of 
cruises from Fiji to Vietnam and on the World Discoverer from Fiji to Hawaii. Rodney 
was Expedition Leader on the companies successful operation in Antarctica during 
the 1994/95 season.

        Simon Heppelthwaite
        Simon has spent the last ten years working in Ecotourism whilst undertaking 
University study. He spent six years guiding on the Milford Track in Fiordland and has 
written "The Natural History Field Guide of the Milford Track". His background 
includes considerable sea time accrued along the coast of Fiordland whilst working on 
crayfishing boats and he is the holder of a Commercial Launchmasters Certificate. At 
University Simon concentrated his studies on the evolution and ecology of New 
Zealand plants. History, Geology, plant and animal interactions and the interpretation 
of landscapes are his other areas of interest. For four years Simon did contract 
summer guiding for Southern Heritage Expeditions whilst at University. He is now a 
full time employee of the company.

2.5.2   Cruise Director/Hotel Manager
        Mandy Bishop
        Mandy holds a newly created position on the ship, the position of Cruise 
Director/Hotel Manager focus's on the domestic side of the operation. The person 
holding this position is also a zodiac driver. Mandy is well skilled for the job, she has 
travelled extensively and held positions in the hotel and service industries and in 

5
retailing. She has extensive zodiac driving skills, first aid training and has a love and 
knowledge of the outdoors. Mandy worked on Campbell Island for one year 
(1988/89) as the Senior Metrological Officer.

2.5.3 Lecturers/Naturalists:
There will be different staff on each voyage. In addition to the Expedition Leader each 
expedition will be accompanied by three other naturalists who will also act as Zodiac 
drivers. Staff will include:

    Rowley Taylor - Now semi-retired Rowley was a biologist with Ecology Division of 
    DSIR. Rowley has also had extensive experience in the Subantarctic and also 
    Antarctica.

    Dr David Given - David is a world renowned biogeographer/botanist who has made 
    numerous trips to the Antarctic and also Subantarctic.

    Dr Chris Challies - Chris is an ornithologist and biologist with considerable 
    experience in the Subantarctic. This will be his first trip to the Antarctic.

    Terry Reid - Terry is an employee of the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife 
    Service. Terry has spent 16 months as a Ranger on Macquarie Island. Terry is a 
    general naturalist with small boat skills.

    Dr Mark Norman - Mark is an Australian Marine Biologist who has travelled 
    extensively. In 1985 he spent some time in Antarctica and also at Heard Island. He 
    also has extensive small boat skills.

    Jennifer Bassett - Jennifer has had an association with Antarctica spanning 16 years 
    including 8 season involved in biological programmes on the continent itself or on ship 
    based surveys in southern waters.

    Sally Troy - Sally is presently studying for her Ph. D. at the dept of Zoology, 
    University of Melbourne. Her study is on the behavioural Ecology of the NZ fur seal.

2.5.4 Staff Training:
Staff have had experience in either Antarctic, the Subantarctic Islands or both. Some 
have taken the opportunity to further their own training by either attending inflatable 
training courses and others have borrowed a company Naiad to familiarise themselves 
with these craft. A staff training weekend was held in Christchurch on the 29th - 30th 
October 1995. Time was spent with a professional outboard motor mechanic learning 
about maintenance of outboard motors. A Naiad was launched and staff practised the 
principals they had learnt in the workshop. Staff familiarised themselves with the
6    ?
safety equipment tents pitched and all other equipment was tested and checked.

2.5.5 An important part of each trip will be the regular staff meetings that will be held to 
discuss daily programmes and activities and also any problems. These meetings will be 
open to both the Captain and also the New Zealand Government Representative. Staff 
meetings will be an opportunity to answer questions, discuss areas with which staff 
may not be familiar and will reinforce expectations that the Company and Expedition 
Leader has of them.

7
3.0 PROPOSED ACTIVITY, BENEFITS OF ACTIVITY AND ALTERNATIVES

3.1 Description of Operational Area

The activities of SHEL covered in this Initial Environmental Evaluation will be 
conducted within the area bounded by longitude 160 degrees East and longitude 180 
degrees East and between latitude 45 degrees South and latitude 78 degrees South 
including a substantial proportion of the Ross Sea and the land and seas to the south of 
New Zealand. A map showing the operational area is found in Appendix 4.

3.2 The location, duration and intensity of each of the proposed activities in Antarctica is 
specifically as follows:

The Company, for the coming summer 1995/96 season, proposes three Expedition 
Cruises to Antarctica. These are termed Voyage 1294: "The Nature of Antarctica"; 
Voyage 1295: "South to Antarctica in the Footsteps of Douglas Mawson"; and 
Voyage 1296: "In the Footsteps of Scott and Shackleton". See photocopy of sales 
brochure for detailed information. Appendix 5.

Voyage 1294: "The Nature of Antarctica"
December 29th 1995 - January 22nd 1996
Passengers will depart from Bluff New Zealand visiting the Snares, Aucklands and 
Campbell Island before heading south to the continent. It is the intention to make 
landfall on the George V Land, as areas of this coast are one of the first to become 
"icefree" and as a result there are many species of birds to be seen. Landings will be 
attempted at Commonwealth Bay and other localities as ice conditions permit. A 
search will be made for Emperor penguins, which may still be present at this time of 
the year. The Expedition returns to Hobart via Maquarie Island.

Voyage 1295: "South to Antarctica in the Footsteps of Douglas Mawson"
January 21st - February 19th 1996
This expedition departs from the Port of Hobart with the first call being Maquarie 
Island. Sailing south from Macquarie the first landfall will be at Cape Adare where 
there will be a visit to Borchgrevink's hut and the Adelie penguin colony. South of 
Cape Adare a landfall will be made at the Possession Islands. The expedition will 
continue south taking advantage of the many wildlife observations. The expedition 
plans to visit Scott base and McMurdo Station on Ross Island and expedition members 
will inspect Scott's Discovery Hut. Expedition members will also inspect the hut of Sir 
Ernest Shackleton at Cape Royds and the hut of Robert Falcon Scott at Cape Evans. 
From there the ship will cruise to Cape Hallet by way of Terra Nova Bay where if 
permission is granted, the Expedition members will visit the Italian research base. A 
landing is planned at Cape Hallet so that Expedition members can visit the penguin 
rookery there. The Expedition will return to New Zealand by way of the Campbell and 
Auckland Islands.

Voyage 1296: "In the Footsteps of Scott and Shackleton"
February 18th - March 9th 1996

8
The ship will depart from Bluff, New Zealand and travel by way of Campbell Island to 
reach the Ross Sea. On arrival in the Ross Sea it is intended to visit the penguin 
rookery and Borchgrevinks hut at Cape Adare. Landings will be made on the 
Possession Islands before sailing further south to visit Terra Nova Bay and the Italian 
research base if permission is granted. The ship will visit Scott Base and McMurdo 
Station on Ross Island and Expedition members will inspect Scott's Discovery Hut. 
Expedition members will then move to Cape Evans and visit the hut of Captain Robert 
Falcon Scott and then onto Cape Royds to visit the Hut of Sir Ernest Shackleton. If 
conditions permit the ship will cruise by way of Cape Hallet where a landing will be 
made. The expedition will return to New Zealand by way of the Auckland Islands.

3.3     Safety
SHEL appreciates the fact that it is operating in an area that should there be an 
emergency SHEL will have to deal with any emergencies without outside assistance. 
SHEL attempted to lessen the risks as much as possible by selecting a ship that is 
suitable for the latitudes and conditions intended to be visited and by conducting the 
cruises at a time of the year when conditions are most suitable. The Company has 
attempted to identify those areas where the greatest risks are and introduce Risk 
Management to these. The following areas have been identified.

3.3.1   Clothing
All passengers have been sent clothing lists suggesting the type of clothing they should 
pack and weather conditions likely to be encountered. In addition to this Southern 
Heritage Expeditions will be providing each member with an Expedition Parka. Refer 
Appendix 6.

3.3.2   Life Jackets
The wearing of Life Jackets in the semi rigid inflatables is compulsory at all times. Life 
Jackets are supplied by SHEL to each Expedition member. Operating instructions and 
specifications are included in Operations Manual

3.3.3   Radio Contact
Staff are required to be in radio contact at all times with the Expedition Leader and 
with the Bridge of the Ship, prior to and during landing and on shore excursions. 
Radios are supplied by SHEL. Full specifications are included in Operations Manual

3.3.4   Survival Equipment
In addition to the equipment carried in each Naiad, safety survival will be landed each 
time a party is put ashore. This equipment will include sufficient items to enable 
Expedition members to survive should the party not be able to get back to the ship. 
There will be three sets of this equipment - one for each Naiad. See appendix 7 for list 
of survival equipment.

3.3.5   Tag Board
A special need is seen by SHEL to control the numbers of passengers, staff and crew 
whilst ashore. Each person on the ship is allocated a unique number. This is used on a 
"Tag Board" system. The system allows that tag being reversed on the board to show

9
a different colour whilst that individual is away from the ship or ashore. Upon his or 
her return to the ship the tag is reversed again on the board.

3.3.6   First Aid.
Staff carry a Field First Aid Kit whenever they are a shore and are encouraged to hold 
current First Aid Certificates. The Cruise Director is a National Heart Foundation 
Instructor and holds certificates from New Zealand Fire Service and the Order of St 
John. In addition to this there is a fully qualified Doctor on board the ship with a well 
equipped First Aid Station.

3.3.7   Protective Clothing
Zodiac drivers and shore staff will wear neoprene waders. In particularly adverse 
conditions drivers and or shore personal will wear immersion suits.

3.3.8   Response.
Because the principal of SHEL, or one of the companies full time employee, 
accompanies each cruise immediate and responsible action can be taken in perceived 
breaches of safety protocols.

3.4     Insurance.

3.4.1   Insurance
As Head Charterer of the vessel Quark Expeditions will name SHEL as an additional 
insured under its broad form liability. This liability policy has limits of at least 
US$10million.

In addition to this policy Southern Heritage Expeditions carries the following Policies:

        (a)     Charterers Liability with limits of US$10million
        (b)     Zodiac Operations Liability with limits of US$5million
        (c)     Public Liability with limits of AUD$5million
        (d)     Professional Travel Agents Liability with limits of AUD$2.5million.

In addition to these Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) have assured the 
Company that all staff on the payroll are entitled to cover.

3.4.2   Under the Company's "Booking Terms and Conditions" it is stated "we strongly 
recommend that travellers purchase Trip Cancellation Protection and/or Travel 
Insurance at the time of booking". The Company has negotiated Travel Insurance for 
passengers through an Australian Company called Harbour Pacific Underwriting 
Management Pty Ltd. A copy of the Policy and its negotiated benefits is attached in 
Appendix 8.

3.5     Alternatives

3.5.1   It is considered by SHEL that there are no viable alternatives to the activities apart 
from the alternative of not proceeding.

10
4.0   INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL STATE

The open Antarctic landscape and clear atmosphere make any modification by human 
activities particularly obvious. The impact of tourist visits on the environment 
however are generally lower than the effects on other Antarctic support and science 
activities.

The Historic Sites, the focus of a significant portion of the Expeditions of SHEL are 
already significantly modified by human activities over periods of up to almost 100 
years. It is unlikely that any short term visit being of no more than a "minor or 
transitory impact". SHEL will comply with all AHT impact codes.

SHEL Expeditions members will also visit penguin rookeries in the Ross Sea Region. 
The impact of Expedition members on birds and animals is referred to in the appendix 
9 and 10.

Other sites in Antarctica likely to be visited can be generally described as being open 
shingle or stony beaches, free of fast ice or other objective danger which could restrict 
landings by inflatables.

It is considered unlikely that visits to such land forms would have any lasting effect. 
Any footprints left are likely to be erased by tide or weathering over a relatively short 
period. No garbage will be left on shore

SHEL wished to be free to select landing sites on an "as available" basis. The 
relatively small numbers of Expedition members, the enthusiasm and ability of staff, the 
fact that all passengers can be accommodated at one time in the inflatables carried on 
the ship will allow decisions to be made as to landings on very short notice on any sites 
in the Ross Sea Region (as shown on the map Appendix 4) not protected by SSSI or 
SPA designations.

Please see Appendix 11 for a list of potential, but by no means complete, landing sites 
which maybe used by Southern Heritage Expeditions on any one cruise.

 
11
5.0  NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF IMPACTS AND OPERATIONS

5.1  Purpose

The purpose of these Expeditions is to create "Ambassadors" by raising the awareness
of participants through sharing with them the unique natural history of Antarctica and
the Subantarctic, allowing Expedition members to visit historic sites and discussing
with them the conservation issues confronting the Antarctic Continent. This will be
done in a manner so as to limit the impacts on the Antarctic environment and its
dependent and associated ecosystems.

5.2  Monitoring

The Expedition Leader will cause to be kept a log of the dates, times and duration of
each landing by an Expedition member or specifically the numbers of persons landed
and the duration they spend on land. Regular staff meetings will be held, to which the
New Zealand Government Representative will be invited, to review procedures and
make amendments and improvements where necessary.

5.3  Impact on Birds

SHEL consider it unlikely that there will be any direct or second order impact from the
proposed activity on the life and breeding cycle of birds likely to be encountered. The
Antarctic Visitor Guidelines will be strictly adhered to minimise the risk of impact.
Experienced staff are able to identify stress related behaviour in birds and in the
unlikely event that this occurs, the activity causing stress will cease immediately. See
Appendix 9 for list of species.

5.4  Impact on Marine Mammals

The observation of marine mammals is an important aspect of all Expedition Cruises.
Southern Heritage Expeditions considers it unlikely that there will be any direct or
second order impact from the proposed activity on the life and breeding cycle of the
mammals encountered. The Marine Mammals Protection Regulations (1992) will be
used as a guideline for activities around and involving marine mammals. See Appendix
10 for list of species.

5.5  Impact on Land

Care will be taken to avoid any garbage, rubbish or other material being left at any of
the landing sites. Expedition members will not be allowed to smoke cigarettes or
tobacco whilst ashore. No one will be allowed to collect any biological or geological
specimens, unless a special permit has been obtained from the relevant authorities.
Landing sites will be carefully chosen to minimise the impact of landings. To prevent
the possible introduction of micro-organisms, boots and articles of clothing likely to
transfer soil residue from previous landings in Subantarctic and/or New Zealand will be
thoroughly washed before a landing is made in Antarctica. Because of low numbers of
12
Expedition members, no impact is likely from the proposed on land activities. See 
appendix 11.

5.6   Historic Sites

SHEL is aware of the requirements of the Antarctic Heritage Trust and the New 
Zealand Government Representative relating to visitor numbers and durations of visits 
to the Historic Huts administered by the Trust.

SHEL recognises Commonwealth Bay as an HSM under the Madrid Protocol and will 
visit Commonwealth Bay in accordance with the rules established by the Australian 
Government.

All historic huts in the Ross Dependency (Scott's Discovery Hut - McMurdo, Scott's 
Hut - Cape Evans, Shackleton's Hut - Cape Royds, Borchgrewink's Hut - Cape Adare) 
are kept locked and visits to the interiors can only be made subject to the conditions 
imposed by NZAP.

5.7   Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty opened for 
signature at Madrid, Spain in 1991. The Protocol makes provision for the 
establishment of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially 
Managed Areas (ASMAs) (Article 3 Annex V Second Schedule of the Protocol). The 
term Antarctic Specially Protected Areas redefines the former terms of Specially 
Protected Area and Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

There are only four Specially Protected Areas in the Ross Dependency which are likely 
to be in the vicinity of any of the Expedition Cruises conducted by SHEL.

      Specially Protected Area 4 - Sabrina Islet, Balleny Islands,
      Specially Protected Area 5 - Beaufort Island, Ross Sea,
      Specially Protected Area 7 - Cape Hallett, Victoria Land, and
      Specially Protec?ed Area 20 - New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross 
      Island.

There are 4 Sites of Special Scientific Interests designated within the Ross Dependency 
which are likely to be in the vicinity of any of the Expedition Cruises conducted by 
SHEL.

      Sites of Special Scientific Interest 1 - Cape Royds, Ross Island,
      Sites of Special Scientific Interest 2 - Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross 
      Island,
      Sites of Special Scientific Interest 4 - Cape Crozier, Ross Island, and
      Sites of Special Scientific Interest 10 - Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island.

SHEL is aware of the precise location of each of the above Sites of Special Scientific
13
Interest and Specially Protected Area and is fully acquainted with all of the 
Management plans for the areas.

SHEL will ensure that Staff, Passengers and Crew are fully briefed on the absolute 
need to respect the designated areas and will ensure that none are trespassed upon.

5.8     Contact with Research Stations in Antarctica

SHEL recognises that research bases are established by their national Governments for 
Antarctic research and that the impact of tourist visits can be significant. SHEL 
undertakes to comply with all requirements of national Governments in respect of 
tourists visits to such bases and will adhere to all protocols and regulations required by 
such Government or by base management to ensure that base operations are not 
unnecessarily impacted upon. Full details are included in the Operations Manual.

5.8.1   Management of Passenger Visits to Research Stations

SHEL will ensure that, prior to commencement of its Expedition Cruise season, 
procedures and systems for adequate communication with Antarctic bases are 
established. Final arrangements for any Base visit will be confirmed with Base 
Management between 72 hours and 24 hours prior to expected arrival. All Expedition 
members, staff and crew will comply with any conditions on restrictions of their 
movement for safety or operational reasons. A full report will be made by SHEL of 
each Base visit to the national Government of any Base or Station visited.

5.9     Within three calendar months from the completion of the last of their Expedition 
Cruises to Antarctica SHEL will provide all relevant and required Authorities with a 
full written report on the activities of the company in Antarctica.

5.10    Visitor Management

5.10.1  The Akademik Shokalski will carry a maximum of 38 passengers, 8 staff and a New 
Zealand Government Representative. The ship has 27 crew.

5.10.2  Briefing of Passengers

Passengers for Expedition cruises are first sent by SHEL a comprehensive set of 
briefing documents, specifically including the "Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctic 
Visitors" established by IAATO. More detailed documentation is also given 
emphasising the need for passengers to observe strictly the rules about approach to 
wildlife and emphasising the dangers of interfering with vegetation and geological 
specimens. A copy of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty will be sent to each passenger.

5.10.3  Information for Passengers

5.10.3.1  Details of the information given to passengers and copies of the documents 
handed to them pre-departure briefing are noted in Appendix 12.

13.1    Antarctica Visitor Guidelines

14
13.2     Guidelines for visits to Cape Dennison Historic Site (Voyage 1294)
         13.3     Code of Conduct - A contract with the passengers
         13.4     Landing Procedures by Naiad
         13.5     Minimum Impact Code Subantarctic Islands
         13.6     IAATO Guidance for Visitors to Antarctica

5.10.3.2 In addition to the above mentioned SHEL will ensure that a full copy of the
         Antarctic Treaty and current relevant commentaries and a full copy of the Madrid
         Protocols and Recommendations are available to passengers in the Ship's Library.

5.10.4   Communications with Passengers

5.10.4.1 Recaps/Briefings
         A regular recaps session is held as appropriate at the conclusion of each day's
         activities. Such sessions reinforce the instructive and educational aspect of the Cruise
         and allow staff to comment upon all aspects of landings or cruising (specifically safety
         aspects of landing and member behaviour) and also allows the Expedition members to
         comment on the day's activities. At a recap session a briefing of the likely activities for
         the following day is also undertaken by the Expedition Leader.

5.10.4.2 Lectures
         The lecturers on board are expected to present at least six lectures each throughout the
         course of each cruise. Lecture topics will relate to their sphere of interest and
         expertise. They are informal lectures and provide an ideal opportunity to talk about
         and discuss issues relating to the environment. In addition to these lectures SHEL will
         arrange to screen a series of documentary videos. A full list of all videos carried on
         board the ship is included in the Operations Manual.

5.10.4.3 Daily Newsheet
         A daily newsheet will be prepared and given to each Expedition member each night.
         This will outline the following days programme and will be an excellent medium to
         communicate with the Expedition member. It will be used to highlight safety and
         environmental issues.

5.11.1   Description of Ship
         The ship to be used for Voyages 1294, 1295, 1296 is the "Akademik Shokalski"
         chartered by SHEL from Quark Expeditions Limited. The name of the Captain of the
         Akademik Shokalski, the Registration of the ship, its radio call signs and the radio
         frequencies it monitors will be confirmed to NZAP before departure as will
         confirmation of final numbers of passengers, staff and crew. A sister ship of the
         Akademik Shokalski, the Professor Molchanov, has been sucessfully operating as an
         Expedition cruise ship in the Antarctic for a number of seasons. The Akademik
         Shokalski measures 236 feet in length and 48 feet in width. She was built in Finland in
         1983 and was designed as a research vessel. She is steel built and ice strengthened
         being specifications designed for cruising waters of the higher latitudes. The Akademik
         Shokalski has a GR tonnage of 2140 and Lloyds ice class of 101A Super. She is
         equipped with two 1560 horse power diesel engines which have an average use of 5 to
         
15
6 tonnes of light marine diesel per day. The ship will be staffed by Russian officers and 
crew with extensive Arctic experience in ice navigation. Many will have Antarctic 
experience. The ship will use 3 x 4.8 metre Naiad semi rigid inflatable craft equipped 
with 40 horsepower Yamaha motors. The ship will carry approximately 5 x 200 litre 
drums of gasoline for use by Naiads.

5.11.2     Waste Management 
5.11.2.1   Oil and Oilly Mixtures 
The Akademik Shokalski allows for oil and oil/water mixtures to be collected and 
stored. Oil and water mixtures are separated to reduce oil content to below 15 parts 
per million. Separated water residue is stored. Waste oil is burnt in the incinerator at 
800 degrees centigrade and the oil/water residue is released in accordance with the 
MARPOL regulations. The discharge outlet for oil/water residue is fitted with a 
switch which shuts off when the oil content of the residue exceeds 15 ppm. Oil/water 
residues are only discharged at sea when the ship is underway. Outlet valves are 
sealed when the ship is within 12 nautical miles of land or ice shelf. SHEL will ensure 
that the relevant inspection certificates are current and valid.

5.11.2.2   Garbage 
SHEL will negotiate with the Captain, management and crew of the ship before the 
Expedition cruise season commences to ensure that MARPOL requirements and 
guidelines are met. Experience of other charterers of ships of this class show that the 
Captain, management and crew of Russian ships are generally aware of their 
obligations. On board incineration of waste is an approved garbage treatment process 
under MARPOL and MEPC 59(33) incorporates specifications for ship board 
incinerators. The incinerator on the Akademik Shokalski is designed, constructed, 
operated and maintained in accordance with this standard. Dry garbage is to be 
incinerated daily at a rate of 30 kilograms per hour. Medical wastes including sharps and all plastics are incinerated with dry garbage. MARPOL 
totally prohibits the discharge of plastics at sea so all plastics will either be burned or 
brought back and disposed of at Port.

IAATO Tour Operator guidelines go beyond MARPOL requirements for the disposal 
of plastics. IAATO Guideline 16 states that all plastics should be retained for proper 
disposal at Port. Although the Akademik Shokalski may not comply strictly with this 
requirement, correct incineration is probably a better course as otherwise plastics may 
end up in a poorly managed landfill site. The Expedition cruises of SHEL will comply 
with Antarctic Treaty recommendation XV-3(7) in removing from Antarctica 
polystyrene beads and chips. Negotiations will take place with the Captain, 
management and crew to ensure that such packaging and other prohibited items are 
not used. SHEL will also comply with Antarctic Treaty recommendation XV-3(11) to 
remove all stated items including electrical batteries and publicity will be given to this 
on board ship. A provision will be made for separate containers for these so that they 
can be returned to Port. SHEL proposes to encourage consideration of recycling and 
source reduction of waste with an education programme on board the ship.

Wet garbage, predominately kitchen waste from food preparation and disposal, will be 
                                                                                
16
stored in tanks until it can be released into the sea north of 60 degrees South.

5.11.2.3    Sewage
The Akademik Shokalski complies with MARPOL requirement for sewage treatment.
All sewage, grey water and kitchen sink water is stored until it can be processed. The 
treatment plant chlorinates and flocculates sewage, separating solids and liquids. If 
possible all treated liquid waste will be held in tanks and disposed of when the ship is 
north of 60 degrees, if this is not possible (depending on capacity) then it will be 
discharged at a speed of no less than 4 knots when the ship is more than 12 nautical 
miles from the coast or ice shelves. Sewage sludge is drawn from the treatment plant 
and incinerated. The sewage discharge provision of the ship will be inspected and 
SHEL will ensure that relevant MARPOL requirements and relevant inspection 
certificates are current and valid at the time of Expedition cruises.

5.11.2.4    Ballast
SHEL has assured itself that the ship operators are aware of and comply with 
international guidelines for preventing the introduction of unwanted aquatic organisms 
and pathogens from ship's ballast water and sediment discharges. SHEL will require 
the uptake and release of only clean ballast picked up in the Southern Ocean north of 
60 degrees South and will not allow tank washing water, other oily residues or 
mixtures to be released in Antarctica.

5.11.3    Emergency Response to Contaminant, Waste, Fuel or Oil Spill
If a spill occurs the following steps will be taken by or on behalf of SHEL.

(a)    Ensure personal safety of passengers, staff and crew.
(b)    Ensure safety of ship/inflatable and property.
(c)    Assess risk of contaminant.
(d)    Report spill to appropriate authorities including detail of location position 
       (including threats to any particularly sensitive areas) type of contaminant or 
       fuel and any assessed fire or explosion hazard.
(e)    Attempt to clean up small (up to 100 litre) spills as quickly as possible using 
       available equipment with a priority to ensure any spill does not migrate to 
       particularly sensitive areas.
(f)    Recover oiled or contaminated soil, ice, snow, rock or shingle and associated 
       debris and waste including cleaning material, seal and store in strong plastic 
       storage bags pending return to Port in New Zealand. Refer Annex IV Second 
       Schedule Article Protocol Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Bill.

5.11.4    Landing Craft
The key to successful Expedition cruising are the very versatile landing craft used to 
shift passengers from the ship to the shore. SHEL will be placing 3 x 4.8 metre (1 x 
1994 and 2 x 1995 models) Naiad semi rigid inflatable craft on board the Akademik 
Shokalski for this purpose. These boats will be powered by 40hp Yamaha motors (2 x 
1995 models and 1 x 1996 model) in addition to these there will be one spare 25hp 
Yamaha motor (1995 model) on board. To avoid accidental spills of all refuelling of 
these boats will be carried out on deck. The fuel tanks are located into specially
                                                                             17
designed forward lockers with a rigid fuel line running to the motor. This prevents accidental spills due to rupture of tank or fuel line. Full description of landing craft and operating/servicing manuals for all the motors are included in the Operations Manual. Details of the safety equipment carried in each of the Naiads is also included in this manual. Both the Naiads and the outboard motors have been fully serviced by the manufactures or their appointed agents.

5.11.5 Port Facilities

Expedition cruises scheduled for Antarctica will commence and end at either Bluff, New Zealand or Hobart, Tasmania.  SHEL is co-ordinating the pre-departure of each cruise. The relevant Port authorities have been contracted to dispose of garbage at a landfill site which exceeds MARPOL requirements.

Refuelling of the vessel will be undertaken in accordance with MARPOL and other international requirements. The ship will comply with MARPOL requirements in respect of any "at sea" fuel spill accidents.

18
6.0     CONCLUSION

It is considered that the within information is sufficient to constitute Initial
Environmental Evaluation.

The author is:        Rodney Russ
                      Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited
                      PO Box 20-219
                      Christchurch
                      New Zealand
                      Telephone: (03) 359 7711
                      Facsimile: (03) 359 3311

Copyright is claimed in respect of this document under the Copyright Act and it is
considered that (under the Official Information Act) some of the information is
commercially sensitive.

19
SCHEDULE OF APPENDICES

1.    IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Tour Operators
2.    IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors
3.    IAATO By-Laws
4.    Map
5.    Sales Brochure
6.    Clothing List
7.    Survival Equipment
8.    Insurance, Copy Policy
9.    Birds
10.   Mammals
11   Landings
12.   12.1   Antarctica Visitor Guidelines
      12.2   Guidelines for visits to Cape Dennison Historic Site (Voyage )
      12.3   Code of Conduct - A contract with the passengers
      12.4   Landing Procedures by Naiad
      12.5   Minimum Impact Code Subantarctic Islands
      12.6   IAATO Guidance for Visitors to Antarctica

20
APPENDIX 1

                                                               Guidelines of Conduct
                               for Antarctica Tour Operators

1.  Thoroughly read the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978 (U.S. Public Law 95-541), abide by the regulations set forth in the Act, and brief your staff accordingly.  Comparable legislation for non-U.S. countries should be adhered to accordingly.  Be mindful of your own actions and present the best example possible to the passengers.

2.  Be aware that under the Act, it is prohibited to enter Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) and Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) unless permits have been obtained in advance.  Only those with "compelling scientific purpose" are allowed permits to enter SPAs, as any entry could "jeopardize the natural ecological system existing in such an area."  SSSIs are "sites where scientific investigations are being conducted or are planned and there is a demonstrable risk of interference which would jeopardize these investigations."  Permits to enter SSSIs are only granted if the "proposed entry is consistent with the management plan" for that particular site.

3.  Enforce the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors in a consistent manner.  Please keep in mind, however, that guidelines must be adapted to individual circumstances.  For example, fur seals with pups may be more aggressive than without pups, and therefore passengers need to stay farther away; gentoo penguins are more sensitive to human presence than chinstraps; penguins on eggs or with small chicks are more easily disturbed than molting chicks.

4.  Hire a professional team, including qualified, well-trained and experienced expedition leaders, cruise directors, officers, and crew.  Place an emphasis on lecturers and naturalists who will not only talk about the wildlife, history and geology, but also guide passengers when ashore.  It is recommended that at least 75% of the staff have previous Antarctic experience.

5.  Hire Zodiac drivers who are familiar with driving Zodiacs in polar regions.  Zodiac drivers should take care not to approach too close to icebergs or other floating ice, or glaciers where calving is a possibility, or to steep cliffs where snow or ice may suddenly slip down into the sea.  They should also use caution not to disturb wildlife, which can be very sensitive to engine noise.

6.  Educate and brief the crew on the IAATO Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors, the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 and the Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, and make sure they are consistently enforced.  We encourage tour operators to give slide illustrated talks to the crew and offer guided tours ashore, in order to stimulate the crew's interest in Antarctica and to make sure that they also understand the need for the environmental protection of the region.  Unsupervised crew should not be ashore.

7.  Have a proper staff-to-passenger ratio.  Ensure that for every 20 to 25 passengers there is 1 qualified naturalist/lecturer guide to conduct and supervise small groups ashore.

8.  Limit the number of passengers ashore to 100 at any one place at any one time.

                                                               1992/93
APPENDIX 2

                                                                 IAATO
                                                 INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
                                         ANTARCTICA TOUR OPERATORS


Guidelines of Conduct
for Antarctica Visitors


Antarctica, the world's last pristine wilderness, is particularly vulnerable to human presence. Life in
Antarctica must contend with one of the harshest environments on earth, and we must take care that our
presence does not add more stress to this fragile and unique ecosystem.

The following Guidelines of Conduct have been adopted by all members of the International Association
Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) and will be made available to all visitors traveling with them to
tarctica. With your cooperation we will be able to operate environmentally-conscious expeditions that
protect and preserve Antarctica, leaving the continent unimpaired for future generations.

Please thoroughly study and follow these guidelines. By doing so, you will make an important
contribution towards the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem and minimize visitor impact. It will also
help to insure that you will have a safe and fulfilling experience in visiting one of the most exciting and
fascinating places on earth.

1. DO NOT DISTURB, HARASS, OR INTERFERE WITH THE WILDLIFE.
   * never touch the animals.
   * maintain a distance of at least 15 feet (4.5 meters) from penguins, all nesting birds and true seals
         (crawling seals), and 50 feet (15 meters) from fur seals.
   * give animals the right-of-way.
   * do not position yourself between a marine animal and its path to the water, nor between a parent and its
         young.
   * always be aware of your surroundings; stay outside the periphery of bird rookeries and seal colonies.
   * keep noise to a minimum.
   * do not feed the animals, either ashore or from the ship.

Most of the Antarctic species exhibit a lack of fear which allows you to approach relatively close; however,
please remember that the austral summer is a time for courting, mating, nesting, rearing young and
molting. If any animal changes or stops its activities upon your approach, you are too close! Be
especially careful while taking photographs, since it is easy to not notice adverse reactions of animals
when concentrating through the lens of a camera. Disturbing nesting birds may cause them to expose their
eggs/offspring to predators or cold. Maintain a low profile since animals can be intimidated by people
standing over them. The disturbance of some animals, most notably fur seals and nesting skuas, may
elicit an aggressive, and even dangerous, response.

2. DO NOT WALK ON OR OTHERWISE DAMAGE THE FRAGILE
PLANTS, i.e. LICHENS, MOSSES AND GRASSES.

Poor soil and harsh living conditions mean growth and regeneration of these plants is extremely slow.
Most of the lichens, which grow only on rocks, hard-packed sand and gravel, and bones, are extremely
fragile. Damage from human activity among the moss beds can last for decades.

                                                                                                          1992/93
In addition to the Guidelines of Conduct for Antarctica Visitors adopted by IAATO, all visitors should be aware of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. This annex to the Antarctic Treaty of 1959 addresses the protection of the environment and conservation of wildlife. Citizens of any government that has ratified the Antarctic Treaty are legally bound by the following guidelines of conduct in the region south of Latitude 60° South:

Conservation of Wildlife

Animals and plants native to Antarctica are protected under the following five instruments outlined in the Agreed Measures:

1. Protection of Native Fauna
   Within the Treaty Area it is prohibited to kill, wound, capture or molest any native mammal or bird, or any attempt at such an act, except in accordance with a permit.

2. Harmful Interference
   Appropriate efforts will be taken to ensure that harmful interference is minimized in order that normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird are protected. Harmful interference includes any disturbance of bird and seal colonies during the breeding period by persistent attention from persons on foot.

3. Specially Protected Species
   Special protection is accorded to Fur and Ross Seals.

4. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
   Areas of outstanding scientific interest are preserved in order to protect their unique natural ecological system. Entry to these areas is allowed by permit only.

5. Introduction of Non-Indigenous Species, Parasites and Diseases
   No species of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought into the Area, except in accordance with a permit. All reasonable precautions have to be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of parasites and diseases into the Treaty Area.

Additionally, the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 prohibits U.S. citizens from taking or importing marine mammals, or parts of marine mammals, into the U.S. Both accidental or deliberate disturbance of seals or whales may constitute harassment under the Act.

1992/93
APPENDIX 3

BY-LAWS

ARTICLE I - FOUNDATION, NAME, REGISTRATION, HEADQUARTERS

Section A.  The association was founded in 1991 by seven Antarctica tour operators:
Adventure Network International, Mountain Travel•Sobek, Paquet/Ocean
Cruise Lines, Salen Lindblad Cruising, Society Expeditions, Travel
Dynamics and Zegrahm Expeditions.

Section B.  The name of the association is "International Association of Antarctica
Tour Operators". The abbreviated name "IAATO" will henceforth be used
in these by-laws.

Section C.  IAATO is registered in Olympia, in the State of Washington, USA.

Section D.  IAATO's headquarters are currently located in Kent, in the State of
Washington, U.S.A. There are no affiliated chapters at present but, being
an international association, it is not excluded that foreign chapters may be
established in the future.

ARTICLE II - OBJECTIVES

Section A.  To represent the ship and airborne tour operators and charter companies
providing Antarctic travel opportunities, to the Antarctic Treaty
Organization, member countries and the public at large.

Section B.  To advocate, promote and practice safe and environmentally responsible,
private sector travel programs, including tourism, to Antarctica.

Section C.  To develop, and encourage international acceptance of:
-   Guidelines of Conduct for Tour Operators
-   Guidelines of Conduct for Visitors
-   Certification/Accreditation for field personnel
-   Education programs linked to the certification program

Section D.  To operate within the parameters of the Antarctic Treaty and the
Environmental Protocol with Annexes, MARPOL, SOLAS and similar
international agreements, as amended.

Section E.  To foster cooperation between tour operators in the coordination of their
itineraries so that overlapping site visits are avoided.

Office Of The Secretariat
11417 S.E. 215th Street • Kent, WA 98031 • U.S.A.
Tel: (206) 854-7541 • Fax: (206) 850-3167
Section F.     To provide a forum for the international, private sector travel industry 
               involved in Antarctica to share expertise and opinions among members 
               themselves and with prospective members.

Section G.     To enhance public awareness and concern for the conservation of the 
               Antarctic environment and ecosystem, and to better inform the media, 
               governments, politicians and environmental organizations about private 
               sector travel to that region.

Section H.     To foster cooperation between private sector visitors and the international 
               scientific community active in Antarctica.

Section I.     To support science in Antarctica through cooperation with Antarctic 
               National Programs and to provide logistical support for science.

Section J.     To create a corps of ambassadors for the continued protection of Antarctica 
               through offering the opportunity to experience this continent first hand.

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

Section A.     There are two categories of membership:

               1.    Full Members: For-profit companies who operate travel programs 
                     to Antarctica and who have fulfilled the requirements for membership; who 
                     have pledged to abide by IAATO's bylaws; who agree to not carry over 400 
                     passengers per trip to the Antarctic; and whose application has been 
                     formally accepted by at least two-thirds of the standing members.
               2.    Associate Members: Other organizations and individuals who are 
                     interested in Antarctica and wish to support IAATO's objectives.

Section B.     Membership application requirements are set by a standing committee and 
               approved by two-thirds of the full members. These requirements may 
               change from time to time in accordance with the dynamics of the Antarctic 
               Treaty regulations.

Section C.     Membership is non-transferable. In the event a member organization is 
               acquired by another entity, that entity would have to re-apply for 
               membership.

Section D.     Current full members who drop their affiliation but wish to re-instate their 
               membership at a later time, must re-pay the initiation fee.

Section E.     Full members are bound to strictly adhere to and actively support IAATO's 
               objectives as stated in Article II and, particularly, obey and enforce the 
               Guidelines of Conduct for Tour Operators and the Guidelines of Conduct 
               for Visitors, as amended.

Section F.     New full members accept to have an Observer onboard who is appointed 
               by the office of their respective National Antarctic Programs.

P. 2                                                             2/18/94
Section G.     Full members are subject to annual membership dues and fees as agreed 
               from year to year by two-thirds of full members in good standing.

Section H.     Full members in good standing are those who act in compliance with the 
               by-laws and are current with their IAATO dues.

Section I.     Non-compliance with the by-laws and non-payment of applicable dues and 
               fees will subject the full member to reprimand or expulsion, after review by 
               the membership or their appointed committee.

Section J.     Associate members will be subject to payment of annual dues as proposed 
               by the standing committee and agreed by two-thirds of full members in 
               good standing.

Section K.     During their annual July meeting full members will review their Antarctic 
               operations vis-a-vis IAATO objectives and guidelines.

ARTICLE IV - ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

Section A.     Each year, during the annual July meeting a Secretary and a Spokesperson 
               will be appointed for the duration of one year.

Section B.     The Secretary and Spokesperson are elected positions with a remuneration. 
               Responsibilities, time requirements and remuneration will be defined in 
               connection with the proposed program and budget and agreed upon by 
               two-thirds of full members during the annual July meeting.

Section C.     The Secretary's responsibilities include, but are not limited to: 
               coordinating the annual program, act as a communication center between 
               full members and with non-members, act as the Treasurer, keep records, 
               relay and distribute IAATO information to interested parties, nationally 
               and internationally and submit to the full members a status report of 
               IAATO activities and finances during each annual meeting. Make 
               recommendations in regards to organizational and financial matters.

Section D.     The Spokesperson's responsibilities include: to represent IAATO at national 
               and international, official and unofficial meetings as directed by the 
               membership, promote IAATO's objectives, and speak for IAATO at 
               selected forums, make recommendations and present detailed reports on 
               activities carried out on behalf of IAATO.

Section E.     Individuals with relevant qualifications who are thought of as being able 
               and willing to provide guidance to IAATO in its attempts to reach its goals 
               may be invited to sit on the Advisory Board. Such individuals will be 
               named as Associate Members of IAATO. Members of the Advisory Board 
               do not receive an honorarium.

P. 3                                  2/18/94
ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS AND VOTING

Section A.     Elections will be held once every year during the annual meeting.

Section B.     All full members in good standing are eligible for committee positions and 
               other elective offices. Before any election, the Secretary will qualify the 
               candidates.

Section C.     Only full members in good standing are eligible to vote. Prior to any 
               election the Secretary will disqualify any attending full members who are 
               not in good standing.

Section D.     Each qualifying full member will have one vote.

Section E.     Associate Members have no voting right.

Section F.     Full members in good standing who are unable to attend may vote in 
               writing to the Secretariat, provided that the ballots are returned latest one 
               week prior to the meeting.

Section G.     Full members who are not in attendance at the meeting forfeit their voting 
               right on any impromptu issues that require voting during the meeting.

Section H.     Any issue to be voted on will pass with a two-thirds vote in favor of the 
               issue.

ARTICLE VI - STANDING COMMITTEES

Section A.     A 3-member Executive Committee shall be elected at the annual meeting 
               to assist the Secretariat. This committee shall make decisions on behalf of 
               the full membership where deemed appropriate, subject to ratification.

Section B.     Further standing committees, as required, shall be elected by a two-thirds 
               majority of the full members during any annual meeting.

ARTICLE VII - MEET!NGS

Section A.     A minimum of one annual meeting will be held in the month of July in 
               Washington D.C. in conjunction with the annual NSF Tour Operator 
               meeting.

Section B.     The Secretary will coordinate the time and venue of the meeting and the 
               agenda and advise full members in writing at least 60 days prior to the 
               meeting.

Section C.     Attendance at the annual meeting is reserved for full members only. 
               Attendance requests by non-members may be accepted by two-thirds of 
               the attending full members.

P. 4                                                  2/18/94
Section D.     Meetings will be presided over by the Spokesperson. In the absence of the 
               Spokesperson attending members will elect one member to preside.

Section E.     The Secretary will take minutes during the meeting and distribute them to 
               all full members within one month after the meeting.

ARTICLE VIII - FINANCES

Section A.     The Secretary will collect and administer all dues and fees and will actively 
               solicit timely payment.

Section B.     The Secretary will manage the finances and submit for review a balance 
               sheet prior to each meeting, to be approved during the meeting.

Section C.     The Secretary will make payments within the agreed budget constraints 
               and make timely recommendations concerning any short falls in the cash 
               flow during the year.

Section D.     Dues and fees are non-transferable and non-refundable. Any overpayment 
               will be credited to the member's account.

Section E.     A detailed budget will be proposed by a standing committee 60 days prior 
               to the annual July meeting, to be agreed upon during the meeting by two-
               thirds of the full members.

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS TO IAATO'S BY-LAWS

Section A.     These By-Laws may be added to or otherwise amended by a resolution 
               passed by two-thirds of the full members in good standing at any annual 
               meeting.

Section B.     Notification of any such amendment must be forwarded to the full 
               members by the Secretary no later than two weeks prior to the date of the 
               meeting.

P. 5
2/18/94
APPENDIX 4


AUSTRALIA
SYDNEY
CANBERRA
MELBOURNE
TASMANIA
HOBART

TASMAN SEA

North Island
AUCKLAND
NEW ZEALAND
CHRISTCHURCH
(Lyttelton)
DUNKIN
(Port Chalmers)
Stewart Island
INVERCARGILL (Bluff)
Paterson Inlet
Auckland Islands
Campbell Island
Macquarie Island

PACIFIC OCEAN

ROSS DEPENDENCY

Balleny Islands
Scott Is.

ROSS SEA

Cape Adare
Possession Islands
Coulman Is.
Ross
Island
Discovery Inlet
Bay of
Whales
(Little America)
Ice Barrier
ROSS ICE
SHELF

ANTARCTICA

South Pole

0       300     600     900 km
Antarctica
The Ross Sea Region

The Subantarctic Islands
New Zealand and Australia

The Fiords
of New Zealand

DISCOVER
REGIONAL
EXPEDITIONS
Akademik Shokalski

Our ship is the Akademik Shokalski built in Finland in 1983 and originally designed as a research vessel.
She provides comfortable accommodation for 38 passengers(there are 19 twin occupancy cabins).
Measuring 236 foot in length and 42 foot in breadth,
the Akademik Shokalski is a steel built, ice
strengthened vessel perfect for cruising the
Subantarctic and Antarctic. Of Russian registry, she
will be manned by an enthusiastic Russian crew of
about 30 with extensive experience in ice conditions.
The Russians are renowned for their abilities in sailing
throughout the polar regions and we will be in very
capable hands.
Powered by two 1560 horse power diesel engines, she
is capable of sea speeds of 12 knots. She has a good
anti-roll system and a range of 50 days independent
operation. The Akademik Shokalski will meet all the
quirements under the Protocol on Environmental
Protection in Antarctica.

FACILITIES ON BOARD.
The Akademik Shokalski is well suited for expedition
cruising and has a large well equipped bridge and good
open deck viewing areas. She has a full complement of
inflatable landing craft enabling landings and wildlife
viewing opportunities in otherwise inaccessible areas.
A comfortable dinning room serving international
cuisine from European chefs also serves as a lecture
room with TV/VCR facilities plus a slide screen. The
vessel also has a library/card room, bar, sauna and
laundry.

DECK 3
(lower deck)

DECK 4
(middle deck)

DECK 5
(upper deck)

= Upper and 
Lower Bed      = Lower Bed
B= Bathroom    W = WC/Toilet
S = Shower

Bar and Lounge

Sauna

Suite
Rodney Russ: Expedition 
Leader and Naturalist. 
Rodney has devoted a 
lifetime to conservation in 
New Zealand and the 
subantarctic Islands. He is 
a founding director of 
Southern  Heritage 
Expeditions.

Brian Bell: Ornithologist. 
Brian is New Zealands 
leading ornithologist, his 
speciality is pelagic species 
of which there are many in 
this part of the world.


Dr Chris Challies: 
Ecologist.Chris's interest is 
the impact of introduced 
animals on native faunas. 
He is also a competent 
"Birder" with a special 
interest in penguins.

Rowley Taylor: Ecologist. 
Rowley has been a regular 
visitor to the Southern 
Islands and the Ross Sea 
region where he has 
conducted several long term 
studies on wildlife.

Dr David Given: Botanist 
David is the author of 
several books and numerous 
articles on the flora of these 
regions. He has carried out 
extensive field work in the 
Ross Sea Region.

Simon Heppelthwaite: 
Naturalist. Simon has just 
completed study at 
University of Canterburv. 
he brings a wide range of 
skills and knowledge to 
expedition travel.

Expedition Cruising and 
Southern 
Heritage Expeditions

Dear Traveller,

Welcome to the world of Expedition Cruising - our world. Southern 
Heritage Expeditions has been offering discerning travellers the 
opportunity to discover previously inaccessible wilderness areas and 
islands in New Zealand and the southern ocean since 1985. 
Programmes which have won international acclaim and awards, 
including the Air New Zealand Ecotourism Award and highly 
commended in the British Airways Tourism for Tomorrow Awards.

We are pleased to present to you our 1995/96 collection of 
expedition cruises. They continue the high standard of research and 
presentation that discerning travellers have come to expect. These 
expeditions are designed for people who are truly interested in the 
destination, who wish to participate and be informed. We employ 
some of New Zealand's leading field scientists and experts to 
accompany each expediton and this season is no exception.

Many of the areas that we visit contain fragile ecosystems. To 
ensure that impacts are kept to a minimum we adhere to responsible 
visitor guidelines and group sizes are deliberately kept small. You 
will be one of just 38 passengers on board, imagine the opportunities 
that this presents. We have completed an Environmental Impact 
Assessment Report on our operations. This has been audited and 
approved by the New Zealand Government. Our safety standards 
are among the highest in the world with modern equipment and 
state of the art semi rigid inflatable craft for landings.

The destinations continue to excite those that join us. The Ross 
Sea Region of Antarctica played an important role in the 
exploration of the continent, it is one of the most historic yet remote 
regions of Antarctica. The birds and mammals which have intrigued 
explorers and scientists alike remain much as they were when the 
first explorers arrived, indifferent to human visitors. The 
Subantarctic Islands are lonely outposts in the southern ocean. 
They are important breeding grounds for the millions of seabirds, 
albatross's, petrels and prions, that must come ashore to nest. So 
valuable are these Islands that authorities restrict the number of 
visitors that are allowed ashore each year to 600. The southern 
most fiords of New Zealand are amongst the most majestic in the 
world and are only accessible by ship. Here the mountains, forests 
and rivers combine to form a dramatic landscape.

Our objective is to share these places with you in such a manner, 
that you will return ambassadors for the continued protection, of 
what we believe are among the most magnificent places on earth. We 
invite you to join us.

Rodney and Shirley Russ 
Joint Manager Directors
VOYAGE # 1290

SUBANTARCTIC ISLANDS C
NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALI

A bird watchers and naturalists special. It is an opportunity for "birders" to add a large number of new
birds including some rare endemic to their lists. For
naturalists it is a rare chance to visit some of the most
spectacular wildlife islands in the southern ocean. Thes
islands are lonely outposts in a huge ocean to which
thousands of seabirds and seals return each summer to
breed. Rated as some of the greatest Nature Reserves in
the world, permits to visit these islands are strictly limit
This cruise will be accompanied by a number of New
Zealands leading scientists and naturalists, their
knowledge of these islands and the many birds and plan
add another dimension to a visit.

Day 1 Arrive Christchurch, there will be an opportunity to go
"birding" this evening. Day 2 Depart Lyttelton for the Chatham
Islands Day 3 At sea. Day 2 Depart Lyttelton for the Chatham
Islands Day 3 At sea. As we enjoy some of the best pelagic birding in
world as we sail across the "Chatham Rise". Day 4 Arrive Chatha
Islands. Many of the birds are endemic to the Chatham Islands.
Expedition etope will give opportunities to search for these birds ar
we will zodiac cruise South East Island for the shore plover. Day 5
The salvine mollymawk, erect crested penguin and the endemic
Bounty Island cormorant seek what shelter they can from the
prevailing winds. These islands are so exposed that sometimes they
can only be viewed from the ship. Day 6 The Antipodes Island is
New Zealands most isolated Suhantarctic Island. It is an importan
nesting ground for thousands of seabirds including, wandering
alhatross and numerous other smaller petrels and prions. Free
crested and rockhopper penguins nest along the rocky shore. Landi
are not permitted but zodiac cruising allows excellent viewing. Day
At Sea enroute to Campbell Island. Day 8 At Campbell Island it i
an easy walk from the meteorological station to the Col-Lyall ridge t
observe and photograph the magnificent southern royal albatross
which nest in large numbers on this island. We will also see the
endemic cormorant, light mantled sooty alhatross, grey headed anc
blackbrowed mollymawk. Day 9 At sea as we sail to Macquarie
Island. Day 10/11 This island has been desribed as one of the
"wonder spots" of the world. Four species of penguin, the endemic
royal is best seen at Sandy Bay where there is a large colony. The
king, gentoo and rockhopper also breed on the island. Day 12 A
sea enroute to the Auckland Islands. Day 13/14 We will have an
entire day ashore on Enderby Island in the Auckland Islands.
Southern royal albatross, light mantled sooty alhatross, giant petre
red crowned parakeets, bellbirds, tomtits, dotterel, the endemic
cormorants and flightless teal and sometimes the snipe can all be
seen. Hookers sealions breed on the beach at Enderby island. On 
second day there will be an opportunity, for the more energetic, to
visit the Southwest Cape shy mollymawk colony. Wandering
alhatross's nest nearby. Day 15 We zodiac cruise the eastern
shoreline of the Snare s Island to see the endemic Snares crested
penguin and the tomtit. Day 16 Arrive Port of Bluff and disemba

Departure Date:

November 10 th - 25th 1995

Cost:  Per person on a twin share basis in US
Dollars.
Twin share shared facilities:     $4697.00
Twin share private facilities :   $5242.00
Suite:                               $5677.00
VOYAGE # 1203

CHRISTMAS IN THE NEW ZEALAN] FIORDS

New Zealands southern fiords are amongst the mo
majestic in the world. They are accessible only by ship. Tl
area is the most isolated part of New Zealand, here tl
mountains, forest and rivers combine to form a dramat
landscape. There is a richness of natural life which h.
developed over millions of years of geological, climatic ar
biological interaction. Attempts to tame this wilderne
have been beaten back every time. The great Englis
explorer, Captain James Cook was the first European to vis
these fiords. Sealers and whalers followed him, the
rumours of gold led to a short lived golddrush in the 1890'
Today the area is included in the Fiordland World Herita]
Park and it remains very much as it always was - a
incredible wilderness.

Day 1 Arrive at the city of Invercargill, New Zealand's southern mc
city. On arrival transfer to Kelvin Hotel, in the central city. Dinner is
the hotel. Day 2 Transfer to the Akademik Shokalski at Port of Blu
Depart for Stewart Island, ashore at Ulva Island, a magnificent Nat
Reserve. After dinner we go looking for Kiwi. Day 3 We enter P
Pegasus at the southern end of Stewart Island at first light. It is a vc
protected and sheltered natural harbour. A choice of activities tl
morning. Climb to trig D on the Tin Range, travel up Cooks Arm a
walk out to the granite knobs of Gog and Magog (Fraser Peaks) or we
through to Wilson Bay. This evening we sail around South Cape (t
southern most tip of New Zealand) Day 4 Sail into Port Preservatic
Fiordland. Walk to Puysegur Point lighthouse an easy 6 Km walk alo
a disused roadway. We visit the abandoned Tarawera Smelter, in lathm
Sound before celebrating Christmas together. We depart for Dus
Sound at about midnight. Day 5 First light we enter Dusky B.
discovered and chartered by Captain James Cook in 1773. We will la
at Astronomers Point in Pickersgill Harbour. One of the most idy!
spots in Dusky Sound is Luncheon Cove, Captain Cook named
because he had lunch there. It became the site of the first Europe
house in New Zealand and the site where the first European ship v
constructed in New Zealand. We visit the site of Richard Henrys' hor
A conservationist and caretaker of nearby Resolution Island in the189
who transferred both Kiwi and Kakapo on Resolution Island. T
evening we cruise through the Acheron Passage to Breaksea Sound.
Day 6 Enter Caswell Sound at first light and make an expedition stop
the head of this very attractive Fiord, there will be an opportunity to w
up to the old "Castaway" hut beside the Stillwater River. Cruise to Geo
Sound, one of the more spectacular of the Northern Fiords. We
cruise to the head of the Fiord and here there will be a chance to go
ashore and explore. We depart George Sound late this evening
Milford Sound. Day 7 One of the highlights of the cruise will
entering Milford Sound at dawn this morning. It is the best known of
the fiords. The sheer rock walls carved during the last period of glaciat
rise for hundreds of feet from the sea to enow capped peaks above.
depart Milford for the Port of Bluff. Day 8 Arrive at Port of Bluff 
disembark.

Departure Date:

December 22nd 1995 - December 29th 1995

Cost:  Per person on a twin share basis in US
Dollars.
      Twin share shared facilities:       $1674.00
      Twin share private facilities :     $1861.00
      Suite:                              $2047.00
VOYAGE # 1294

THE NATURE OF ANTARCTICA.

We invite you to join our team of naturalists and 
ornithologists on board as we voyage south on what is 
arguably one of the most fascinating natural history 
cruises. Sail south from New Zealand to an area whe 
nature reigns supreme. Visit the Snares, Auckland a 
Campbell Islands, lonely outposts in the vast Southe 
Ocean, home to millions of seabirds that must come 
land to nest. We will venture as far south as Antarcti 
and penetrate the ice as conditions permit. Our visit 
cuincides with the peak of the brief southern breeding 
season. We will endeavour to seek out the best wildlif 
experiences the region has to offer.

Day 1 Arrive Invercargill Day 2 Transfer to Port of Bluff and j 
ship to begin our journey south. Day 3 The Snares Island is a n 
reserve of International importance and landing is prohibited. W 
however use our zodiacs to cruise the coastline to see the endem 
Snares crested penguin and other endemic birds. Day 4&5 Arriv 
Auckland Islands. We will spend an entire day ashore on Enderby 
Island. Southern royal albatross, lightmantled sooty albatross an 
petrels all nest on this magnificent island. The rare yelloweyed pe 
also nests here. They are best observed late evening as they come 
ashore. During our second day at the island we will explore the se 
visited Carnley Harbour in the south of the group. Day 6 Campl 
Island, home of the southern royal albatross. It is an easy walk to 
Col-Lyall ridge where it is possible to observe and photograph the 
magnificent birds. Day 7 - 10 At sea enroute to the Ross Sea re 
Days 11-15 Ross Sea. We will spend the next five days in the R 
Sea region. We will be seeking as many wildlife experiences as po 
and make as many landings as possible. We plan to visit an a 
penguin colony. These penguins breed in large numbers in the 
Sea region. Days 16 - 19 At sea enroute to Macquarie Island. I 
20 & 21 Macquarie Island has been described as one of the "wor 
spots" of the world. Four species of penguin breed here, including 
endemic royal penguin. Other penguins we will encounter include 
king, gentoo and rockhopper. We visit Sandy Bay and zodiac cru 
Lusitania Bay. Day 22- 24 At sea enroute to Hobart. Day 25 A 
Hobart, Tasmania and disembark.

Departure Date:

December 29th 1995 - January 22nd 1996

Cost: Per person on a twin share basis in US 
Dollars.
  Twin share shared facilities:     $8426.00
  Twin share private facilities :  $8973.00
  Suite:                            $9783.00


NOTICE

Amendment to Itineraries # 1294 and #1295

Voyage #1294. This voyage will now sail from Campbell Isli 
George V Coast, instead of the Ross Sea. We will visit Common 
Bay and Mawsons Hut and explore the coastline including 
Glacier. Opportunities to see nesting Snow and Antarctic p 
Wilsons storm petrel, Adelie Penguins and search for En 
penguins. Visit South Magnetic Pole before continuing to Mac 
Island.

Voyage #1295. This voyage will now sail direct from Mac 
Island to the Ross Sea. (It will not visit Commonwealth Bay be 
recent heavy ice conditions could cause lengthy delays travelling 
this area to the Ross Sea) The extra time will be used in exp 
some of the lesser known sites in the Ross Sea and ensuring max 
time ashore before continuing the itinerary onto Campbell Islar 
Please write for revised detailed itineraries
VOYAGE # 1295:

SOUTH TO ANTARCTICA IN TH
FOOTSTEPS  OF  DOUGLA
MAWSON

The ultimate Antarctic voyage. Cruise into a region very seldom visited by people other than scientific personnel. Travel via the Subantarctic Islands of New Zealand and Australia enroute to the Ross sea region to places made famous by Douglas Mawson, Ernest Shackleton and Robert Falcon Scott. Our ice strengthened ship will enable us to visit the well known geographical locations, historical sites and search for the unique wildlife that is endemic to this region. Our knowledgable lecture staff wil introduce you to the rich cultural and natural history.

Day 1 Arrive Hobart, Tasmania Day 2 Transfer to the ship and beg our journey south. Day 3-5 At sea, lecturers and staff will provide valuable background information on the regions we will be visiting, a chance to see the many different species of seabirds, albatrosse and mollymawk. Day6-7 Macquarie Island has been described as one of the "wonder spots" of the world. Four species of penguins including t endemic royal penguin breed here. During our visit we will concentra on the best wildlife areas with opportunities to both observe and photograph them.Day 8-11 At sea Day 12 Visit Commonwealth Bay and the remains of Douglas Mawsons hut used on the 1912 sou magnetic pole expedition. This is the "home of the blizzard" where winds of 320 km an hour have been recorded. Day 13 Cruising the Mertz Glacier. The tongue of this huge glacier extends seawards for many miles. Day 14 We will pass as ice conditions will allow to the remote Balleny Islands. Day 15 At sea Day 16 Visit Borchgrevinks hut at Cape Adare. This hut was built for the first expedition to overwinter, behind it a huge adelie penguin colony cove the hillside. Day 17 Cruising the Ross Sea. A constant lookout will kept for the Emperor penguin and other wildlife including seals. 
Day 18 Today we sail as far south as any ship can. Visit the US anc NZ research stations on Ross Island. We inspect Scotts "Discovery" hut dating from his 1901 - 1904 expedition. Day 19 Ashore at Cap Royds where Ernest Shackletons hut stands more or less unchanged from when he abandoned it in 1909. Later in the day we will go ashc at Cape Evans where the hut from Scottes 1911 expedition still etanc Day 20 Cruise Terra Nova Bay and if permission is granted we will visit the Italian research base. Day 21 The scenery is wild and spectacular at Cape Hallet, mountains rise from sea level to over 12,000 feet and glaciers carve their way down from the interior. We hope to make a landing here. Day 22-25 At Sea Day 26 At Campbell Island we observe and photograph the magnificent souther royal albatrose which nest in large numbers on this island amongst tl many flowering mega herbs. Day 27 - 28 We will spend an entire d ashore on Enderby Island. It is breeding ground for the rare Hookers sealion. In the forest behind the beach there are bellbirds, redcrowned parakeets and the friendly tomtits. Yelloweyed penguins also nest in the forest. On the open country beyond the forest royal albatrose anc the endemic Auckland Island dotterel can be found. In Carnley Harbour we will visit the abandoned World War Two coastwatchers hut in Tagua Bay. Day 29 At sea. Day 30 Arrive Bluff (NZ) and

Departure Date:

January 21st - February 19th 1996

Cost: Per person on a twin share hasis in US Dollars.
Twin share shared facilities:     $9787.00
Twin share private facilities :  $10315.00
Suite:                               $11255.00
VOYAGE # 1296:

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF SCOT
AND SHACKLETON

Follow in the footsteps of two of the greatest Antarctic 
explorers, Ernest Shackleton and Robert Falcon Scott t
the Ross Sea region. This area is seldom visited except b
scientific personnel. Our ice strengthened ship will take 
to the areas where these men and their colleagues lived a
worked during their expeditions earlier this century. Ou
historians will bring this "heroic period" of Antarctic 
discovery alive with shore excursions and informal lectur
This is a rare opportunity to experience this region first 
hand.

Day 1 Arrive Invercargill and stay overnight. Day 2 Transfer to
ship and begin the journey south. Day 3 At sea enroute to Campb
a chance to relax and watch for seabirds or catch up on some readi
from the well stocked library. Day 4 At Campbell Island an easy a
to observe the southern royal albatross nesting amongst the floweri
megaherhs. We will also see the Campbell Island comorant, light 
mantled sooty albatross, sealions and elephant seals. Day 5-8 At 
where there will be a series of lectures preparing us for our time as
in Antarctica. Day 9 Cruising the Ross Sea region, we aim to m
a zodiac excursion to Coulman Island. We will be on a constant 
lookout for whales and we should see Orca (killer whale), minke a
hopefully the little known southern bottle nose whale. Day 10 Cn
Terra Nova Bay and if permission is granted we visit the Italian resear
base. Day 11 The Ross Ice shelf is the largest ice shelf in Antarct
and truly an amazing spectacle. Day 12 We sail as far south as ar
ship can and visit the US and New Zealand research stations at R
Island. We inspect Scotts Discovery hut dating from his 1901 
expedition. Day 13 Ashore at Cape Royds where Ernest Shac
hut stands more or less unchanged from when he abandoned it 
1909. It was from this base that he headed out for the South Pole 
conceded defeat when he was just 97 miles from the Pole. Later t
day we go ashore at Cape Evans where the hut from Scotts 1911 
expedition still stands. It is a poignant reminder of this great explo
who, along with his companions died, after been beaten to the Sou
Pole by Ronald Amundsen. Day 14 The scenery is wild and 
spectacular at Cape Hallet. We aim to make a landing here and at 
Cape Adare where the first recorded landing in the Ross Sea region 
took place in January 1895. Borchgrevink, a young Norwegian, cl
to have been the first person ashore. He returned a few years later 
member of the first party to winter over in Antarctica, their hu
stands at Cape Adare. Day 15-18 At Sea enroute to the Auckla
Islands Day 19 Enderby Island in the Auckland Islands is home 
the rare Hookers sealion. In the forest behind the beach we will fir
bellbirds, redcrowned parakeets and the friendly tomtits. Yelloweye 
penguins also nest in the forest. On the open country beyond the 
forest we will find royal albatross and the endemic Auckland Island 
dotterel. Day 20 At sea. Day 21 Arrive Port of Bluff and disem

Departure Date:

February 18th - March 9th1996

Cost:  Per person on a twin share basis in US 
Dollars.
Twin share shared facilities:     $6989.00
Twin sha.? private facilities :   $7671.00
Suite:                               $8499.00
"AKADEMIK SHOKALSKI" BOOKING FORM

To be completed by the client

Your particular attention is drawn to the TERMS, CONDITIONS and BOOKING CONTRACT and the general information contained in the cruise brochure. TRAVEL INSURANCE IS STRONGLY RECOMMENDED.

I have read and accepted the condtions of booking in the brochure and agree to be bound thereby. I confirm that I am authorised to sign this contract and accept its conditions for all the persons listed on this form. I/We are aware that valid passports are required, visa and health documents may also be required and that the obtaining of these documents is my/our responsibility. It is the traveller's responsibility to maintain contact with their booking agent to check whether any variations to itinerary, price or other aspects have occurred. The booking agent is the agent for the traveller.

I (name) ______________________________________________                  Tel (Work): __________________________________

of (address) ______________________________________________              Tel (Home): __________________________________

____________________________________________________  Post Code: ____________________    Fax: ____________________

Authorised Signature ______________________________________                  Date: ___________________________________________

DETAILS OF PASSENGERS TRAVELLING: (PLEASE USE BLOCK LETTERS THROUGHOUT)

| Mr/Mrs Ms/Miss Dr/etc. | Surname (As shown on passport) | First Name/s (As shown on passport) | Date of Birth | Nationality Shown on Passport | Passport Number | Expiry Date |
|------------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------------------|-----------------|-------------|
|                        |                                |                                     |               |                               |                 |             |
|                        |                                |                                     |               |                               |                 |             |
|                        |                                |                                     |               |                               |                 |             |
|                        |                                |                                     |               |                               |                 |             |

NOTE: A VALID PASSPORT IS REQUIRED FOR ALL CRUISE EXPEDITIONS. (If you are not in possession of a current passport please advise details, when obtained.) Any Visa requirements will be forwarded to you on receipt of deposit.

Please reserve the above passenger/s on the following "Akademik Shokalski" Cr::ise/s:

  Cruise Name/No.: __________________________________      Departing from: ______________________________    Departure Date: ______________________________

  Cruise Name/No.: __________________________________      Departing from: ______________________________    Departure Date: ______________________________

Cabin (Twin share) Preference:     Suite         Private Facilities         Share Facilities

We/I require     Share twin cabin (two passengers booking together)

or       Single cabin

or       I am travelling by myself and wish to share a cabin with a roommate assigned by the cruise co-ordinators

     Smoking         Non Smoking         Don't mind

Are the above passengers in good health?         Yes         No

Do any of the above passengers suffer from disabilities         Yes         No

If yes, please attach details of doctor's certificates stating fitness to travel.

Please complete if deposit not already forwarded:

Please find enclosed a Bank Draft for USD$ __________________________________ being the deposit for the above passenger/s, made payable to:
IMPORTANT INFORMATION

Terms and Conditions
Southern Heritage Tours Ltd, trading as 
Southern Heritage Expeditions (SHE)
includes in the expedition fee:
* Ship accommodations, all onboard 
lectures and accesse to all public areas.
* All meals on board ship
* Shore excursions as described and 
zodiac cruises
* One nights accommodation before the 
cruise including dinner (3 course) and 
continental breakfast. Accommodation 
based on twin share occupancy. Single 
supplement will apply for guaranteed 
single.
* Group transfer from overnight 
accommodation to embark the ship and 
transfer from ship to city hotels and/or 
airport on disembarkation.

Not included in the expedition fee
* Airfare to and from your home to the 
port of departure/arrival in New Zealand
* Port dues and airport taxes.
* Items of a personal nature such as 
insurance, beverages and excess baggage 
charges.
* Passport, visa and vaccination fees.

Single travellers
Single travellers who wish to share their 
cabin/hotel room should so indicate on 
the application form. The published per 
person double occupancy fare is 
guaranteed in this case, whether or not a 
cabin-mate is available.
Single travellers who require sole 
occupancy of calins will be charged at 
1.5 times the published fare on all cabins 
except the suite which will be charged at 
1.8 times the published fare.

Deposits and Cancellations
A deposit of 25% of the expedition fee is 
required upon booking to confirm 
participation. The balance of the fee is 
payable 90 days prior to your departure 
date. Cancellations must be received in 
writing. For cancellations received more 
than 120 days before the departure date, 
a full refund will be made less 
US$400.00 fee for administration/
handling. For cancellations received 
within 120 days of your embarbation 
date, the full deposit is forfeited. The full 
expedition fee is forfeit if your notice 
of cancellation is received within 90 
days of your departure date.
On forwarding the deposit you agree to 
be bound by the terms and conditions 
found here.

Insurance
We strongly recommend that travellers 
purchase trip cancellation protection 
and/or travel insurance at the time of 
booking.

Price Changes
We reserve the right to alter our prices 
should there be substantial changes in 
tariffs, exchanges rates, cost of fuel, 
labour or materials.

Itinerary Changes
Due to the nature of our expedition, 
weather, ice or government regulations 
may require changes to be made to the 
itineraries and/or the cancellation of 
certain shore excursions. Every attempt 
will be made to adhere to the itineraries 
described within the limits of safety and 
time. The ships captain has the last word 
on any decision made with regard to the 
vessels itinerary and it is understood that 
such decision will be made in the interest 
of safety of the vessel and of all 
passengers on board.

In the event of changes, passengers have 
no right to any refund or other 
compensation.

Expedition fees are based on group 
participation. Should you choose not to 
take part in any activity or make use of 
services provided, no refund will be made.

Important Health Information
SHE expeditions are intended for 
persons in reasonably good health. By 
forwarding the expedition deposit you 
certify that you do not have any physical 
conditions or disability that would create 
a hazard for your or other passengers, 
SHE reserves the right to to decline to 
accept or retain you or any other 
passenger should your health, actions or 
general deportment impede the operation 
of the expedition or the rights, welfare or 
enjoyment of other passengers.

Responsibility
Southern Heritage Expeditions is the co-
ordinator of the cruises on the Professor 
Shokalski outlined herein. SHE, its 
affiliated companies and/or its associated 
agents shall not be held responsible for 
any liability of property loss or damage, 
and/or any damages resulting from 
illness, personal injuries or death which 
may be sustained for reason of, or while 
engaged on any tour, whether due to the 
ownership, maintenance, use, operation 
or control of any aircraft, vehicle, vessel 
or otherwise, or whether caused by failure 
or delay or by any transportation 
company, due to any cause whatsoever, 
including any acts or omissions occurring 
during a tour under which the means of 
transportation or other service provided 
thereby is offered or supplied by its 
owners, operators or public carriers for 
whom SHE acts only as agent. SHE 
shall not be held responsible for any 
injury resulting to a person (whether or 
not resulting in death), or damage to 
property arising out of any act of war, 
insurrection, revolt or other civil 
unrest, or any military action
Southern Heritage Expeditions
  P.O. Box 20-219
  Christchurch, New Zealand
  Ph (03) 359 7711
  Fax (03) 359 3311
APPENDIX  6

Antarctica and Subantarctic Islands

Climate information

Our expeditions are scheduled during the summer season in the Southern Hemisphere. Generally 
in Antarctica, temperatures during the day are in the upper 30's, lower 40's dropping in the 
evening; however the wind chill factor should always be considered.

In the Subantarctic Islands the mean average temperature is as follows:

                  Nov         Dec         Jan         Feb      
Auckland      44.7°F      46.7°F      50.2°F      50.7°F
Islands         7°C          8°C        10°C       10.5°C

Campbell      44.9°F      47.2°F      49.2°F      48.2°F
Island           7°C        8.2°C       9.6°C         9°C

Macquarie    40.1°F      43.0°F      44.2°F      43.8°F
Island          4.5°C       6.1°C       6.9°C       6.5°C

In the Ross Sea region average monthly maximum /minimum temperatures are:

                  Dec                   Jan       Feb                  Feb
Maximum      38.5°F                                  43.5°F               29.5°F
                +3.6°C                                  +6.5°C              -1.4°C

Minimum       +8.6°F           +7.5°F           -7.6°F
                -13.0°C         -13.7°C         -22.1°C

Clothing information

On board ship:
The ship is heated throughout. Comfortable and casual clothing, in the expedition spirit, is 
recommended for the vessel.
For women - slacks, blouses, sweaters, skirts (dresses if desired) and for men - slacks, shirts, 
sweaters. Appropriate footwear including one pair deck type rubber soled shoes.

Off the ship:
Southern Heritage Expeditions will provide those on voyage 1193, 1195 and 1196 with a special 
water-repellant expedition parks with hood. This will be given to you on board the ship when you 
embark.
The following additional clothing suggestions will assist you in preparing for this expedition. You 
may, of course, wish to modify the list to suit your individual needs, keeping in mind that each 
individual has his/her own "thermostat" to consider:

- waterproof and/or woollen gloves

- warm woollen socks: 1 thin pair, 1-2 thick pairs

- pull on rubber, unlined waterproof knee high boots (14 - 16") with a strong rubber 
ridged non-skid sole. These specification are very important. You may  be stepping into 
water up to 10" deep on the wet landings. Felt or sealed foam liners are good  insulators. 
(Note: be sure a combination of the woollen socks will provide a proper fit for your 
boots.

- Good quality waterproof parks/ jacket is especially important for voyages 1191,  1192 
and 1194

- Good quality pull on waterproof trousers - fishermans pants or equivalent - very 
important for spray in zodiacs and wet landings.

- Warm pants to be worn under waterproof trousers i.e. wool slacks, cords, jeans, 
"sweatpants", knickerbockers (if you already have)

- Thermal underwear, depending on your personal thermostat

- Woollen sweaters, one light and one heavier weight. Sweatshirts as well as  cotton or 
silk turtlenecks are also good insulators.

- Hat as well as scarf or other face protection

- Sun glasses, protective sun lotion and chapstick. The glare from the water and 
surrounding snow/ice can be quite penetrating, even when the sky is overcast.

Other items:

Binoculars - highly recommended

Camera and plenty of film

Backpack: This is essential for putting camera gear and/or binoculars in for shore excursions. 
Putting these into waterproof plastic bags before placing in them into a backpack will provide best 
protection.
APPENDIX  7

Survival Equipment

The following will be in each of the Zodiacs, packed in waterproof staff bags and landed each time at a landing where it is possible conditions may change, preventing the party from getting back to the ship.

        Tent (4 - 5 person alpine tent)
        Sealed Foam Pads
        Sleeping Bags (2 full zip bags)
        Survival blankets
        Primus (gaz)
        Spare gaz cylinders
        Torch and Batteries
        Billy (1 large)
        Spoons
        Mugs
        Matches
        First Aid Kit
        Emergency Rations - dried food, soups etc for 48 hours
Southern Heritage Expeditions
Travel Insurance Application Form

Insured Person(s) _____________________________________________________

Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________

Date of Birth ___________________________  No. of Children _____________________

Telephone: Home ________________________  Work ______________________________

The Journey _____________________________________________________________

Period of Insurance ________________________________  No. of Days _____________________

I have chosen:    Single Cover: __________________     Family Cover: ___________________

Premium         $ ___________________________      (includes stamp duty)

Enclosed is my cheque for: $ ______________________________________________

Insured Person's Signature ___________________________  Date _____________________

Sums Insured                                 Single                                  Family

Death and Capital Benefits          AUS$25,000                            AUS$50,000
Weekly Benefit                            AUS$   500                              AUS$   500
(14 day excess/ benefit period 26 weeks)
Medical and Additional Expenses   AUS$1,000,000                      AUS$1,000,000
Emergency Assistance                 included                                 included
Cash in Hospital (AUS$100 per day)  AUS$ 6,000                           AUS$12,000
Hijacking (AUS$1,000 per day)         AUS$ 6,000                           AUS$12,000
Baggage, Personal Effects and Travel Documents  AUS$ 6,000  AUS$12,000
Money                                                    AUS$   200                              AUS$   200
Loss of Deposits                                     AUS$ 5,000                           AUS$10,000
Personal Liability                                    AUS$2,500,000                     AUS$2,500,000
Travel Insurance for Southern Heritage Expeditions Akademik Shokalski programme.

Pacific Harbour Underwriting Management have arranged a travel insurance programme for the 
Akademik Shokalski programmes with the following premiums and benefits. The dollar amounts 
are expressed in Australian dollars.
Insurance through them is only available to passengers who are residents of New Zealand or 
Australia.

                              Premium

No. of Days                  Single              Family
11                           AUS$137.50          AUS$275.00
19                           AUS$176.00          AUS$352.00
24                           AUS$176.00          AUS$352.00
29                           AUS$225.50          AUS$451.00
32                           AUS$225.50          AUS$451.00

Sums Insured                 Single              Family
Death and Capital Benefits   AUS$25,000          AUS$50,000
Weekly Benefit               AUS$   500          AUS$   500
(14 day excess/ benefit period 26 weeks)                  
Medical and Additional Expenses  AUS$1,000,000     AUS$1,000,000
Emergency Assistance         included            included
Cash in Hospital (AUS$100 per day)  AUS$ 6,000     AUS$12,000
Hijacking (AUS$1,000 per day)  AUS$ 6,000         AUS$12,000
Baggage, Personal Effects and Travel Documents  AUS$ 6,000  AUS$12,000
Money                        AUS$   200          AUS$   200
Loss of Deposits             AUS$ 5,000          AUS$10,000
Personal Liability           AUS$2,500,000       AUS$2,500,000

Excess
AUS$60.00 each and every claim
HARBOUR PACIFIC HLDS     ID:61299594653     25 JUL '95     13:20 No.006 P.03

HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 1

GROUP TRAVEL POLICY

SOUTHERN HERITAGE EXPEDITIONS

In accordance with the provisions of the Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Act 1984. Harbour Pacific 
Underwriting Management Pty Ltd (hereinafter called "HPUM") gives notice that this contract has been effected 
under an Authority. given to HPUM by The Company. HPUM has entered into the Contract as an agent of 
The Company and not an agent of the Insured.

This Policy consists of several Sections. An Insured Person is covered for insurance under those sections 
selected by you as indicated in the Schedule.

We hereby agree to insure such person or persons as you shall nominate from time to time on the terms and 
conditions and subject to the exclusions set out in this Policy.

There is a maximum amount payable under each Section of the Policy with respect to each Insured Person, and 
with respect to all claims payable under this Policy during each Period of Insurance. The limits of the Sum 
Insured under each Section is stated in the Schedule.

IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS

The following important definitions apply to each Section of this Policy:

INSURED PERSON is any person nominated by you from time to time for the insurance cover selected by you and with 
respect to whom a premium has been paid.

INSURED TRAVEL means travel being carried out as described in the Schedule.

PERIOD OF INSURANCE is the period referred in the Schedule.

SCHEDULE includes any current Schedule on renewal or variation of this Policy.

THE COMPANY means GIO General Ltd. ACN 002 861 583, of Level 12. 4-6 Bligh Street, Sydney, New South Wales, 
2000. Australia, a company duly incorporated under the laws of Australia and registered in New South Wales, Australia.

WE/OUR/US means Harbour Pacific Underwriting Management Pty Ltd, ACN 003 406 611, of Level 3. 213 Miller Street, 
North Sydney, New South Wales, 2060. Australia.

YOU/YOUR is the Insured named in the Schedule.

7/95
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 2

INDEX                                                                   Page

Section 1   -   Personal Accident                                          3
Section 2   -   Medical Expenses and IMAN                                 5
Section 3   -   Additional Expenses                                       6
Section 4   -   Baggage, Travellers' Cheques, Travel Documents,           
                 Credit Cards and Money                                    8
Section 5   -   Loss of Deposits and Cancellation Charges                  9
Section 6   -   Personal Liability                                       10

General Exclusions Applying to all Sections                              10

General Conditions Applying to all Sections                              11

                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
7/95

AIBA NIH SYDNEY                                                          102 628 4564
                  900 D
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 3

SECTION 1 - PERSONAL ACCIDENT

EXTENT OF COVER

If an Insured Person suffers an Injury whilst engaged on Insured Travel during the Period of Insurance and as a direct result 
and within twelve (12) months of the date of the Injury suffers from any of the Insured Events set out in the Table of Benefits,
We will pay the Compensation stated in that Table.

DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Section 1:

FINGERS OR TOES means the digits of a hand or foot above the metacarpophalangeal joints or metatarsophalangeal joints.

INJURY means bodily Injury resulting from an accident that occurs fortuitously to the Insured Person during the Period of 
Insurance and results in any of the Insured Events specified in the Table of Benefits within twelve (12) calendar months from 
the date thereof, but does not include any consequences of an Injury which are ordinarily described as being a disease.

LIMB means a hand at or above the wrist or a foot at or above the ankle.

PARTIAL DISABLEMENT means disablement which prevents the Insured Person from carrying out a substantial part of his 
or her usual occupation or business or, if he or she has no usual occupation or business, from carrying out a substantial part 
of his or her usual duties.

PERMANENT means lasting twelve (12) calendar months and at the expiry of that period being beyond hope of improvement.

SALARY means the average weekly gross income earned by an Insured Person from personal exertion during the twelve (12) 
months immediately preceding the Injury, but exclusive of bonuses, commission, overtime payments and any allowances.

TOTAL DISABLEMENT means disablement which entirely prevents the Insured Person from carrying out his or her usual 
occupation or business or, if he or she has no usual occupation or business, from carrying out his or her duties.

EXPOSURE

If as a result of an Injury occurring during the Period of Insurance and whilst engaged on Insured Travel the Insured Person 
is exposed to the elements and suffers from any of the Insured Events set out in the Table of Benefits as a direct result of that 
exposure, We will pay benefits accordingly.

DISAPPEARANCE

If an Insured Person disappears following the disappearance, sinking or wrecking during the Period of Insurance of a 
conveyance in which he or she was then travelling whilst on Insured Travel and his or her body has not been found within 
twelve (12) months after the date of disappearance, We shall pay a benefit on the basis that that person died as a result of an 
Injury at the time of the disappearance, sinking or wrecking of the conveyance.

7/95
900 
AIBA NTH SYDNEY.                   0[?]16 6284 t 
26/07/98   15:18   68.10[?]18
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 4

TABLE OF BENEFITS

INSURED EVENTS                                      THE COMPENSATION
                                                      being a percentage of the Sum
                                                      Insured stated in the Schedule

Injury resulting directly in:

1.  Death                                            1.      100%
2.  Permanent Total Disablement                      2.      100%
3.  Permanent and incurable paralysis of all limbs   3.      100%
4.  Permanent Total Loss of sight of both eyes      4.      100%
5.  Permanent Total Loss of sight of one eye        5.      100%
6.  Permanent Total Loss of use of two limbs        6.      100%
7.  Permanent Total Loss of use of one limb         7.      100%
8.  Permanent and incurable Insanity                8.      100%
9.  Permanent Total Loss of hearing in:            
    a.  both ears                                    9a.     80%
    b.  one ear                                      9b.     20%
10. Permanent Total Loss of four fingers and thumb of either hand  10.     80%
11. Permanent Total Loss of the lens of one eye      11.     60%
12. Permanent Total Loss of use of four fingers of either hand  12.     50%
13. Third degree burns and/or resultant disfigurement
    which covers more than 40% of the entire external body  13.     50%
14. Permanent Total Loss of use of one thumb of either hand 
    a.  both joints                                  14a.    30%
    b.  one joint                                    14b.    15%
15. Permanent Total Loss of use of fingers of either hand 
    a.  three joints                                 15a.    10%
    b.  two joints                                   15b.    7.5%
    c.  one joint                                    15c.    5%
16. Permanent Total Loss of use of toes of either foot:
    a.  all - one fout                              16a.    15%
    b.  great - both joints                          16b.    5%
    c.  great - one joint                            16c.    3%
    d.  other than great, each toe                   16d.    1%
17. Fractured leg or patella with established non-union  17.     10%
18. Shortening of leg by at least 5cm                18.     7.5%
19. Permanent Disability not otherwise provided
    for under Insured Events 9 to 18 inclusive       19.     Such percentage of the Sum Insured as We
                                                        shall in Our absolute discretion determine
                                                        and being in Our opinion not inconsistent
                                                        with the benefits provided under Insured
                                                        Events 9 to 18 inclusive.

20. Temporary Total Disablement                      20.     During such Disablement, the Weekly
    (maximum Aggregate Period 104 weeks)                Benefit as specified or Salary as defined
                                                        whichever is the lesser.

21. Temporary Partial Disablement                    21.     25% of the amount payable for Event 20.

7/95
L007 
AIBA NTH SYDNEY                             0282 1 210  1591  95. 26/07/95  15:50  25/07/98  16:09
HARBOUR PACIFIC HLDS     ID:61293594653       25  JUL 95   13:44   NU.uuu   . . .

HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 5

CONDITIONS

1. Compensation shall not be payable for more than one of the Insured Events 1 to 19 in respect of the same Injury.

2. Any compensation payable for Insured Events 1 to 19 shall be paid in addition to any sum already paid for under Insured 
   Events 20 and 21 in respect of the same Injury.

3. After the occurrence of any of the Insured Events 2 to 8, all cover with respect to that Insured Person under this Section 
   1 shall cease other than any entitlement under Insured Events 20 and 21.

4. Compensation shall not be payable:

   4.1 for Insured Events 20 and 21 in excess of a total period of one hundred and four (104) weeks in respect of any one 
       Injury;

   4.2 unless the Insured Person shall as soon as possible after the happening of any Injury giving rise to a claim under this 
       Section 1, procure and follow proper medical advice from a legally qualified medical practitioner.

5. The Weekly compensation payable for Temporary Total Disablement shall be reduced by the amount of any Workers' 
   Compensation entitlement for incapacity for work or any other payment which the Insured Person is entitled to receive 
   for disability from any insurance policy effected by a person other than the Insured Person.

6. Compensation payable to Insured Persons under eighteen (18) years of age for Insured Events 1 to 19 will be 10% of the 
   minimum Sum Insured stated in the Table of Benefits unless otherwise specified.

EXCLUSIONS

No benefits shall be payable with respect to any Insured Event which:

1. Results from the Insured Person engaging in or taking part in:

   1.1 naval, military or air force service or operations;

   1.2 training for professional sports of any kind;

2. Is attributable wholly or partly to childbirth or pregnancy.

SECTION 2 - MEDICAL EXPENSES AND IMAN

EXTENT OF COVER

1. If an Insured Person incurs Medical Expenses (as defined) during the Period of Insurance and whilst engaged on Insu 
   Travel we will pay those expenses provided they are incurred outside the Insured Person's country of residence.

2. We will also pay the expenses related to the emergency evacuation of an Insured Person provided such evacuation 
   recommended by a legally qualified medical practitioner and is authorised by IMAN or Harbour Pacific Underwri 
   Manayement Pty Ltd.

DEFINITIONS

MEDICAL EXPENSES means expenses incurred within twelve (12) months from the date the first expense was incurred 
paid to a legally qualified medical practitioner, nurse, hospital or ambulance service for medical surgery, hospitalisatio 
nursing treatment including the cost of overseas medical supplies and overseas ambulance hire but excluding the cost of d 
treatment unless such treatment is required urgently and excludes costs involved to repair, replace or adjust dentures.

7/95
AREOUR PACIFIC HLDS   ID:61299594653                  25 JUL '95   13:22 No.006 P.08 .

HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                      Page 6

EXCLUSIONS

We shall not pay for any medical or other expenses which:

1. Are caused wholly or partly by childbirth or pregnancy or the complications thereof;

2. Result from the Insured Person engaging in or taking part in or training for any professional sports of any kind;

3. Are incurred in relation to any condition which was known would require treatment during the period of Insured Travel;

4. Amount to twenty dollars ($20) or less;

5. Are recoverable by You or by the Insured Person from any other source to the extent to which they are so recoverable.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
International Medical Assistance Network (IMAN)

An Insured Person is also entitled to the services of IMAN in the event of a medical emergency or Sickness by using a toll-free or reverse-charge telephone number stated on the Harbour Pacific Assistance Emergency Identification Card which we have made available to You.

IMAN provides many travel and emergency services. including:

1. Pre-travel advice on matters relating to health;

2. Case management if hospitalised;

3. Emergency assistance worldwide;

4. The arrangement for transport by road, aircraft or special air ambulance to an appropriate medical centre if this is required for treatment, accompanied if necessary by a doctor or nurse;

5. Arrangements for evacuation and transportation home if necessary.

SECTION 3 - ADDITIONAL EXPENSES

EXTENT OF COVER

1. We will reimburse an Insured Person or other persons for additional and/or forfeited expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred as a direct consequence of:

    1.1 the unexpected death, Injury or Sickness of the Insured Person or a member of the Insured Person's travelling party 
        (provided that all such persons are under the age of eighty (80) years) happening after the commencement of the 
        Insured Travel and resulting in the Insured Person or any of those persons having to return to the point of origin of 
        such travel;

    1.2 the unexpected death. Serious Injury or Sickness of a relative or close business associate of the Insured Person 
        (provided that all such persons are under the age of eighty (80) years) happening after the commencement of the 
        Insured Travel and resulting in the Insured Person or any of those persons having to return to the point of origin of 
        such travel. We will also pay for the return of the Insured Person so he/she can continue with his/her Insured 
        Travel;

    1.3 the necessity on written advice of a medical practitioner for a Relative. friend or close business associate of the 
        Insured Person to travel to or remain with or escort him or her directly back to the point of origin of the Insured 
        Travel if the Insured Person has suffered Injury or Sickness during the Insured Travel;

7/95
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 7

1.4 any other unforeseen Injury or Sickness of the Insured Person which results in the Insured Travel being delayed or 
    disrupted and which is outside the control of the Insured not otherwise excluded under this Section 3;
1.5 loss of passport and/or travel documents.

2. If an Insured Person necessarily and reasonably incurs legal costs by reason of false arrest or wrongful detention by any 
   Government or foreign power during Insured Travel, We will reimburse those legal costs up to ten thousand dollars 
   ($10,000) for each Insured Person.

3. If Insured Travel is delayed or interrupted in excess of twelve (12) hours and the Insured Person is prevented from 
   reaching his or her scheduled destination as a result of an aircraft on which he or she is travelling being hijacked, We 
   will pay an amount of one thousand dollars ($1.000) per day to a maximum of six thousand ($6,000) dollars per single 
   and twelve thousand ($12.000) dollars per family.

4. If an Insured Person dies whilst engaged on Insured Travel, We will pay funeral or cremation expenses if the body is 
   buried at the place of death, or the cost of returning the Insured Person's body or ashes to his or her home address.

5. We will reimburse an Insured Person for additional expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred as a direct consequence 
   of cancellation including strikes, riot, hijacking, civil commotion. flood, adverse weather conditions or natural disasters.

6. If an Insured Person is hospitalised overseas as an in-patient for more than twenty-four (24) hours due to an accident or 
   illness we will pay one hundred dollars ($100) per day for each completed twenty-four (24) hours to a maximum of six 
   thousand dollars ($6.000) per single and twelve thousand ($12.000) dollars per family in addition to any charges made 
   by the hospital in which the Insured Person is hospitalised.

DEFINITIONS

INJURY OR SICKNESS is one which requires treatment by a medical practitioner and for which the medical practitioner 
certifies the Insured Person or the other persons referred to as unfit to travel or continue with the original journey.

RELATIVE means the Insured Person's spouse, parent, parent-in-law, grandparent, step-parent, child, step-child, grandchild, 
brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, fiance, fiancee, half-brother or half-sister.

SERIOUS INJURY OR SICKNESS is a condition other than pregnancy which a person has not received regular treatment 
or advice for treatment at the date of the commencement of the Insured Travel, and for which a medical practitioner certifies 
that the attendance of the Insured Person is necessary for the health of or treatment of that Person or in the case of a business 
associate require the Insured Person to take over that person's business role.

EXCLUSIONS

We will not pay for any expenses:
1. which are caused wholly or partly by childbirth or pregnancy or the complications thereof;
2. Consequent upon the Insured Person or any other person engaging in or taking part in or training for any professional 
   sports of any kind;
3. Caused directly or indirectly by:
   3.1 cancellation, curtailment or diversion of scheduled public transport services, including strikes, if there had been prior 
       warning before the date of commencement of the particular Insured Travel that such events were likely to occur 
       during the Period of Insurance;
   3.2 carrier-caused delays where the cost of the expenses is recoverable from the carrier;
   3.3 any business or financial contractual obligations of the Insured Person or any other person;
   3.4 any change of plans or disinclination of the Insured Person or any other person to travel;
   3.5 the inability of any tour operator or wholesaler to complete arrangements for any tour due to a deficiency in the 
       required number of persons to commence any tour or journey.

7/95
--------------------------------------------------
AIBA NSW SYDNEY  0T0 
-- --- 
28/02/98  13:33   620 210T
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 8

SECTION 4 - BAGGAGE, TRAVELLERS' CHEQUES, TRAVEL DOCUMENTS, CREDIT 
CARDS AND MONEY

EXTENT OF COVER

1. We will indemnify the Insured Person for loss of or damage to Property Insured occurring during the Period of Insurance 
and whilst the Insured Person is engaged on Insured Travel.

2. We will indemnify the Insured Person for loss, theft or fraudulent use of travellers' cheques, travel documents and credit 
cards occurring during the Period of Insurance and whilst the Insured Person is engaged on Insured Travel, together with 
the cost of replacing, and the Insured Person's legal liability for payment as a result of loss by theft or unauthorised use 
by other persons of the Insured Person's personal travel documents.

3. If the Insured Person's baggage is misplaced by a carrier for more than twelve (12) hours whilst the Insured Person is 
engaged on Insured Travel during the Period of Insurance, We will pay up to two thousand dollars ($2,000) to cover the 
emergency purchase of essential replacement items.

4. We will indemnify the Insured Person for accidental loss of cash, bank or currency notes, cheques, postal or money 
orders or petrol coupons occurring on Insured Travel during the Period of Insurance, together with the cost of replacin
them and the legal liability of the Insured Person for payment as a result of loss by theft or by unauthorised use by other 
persons.

DEFINITIONS

THE PROPERTY INSURED means:

1. Baggage and other personal effects (other than household furniture) that accompany the Insured Person whilst engaged 
on Insured Travel, including tickets, credit cards, travellers' cheques, travel documents and passports (any one article 
limited to 25% of the Sum Insured under this Section 4 or one thousand dollars ($1,000), whichever is the greater);

2. Money, cheques, postal notes, money orders and petrol coupons taken by the Insured Person whilst engaged on Insured 
Travel.

CONDITIONS

The amount payable under this Section 4 for loss of or damage to the Property Insured is by repair or replacement with articles 
in the same condition but not better or more extensive than the article when new or by payment of the cost of same.

EXCLUSIONS

We shall not be liable to make any payment under this Section 4 for:

1. Wear and tear, deterioration or losses caused by atmospheric or climatic conditions, insects, rodents or vermin or by any 
process of cleaning, repairing, restoring or alteration;

2. Loss, theft or misplacement not reported within twenty-four (24) hours to the police or responsible officer of any aircraft, 
vehicle or vessel on which the Insured Person is travelling. All such reports must be verified by a written statement from 
that authority;

3. Loss of credit cards, travellers' cheques, travel documents, cheques, postal or money orders or petrol coupons unless 
reported to the issuing authority as soon as possible after discovery;

4. Loss or damage to unaccompanied baggage and personal effects unless collected from the Insured Person by a carrier in 
order to be taken on the Insured Travel;

7/95
TTO 
AIBA IN SYDNEY                  6284 9[?]6                  15:55     28/10/28 ------
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 9

5. Loss or damage of any goods over one thousand dollars ($1.000) that are intended for use in connection with any trade,
business or occupation unless otherwise specified in the Schedule:

6. Personal Computers or any electronic equipment:

      a. where theft or attempted theft occurs whilst such equipment is unattended unless securely locked inside a building
         or securely locked out of sight inside a motor vehicle:

      b. whilst carried in or on any aircraft, aerial device, waterborne vessel or craft unless they accompany you or one of
         your employees as personal cabin baggage.

7. Loss or damage occurring through confiscation by quarantine, customs regulations or by order of any Government or
Public Authority or losses due to devaluation of currency:

8. Loss of money in excess of the amount allowed by any applicable currency regulation at the time of commencement of
the Insured Travel;

9. Any item which is recoverable by You or by the Insured Person from any other source to the extent to which they are
so recoverable.

SECTION 5 - LOSS OF DEPOSITS AND CANCELLATION CHARGES

EXTENT OF COVER

We will indemnify You and any Insured Person for loss of travel and accommodation expenses paid in advance by You or
the Insured Person and for the loss of which You, he or she is legally liable and which are not recoverable from any other
source, consequent upon the cancellation of travel occurring between the date of payment of those expenses and the date of
commencement of the Insured Travel caused only by:

1. The unexpected death, Injury or Sickness, compulsory quarantine or jury service of an Insured Person or any person with
   whom the Insured Person intended to travel;

2. The unexpected death, Serious Injury or Sickness of any Relative, business partner or co-director of the Insured Person
   who is under the age of eighty (80) years;

3. Any unforeseen circumstances outside the control of the Insured Person not ctherwise excluded.

DEFINITIONS

INJURY OR SICKNESS is one which requires treatment by a medical practitioner and which precludes the Insured Person
or other persons from undertaking the Insured Travel.

RELATIVE means the Insured Person's spouse, parent, parent-in-law, grandparent, step-parent, child, step-child, grandchild
brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, fiance, fiancee, half-brother or half-sister.

SERIOUS INJURY OR SICKNESS is a condition which a person is not receiving treatment for or advice for treatment at the
date of payment of Insured Travel. Such Serious Injury or Sickness must requires a medical practitioner to certify the
attendance of the insured Person is necessary for the health of or treatment of that person.

EXCLUSIONS

We shall not be liable fur loss of expenses caused by:

1. Childbirth, pregnancy ur the complications thereof;

7/95

AIBA WITH SYDNEY                              9291821  26/10/96  15:55   2/10[?]2
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                  Page 10

2. Any person engaging in or taking part in or training for professional sports of any kind;
3. Carrier-caused delays that are recoverable from the carrier;
4. Any business or financial contractual obligations;
5. Any changes of plans or disinclination to travel;
6. The inability of any tour operator or wholesaler to complete arrangements for any tour due to a deficiency in the required 
   number of persons to commence any tour or journey.

SECTION 6 - PERSONAL LIABILITY

EXTENT OF COVER

We will indemnify the Insured Person for his or her legal liability to pay compensation arising out of death, bodily injury or 
illness of another person or arising out of damage to property of another person happening during the Period of Insurance 
arising out of an occurrence and whilst the Insured Person is engaged on Insured Travel. We will also pay all legal costs and 
expenses incurred by Us or by the Insured Person with Our prior consent in the defence of any claim.

SUM INSURED

The Sum Insured under this section is two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000) for each and every occurrence. 
For the purpose of the Sum Insured, all occurrences or series of occurrences arising out of the one original cause shall be 
deemed to be the one event.

DEFINITIONS

OCCURRENCE means an event which results in bodily Injury or illness, neither expected from the Insured Person's 
standpoint. Bodily Injury and illness means Injury, Sickness, disease or disability including death.

EXCLUSIONS

We shall not be liable for claims arising from:

1. Death, bodily injury or illness to or loss of or damage to property owned by or in the control of:
   1.1 the Insured Person or members of his or her family ordinarily residing with him or her;
   1.2 any employee of the Insured Person arising out of or during the course of their employment.

2. The business, trade or professional activities of the Insured Person (other than part-time temporary care of children), 
   except if the Insured Person is carrying out those activities as an employee;

3. The ownership, possession or use of mechanically propelled vehicles, aircraft, aerial devices or watercraft powered by 
   motor excluding golf buggies and wheelchairs.

GENERAL EXCLUSIONS APPLYING TO ALL SECTIONS

We shall not be liable to pay for any claim caused by or arising out of:

1. The Insured Person engaging in air travel except as a passenger in any properly licensed aircraft;
2. A deliberately self-inflicted injury;
3. War, invasion, acts of foreign enemies, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), civil war, rebellion, revolution, 
   insurrection or military or usurped power, or confiscation or nationalisation or requisition or destruction of or damage 
   to property by or under the order of any Government or Public or Local Authority;

7/95
-------------------------------------------------------------
26/10/98   15:54   02 781 2 629 1481   AIIA WITH SYDNEY CTO[?]
HARBOUR PACIFIC UNDERWRITING MANAGEMENT PTY LTD                                                              Page 11

4. The use, existence or escape of nuclear weapons material or ionising radiation from or contamination by radioactivity from 
any nuclear fuel or nuclear waste from the combustion of nuclear fuel;

5. A sexually transmitted disease, or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) disease or Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus (HIV) infection.

GENERAL CONDITIONS APPLYING TO ALL SECTIONS

1. NOTICE OF CLAIM

Written notice of claim must be given to Us within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of any circumstances giving rise to 
a claim or as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible.

2. SUBROGATION

In the event of any payment being made by Us under these Sections, We shall be subrogated to all the Insured Person's right 
of recovery against any person or organisation. The Insured Person must not take any action to prejudice any such right of 
recovery and must co-operate with and do all things necessary to enable the recovery action to be prosecuted.

3. CLAIM FORMS

Upon receipt of a notice of claim, We shall submit our usual claim form for completion. We shall not be liable to make any 
payment under this Policy unless the claim form is properly completed and all information reasonably required by Us has been 
furnished.

4. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND AUTOPSY

We may at Our own expense conduct any medical examination or examinations of any Insured Person or arrange at Our own 
expense for an autopsy to be carried out.

5. LEGAL ACTION

No action at law or in equity shall be brought to recover on this Policy prior to the expiration of sixty (60) days after Our 
reasonable requirements in connection with a claim have been met. No such action shall be brought after the expiration of 
three (3) years after the time of the loss or damage or the time the liability was incurred (as the case may be).

6. CANCELLATION

1. This Policy may be cancelled by You at any time by giving Us written notice, in which case We shall retain a proportion 
of the premium calculated at Our usual short-term rates for the time the Policy has been in force;

2. We may cancel this Policy in accordance with the provisions of the Insurance Contracts Act. Upon cancellation by Us, 
We shall refund a proportion of the premium paid calculated by reference to the unexpired Period of Insurance.

7. AGE LIMITATION

We shall not be liable to pay any money with respect to any Insured Person who has attained the age of eighty (80) years.

8. LIMIT OF LIABILITY

Our total liability for all claims arising under this Policy during any Period of Insurance shall not exceed the amount statex 
in the Schedule other than with respect to Section 6 - Personal Liability.

In the event this limit is reached, the amount will be automatically reinstated with the appropriate additional premium plu 
stamp duty being charged.

7/95

                                                                 10 
                   ARIA VTL SYDNEY                                   LU1 on 1-1-100t```
Appendix 7
Impact on Birds

|               Species              |                  Place of observation/method                 |                        Impact/Action taken to lessen impact                       |
|:----------------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------------------:|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
|     Southern Giant Petrel         | Flying at sea. With binoculars from ship or zodiac           | Nil                                                                                |
|                                    | Sitting on icefloes. From ship or zodiac                     | Birds maybe disturbed and fly off. Where possible we will alter course to avoid floes. Zodiacs will not approach too close. |
|     Cape Pigeon                   | Flying at Sea. With binoculars from ship or zodiac           | Nil                                                                                |
|     Antarctic Fulmar              | Flying at sea. With binoculars from ship or zodiac           | Nil                                                                                |
|     Antarctic Petrel              | Flying at Sea. With binoculars from ship or zodiac           | Nil                                                                                |
|     Snow Petrel                   | Flying at Sea. With binoculars from ship or zodiac           | Nil                                                                                |
|     Wilsons Storm Petrel          | Flying at Sea. With binoculars from ship or zodiac           | Nil                                                                                |
|     Emperor Penguin               | At Sea. With binoculars                                      | Nil                                                                                |
|                                    | On ice floes or fast ice. From Ship, zodiac or by landing.   | Birds maybe disturbed. Ship or zodiac will not cruise too close. If passengers land they will be instructed not to approach birds too close - suggest 5 metres, they will not be allowed to get between the birds and the sea and nor will they be allowed to surround the birds. |
Adelie Penguins                                 
                                                Cape Adare - either sitting on ice floes or at colony.
                                                Possession Islands - in colony
                                                Cape Royds - on ice floes or on land
                                                Cape Hallet - on ice floes or in colony.
                                                In all cases observations will be either from 'halads' or from 
                                                land with binoculars or unassisted.

Presence of ship may disturb birds causing them 
                                                to leave the ice floe and birds maybe disturbed at 
                                                the colony. Where at all possible the ship will 
                                                avoid approaching floes with penguins on it. In 
                                                the colonies visitors will be restricted to the 
                                                edges of the rookeries - this will reduce the 
                                                impact to non breeding birds or perhaps chicks 
                                                that have moved out to the edge.

South Polar Skuas                              Cape Adare - nesting colony on ridge above the flat.
                                                Observations will be from the land either unassisted or with 
                                                binoculars.

These birds will fly if approached and therefore 
                                                minimise impact. Chicks in the colony will be 
                                                well advanced by the time of our visits - these 
                                                chicks are well camouflaged and avoid 
                                                disturbance by hiding. Visitors will not be 
                                                permitted to approach these chicks closer than 5 
                                                metres.
Appendix 1c
Impact on Marine Mammals

The regulations as laid down in the Marine Mammal Protection Regulations 1992 Part 3, Section 18 - 20 will be observed at all times when whales are encountered. A whale and Dolphin sighting sheet will be kept at all times, this will be made available to any interested parties.

Seals
 Species                  | Place of observation/Method                | Impact/Action taken to lessen Impact
-------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------
Weddell                  | On land or fast ice. With binoculars/naked eye | Seals maybe disturbed. No one will be allowed to approached closer than 5 metres, if animals show signs of stress then this distance will be increased.
                         | On ice floes. With binoculars/naked eye    | Seals maybe disturbed. Where at all possible the ship and zodiac will keep such a distance so as not to disturbed the animals.
Ross                     | On ice floes. With binoculars.             | Seals maybe disturbed. Ship and zodiac will, where possible maintain such a distance so as not to disturbed animals.
Leopard                  | On ice floes. With binoculars              | Seals maybe disturbed. Ship and zodiac will maintain, where possible such a distance so as not to disturbed the animals.
Crabeater	On land or fast ice. With binoculars/naked eye	Seals maybe disturbed. No one will be allowed to 
             	On ice floes. With binoculars/naked eye.	approach closer than 5 metres, if animals show 
              						signs of stress then this distance will be 
              						increased.
              						Seals maybe disturbed. Where at all possible the 
              						ship and or zodiac will maintain such a distance 
              						so as not to disturbed the animals.

Whales

 Species          	            Place of Observation/Method	                                Impact/ Action Taken to lessen Impact
Blue Whale	      At sea. With binoculars	Conditions as laid out in Part 3 section 18 - 19 of 
              						the marine Mammals Protection Regulations 
              						1992 will be observed to lessen any impact. A 
              						copy of the relevant sections is appended. This 
              						applies to all whale observations.

Fin whale	      At sea. With binoculars	
Southern Right Whale	At sea from either ship or zodiac. With binoculars/naked eye.	
Sei Whale	      At sea from sliip. With binoculars/naked eye.	
Minke Whale	      At sea from either ship or zodiac. With binoculars/naked eye.	
Humpback Whale	At sea from ship. With binoculars/naked eye.	
| Sperm Whale                | At sea from ship. With binoculars/naked eye. |                                          |
| Killer Whale               | At sea from either ship or zodiac. With binoculars/naked eye. |                                          |
| Southern Bottlenose        | At sea from ship. With binoculars/naked eye. |                                          |

Dolphin

| Species      | Place of Observation/Method              | Impact/Action taken to lessen Impact                            |
| Hour Glass   | At sea. With naked eye or Binocular      | Conditions as laid out in Part 3 section 18 &20 of the Marine Mammals Protection Regulations 1992 will be observed to lessen any impact. A copy of the relevant sections is appended. This applies to all whale observations. |
Marine Mammals Protection Regulations 1992                  9

person's permit; and the Minister may confirm, reverse, or modify the
decision appealed against.

                                                          PART III
                                              Behaviour Around Marine Mammals

17. Application of this Part--Nothing in regulation 18 or regulation
19 or regulation 20 of these regulations shall apply to persons, vessels,
aircraft, or vehicles rendering assistance to stranded or injured marine
mammals.

18. Conditions governing commercial operations and behaviour
of all persons around any marine mammal--Every commercial
operation, and every person coming into contact with any class of marine
mammal, shall comply with the following conditions:

(a) Persons shall use their best endeavours to operate vessels, vehicles,
and aircraft so as not to disrupt the normal movement or
behaviour of any marine mammal;

(b) Contact with any marine mammal shall be abandoned at any stage if
it becomes or shows signs of becoming disturbed or alarmed;

(c) No person shall cause any marine mammal to be separated from a
group of marine mammals or cause any members of such a
group to be scattered;

(d) No rubbish or food shall be thrown near or around any marine
mammal;

(e) No sudden or repeated change in the speed or direction of any vessel
or aircraft shall be made except in the case of an emergency;

(f) Where a vessel stops to enable the passengers to watch any marine
mammal, the engines shall be either placed in neutral or be
switched off within a minute of the vessel stopping;

(g) No aircraft engaged in a commercial aircraft operation shall be flown
below 150 metres (500 feet) above sea level, unless taking off or
landing;

(h) When operating at an altitude of less than 600 metres (2000 feet)
above sea level, no aircraft shall be closer than 150 metres (500
feet) horizontally from a point directly above any marine
mammal or such lesser or greater distance as may be approved
by the Director-General, by notice in the Gazette, from time to
time based on the best available scientific evidence;

(i) No person shall disturb or harass any marine mammal;

(j) Vehicles must remain above the mean high water spring tide mark
and shall not approach within 50 metres of a marine mammal
unless in an official carpark or on a public or private slipway or
on a public road;

(k) No person, vehicle, or vessel shall cut off the path of a marine
mammal or prevent a marine mammal from leaving the vicinity
of any person, vehicle, or vessel;

(l) Subject to paragraph (m) of this regulation, the master of any vessel
less than 300 metres from any marine mammal shall use their
best endeavours to move their vessels at a constant slow speed
no faster than the slowest marine mammal in the vicinity, or at
idle or "no wake" speed;

(m) Vessels departing from the vicinity of any marine mammal shall
proceed slowly at idle or "no wake" speed until the vessel is at
:0

Marine Mammal Protection Regulations 1992

least 500 metres from the nearest marine mammal, except that
in the case of dolphins, vessel may exceed :he "no wake-
speed" in order to outdistance the dolphins at must increase
speed gradually, and shall not exceed 10 knots within 500 metres
of any dolphin:


(n) Pilots of aircraft engaged in a commercial aircraft operation shall use
their best endeavours to operate the aircraft in such a manner
that, without compromising safety, the aircraft's shadow is not
imposed directly on any marine mammal.

19. Special conditions applying to whales-In addition to complying
with the provisions set out in regulation 18 of these regulations, every
commercial operation and every person coming into contact with whales
shall also comply with the following conditions:

(a) No person in the water shall be less than 100 metres from a whale.
unless authorised by the Director-General:


(b) No vessel shall approach within 50 metres of a whale, unless
authorised by the Director-General:


(c) If a whale approaches a vessel, the master of the vessel shall,
wherever practicable,—

     (i) Manoeuvre the vessel so as to keep out of the path of the
whale; and

    (ii) Maintain a minimum distance of 50 metres from the whale:


(d) No vessel or aircraft shall approach within 300 metres (1000 feet) of
any whale for the purpose of enabling passengers to watch the
whale, if the number of vessels or aircraft, or both, already
positioned to enable passengers to watch that whale is 3 or more:


(e) Where 2 or more vessels or aircraft approach an unaccompanied
whale, the masters concerned shall co-ordinate their approach
and manoeuvres, and the pilots concerned shall co-ordinate their
approach and manoeuvres:


(f) No person or vessel shall approach within 200 metres of any female
baleen or sperm whale that is accompanied by a calf or calves:


(g) A vessel shall approach a whale from a direction that is parallel to the
whale and slightly to the rear of the whale:


(h) No person shall make any loud or disturbing noise near whales:


(i) Where a sperm whale abruptly changes its orientation or starts to
make short dives of between 1 and 5 minutes duration without
showing its tail flukes, all persons, vessels, and aircraft shall
forthwith abandon contact with the whale.

20. Special conditions applying to dolphins or seals—In addition to
complying with the conditions set out in regulation 18 of these regulations,
any commercial operation and any person coming into contact with
dolphins or seals shall also comply with the following conditions:


(a) No vessel shall proceed through a pod of dolphins:


(b) Persons may swim with dolphins and seals but not with juvenile
dolphins or a pod of dolphins that includes juvenile dolphins:


(c) Commercial operators may use an airhorn to call swimmers back to
the boat or to the shore:


(d) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this regulation, no person shall
make any loud or disturbing noise near dolphins or seals:
Appendix 1/
LANDINGS

 
Landing         | Position          | Type/duration of Landing                          | Impacts
---------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------
Cape Adare     | 71∞20' S, 170∞20'E| Rocky beach. Estimate that we will make two      | No physical impact on shore line at all. Any 
               |                   | landings of approx 6 hours duration each.        | footprints left will be covered by snow/ice
Cape Hallet    | 72∞18' S, 170∞10'E| Rocky beach. Estimate that we will make two      | As above.
               |                   | landings of approx 3 hours duration. landing is  | 
               |                   | subject to ice conditions.                       | 
Possession Islands| 71∞55' S, 171∞00'E| Rocky Beach, with large damp flat land behind.  | No physical impact on shore line. Some 
               |                   | We estimate that we will make 2 landings of      | footprints maybe left behind on damp area 
               |                   | approx 3 hours duration each.                   | behind beach. These will soon disappear 
               |                   |                                                  | either with heavy penguin traffic or snow/ice.
Cape Royds     | 77∞35'S, 166∞10'E | Ice foot or shingle beach. We estimate 2        | Footprints/track will be left behind in the 
               |                   | landings of approx 6 hours duration.             | snow. This will soon disappear under 
               |                   |                                                  | snow/ice. Guidelines for behaviour around 
               |                   |                                                  | historic sites will be observed at all times.
Cape Evans     | 77∞38'S, 166∞40'E | Ice foot or shingle beach. We estimate 2        | As above.
               |                   | landings of approx 4 hours each.                 | 
Cape Bird      | 77∞12'S, 166∞30'E | Rocky beach. We hope for 1 landing of approx    | No physical impact on shoreline, any foot 
               |                   | 4 hours.                                         | prints left behind will soon disappear with 
               |                   |                                                  | the weather.
McMurdo Sound  | 77∞50'S, 166∞40'E | Ice foot - we hope for two landings here of      | Footprints will soon disappear with the 
               |                   | approx 5 hours.                                  | amount of traffic from the two permanent 
               |                   |                                                  | stations. Guidelines for visits to these 
               |                   |                                                  | stations will be adhered to at all times
Coulman Island | 73∞28'S, 169∞40'E | Ice foot. Difficult landing maybe one or two    | Footprints will be left in the snow these will 
               |                   | landings of about 2 hours duration.              | soon disappear with weather.
|Franklin Island          |76° 05'S, 168° 10'E      |Rocky foreshore with large flat areas behind beach. We hope for 1 or 2 landings of about 2 - 3 hours duration each.              |No impact on rocky foreshore - footprints maybe left on flat area behind but these will soon disappear with weather and penguin movement.    |
|Commonwealth Bay         |67° 00'S, 142° 40'E      |Ice foot. We hope for 1 landing approx 4 - 6 hours duration.                                                                      |Footprints maybe left behind in snow - these will soon disappear with the weather. The historic sites will be treated in the same manner as the AHT managed sites in the Ross Sea.              |
|Terra Nova Bay          |74° 50'S, 164° 05'E      |Ice foot. We hope for 2 landings of approx 4 - 6 hours.                                                                           |Footprints maybe left in snow but these will soon be lost amongst those of the Research base and will be destroyed by the weather.         |
APPENDIX 12.1

ANTARCTIC VISITOR GUIDELINES

We ask you to thoroughly study and follow these guidelines. By doing so, you will make an important contribution towards the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem, and avoid potentially harmful and long-lasting damage.

1.    Maintain a distance of at least 15 - 20 feet from penguins, nesting birds and crawling seals, and 50 feet from fur seals. Most of the Antarctic species exhibit a lack of fear which allows you to approach closely: however, please remember that the austral summer is a time for courting, mating, nesting and rearing young. If you approach the animals or birds too closely you may startle and disturb them sufficiently that they will abandon the nesting site, leaving eggs or chicks vulnerable to predators. And even from the recommended distance you will be able to obtain fantastic photographs.
      You should also remember that wild animals, especially seals, are extremely sensitive to movement and a person's height above the ground in relation to their size. Approach wildlife slowly when preparing to take photographs. And it is important to remember that your photography is not over when the shutter clicks
      - make your retreat from the subject in the same way you approach. The key point to remember is not to cause the animals any distress. You should be careful to avoid altering their natural behaviour.

2.    Be alert while you are ashore! Watch your steps in order not to stumble upon an aggressive fur seals or a nesting bird that is unaware of your presence.Pay attention to the behaviour of flying birds, as well as those on the ground. As an example, when a tern or skua becomes excited or agitated and starts "dive bombing" you, it is a good indication that you are walking too close to its nest, though you may not have spotted it.

3.    Do not get between a marine animal and its path to the water, nor between a parent and its young. Never surround a single animal, nor a group of animals and always leave them room for retreat. Animals always have the right of way!

4.    Be aware of the periphery of a rookery or seal colony, and remain outside it. Follow the instruction given by your leaders.

5.    Do not touch the wildlife. The bond between parent and young can be disrupted and the survival of the young jeopardized.

6.    Never harass wildlife for the sake of photography. Our intention is to observe wildlife in its natural state.

7.    Keep all noise to a minimum in order not to stress the animals.

8.    Avoid walking on, stepping on, or damaging the fragile mosses and lichens. Regeneration is extremely slow and the scars from human damage last for decades.

9.    Take away only memories and photographs. Do not remove anything, not even rocks or limpet shells. This includes historical evidence of man's presence in Antarctica.
10. Return all litter to the ship for proper disposal. This includes litter of all types such as film containers, wrappers and tissues. Garbage may never break down in this harsh environment.

11. Do not bring food of any kind ashore.

12. Do not enter buildings at the research stations unless invited to do so. Remember that scientific research is going on, and any intrusion could affect the scientists data. Be respectful of their work.

13. Historic huts can only be entered when accompanied by a specially designated governmental representative or properly authorized ships leader.

14. Smoking is prohibited when ashore!

15. When ashore stay with the group and/or one of the ships leaders. For your own safety, do not wander off on your own.

16. Listen to the Expedition Leader, lecturers and naturalists. They are experienced and knowledgeable about Antarctica. If you are unsure about something please ask your leaders and guides.

Protection of the environment and conservation of the wildlife are addressed in the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, which is an annex to the Antarctic Treaty of 1959. Citizens of any government that has ratified the Antarctic Treaty are legally bound by the following guidelines of conduct in that area below latitude 60 degrees South:

Conservation of Wildlife
Animals and plants native to Antarctica are protected under the following five instruments outlined in the Agreed Measures:

1. Protection of Native Fauna
Within the Treaty Area it is prohibited to kill, wound, capture or molest any native mammal or bird, or any attempt at such, except in accordance with a permit.

2. Harmful Interference
Appropriate efforts will be taken that harmful interference is minimized in order that normal living conditions of any native mammal or bird are protected. Harmful interference includes any disturbance of bird and seal colonies during the breeding period by persistent attention from persons on foot.

3. Specially Protected Species
Special Protection is accorded to Fur and Ross Seals.

4. Specially Protected Areas (SPAs)
Areas of outstanding scientific interest are preserved in order to protect their unique natural ecological system. Entry to these areas is allowed by permit only.
5. Introduction of Non-Indigenous Species, Parasites and Diseases. No species 
of animal or plant not indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area may be brought 
into the Area except in accordance with a permit. All reasonable precautions 
have to be taken to prevent the accidental introduction of parasites and diseases 
into the Treaty Area.

Our ships staff will make certain that the above guidelines are adhered to.

By encouraging your fellow expeditioners to follow your environmentally conscious 
efforts you will help ensure that Antarctica will remain pristine for the enjoyment of 
future generations. Thank you in advance for your co-operation.
APPENDIX 12.2

GUIDELINES FOR VISITS TO CAPE DENNISON HISTORIC SITE
(Established by A.N.A.R.E for the Australian Government)

INTRODUCTION

The main Hut and the cross and plaque are designated as Historic Monuments in accordance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty. Australia also has responsibility for the site under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975. The Cape Dennison Historic Site was entered in the Register of The National Estate in February 1979. The Hut, Cross and Plaque commemorate the Australian Antarctic Expedition (AAE) which had its Winter Quarters here from 1912-1914. The Winter Quarters consisted of four Huts and assorted scientific equipment dotted around the area to the South and East of Boat Harbour. From a point near the door of the main Hut a plume of discarded objects, which includes building material, domestic and scientific artifacts, food containers and clothing, stretches out to Boat Harbour and beyond. This plume results from the garbage disposal method adopted by AAE Members during their two year stay. This "garbage" is in fact of considerable archaeological interest. Some items in the "garbage" are new, and are labelled to allow monitoring of the effect of wind on artifact movement.

GUIDELINES FOR VISITS

1.    The Tour Operator shall limit the number of persons visiting the site at any one time to twenty.

2.    The Tour Operator shall not allow any visitor to enter any historic structure, nor climb on structures.

3.    The Tour Operator shall not allow visitors to souvenir objects or disturb or remove artifacts and other material surrounding Huts or structures. The Tour Operator shall not allow visitors to interfere with test materials on Granholm Hut. All these items are the subject of an ongoing archaeological study.

4.    The Tour Operator shall ensure that visitors move only on snow, ice or rock so as to avoid trampling of sensitive areas. In particular, the Tour Operator shall not allow visitors to disturb cached seal and bird carcasses by touching or trampling on these or to trample on or move artifacts such as "garbage" scattered around the site.
-2-

5. The Tour Operator shall ensure that visitors do not collect geological or other 
specimens.

6. The Tour Operator shall strictly enforce quarantining measures to prevent the 
transfer of non-indigenous species from Subantarctic Islands to the Antarctic 
Continent. These measures shall be conducted before landing operations 
commence and shall include:

    A) Checking of all survival equipment before landing to ensure equipment 
       is free from soil and vegetable matter.

    B) Cleaning of boots and personal equipment; and

    C) Provision on shore of only processed, packaged food items, which do 
       not include poultry products of any kind.

7. The Tour Operator shall ensure that no litter is deposited in the Cape 
Dennison Historic Site. All rubbish and food items are to be returned to the 
ship.

8. Except in an emergency the Tour Operator shall ensure that visitors DO NOT 
ENTER or use supplies from Australian Antarctic Division Field Huts 
Granholm and Soerensen Huts. The Tour Operator will promptly report the 
use of any Huts or supplies to the Australian Antarctic Division.
APPENDIX 12.3

CODE OF CONDUCT FOR TOURISTS IN ANTARCTICA

Antarctica, with its spectacular scenery, incredible wildlife, and fascinating history 
of exploration has always been a popular adventure seeking Expedition Cruise 
destination. Tourism in Antarctica is on the increase, and that increase is intensifying 
the pressures exerted upon a very fragile ecosystem. The conduct of Antarctic ship-
based tourism, especially, is coming under closer and more exacting scrutiny. SHEL 
believes responsible tourism in Antarctica is a good thing, because in the long term 
tourist Expedition Member tourists with their first-hand experience and understanding 
are a valuable resource and will become Ambassadors in the conservation efforts 
needed to protect Antarctica.

SHEL accepts the responsibility of tour operators to educate and supervise the 
behaviour of their clients while in Antarctica. Also, it is of utmost importance that 
any cruise ship being utilized be properly certified for the rigors of Antarctic waters 
and conditions, and be managed by experienced and competent personnel. SHEL has 
chartered the Professor Shokalski which is

Our Police is to maximize the experience and enjoyment for those who visit the 
Antarctic continent, while at the same time minimize the ecological impact by that 
visit.

The SHEL Expedition Members must realize that they also play an important part in 
the safeguarding of the fragile ecosystem of Antarctica. Therefore, it is necessary 
that all visitors accept this responsibility and conduct themselves accordingly by a 
code of ethics.

PLEDGE TO SAFEGUARD THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT.

I,                                                  the undersigned, do hereby 
pledge to co-operate in the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty to insure an unspoiled 
Antarctica for future generations, to protect the wildlife, to avoid disturbing the 
fragile plant life, to safeguard historic sites, to refrain from leaving behind any refuse 
or other pollutants, and to adhere to regulations set by SHEL Staff supervising the 
Expedition.

SIGNED: ..................................................
APPENDIX 12.4

LANDING PROCEDURES BY NAIAD WITH
PASSENGERS & CREW

As all landings are made in Naiad, your safety requires that you familiarise yourself with these instructions.

1.    Embarkation in Naiad is done at the Boarding Area, but do not go there to line up until announcement to do so, has been made.

2.    Reverse your landing tag (on the Tag Board), when leaving the Ship and revert it upon your return.

3.    Put on your Expedition life jacket, from your cabin, before entering the Naiad and again, ashore, before your return to the Ship.

4.    Only one Passenger at a time, may step onto the landing platform where the Naiad is situated.

5.    BOTH ARMS MUST BE FREE. It is recommended that loose articles be carried in a rucksack. If this is not possible, please hand over loose items to the Helper, before boarding the Naiad.

6.    WHEN STEPPING INTO AND OUT OF THE NAIAD, YOU EXTEND "FOREARM TO FOREARM" TO THE PERSON ASSISTING YOU. NEVER GRIP HANDS - IT IMMOBILISES THE HELPER.

7.    Obey orders of the Naiad driver. He is there to help you and transport you safely. Please do not try to help in any way, unless asked to do so.

8.    Never jump into or out of Naiad. Sit down as soon as you enter the boat and stand up only when requested to do so.

9.    When boarding or disembarking, please wait until requested to move.

10.   While seated in a Naiad, hold on to the nearest holding point, on the boat.

11.   Boarding is done in order of arrival. If two people are together, they may have to separate for the short duration of the Naiad ride.

12.   NEVER stand up, in Naiad, not even for a picture, unless the Driver has agreed it is safe to do so.
The Tourism Impact Management Fee

The Department of Conservation charges a tourism impact management fee in order to help with the cost of providing for tourism on the islands.

Visitors should recognise that their presence, while welcome, creates management expenses and inherent risks to the island ecosystem.

The fee is payable by the tour operator for each tourist visiting the islands. The fee helps cover the following costs:

1. Provision of Limited Tourist Facilities on the Subantarctic Islands
Due to the fragile nature of the subantarctic islands' peat soils an extensive and costly programme of boardwalking has been carried out at permitted tourist sites at both Campbell Island and Auckland Islands.

2. Animal and Plant Quarantine Contingency
Every visitor (research, management or tourist) places a risk of accidental introduction of animal or plant pests to these unique islands. All introduced species have the potential to devastate these fragile island communities. If an animal or plant were accidentally introduced during a visit, there would be significant costs in eradicating the alien species. (A store of rodent and plant quarantine equipment is maintained in Invercargill and regular rodent quarantine work is carried out by the Department of Conservation at ports and anchorages from which subantarctic tour boats most frequently depart eg Port Pegasus, Stewart Island).

3. Provision of Department of Conservation Representative and Visitor Monitoring Programme
The Department of Conservation representative, required on all tourist ships, has the important roles of ensuring that visitor guidelines are followed and monitoring visitor impacts as part of an on-going programme.

4. Government Resource Rental
Commercial operators utilising Department of Conservation-administered land are required to pay a resource rental.

The subantarctic islands - national assets managed on behalf of all New Zealand citizens - are no different. The resource rental is spent by the department directly on management of the islands.

5. Subantarctic Islands Guidebook
A copy of this is given to each visitor.

For Further Information:
Department of Conservation, Southland Conservancy, PO Box 743, Invercargill.

                                  ATLAS 982

Subantarctic Islands Minimum Impact Code

CONSERVATION
TE PAPA ATAWHAI

Southland Conservancy
Invercargill
Be Safe

Be prepared for severe and changeable weather and ensure that
your equipment and clothing meet Antarctic standards. Remember
that the Antarctic environment is inhospitable, unpredictable,
and potentially dangerous.

• Know your capabilities, the dangers posed by
the Antarctic environment, and act accordingly
Plan activities with safety in mind at all times
• Keep a safe distance from all wildlife, both on
land and at sea
• Take note of, and act on, the advice and
instructions from your leaders, do not stray
from your group
• Do not walk onto glaciers or large snow fields
without the proper equipment and experience,
there is a real danger of falling into hidden
crevasses
• Do not expect a rescue service. Self sufficiency
is increased and risks reduced by sound planning,
quality equipment, and trained personnel
• Do not enter emergency refuges (except in
emergencies). If you use equipment or food
from a refuge, inform the nearest research
station or national authority once the
emergency is over
• Respect any smoking restrictions, particularly
around buildings, and take great care to
safeguard against the danger of fire. This is a
real hazard in the dry environment of Antarctica

Keep Antarctica Pristine

Antarctica remains relatively pristine, the largest wilderness area on
Earth. It has not yet been subjected to large scale human perturbations
Please keep it that way
• Do not dispose of litter or garbage on land
Open burning is prohibited
• Do not disturb or pollute lakes or streams. Any materials
discarded at sea must be disposed of properly
• Do not paint or engrave names or graffiti on
rocks or buildings
• Do not collect or take away biological or geological
specimens or man-made artifacts as a souvenir,
including rocks, bones, eggs, fossils, and parts or
contents of buildings
• Do not deface or vandalize buildings, whether occupied,
abandoned, or unoccupied, or emergency refuges.

Guidance for Visitors
to the Antarctic

Activities in the Antarctic are governed by the
Antarctic Treaty of 1959 and associated agreements,
referred to collectively as the Antarctic Treaty System
The Treaty established Antarctica as a zone of peace
and science

In 1991, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties
adopted the Protocol on Environmental Protection
to the Antarctic Treaty, which designates the
Antarctic as a natural reserve. The Protocol sets out
environmental principles, procedures and obligations
for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic
environment, and its dependent and associated
ecosystems. The Consultative Parties have agreed that,
pending its entry into force, as far as possible and in
accordance with their legal system, the provisions of
the Protocol should be applied as appropriate

The Environmental Protocol applies to tourism and
non-governmental activities, as well as governmental
activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area. It is intended
to ensure that these activities, do not have adverse
impacts on the Antarctic environment, or on its
scientific and aesthetic values

This Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic is
intended to ensure that all visitors are aware of,
and are therefore able to comply with, the Treaty
and the Protocol. Visitors are, of course, bound by
national laws and regulations applicable to activities
in the Antarctic

APPENDIX 12.6
