UTRECHT
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  XX ATCM/INF 62
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English

ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING ITS STATUS AND PROSPECTS
IN THE RUSSIAN ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION

(Agenda item 22)

(Submitted by RUSSIAN)
Environmental monitoring,
its status and prospects
in the Russian Antarctic Expedition

Acknowledging the importance and necessity of environmental
monitoring as a means of early prevention and prediction of possible
impact on the Antarctic environment as a result of human activity, the
Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) makes the most use of the scientific,
technical, logistic and financial reserves for its realization.

Currently a scientific program on long-term monitoring of ozone layer
and «green-house» gases is still in progress in RAE. Observations on major
ions composition in fresh snow and firn lasted for 10 years. A valuable
data on the untouched Antarctic areas had been collected over the period
of pioneering Soviet Antarctic Expeditions which present now a perfect
base to evaluate the environmental impact of the past human activity.

The collected scientific information, historical data on the logistics,
backlog of experience on the on-site research and scientific monitoring form
the basis for advanced methods of environmental monitoring.

1. The analysis of the available scientific and technical data starting from
the first Antarctic expeditions until now

Objectives:
- to obtain basic information on the initial environment state of the area;
- to detail the geographical scale of the performed work, including the
areas of past activity and to find out a total amount and type of cargoes
delivered to Antarctica;
- to choose subjects of environmental monitoring based upon the
obtained observation series and to determine areas for the comparison
analysis and the modeling of the ecosystem recovering process in case of
damage.

Results:
- the chronology of Russian research in Antarctica has been published;
- the description of natural conditions of the RAE station areas and their
infrastructure;
- a scientific monograph on Bunger and Schirmacher Oases as a potential
areas for the long-term monitoring is ready-to-publish.
                                                 1
2. Current observations on environmental object state

2.1. Observations on the abiotic object state

Objectives:
- to identify local sources and input mechanisms of contamination;
- to study the spatial-temporal variability of the concentration of contaminants in soil and water objects;
- to simulate processes occurring in ecosystems affected by the human activity in order to predict their behavior.

Results:
- level of chemical contamination of some nature object at the areas of Mirny, Oasis, Molodezhnaya, Novolazarevskaya, Bellingshausen stations has been determined;
- the existence of the individual hydrochemical patterns of lakes that characterize the water ecosystem vital activity has been revealed.

2.2. Observations on the state of biological objects

Objectives:
- to determine the distribution range and population status of the introduced microorganisms and plants;
- to obtain the data on fauna and population, flora and vegetation as well as on current state of the ecosystem as a whole in the areas of the RAE activity in order to form a data base;
- to choose a prior objects and parameters for the subsequent biological monitoring.

Results:
- data on the microbiological pollution of the coastal station areas have been obtained;
- as an object of long-term monitoring a colony of Emperor penguins at Mirny station area and a population of Giant petrel at Fildes Peninsula have been chosen.
Any scientific programs and logistic operations in Antarctica are very 
costly. The same is also true for the environmental monitoring. The 
environmental monitoring set up in RAE proved the possibility and 
necessity of joint use of transport, equipment, ship's scientific lab and 
experts under the performance of major logistic operations and scientific 
programs.

Of great importance is the cooperation with national operators running 
the stations situated closely to each other, for example those at Fildes 
Peninsula. The similar impact on environment of the neighboring stations 
and the same observation objects allow to elaborate the joint program on 
the environmental monitoring of the area, including comparable data bases 
and facilities as well joint work team.

Such a cooperation would allow to considerably reduce expenses 
incurred with the organization of the separate programs and to evaluate the 
most efficiently the obtained data.

                                                                                             3
