UTRECHT
29.4.96-10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР  ОБ  АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 57
April, 1996
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA

(Agenda item 3)

(Submitted by Canada)
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING
Utrecht, 9 April - 10 May 1996

OPENING ADDRESS

BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA

Mr. Chairman:

On behalf of Canada I am pleased to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this
important meeting of the Antarctic Treaty. The twentieth Consultative Meeting marks a milestone in the
maturity of this Treaty which has not only met its original purposes in achieving international cooperation
for the governing of an entire continent, but has provided an outstanding example to the rest of the world
of the ability of a large number of nations to work together towards common goals of environmental
protection, peaceful management, and the pursuit of knowledge for all to share. My country also expresses
its gratitude to the Government of The Netherlands for its hospitality in hosting this meeting and for the
excellent organization that has enabled us all to be here.

Since before Canada became a political entity as a nation, Canadians have had a sustained interest
in and familiarity with polar matters. Today, the Government of Canada has given expression to this interest
through creation of the post of Ambassador for Circumpolar Affairs, with responsibilities for north polar and
south polar regions, and it is in that capacity that I am pleased to represent Canada at this meeting. As an
Indigenous northerner, whose ancestors have lived in the north polar regions since before recorded history
and developed a culture and attitudes attuned to the realities of the polar environment, I believe that we can
make a useful contribution not only to the North, but also to south polar and Antarctic issues of today.

During the past year, Canada was host to the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Arctic Environmental
Protection Strategy. On that occasion, in accordance with the decision made in Korea at the last meeting
of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, Canada was pleased to present the report from the XIX ATCM, and
so set in motion systematic exchange between the inter-governmental organizations dealing with the Arctic
and the Antarctic respectively. The Ministers of the eight Arctic countries, for their part, welcomed this
exchange, and agreed to reciprocate, in the manner that will be dealt with later in the Agenda of this
meeting.

I am pleased to be able to report to you, also, that after several years of sustained and sometimes
difficult negotiations, the final steps are being taken toward creation of an Arctic Council, which will include
in its membership representatives of the governments of the circumpolar Arctic countries and of major arctic
indigenous organizations. Canada will initially chair the Council and provide the Secretariat. We hope to
be able to report, at the next ATCM, that the Arctic Council has been established. There will be subjects
on which the Council may be able to facilitate co-operation between arctic and antarctic interests.
Environmental protection and sustainable management of resources are priority interests in both areas.

Another development in north polar areas during the past year, which will be of interest to those
concerned with Antarctic issues and which as representative of Canada I am pleased to bring to your
attention is the Second Conference of Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region, which was held in Yellowknife,
Northwest Territories, Canada, last March. Elected representatives from a wide range of political parties from
seven circumpolar countries discussed common problems and the need for inter-country cooperation on
questions of the sustainability of economies and cultural values, environmental contaminants, problems of
2

governance and new dimensions of international security in the arctic region. They found value in shared 
experiences and mutual opportunittes for elected representatives to collaborate in addressing both national 
and international issues in polar regions. The experience of the Antarctic Treaty was important to these 
discussions.

Mr. Chairman, Canada wishes you and all delegates success in our forthcoming discussions. The 
Antarctic Treaty System has responsibility for management of a large and important part of the planet in the 
interests of all humankind and natural ecosystems. It is also, although not without its difficulties, a 
successful development in the growth of a shared sense of caring for our environment, manifest through 
international policy. Canada is pleased to be part of this growth.

                                     Mary M. Simon
                                     Ambassador for Circumpolar Affairs,
                                     Canada
