ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



                         XX ATCM/INF 10
                         March, 1996
                         Original: English


DECOMMISSIONING VANDA STATION
WRIGHT VALLEY, ANTARCTICA

(Agenda item 18)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
MAR 11 '96   01:52PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                         P.2


New Zealand Antarctic Programme


Decommissioning Vanda Station, Wright Valley, Antarctica


1.0  Executive Summary


The decommissioning and removal of Vanda Station is now complete. Monitoring activities will 
continue for at least the next three seasons. Removal of the station, comprising eight 
buildings and able to accommodate 14 people, took over 180 person days and 70 helicopter 
hours to complete. The resources and effort which went into the removal process were 
underestimated during the planning phase. The need for extensive detailed planning, skilled 
and adequately trained removal parties, regular checks, field assessments and re-evaluation 
of activities were consistently highlighted throughout the project.


While remediation activities were extensive, NZAP believes that we'e necessary in order 
to return the site to as "natural" a state as possible. Of particular concern was the level of 
contamination in some low lying areas and the potential for release of contaminants into one of 
the worlds most pristine lakes. The effectiveness of remediation activities in preventing major 
contamination of the lake will be assessed when parts of the site are flooded.


Further New Zealand research and longer term monitoring activity is also planned at the site. 
Research may include investigations into the rate at which contaminants remaining in the soil 
permeate into lake waters and the process by which algal mats take up nutrients and heavy 
metals. Further impacting of the site eg through field camps or helicopter landings, should be 
avoided to protect the values of this site for research and monitoring. The likely flooding of 
the Vanda Station site has the potential to provide valuable practical and scientific information 
directly applicable to environmental management practices in the Dry Valleys as well as other 
parts of the Antarctic.


2.0  Background


Seasonal variations in the climate of the Dry Valleys have resulted in raised levels of Lake 
Vanda, in the Wright Valley. In the last two decades the lake has risen to seven metres above 
its 1970 level threatening to inundate or partially inundate Vanda Station located on the 
shores of Lake Vanda. The station was operated by the New Zealand Antarctic Programme 
(NZAP). Increases in lake level led directly to the decision by NZAP to decommission and 
remove Vanda Station.


Vanda Station was established by the New Zealand Antarctic Research Programme in 
1968/69. It consisted of eight buildings and could accommodate up to 14 people. Since 
establishment until the 1991/92 austral summer, the station was occupied for three months of 
every season and all year round for three years. During periods of occupation, extensive 
scientific programmes were carried out on the physical sciences including meteorology, 
seismology, geomagnetics. In the summer months Vanda Station also acted as a support 
base for field science parties in the immediate area.


The occupation of Vanda Station and associated activities led to considerable human impacts 
at the site. Impacts were largely the result of disturbance by trampling and vehicle movement, 
excavations and erection of buildings, storage of consumables, accidental spills and waste 
disposal. In the first two years of operation some dry wastes were burnt and all liquid wastes 
were poured onto the ground adjacent to the station. These wastes included grey water, 
urine, used photo chemicals and some battery acid. Since 1970 all solid and liquid waste 
except strained grey water was removed from the Wright Valley. Strained grey water 
continued to be dumped on the ground until the 1992/93 season.
MAR 11 '96 01:52PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                    P. 3

Although no major contamination events were reported or noted around th? e station, 35 years 
of occupation and activities meant that cumulative effects were potentially iignificant. With 
1992 lake levels just two metres below the floor level of the lowest station juilding, the 
decision was made to decommission and remove the station. Given the hi jh scientific values 
of the lake and pristine nature there was considerable concern among scien? tists and 
managers about the removal process and in particular the need to minimis? e the entry of 
contaminants from around the station environment into the lake system.

An initial environmental evaluation (IEE) was prepared to cover the activit? es required to 
decommission and remove the station.

3.0     The IEE Process

A draft IEE was completed in October 1993 and circulated to interested p?rties in New 
Zealand. The document was also reviewed by New Zealand's independe? nt Antarctic 
Environmental Assessment Panel. Surveys of past leaders of Vanda Station and a study of 
soil contamination carried out in 1992/93, contributed significant informati? on to the IEE 
process. The information enabled effective and targeted remediation stra? tegies to be drawn 
up based on known and measured areas of contamination at Vanda Statik? n.

The final IEE was released in March 1994 (XVIII - ATCM/INFO60). The IEE set out a 
programme for the decommissioning of all structures on the station site a? rd the removal of soil 
and grey water from significantly contaminated areas. The following activi? les were proposed 
as necessary to decommission the station and prevent contamination of t? he pristine waters of 
Lake Vanda.

·   Removal of direct hazards for lake water, sediment, biota and ice. These were all 
    facilities and equipment above ground, ie buildings, ante? nnae, towers, and 
    associated equipment.

·   Identification of contaminated sites and remedial action required to minimise leaching 
    and/or diffusion of soil contaminants into the lake system.

·   Identification of potential hazards to the lake's scientific values, carried out in 
    consultation with scientists from the National Institute for Water and Atmosphere 
    (NIWA) with previous experience in the area.

·   Removal of sub-surface installations as far as practical, i?: buried power and 
    communication cables and building anchors, that may pose futu? re hazards to the lake 
    system.

·   Restoration of the natural surface as close as possible to the original form.

·   Monitoring of any ongoing impacts and the effectiveness ?f decommissioning 
    actions.

4.0     Decommissioning and Removal

During the 1993/94 season some preliminary decommissioning work wa? s carried out. 
However the majority of work involved in the decommissioning was com? pleted in the 1994/95 
austral summer.

Facilities decommissioned at Vanda during the 1994/95 season include? d the mess, 
workshop, laboratory, "new" sleeping hut, antennas and associat? ed tow? ers, anchors and 
underground electrical wiring. These facilities were decommissioned ov? er a period from 
November 1994 to January 1995 by two teams dedicated to this work c? us personnel from 
Scott Base.

Approximately 180 person days were required to complete decommissi? ning and removal of 
the station. In addition, removal of materials and contaminated soil from the site to Scott Base 
required over 70 helicopter hours to complete. Materials were also tran? ported over the sea 
ice to Scott Base from Marble Point.

2
MAR 11 '96  01:53PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.4

During decommissioning activities all reasonable precautions were taken to minimise the 
release of foreign items into the environment. All obvious surface litter was collected, 
including particles originating from food, building materials, crates, packaging and wrapping 
material. The use of saws was kept to minimum and where possible inside the workshop so 
saw dust could be easily collected. Asbestos was also present in the buildings and required 
special handling and precautions. All fuels stored at the station were returned to Scott Base. 
All painted rocks were also collected and removed from the site or relocated to the new Vanda 
Huts, to mark the helicopter pad.

Helicopter visits to the station were minimised to reduce the blowing of sand over any small 
items on the ground or the blowing away of light objects. Loads were moved 50 - 100 metres 
away for pick up. The explosives cache at Vanda Station was also removed.

Several anchors which could not be practically removed (buried in permafrost up to two 
metres) were cut off half a metre below the ground surface.

5.0  Remediation Activities

NZAP undertook to remove contaminated soil and water from the most heavily contaminated 
sites around the station. Key aspects of the remediation programme were based on an 
evaluation of the potential contamination load on the lake from station soils.

Some contaminants, for example phosphorus, nitrogen and heavy metals, are natural 
compounds in Lake Vanda. However there are organic compounds associated with human 
contamination which are not naturally present in the lake, such as condensed 
polyphosphates, oil residues, soot, animal fats and oils. Soils containing these compounds 
were given priority for removal especially at sites under immediate threat from inundation of 
lake waters. Some remediation work was therefore carried out in 1993/4 in particularly low 
lying areas. Two 209 litre drums of contaminated water and approximately 5000 kg of 
contaminated soil were removed from a gully ("grey water gully") immediately adjacent to the 
station in January 1994.

Further extensive remediation was carried out in 1994/95 following site visits by 
environmental staff. Attachment 1 shows the Vanda Station site before and after 
decommissioning activities. This work included the following:

  •  Removal of painted rocks from around the station. Most paint used during the 
     operation of the station was lead based.

  •  Removal of soil showing obvious signs of hydrocarbon contamination in the 
     immediate station area, helicopter pads and at other sites identified by the 1992/93 
     survey. Sites were then covered with fines from the track between the station and 
     helicopter pad and surface rocks replaced.

  •  Fat and grease coated pebbles and contaminated fines were removed from an old 
     grey water disposal site in grey water gully - approximately 2000 kg of rocks and soil 
     was removed from an area of 8 m x 4 m x 150 mm. All visibly contaminated material 
     (dark and non friable) was removed. The excavation was covered using fines and 
     gravel from the helicopter pad track and surface rocks were replaced.

  •  Soil was removed from an incinerator/dump site. Excavated soil contained elevated 
     levels of copper, lead and zinc as well as macro waste items such as packaging, paper 
     and dry cell batteries.

  •  Disused science equipment was removed and surface areas remediated. Sites 
     included an old dust trap, a seismic vault and a water staff gauge.

  •  All tracks and rock walls were remediated. Rocks were replaced right way up where 
     ever possible (ie wind worn surface uppermost). Granite was replaced where granite 
     occurs naturally, dolerite in dyke formations ie as "naturally" as possible.

  •  All cairns were dismantled and rocks replaced "naturally" in the surrounding area 
     taking care of rock type and orientation.

3
'MAR 11 '96 01:54PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.5

-   Old rock lines used to hold down wires for various science experim nts were 
    randomised. Rocks were replaced "naturally" in the surrounding ar a taking care of 
    rock type and orientation.

-   Building and mast anchors were removed totally (if possible) or cut off 20 cm beneath 
    ground level and the surface returned to near natural state.

-   A daily walk around collected exposed rubbish (nails, wood chips, splinters etc).

An estimated total of 15,000 kg of contaminated soil and rocks were remov d from Vanda 
Station and vicinity. Soil returned to Scott Base has been deposited at a di signated site at 
Scott Base. The site will not be reworked by base activity in the future and records kept of all 
Vanda soil deposited on this site.

6.0     Monitoring

The IEE recognised that all contaminating substances in the soils of the V anda Station 
environs would not be successfully removed. One problem for example v as the nature of the 
terrain which comprises shattered bedrock at shallow depth. Contaminat ng substances 
which reached this layer would have been impractical to remove. Therefc re, the monitoring 
programme is aimed primarily at assessing the rate of release and quantity of any contaminants 
entering the lake waters from contaminated areas at the station site.

The potential contamination load on Lake Vanda from flooded sites at Va da Station was 
calculated based on the 1992/93 soil study (refer section 3.0). Calculati ns showed that if no 
remediation was carried out, contaminant phosphorus, copper and lead (ound in high levels 
in station soils) would be unlikely to provide significant additional input into he lake. The 
hypothesis was put forward that the extensive benthic algal mats in Lake Janda could serve as 
effective traps for phosphorus and dissolved metals, including copper a d lead, being 
circulated across their surfaces. Therefore sampling of both algal mats ar d lake water were 
included as integral components of the monitoring programme.

Monitoring activities commenced in December 1994 and will continue for at least three years 
after the site and/or contaminated areas are flooded. The main compon nts of the monitoring 
programme include the following:

    -   Sampling benthic algal mats (cyanobacterial) and water at the la e edge near the most 
        heavily impacted area (grey water gully) and at a control site. Sar ples are analysed for 
        nutrients and heavy metals.

    -   Sampling water from snow bank run-off ponding over contaminat d areas in grey 
        water gully and a control site. Samplas are analysed for nutrient s and heavy metals.

Conductivity is also measured at each water sample collection point.

It is expected that the chemistry of the shallow waters near the station s te and the control site 
will vary through the season depending on the Onyx River flow whilst  he chemistry of the 
microbial mats will not vary in this way. Thus water samples will provide  short time scale 
indications of water quality and mats will provide biological indications o a longer time scale of 
water and sediment quality.

The results of the monitoring work will be reported after each season. The programme will 
then be reviewed based on these results and in consultation with NIW  scientists assisting 
with the sample collection and analysis.

For further information contact:

E J Waterhouse
New Zealand Antarctic Programme
P O Box 14 091
Christchurch
4
MAR 11 '96  01:54PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.6

Attachment 1:  The Vanda Station Site, before and after the Station was removed.

Vanda Station on the shores of Lake Vanda before decommınissioning
activities began in 1993/94.

The Vanda Station site, December 1995, 10 months afte the completion of
decommissioning and remediation activities.

5
