ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                  XX ATCM/INF 44
                                                  April, 1996
                                                  Original: English

Environmental Health and Safety Managment System: Sanac
(Agenda Item: IX)
(Submitted by South Africa)
ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND SAFETY
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (EHSMS)

PROGRESS REPORT
(DOCUMENT 8)

of the on the 1995/1996 summer season
at the construction phase of the new SANAE IV facility
at Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land, Antarctica

COMPILED BY:

PETRUS GILDENHUYS

REVIEWED BY:

PAUL CLAASSEN
DIRK VAN SCHALKWYK

APRIL 1996

Copies of this document are available from:
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Private Bag X447
PRETORIA
0001
SOUTH AFRICA

Contact person: Petrus Gildenhuys
E-mail: ont_pg@ozone.pww.gov.za
TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                Page

1.  INTRODUCTION ............................................... 1

2.  AUDIT PROCESS ............................................... 2

    2.1  Audit Objectives ........................................ 2
    2.2  Audit Team ................................................ 2
    2.3  Audit Scope ................................................ 2
    2.4  Gathering of Audit Evidence ............................ 3
    2.5  Evaluating Audit Results ................................ 3

3.  AUDITING OF THE EHSMS ....................................... 3

    3.1  EHSMS Programme auditing ............................... 4
    3.2  Waste Management auditing .............................. 4
    3.3  Code of Conduct auditing ................................ 4

4.  FOLLOW-UP ACTION PLAN ....................................... 4

5.  CONCLUSION ..................................................... 5
SANAE IV                                 95/96 EHSMS PROGRESS REPORT

1.   INTRODUCTION

The audit on the 1995/1996 summer season construction activities is the latest
step in the process followed to take Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
aspects into account during the planning, construction and operation of the new
SANAE IV facility at Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land, Antarctica.

Events to date are as follows:

November 1991:        Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) of the proposed
                      new SANAE IV facility at Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud
                      Land, Antarctica completed and distributed for
                      comment.

May 1993:             Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
                      (CEE) of the proposed new SANAE IV facility at
                      Vesleskarvet, Queen Maud Land, Antarctica
                      completed and distributed for comment.

October 1993:         Final Report: Comments and responses on the Draft
                      CEE distributed.

December 1993:        Document 1: Code of Conduct produced. (First
                      document of the EHSMS)

December 1993 -
March 1994:           On site monitoring and auditing of construction
                      activities.

February 1994:        Additional Comments and Responses on the draft
                      CEE produced.

August 1994:          Document 2: Audit report on the 1993/1994 take-over
                      presented to management.

November 1994:        Document 3:
                      
                      Environmental workshop held with the 1994/1995
                      construction team.

December 1994 -
March 1995:           On site monitoring and auditing of construction
                      activities.

May 1995:             Document 4: 1993/1994 & 1994/1995 EHSMS
                      progress report produced.

June 1995:            Document 5: 1994/1995 Audit Report presented to
                      management.

August 1995:          SANAE IV Environmental Management Update
                      published.

September 1995:       IEE on the burning of untreated timber on the ice
                      shelf

1
SANAE IV                                  95/96 EHSMS PROGRESS REPORT

November 1995:     Document 6: Updated Code of Conduct produced.
                   Information session  held with the  1995/1996 
                   construction team.

November 1995 -   
March 1996:        On site monitoring and auditing of construction 
                   activities.

April 1996         Document 7: CEE follow up report on the 
                   implementation of the final CEE for SANAE IV.

April 1996:        Document 8: Environmental, Health and Safety 
                   Management progress report.

2.   AUDIT PROCESS

     The audit process as outlined in the final CEE was followed again.

2.1  Audit Objectives

     The overall purpose of the Environmental, Health and Safety Audit was to 
     ascertain whether appropriate care was exercised to prevent environmental 
     impacts during construction of the new base.

     The main objectives of the audit were to determine and verify whether all EHS 
     requirements, criteria and constraints (prescribed in the EHS Management 
     Plan) were in place, had been adhered to during the construction phase and 
     whether EHS control programmes (for example the Code of Conduct) had 
     been successful in preventing environmental impacts.

2.2  Audit Team

     The 1995/1996 audit team consisted of:

     Mr P Claassen                                 Deputy Director, Environmental Resource 
                                                  Economics

     Mr PE Gildenhuys                             Landscape  Architect,  Environmental 
                                                  Resource Economics (on site monitoring).

2.3  Audit Scope

     Monitoring was repeated during the November 1995 to March 1996 summer 
     season. This was the third consecutive audit on the construction activities 
     related to the construction of SANAE IV. The resulting Audit Report is currently 
     in the process of being completed.

     The audit process began with a monitoring of compliance to the Mission, Policy 
     and Code of Conduct. The environmental audit involved a critical investigation, 
     evaluation and verification of all management, technical and operational issues 
     and identified areas of concern. Recommendations for improvements in 
     performance will be made in order to assist management in meeting 
     requirements.

                                                                             2
SANAE IV                                  95/96 EHSMS PROGRESS REPORT

This monitoring exercise and audit was confined to the activities involved during 
the 1995/1996 summer season of the construction of SANAE IV. This included 
the ship off-loading area, the transport routes to Vesleskarvet, depots on the 
route and all activities which took place on the entire nunatak. Extra-ordinary 
construction related activities which occurred out of the given areas have also 
been included in the process. The off-loading of waste from the SA Agulhas in 
Cape Town harbour, and the disposal thereof in South Africa, was also 
monitored.

The present SANAE III facility was not included in the monitoring and audit 
process, nor were any logistic or maintenance activities relating to it.

2.4.  Gathering of Audit Evidence

The monitoring and audit team gathered evidence in four ways:

a)   The physical checking of pre-determined elements and activities.
b)   Feedback from personnel at other stations via radio or personal 
      interviews.
c)   Observation of activities outside of the laid-down audit parameters.
d)   Pertinent enquiry after hearsay or discussions of EHS incidents.

2.5.  Evaluating Audit Results

After individual controls had been tested and verified, the team met to integrate 
and evaluate the results and to assess the significance of each deficiency 
(finding) in the overall functioning of the control system. In evaluating the 
findings, which are of primary importance for future action, the team had to 
confirm that there was sufficient evidence to support the findings, and 
summarise related findings in a way that will most clearly communicate their 
significance.

A comprehensive audit report on the 1995/1996 take-over will be produced and 
presented to management in June 1996. This audit report will concentrate on 
factual and objective investigations, evaluations and observations of events. It 
is an internal management tool which is intended as an aid to the Department 
and other participants in the planning and management of activities in 
Antarctica and never as a basis to apportion blame or punishment.

The audit report will be checked for accuracy and objectiveness. All 
observations will be included as appendices to the main audit report.

3.    AUDITING OF THE EHSMS

A set of performance parameters, determined by the requirements of the 
preliminary EHSMS was audited, providing:
      a finding,
      a compliance rating,
      a motivation of the finding and rating, and
      a recommendation or possible remedy to satisfy each parameter.

 
3
SANAE IV                                  95/96 EHSMS PROGRESS REPORT

3.1     EHSMS Programme Auditing

EHS considerations, in the context of an holistic EHSMS, are not new to management any more. Through the tenacious following and upgrading of a well defined programme, a high standard of environmental performance could be met.

3.2     Waste Management Auditing

A revised waste management plan, including a waste classification system and waste handling procedure was drawn up to cover the 1995/1996 construction period. The waste management plan conforms to the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol).

Waste Management auditing revealed the waste management procedure to be simple, flexible and resilient to failures. For the operational life of the base however, a more refined waste management system would be necessary.

All waste was containerised and returned to South Africa except for untreated crate timber which was burned at SANAE III. Although the South African National Antarctic Programme (SANAP) prohibits the incineration of waste, burning of untreated timber crates is being allowed on the ice shelf only for the duration of the construction phase.

An increase of construction personnel during the past take over lead to an increase of pressure on the waste management system. In order to address the problem, dedicated waste personnel were appointed and specially designed equipment was used to mitigate small accidental oil spills.

Waste management auditing is proving to be an important management tool in assessing the SANAP's waste management strategies and efficiency.

3.3     Code of Conduct Auditing

The 1994/1995 Code of Conduct drawn up as part of the EHSMS was updated for the 1995/1996 summer season as the accent of activities changed. The Code of Conduct forms the basis for the manner in which all construction activities should be conducted in Antarctica. This was found to be a very important part of the EHSMS as it required the participation of all personnel working on the project.

4.      FOLLOW-UP ACTION PLAN

After receiving the 1995/1996 Audit Report the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEA&T) will develop an action plan to address all audit findings.

Copies of the 1995/1996 Audit Report will be supplied to the leaders of the various sections within the Antarctic Management Committee, and the relevant problems identified by the audit pointed out to them. They will then be required to propose remedial measures and implement these measures wherever possible.

The environmental education programme will also be improved, as a positive environmental attitude by all personnel is regarded as essential for successful

4
SANAE IV                                  95/96 EHSMS PROGRESS REPORT

Environmental, Health and Safety management.

5.    CONCLUSION

The EHSMS as conducted in Antarctica presently has proved to be a valuable 
instrument to reduce negative environmental impacts.

The eventual EHSMS covering the operational life of SANAE IV will draw 
extensively on the knowledge and experience acquired during auditing of the 
construction activities.

It is believed that the implementation of EHSMS's will hold particular benefits 
for all consultative parties with regard to the efficient management of 
environmental impacts within national programmes.

 
_______________________________________________________________
                                  5
of broken glass, wood fragments, nails,paint spills, cloth, scrap metal,
plastics, cigarette butts and so on.

All debris were collected in small buckets or heavy duty plastic bags for
transferral to 200 litre barrels which were then sealed for removal.

All waste produced by the volunteer camp was sorted out, properly
marked and removed every 4/5 days by the ships changing the volunteer
groups.

Totally at the end of the season 20 barrels of mixed waste collected by
volunteers and about 500 meters of fuel piping have been removed onboard
"Akademik Sergey Vavilov" chartered by the Marine Expeditions.

The educational program for the vulunteers included hikes to the Drake
Passage, lectures presented by the Project managers, slide/video shows,
discussions on the Antarctica geopolitics, visits to neighbouring stations.
The hikes out of Bellingshausen limits were accompanied by the Project
managers.

In our opinion the Project was successful in not only cleaning the
station areas but also in highlighting problems to both visitors and
Antarctic station staff. It demonstrated that even with limited equipment
and personnel a positive and lasting change can be brought to an area.

And in closing on behalf of Russian Antarctic Expedition I would like
to sincerely thank the Leaders and the personnel of the neigh bouring bases
Marsh, Artigas and Great Wall for their hospitality and valuable
assistance provided to the Joint Russian-Canadian Ecological Project.

 
                                                                               2
There is no text to extract from the image. The image appears to be a collection of four black and white illustrations or photographs, possibly depicting scenes of war or conflict, but it does not contain any text.
122395
