UTRECHT
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  XX ATCM/INF 105
                                  May 1996
                                  English

ANNEX ON ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY
CHAIRMAN'S FIFTH OFFERING
ASOC COMMENTARY

(Agenda item 6b)

(submitted by ASOC)
ASOC COMMENTARY

ON

CHAIRMAN'S FIFTH OFFERING

ANNEX ON ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

1.      ASOC is deeply concerned that three and a half years 
after the first liability discussions (XVII ATCM) and four and 
a half years after the signing of the Madrid Protocol, not only 
is the Liability regime mandated by the Protocol not completed, 
but no clear time horizon for its completion is yet evident.

2.      Further, even after the appearance of six offerings, 
representing a major effort by the Chairman, substantial areas 
of the putative annex remain almost entirely untouched, and many 
others remain deeply contentious. In this dismal picture we see:

        (i)     The extraordinary spectacle of some Parties arguing that 
the concept of damage, central to this instrument, should not 
apply to the full range of values supposedly protected by the 
parent Protocol;

        (ii)    Attempts to leave the determination of whether an impact 
is in fact damage (and thus incurs liability) to the state 
responsible for the impact;

        (iii)  Constant efforts to avoid the obligation to clean up 
environmental damage through qualifiers such as "feasibility", 
"proportionality" and "economic [reasonableness]";

        (iv)   Efforts to discourage response action in the face of 
damage to the Antarctic environment on the sole grounds that a 
particular operator is not a State agency. The consequence of 
this may be the environmentally ludicrous scenario of a tourist 
or private expedition vessel being effectively unable to respond 
to a real and present environmental situation without the prior 
authorisation of the state that caused it;

        (v)    Efforts to constrain the reach of these liability 
provisions that might effectively confine the Protocol to the 
continent of Antarctica, despite its promotion as applying to the 
entire Antarctic Treaty area.

3.      Parties at the forthcoming Liability meeting at XX ATCM 
need seriously to address themselves to a process that not only 
produces an Annex as a matter of urgency, but an Annex that is 
actually worth anything when it comes to protection of the 
Antarctic environment.

..../2
ARTICLE 1 or PREAMBLE

(Purpose)

4. The text here for both Alternative A and Alternative B and 
also Note (1) pertaining to it are identical to the Fourth 
Offering.

5. The relative claims of Article or Preamble here are unlikely 
to be resolved until there is some better idea of the final shape 
of the Annex. However, we reiterate the point made in our earlier 
Commentaries, that the focus should be a single annex addressing 
liability for environmental damage, which incorporates response 
action.

ARTICLE 2

(Scope)

6. The text presented here is an attempt to go beyond the 
Alternative A & Alternative B options for paragraph 1 in the 
Fourth Offering. As noted in the ASOC Commentary to the Fourth 
Offering, we believe it is important for the liability regime to 
apply to those activities which are not regulated by ICRW, CCAS 
or CCAMLR. To the extent that this position may be reflected in 
paragraph 2 of the present text, we believe it is an improvement 
and should be supported by Parties.

7. ASOC is seriously concerned that after five meetings of 
legal experts, definitions remain a deeply contentious area.

DAMAGE

8. The definition of damage is central to this Annex. Yet, as 
is clear from the square brackets in (1)(a), there is still not 
even agreement that the full range of values recognised by the 
Protocol (cf Article 3 Principles), such as "intrinsic" 
"wilderness" and "aesthetic", should be included.

9. But the real difficulties arise in relation to determining 
at what level, and by what process, an impact may be determined 
NOT to constitute damage (Subparagraphs (b) and (c) of the 
present text).

10. The stance taken in this Offering is to make only a general 
link to Annex I and Article 8 of the Protocol. But this does not 
in fact address the problem. The crux of the issue is precisely 
WHERE within Annex I it should be resolved.

..../3
11. ASOC asserts that escape from damage (and hence liability) must only be possible where the impacts have been genuinely identified as unavoidable in a properly scrutinised EIA. The only level of EIA which is reasonably transparent and subject to wide international scrutiny is the CEE.

12. We are concerned by the formulation in the Fourth Offering, where the appropriate level of decision could be interpreted as the "Preliminary Stage", and thus left to a single Party.

13. The expression "and judged acceptable" in (b) could still leave a single Party to be the judge of whether damage had occurred. For Parties who want to be the sole judge this surely just allows them to presume that application of Preliminary Stage or IEE stage processes is adequate.

14. The only 'teeth' offered are in subparagraph (c), but ASOC believes that if one surrenders prior international scrutiny (through the CEE process), action after the event by an international committee is unlikely to prove effective. At best this could provide merely a post hoc declaration to Parties that certain kinds of impact cannot be characterised in an IEE as acceptable (were the judgement to have been made at Preliminary Stage level, not even this would occur). Such a declaration could not (even in the politically improbable case that it occurred) affect liability once an event took place.

15. Subparagraph (d) appears to arise from one Party's wish to quarantine consequences geographically or temporally distant from the definition of damage. The case is a weak one at best. The critical issue is causality, not distance. Whereas it is evident that at some point demonstrating a causal link is likely to prove problematical, to formalise this statement of the obvious into a defence as in (d) seems unnecessary and certain to encourage its use. It should be deleted.

16. For these reasons, we see the present text as seriously flawed and environmentally unacceptable.

17. ASOC argues strongly for text here which specifically links absolution from "damage" to Article 3 of Annex I, as suggested by New Zealand and Sweden.

"IRREPARABLE DAMAGE"

18. A definition of irreparable damage is new to this Offering. Whilst such a definition may be useful, there are several problems with the present text:

(i) Problems consequential to its linkage with the definition of damage itself, already noted

(ii) Confounding of the concepts of response action and of remedial measure. The fact that end consequences of a particular impact may be irreparable does not necessarily mean all stages leading to it are also irreparable.     ..../4
(iii) No basis for adjudging what is "physically or technically feasible" or "economically unreasonable" is presently found in the Protocol. They offer broad escape clauses, and would simply invite the conclusion that a particular incident is irreparable.

OPERATOR

19. The definition seems reasonable.

REASONABLE

20. This definition would also seem reasonable.

RESPONSE ACTION

21. The definition here seems to undercut the need to include response action in the earlier definition of irreparable. Response action is generally seen as the action taken whilst the event in question is still underway. If this is the case, the irreparability (or not) of the impact will not yet be determined.

REMEDIAL MEASURES

22. Likewise, this definition appears reasonable.

ARTICLE 4
(Preparedness, Response Action and Remedial Measures)

23. A new, and welcome, concept of Preparedness has been added since the Fourth Offering.

24. Paragraphs (1) and (2) seem uncontentious, although one would want "response action" at (2) to be in accordance with best practice under the actual circumstances obtaining and not just "in accordance with its preparatory planning", however worthy such might be.

25. The position that whilst the responsible operator can unilaterally initiate response action, some prior discussion might be necessary before remedial measures commence is probably sensible enough. Since remedial measures may themselves require prior evaluation, and (ordinarily at least) are likely to be temporally distanced from the causal event, this is not a problematical constraint.

26. Whether the authorisation comes from the CEP itself, or from the ATCM, appears to depend upon the emerging practice of the CEP. Article 12 of the Protocol suggests either route could be sanctioned.

..../5
27.  However, when it comes to non state operators the present 
text follows a rather different path. Here, for BOTH response 
action and remedial measures, a non state actor must seek prior 
authorisation. This is not sensible if one sees the rationale for 
action as safeguarding the environment. Whilst authorisation for 
remedial action may be an issue, prior 
authorisation for response action is absurd. When one further 
notes that this authorisation must come from the state 
responsible for the environmental problem in the first place, the 
prospects for such authorisation are surely dim.

                                  ARTICLE 5

                                        (Liability)

28.  Alternative A offers a simple formulation. Aside from its 
concern with usage of the word "reasonable", ASOC believes this 
text, with the addition of paragraph (3) from Alternative B, is 
preferable.

                                  ARTICLE 5bis

                                (Irreparable damage)

29.  This is a new Article and useful in intent. A criticism is 
that again (paragraph (2)), damage to values is not yet firmly 
recognised as falling within the ambit of the Annex. Also, whilst 
some body has to do it, ASOC does not believe that the CEP is the 
appropriate body to elaborate guidelines in the context of 
setting FINANCIAL contributions (paragraph (3)).

                                  ARTICLE 6

                                     (Exemptions)

30.  Exemptions have been a key contentious issue, largely 
because of the insistence of some that any or all exemptions that 
can be found in the Protocol translate into exemption from 
liability too.

31.  The present text represents a slight advance over previous 
Offerings in that paragraph (1) at least circumscribes these a 
little.

32.  The four cases found here relate to three "cases of 
emergency" articles from Annexes (although not every one) and one 
concerning "discharge of oil" under MARPOL standards. ASOC does 
not accept that discharge of oil should be exempt from liability. 
What kind of liability regime is envisaged if even plainly 
obvious causes of environmental damage like oil discharge are 
being, a priori,  excluded?

..../6
33. Further, ASOC is concerned that a seemingly neutral term 
such as "cases of emergency" could be "creatively" interpreted 
if it offered exemption from liability.

34. The subsequent bases for exemptions from liability provided 
in (a) to (c) would be more reasonable if the Act of God clause 
at (a) was tight, if being party to an Act of War removed that 
clause, and if something more than unuttered national 
decision was involved in determining technical or financial 
feasibility.

ARTICLE 7

(Residual Liability of State Operators)

35. Residual liability is incurred through a State Party's 
failure to carry out its obligations under the Protocol 
(paragraph (2)). This is an improvement over the text in the 
Fourth Offering, where the adoption of "laws or regulations" and 
"administrative measures" were the test.

ARTICLE 8

(Compulsory Insurance or Other Financial Security)

36. The text is identical to that found in the Fourth Offering 
apart from the removal of square bracketed text in the 
penultimate sentence and the addition of a new final sentence 
which makes the costs of undertaking response action the basis 
for fixing the limits of insurance.

37. This Article still represents a selective focus on non state 
operators, and from an environmental security perspective it is 
difficult to see why state operators (who these days occur in a 
multiplicity of forms from Departments of Government to quasi 
commercial entities) should not be similarly bound to maintain 
insurance or "other financial security".

38. ASOC reiterates its belief that all who operate in 
Antarctica should be required to insure against all reasonable 
risks of causing damage.

ARTICLE 9

(Limits)

39. The two clauses here are substantially unchanged from the 
text suggested by China in the Fourth Offering.

..../7
ARTICLE 10

(Environmental Protection Fund)

40. Essentially unchanged from the text in the Fourth Offering,
apart from a consequential change to refer to Article 5bis at
paragraph (4)(a).

ARTICLE 11

(Claims Tribunals)

41. Identical with Fourth Offering text. ASOC has no
disagreement with the text as presently drafted.

ARTICLE 12

(Amendment or Modification)

42. Identical with previous Offerings, and existing Protocol
Annexes. Again, no disagreement with the text as presently
drafted.

April, 1996

Published by ASOC,
41 Holt Street                 424 C Street, N.E.
Surry Hills NSW 2010         Washington D.C. 20002
Australia                     USA
Telephone: 61 (2) 211 4066   Telephone: (202) 544-0236
Fax: 61 (2) 211 4123         Fax: (202) 544-8483
