ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




XX ATCM/INF 14
March, 1996
Original: English


COMPLIANCE WITH RECOMMENDATION XVIII-1 IN THE ROSS SEA
OBSERVATIONS BY NEW ZEALAND REPRESENTATIVES
ON BOARD TOUR SHIPS

(Agenda item 9)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
MAR 14 '96. 12:46PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                 P.2

New Zealand Antarctic Programme

Compliance with Recommendation XVIII-1 in the Ross Sea
Observations by New Zealand Representatives on Board Tour Ships

1.0 Tourism in the Ross Sea 1995/96

Four ships made six voyages to the Ross Sea region during the 1995/96 season. New 
Zealand placed representatives on all six voyages. The ships carri d a total of 806 
passengers and made landings at 14 different sites. The largest sh p the Marco Polo 
carried 381 passengers and the smallest, the Akademik Shokalski 38 passengers. 
The following table summaries the activity of all ships for the sea on.

| Ship                  | Passengers | Landing sites (Ross Se  region only)                                                                 |
|----------------------|------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Kapitan Khlebnikov   | 106        | Voyage 1: Ross Ice Shelf, Scot Base and 
                                  McMurdo Station, Cape Evans Cape Royds, 
                                  Canada Glacier. 
                                  Voyage 2: Possession Islands Ross Ice Shelf, 
                                  McMurdo Station, Cape Evans, Cape Royds, 
                                  Canada Glacier, Edisto Inlet 1st ice   |
|                      | 116        |                                                                                                      |
| Akademic Shokalski   | 38         | Voyage 1: Franklin Island, Ce pe Bird, Cape 
                                  Royds, Cape Evans, McMurdc Sound fast ice, 
                                  Cape Wheatstone, Possessio Islands, Scott 
                                  Island. 
                                  Voyage 2: Possession Islands, Cape Evans, Cape 
                                  Royds, McMurdo Station and Scott Base.   |
|                      | 39         |                                                                                                      |
| Bremen               | 126        | Cape Bird, Cape Royds, Cap Evans, Franklin 
                                  Island, Terra Nova Base                                          |
| Marco Polo           | 381        | Cape Evans                                                                                           |

2.0 Compliance with Recommendation XVIII-1

This section summarises comments made by representatives in their reports on tour 
ship activity in the Ross Sea between January and March 1996.

Generally representatives gave favourable reports on the tour c perators' staff 
experience and skills, improvements to safety procedures over previous seasons, 
provision of information, and cooperation with representatives. The compliance of 
tourists with visitor guidelines was reported as being consistentl good.

Specific comments under appropriate subject headings are given below:

Advance Notice requirements
All tour companies provided timely advance notification of their proposed activities 
in the Ross Sea region. New Zealand did not request additional i formation from any 
operator as a result of these notifications.

1
MAR 14 '96, 12:47PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.3

Environmental impact assessments
New Zealand received copies of EIAs prepared by Southern Heritage Expeditions
(Akademik Shokal?ski) and Shipping and General (UK) Ltd (Marco P?lo).

Permission for visits to historic huts and Scott Base
Permission to visit the Ross Sea Historic Huts was granted to all tour operators after
discussion with the Antarctic Heritage Trust. The Trust did express concern
regarding the large numbers of passengers proposed to visit the huts from the Marco
Polo. Consequently New Zealand requested that a number of additional procedures and
precautions be put in place by the operator to ensure that the visits complied with
the guidelines for visits to the huts. The operation took eight hours with only 40
passengers being ashore at any one time. They were well briefed and supervised upon
landing.
Permission was requested and granted to three of the four ships for visits to Scott
Base. (Due to the large number of passengers on the Marco Polo, New Zealand
passengers only were permitted to visit. This visit did not eventuate because of ice
conditions).

Locations of protected areas
One ship accidentally entered the SSSI around Cape Royds but moved when alerted to
this fact by the representative.

Equipment appropriate to Antarctic conditions
This season all operators but one (the Marco Polo) had adopted the practice of landing
survival equipment ashore on the first helicopter or zodiac as a safety precaution.
This was a noted improvement on the practices of previous seasons.

Maps and charts
Not all operators seemed aware of, or had obtained, all the maps and charts available
for the areas being visited

Passenger information and briefings
Passenger information and briefings were noted as generally very good. It was
suggested that when foreign crew are going ashore that they and all English speaking
translator are included in briefings, as possible environmental impacts vary at each
site.

Visits to historic sites
The procedures established for visits to the historic huts generally worked well.
Representatives noted that passengers wearing backpacks in the huts risked damaging
historic items and that there was continuing abrasion of wooden floorboards by
scoria brought in on boots.

Other comments/observations
•   A large amount of heavy, black smoke exhaust was noted from the Kapitan
Khlebnikov's funnel at times.
•   Wildlife impacts were observed during ship travel in the pack ice. It was
suggested that courses be adjusted to avoid concentrations of seals and penguins.
•   A passenger on the Kapitan Khlebnikov had planned to fly a parapente during a
number of landings, including in the Taylor Valley. This was thwarted by wind
conditions, however it does raise possible issues of safety, conflicts with the
wilderness experiences of other passengers and environmental impacts.

2
. . MAR 14 '96, 12:47PM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.4

3.0  Outstanding Key Issue

This season's cruises saw the continuing development of a pattern of helicopter 
landings in the Taylor Valley. The Kapitan Khlebnikov's helicopter on both visits 
favoured a site near the Canada Glacier which provides level access, a small lake, a 
mummified seal and good views. The site is about 700 metres from the SSSI, contains 
areas of moss beds and is outside those areas suggested as suitable landing sites by the 
New Zealand and United States Antarctic programmes during the 1994/95 season. 
The area was flagged by expedition staff and passengers guided away from the moss 
beds.

If this is to become the major site visited in the Dry Valleys, confirmation is needed 
that it is not in conflict with scientific interests. A site plan should be developed 
which identifies sensitive areas and sets in motion a programme to monitor impacts.

New Zealand considers that these helicopters visits raise a number of issues which 
need to be considered in due course.

For further information contact:

New Zealand Antarctic Programme
PO Box 14-091
Christchurch

 
                                                  3
