ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                            ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 52
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English

_____________________________________________________

REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN)

(Agenda Item 5b)

(Submitted by IUCN)

_____________________________________________________
World Headquarters

Rue Mauverney 28
CH-1196 Gland
Switzerland

Tel.: ++ 4122-999 00 01
Fax.: ++ 4122-999 00 02
E-mail: mail@hq.iucn.ch
Telex:  419624 iucn ch

                        IUCN
             The World Conservation Union

REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Agenda Item 5 (b)

April 1996

 
Printed on Chlorine-free pap
REPORT OF THE WORLD CONSERVATION UNION (IUCN)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

April 1996

IUCN, The World Conservation Union, is a unique partnership of States, government agencies and non-governmental organisations. Founded in 1948, it now has over 800 members, including 160 state and government agency members, from some 130 countries.

The Union's mission is:
● "to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable."

IUCN provides a "neutral forum" for the discussion of issues by bringing both GOs and NGOs to the table to discuss issues. The elements of IUCN's policy and programme are agreed by the triennial General Assembly' of members and their execution is coordinated by an international Secretariat. IUCN's six Commissions, bodies of volunteer experts from all over the world, make a major contribution to the development and execution of the programme. With its long experience and worldwide networks of experts, IUCN is in a unique position to offer advise to the Antarctic Treaty Parties on such issues as protected area management, environmental monitoring, environmental legislation, and liability for environmental damage. Two of the IUCN Commissions, those on National Parks and Protected Areas and on Environmental Law, are currently making significant contributions to IUCN's Antarctic programme.

● IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues for over 35 years. In 1991, six months before the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection was signed in Madrid, it published the Strategy for Antarctic Conservation. Many elements of this Strategy were incorporated in the Protocol and its annexes.

In 1992, two workshops were held in partnership with SCAR's Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC), on conservation management and research in the sub-Antarctic islands, and on protected area policy for Antarctica.

In 1993 a workshop on Antarctic environmental education and training was held, again in partnership with GOSEAC. The Proceedings of all these workshops have now been published and are available. IUCN is now planning a fourth technical workshop to be held in Washington DC in September 1996, entitled "Cumulative Environmental Impact in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management." The workshop will build on the results from the SCAR/COMNAP workshops on environmental monitoring, focusing on aspects relevant to cumulative impacts, expanding this to wider discussion on cumulative environmental impacts in Antarctica, including the identification of implications for management of activities, for monitoring and assessment procedures. The outcome should be useful in a
practical way to the ATS in general, specifically to national, non-governmental and commercial operators and to the Antarctic scientific community.

Following the adoption of Recommendations on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and on sub-Antarctic Islands, and the endorsement of an Antarctic programme by the most recent IUCN General Assembly, held at Buenos Aires in January 1994, an Antarctic Advisory Committee (AAC) was established to provide guidance on the programme and to contribute to its implementation.

The AAC is made up of 11 members, appointed in their personal capacities by IUCN'S Director-General, for their expertise in matters relating to the conservation of Antarctica, the sub-Antarctic Islands and the Southern Ocean. AAC members have been chosen from a diverse professional background: academia, governmental conservation agencies, non-governmental organizations and private consultancies. The AAC is chaired by Ms. Beth Marks, based in the United States, with the support of vice-chairs Mr. Mike Prebble (New Zealand) and Mr. John Cooper (South Africa).

In line with the priorities agreed by its 1994 General Assembly, IUCN would like to draw particular attention to the following matters to be considered by the 20th ATCM in Utrecht, The Netherlands, 29 April-10 May 1996:

1.    Ratification and implementation of the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection:

IUCN considers ratification to be a matter of highest urgency, to ensure the entry into force of the Protocol. By April 1996, only four nations out of 26 Consultative Parties remained to ratify. IUCN trusts that all will accomplish this before the end of 1996. In addition, whereas several Consultative Parties have passed the necessary domestic legislation to comply with the Protocol and ensure its implementation for their nationals, many others have not yet done so. This is necessary for the comprehensive implementation of all clauses of the Protocol, and is therefore also a matter of urgency. Once the Protocol is ratified, IUCN considers that the Protocol's Committee on Environmental Protection should be constituted as soon as possible thereafter.

2.    Progress towards completion of a Liability Annex to the Protocol:

This Annex will be an essential part of the Protocol, ensuring that clear legally binding obligations on liability are elaborated for Parties conducting activities in the Antarctic. Negotiations for the completion of this Annex need to be pursued by the Parties with considerably more urgency. IUCN's Commission on Environmental Law has developed a paper "Financial Preparedness and the Joint Compensation Fund in the Annex on Environmental Liability to the Madrid Protocol," which was distributed at the last meeting of the Working Group of Legal Experts in November 1995, and is being distributed at this meeting. Three major points were highlighted in this paper:

(1) there is a need for the Annex to elaborate a strong financial preparedness regime for all Parties operating in the Antarctic;

2
(2) an effective joint compensation fund should be established which would be triggered if (a) liable entities are unable to discharge their obligations or (b) the restoration costs exceed any limitation on liability; and

(3) it is important for the Parties to consider how non-Party operators should be treated.

The Commission on Environmental Law is willing to contribute to the further development of the Annex as best it can, but notes that until now no access to the meetings of the Working Group of Legal Experts has been granted to NGOs. We welcome more open discussion, including outside experts being admitted to the meetings. We also recommend that the negotiations should include consideration of lessons learnt from environmental management elsewhere in the world. IUCN has wide experience in this field.

3. Establishment of a Treaty Secretariat:

A small permanent Secretariat for the Antarctic Treaty is essential for the efficient operation of the mechanisms established under the Protocol, in particular the environmental impact assessment procedures and the Protocol's Committee on Environmental Protection. In addition, IUCN believes that many aspects of the management of Antarctica, including the management of scientific research, of its associated logistics, and of tourism, would benefit from a more integrated, international approach. Establishing a permanent Treaty Secretariat to provide the necessary administrative support would greatly facilitate the development of a more integrated approach to these uses of Antarctica. IUCN considers that the Secretariat should be established without further delay.

4. Protected areas:

IUCN encourages Parties to extend and make the Protected Area system more comprehensive.  The SCAR/IUCN Protected Areas Workshop produced valuable recommendations which were adopted by the Treaty. SCAR also endorsed and the Treaty subsequently adopted the ecosystem matrix that was revised at that workshop. This matrix highlights representative areas in need of protection, and we encourage Parties to use this matrix as a guide when seeking to designate additional areas for protection.  IUCN is tabling an Information paper, "Environmental Protection of the Islands of the Southern Ocean: Towards a Full Coverage of Management Plans," which encourages consistent environmental protection be accorded the southern cold-temperate and sub-Antarctic islands.

5. Environmental education and training:

At XIX ATCM, IUCN offered to compile a draft directory of current Antarctic environmental education and training courses, as recommended by the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Environmental Education and Training. A draft inventory of existing environmental education and training is attached to the Information paper, "Antarctic Environmental Education and Training: Draft Inventory of Existing Arrangements." We encourage Parties to review this directory and send updates to the person listed in the Appendix.

3
6. Overlaps between the ATS and other international agreements:

IUCN was pleased to see the issue of Antarctic Treaty System overlaps with other regimes 
raised by Chile at ATCM XIX in Seoul. We believe the time has come to move beyond 
merely noting the current situation and actually commence dealing with it. The number of 
international treaties, conventions and agreements has increased markedly in recent years 
and there is now some need to consider the consistency or otherwise of rights, obligations 
and measures created by any given agreement, relative to others. This needs to be 
examined not only in a legal sense but also in a broader moral sense. One should not 
exaggerate the likely implications of such an investigation: the Antarctic Treaty System sets 
very high standards for environmental management; thus it is likely its provisions will be 
as good as, if not superior to, the requirements established by other agreements. Overlap 
may produce mutual reinforcement, or have no effect, but if there are dysfunctional 
overlaps, then harmonisation of conflict resolution should be sought. In any case, it is best 
tested by direct comparison, so that any benefits or difficulties can be assessed.

To enhance positive overlaps or relationships, the ATS needs to assess whether stronger ties 
should be sought with other agreements. For example, it might be beneficial for the ATS 
to send formal representation to other fora as a way of putting forward the interests of the 
conservation of an area of the planet which is not otherwise represented.

It is therefore recommended that the XX ATCM appoints a Working Group to:

(a) compile an inventory of international treaties, conventions and agreements of direct 
    relevance to Antarctic Treaty operations;
(b) conduct an initial analysis of overlap situations, sufficient to indicate where such 
    agreements reinforce Antarctic Treaty provisions or create potential difficulties;
(c) make recommendations for any action which ATCPs should collectively or individually 
    undertake, including the utility of seeking formal ATS representation at other international 
    fora; and 
(d) report its conclusions in a preliminary report to be tabled at the ATCM in 1997.

CONCLUSION

IUCN continues to place a high priority on helping the Antarctic Treaty System to maintain 
and enhance its effectiveness in conserving and protecting the Antarctic region. As always, 
IUCN puts its resources and expertise at the service of the ATCM towards this end.

ANNEXES

A. Conservation in the Antarctic--Programme 1994 - 1996
B. IUCN Resolution--Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
C. IUCN Resolution--Improved Protection for Wildlife in Subantarctic Island 
    Ecosystems

1. From 1996, the IUCN General Assembly will be renamed the IUCN World 
Conservation Congress.

    4
Conservation in the Antarctic

The Programme of IUCN - The World Conservation Union for 1994-1996

Background

1. IUCN has been concerned with Antarctic conservation issues since 1960 when, at the 7th Session of the General Assembly held in Warsaw, members urged that the then proposed Antarctic Treaty should set aside inviolable areas for the conservation of the unique polar fauna and its natural environment. A number of issues were raised at subsequent Sessions of the General Assembly, including:

(a) the need for standard regulations for the protection of Antarctic flora and fauna and their habitats;

(b) the need to conserve krill and other marine resources;

(c) the need for some general designation to be given to Antarctica connoting its special conservation values;

(d) the need for comprehensive attention to problems of environmental management;

(e) the need for a comprehensive strategy for Antarctic conservation.

2. The 17th Session of the IUCN General Assembly, held in San José, Costa Rica, in 1988, adopted Recommendation 17.52, which emphasized:

(a) the need for an Antarctic Conservation Strategy;

(b) the importance of environmental impact assessment there;

(c) the need for a coherent system of protected areas and other conservation measures in the region;

(d) the need for the establishment of an Antarctic database;

(e) the importance of rigorous practices to eliminate waste discharges;

(f) the importance of action to address the increasing problems posed by Antarctic tourism;

(g) the need for stronger action to conserve the marine fauna and flora of the Antarctic;

(h) the case for more precise measures to give effect to the conservation of Antarctic seals;

(i) the need for action to prevent mineral related activities in the Antarctic that could impose severe damage on its environment.

3. The IUCN Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA) has for many years regarded Antarctica, with the sub-Antarctic islands and New Zealand, as one of the biogeographical realms reflected in the structure of the Commission, and has been concerned for the adequacy of the protected area network, and for conservation in the sub-Antarctic islands. A comprehensive directory of protected areas in the circum-Antarctic islands was published by IUCN in 1985. This remains the most extensive analysis of the status of protection of sub-Antarctic island wildlife and habitats. The 29th Working Session of CNPPA, held at Wairakei, New Zealand, in August 1987 produced a publication entitled Conserving the Natural Heritage of the Antarctic Realm.

4. In 1989, the Director General established a working group including representation from the Scientific Committee 
2
on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and from NGOs such as the World Wide Fund For Nature (WWF) and the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC) to respond to the General Assembly's call for the preparation of a strategy for Antarctic conservation. The resulting document was discussed at a workshop held during the 18th Session of the General Assembly in Perth, Australia at which further Recommendations were adopted, especially calling for the exclusion of mineral exploration and exploitation from the Antarctic regions. The Union's Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991, after revision in the light of the discussions held at the General Assembly. This is the most comprehensive exposition available of Antarctic conservation problems and requirements. It has been widely distributed, in all three IUCN official languages, and extremely well received, including by the Antarctic Treaty Governments.

5. Since 1990, IUCN has maintained a small Secretariat programme on Antarctic conservation. It was originally established under the personal leadership of the Director General, himself an Antarctic biologist. The initial task was the completion of the Strategy for Antarctic Conservation, but following its publication and the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, work has focused on specific aspects, notably:

    (a) discussion of protected areas policy and practice in Antarctica;

    (b) discussion of conservation management and research priorities in the circum-Antarctic islands;

    (c) discussion of the environmental implications of Antarctic tourism;

    (d) discussion of the needs for information in order to educate and train those working in or visiting Antarctica in practices compatible with good Antarctic conservation.

Output in 1990-1993

6. The Strategy for Antarctic Conservation was published in 1991. In that year IUCN's efforts were concentrated on contributing to the negotiations of the Environment Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol). Subsequently, IUCN promoted the Strategy recommendations through regular attendance at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs), and recently at the Scientific Committee under the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

7. In 1992, two workshops were held:

    (a) on conservation management and research in the sub-Antarctic islands, at Paimpont in France;

    (b) on protected areas in, and protected area policy for Antarctica, held in Cambridge, United Kingdom.

8. In 1993, a workshop on environmental education and training in the Antarctic region was held in Gorizia, Italy.

9. All these workshops were held in partnership with the SCAR Group of Specialists on Antarctic Environment and Conservation. All are leading to substantial publications. More than 20 recommendations from the Cambridge Workshop were presented to the XVII ATCM in 1992, and most were adopted.

The 1994-1996 Programme

10. It is proposed that in 1994-1996, IUCN's contribution to Antarctic conservation reflect IUCN's greatest area of expertise, namely:

    (1) Protected Areas;

    (2) Environmental liability issues (through the Commission on Environmental Law); and

3
(3) Marine ecosystem management with suitable contributions to the work of the commission on the Convention on 
the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

Priorities

11. The activities below will be undertaken in consultation with IUCN members and Antarctica Treaty Parties. An 
appropriate consultative mechanism will be developed to ensure this occurs.

12. The priorities for 1994-1996 are proposed as:

Priority 1

(i) to work for the establishment and management of Antarctic specially protected or managed areas for consideration 
by Antarctic Treaty meetings;

(ii) to work on the development of an annex to the Antarctic Environmental Protocol on Liability for Environmental 
Damage.

Priority 2

(iii) to work on the ecosystem management of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, in consultation with IUCN members 
and the Parties to the Convention on Antarctic Marine Living Resources;

(iv) to hold a workshop on the impact and management of human presence in Antarctica;

(v) in consultation with Treaty Parties and IUCN members to work on the elaboration of detailed proposals for the 
implementation of the Antarctic Environmental Protocol;

(vi) to produce an integrated strategy for conservation in the Sub-Antarctic islands, and assistance with management 
plans for individual islands or groups of islands;

(vii) to participate in Antarctic Treaty consultative meetings, where such participation will contribute to achieving the 
above objectives.

Guidance, Personnel and Administration

13. IUCN's programme in Antarctica was carried out in the past triennium on a part time basis by the Vice-Chair 
for the Antarctic Treaty of CNPPA, under contract to IUCN, by agreement with the Department of Conservation 
in New Zealand. Future arrangements are subject to resources availability and will be determined through the 
consultative mechanisms outlined in point 15 below.

14. Responsibility for this programme at IUCN Headquarters was transferred in October 1993 to the Protected Areas 
Programme, since the greater part of the Union's work in the region has been in that category of activity. 
However, links will need to be maintained with the Marine Programme, Species Conservation Programme, 
Conservation Strategies Programme, Environmental Assessment Service and several other elements.

15. The representation of IUCN at Antarctic Treaty, CCAMLR and SCAR meetings has fallen largely to the special 
consultant, but has also involved the Director General and the Legal Adviser to the Council. A review of this 
representation will be undertaken following the 19th Session of the General Assembly.

16. Some further machinery is needed for the guidance of this programme. At the time when the IUCN Strategy for 
Antarctic Conservation was in preparation, an ad hoc group established to advise the Council and the Director

4
General provided valuable overall guidance. It is proposed that such machinery be re-established in the shape of 
an IUCN Advisory Committee on Antarctic Conservation. The group would be established by the Director 
General in consultation with IUCN members, and the special meeting on the occasion of the 19th Session of the 
General Assembly will permit such consultation. The Committee will need to balance governmental and non-
governmental expertise, and reflect the range of views within IUCN, although members will serve in a personal 
capacity.

Budget

17. Current resources for the Antarctic Programme will be exhausted by the end of 1993 with the exception of funding 
    available for a workshop on the Impacts of Human Presence in Antarctica.

18. The implementation of this Programme is subject to the location of available resources.

                                                                                                                          5
19.96 Antarctica and the Southern 
Ocean

RECALLING Recommendations 18.75, 17.52 and 17.53 
and Resolutions 15.20, 16.8, 18.9 and 18.74 of the 15th, 
16th, 17th and 18th Sessions of the General Assembly;

RECOGNIZING the critical role played by Antarctica 
in global climate and oceanic circulation, the import-
ance of the Antarctic environment and its dependent 
and associated ecosystems, its vital role in the world's 
biophysical and biochemical systems, its great value as 
the world's largest remaining wilderness area, its 
intrinsic and inspirational values, and its importance 
for monitoring and other research directed to under-
standing the natural environment and global processes, 
including those modified by human activity;

NOTING that world opinion has now turned firmly 
against the exploitation of minerals in Antarctica and 
expects impeccable standards of environmental perfor-
mance by all who operate there;

WELCOMING the Protocol on Environmental Protec-
tion to the Antarctic Treaty, adopted by the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties in Madrid, Spain, in October 1991, which 
commits the Parties to the comprehensive protection of 
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associ-
ated ecosystems, designates Antarctica as a nature 
reserve devoted to peace and science and, inter alia, 
prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources 
other than scientific research;

APPRECIATING that the Governments of Argentina, 
Spain, France, Peru, Ecuador and Norway have now 
ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection;

AWARE that the Subantarctic Islands support distinc-
tive ecosystems and many endemic species, that know-
ledge of these islands and their ecosystems remains 
inadequate and that it is important that conservation 
measures in these island groups are strengthened;

EMPHASIZING the importance of the conservation of 
the ecosystems of the circum-Antarctic seas, and the 
need to ensure that any use of their living resources is 
sustainable;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
who have not already done so to ratify the Protocol 
on Environmental Protection as a matter of 
urgency, so ensuring its early entry into force;

2. URGES Parties to the Protocol:

       (a) to revise their domestic legislation and proce-
           dures promptly to comply with the Protocol;

       (b) to negotiate the Annex on liability for damage 
           mandated by the Protocol as soon as practicable 
           to ensure that clear, legally binding obligations 
           are imposed on Parties who administer or 
           conduct activities in the Antarctic;

3. CALLS UPON all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty 
and all organizations active in Antarctica to pay 
particular attention to:

       (a) minimizing environmental impact;

       (b) establishing and safeguarding a comprehens-
           ive network of protected areas, including 
           adequate representation of the principal habi-
           tats and the biological diversity of the Antarctic 
           region;

       (c) preventing the deposition of wastes and facili-
           tating the removal of wastes which have 
           already been deposited;

       (d) establishing and enforcing stringent regula-
           tions governing the conduct of all persons visit-
           ing Antarctica, whether scientists, logistic and 
           other support personnel or tourists;

       (e) otherwise according priority to conservation in 
           Antarctica as a whole;

4. ENCOURAGES Treaty Parties to establish the 
Committee for Environmental Protection on an 
interim basis promptly so that it may function prior 
to the entry into force of the Protocol;

5. CALLS for a permanent ban on all minerals activity 
in Antarctica throughout the area south of 60 
degrees South latitude;

6. ENCOURAGES Treaty Parties to establish a Secre-
tariat to ensure inter alia an effective implementa-
tion of the Antarctic Treaty including the Protocol;

7. CALLS ON Parties to the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
to take all steps necessary to conserve the marine 
ecosystems of the Southern Ocean;

8. ENCOURAGES Parties to the Protocol to build 
upon the inspection provisions in the Antarctic 
Treaty and Protocol and to develop and implement 
an environmental inspection system to assist in the 
effective protection of the Antarctic environment;

9. REQUESTS the Director General, within available 
resources:

       (a) in consultation with Antarctic Treaty Parties 
           and IUCN members, Commissions and Coun-
           cil, to work for:

           (i) the establishment and management of 
               Antarctic specially protected or managed 
               areas;

           (ii) the development of an Annex to the Ant-
                arctic Protocol on liability for environ-
                mental damage;
19.95  Improved Protection for 
Wildlife in Subantarctic 
Island Ecosystems

AWARE of the inadequate knowledge of subantarctic 
island ecosystems and the need to improve protection 
of their biodiversity and ensure their full conservation;

AWARE also of the ongoing review by IUCN of the 
status of the Subantarctic Islands in relation to their 
possible World Heritage status;

NOTING that the conduct of activities such as tourism 
constitutes a danger to the maintenance of the equili-
brium of such ecosystems, which are among the 
world's most fragile;

The General Assembly of IUCN - The World Conser-
vation Union, at its 19th Session in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, 17-26 January 1994:

1. STRONGLY RECOMMENDS that the international 
specialized agencies, as well as all States and Gov-
ernments exercising responsibilities and super-
vision over these areas, should fully protect the 
priceless environmental asset constituted by the 
species these islands contain, many of which are 
threatened with extinction;

2. CALLS UPON the governments concerned to 
adopt, as rapidly as possible, all necessary 
measures to ensure the conservation of these 
ecosystems;

3. REQUESTS the Director General, within available 
resources and in consultation with IUCN members, 
Commissions, relevant governments and NGOs, to 
produce an integrated strategy for conservation in 
the Subantarctic Islands and to offer assistance with 
management plans for individual islands or 
groups.
