ANTARCTIC TREATY                
TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA
TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 121
May 1996
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION

(Agenda item 3)

(Submitted by IOC)
Statement by the Representative
of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission

The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) was founded in 1960 within 
UNESCO. The Commission has functional autonomy within UNESCO and serves the members of the 
UN family in their implementation of joint programmes relating to ocean research and observations. 
From the Commission's 125 Member States, two third are developing countries.

The Commission implements programmes within three subject areas: Marine Sciences; Ocean 
Services; and Training, Education and Mutual Assistance/Capacity Building (TEMA/CB).

In 1992, the UNCED called on the IOC to take a lead in establishing the Global Ocean 
Observing System (GOOS).

GOOS aims to meet the needs (i) for forecasting climate variability and change; (ii) for 
assessing the state of health of the marine environment and its resources, including the coastal zone; 
and (iii) for supporting an improved decision-making and management processes which take into 
account potential natural and man-made changes in the environment and their effects on human health 
and resources.

Many IOC programmes are carried out through a number of regional subsidiary bodies of 
intergovernmental status covering mainly developing ocean regions.

In 1970, the IOC established an Intergovernmental Committee for the Southern Ocean 
(IOCSOC) in order to promote and co-ordinate oceanographic research and observations in the 
Southern Ocean.

In 1993, a comprehensive report called "The Southern Ocean: A review of Activities in Relation 
to IOC Programmes" was issued and was made available to ATCM.

The efforts of the Commission during the last years have been concentrated on

(i) strengthening international research programmes in co-operation with other international 
        organizations (ICSU/SCOR/SCAR, WMO, UNEP) dealing with

        (a)     study of the role of the ocean in global climate variability and change within the 
                World Climate Research Programme, sponsored presently by WMO, IOC, ICSU and 
                UNEP;

        (b)     investigation of marine pollution through the joint IOC-UNEP-IMO-IAEA Programme 
                on Global Investigation of Pollution in the Marine Environment (GIPME): study of the 
                role of the ocean in global CO_(2) balance by co-operating with SCOR in the IGBP 
                Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) as well as making overview evaluations; 
                ocean ecosystem dynamics study through OSLR-HAB and the international GLOBEC 
                (Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics) programme jointly sponsored by SCOR, IOC and 
                ICES; and

(ii) expansion and improvement of ocean observations and oceanographic data exchange 
     through the development of Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) in co-operation with 
     WMO, UNEP and ICSU.
In 1995, the IOC Assembly decided to hold a Southern Ocean Forum in conjunction with the 
6th session of the IOC Committee for the Southern Ocean and accepted the invitation of the Director 
of the Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) to have the first session of the 
Forum and the 6th session of the Committee in Bremerhaven, Germany, from 9 to 13 September 1996.

Discussions will take place in the framework of 6 sessions covering the following topics:

Session I:    The role of the Southern Ocean in the Climate System and in the Global Change.

Session II:   Southern Ocean and Marine Living Resources Research.

Session III:  Marine Pollution Research and Monitoring in the Southern Ocean.

Session IV:   The Southern Ocean Component of the Global Ocean Observing System including 
              data/information management.

Session V:    Framework for International Co-operation in the Southern Ocean: international treaties, 
              conventions, declarations and organizations.

Session VI:   Overall Synthesis of the State of Scientific Knowledge, Gaps and Assessments of 
              Needs for Further Oceanographic Research and Related Services to Address Major 
              Issues Facing Society in the Southern Ocean.

After each session drafting groups will sum up conclusions and make proposals for future 
activities.

Speakers will be eminent scientists as well as representatives of relevant international 
organizations and programmes. A total of 40 to 60 participants is expected.

The Forum will provide an opportunity to scientists and operators working either under the UN 
system, the Antarctic Treaty system or the International Council of Scientific Unions to share common 
views and formulate joint actions for the benefit of all Member States in investigation and exploration 
of this unique continent named Antarctica.

The proposals of the Forum will be subsequently considered by the 6th session of the IOC 
Committee for SOC with a view of formulating recommendations on the future IOC Activities in the 
Southern Ocean for submission to the IOC Executive Council in September-October 1996.
