ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 1
                                  March, 1996
                                  Original: English

NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC TOURISM POLICY

(Agenda item 9)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC TOURISM POLICY: FOR MANAGEMENT OF TOURIST 
AND NON GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES

1      Introduction

1.1    Tourist Activity in Antarctica

Tourism has become an integral part of human activity in Antarctica and, apart from fishing, is now the 
principal commercial enterprise in the Antarctic Treaty area. Tourist activities have grown rapidly in 
recent years. In the 1995-96 austral summer approximately 9,000 tourists visited Antarctica, which is 
double the number of visitors in the 1990-91 season. More tourists now visit the Antarctic than 
scientists and their support staff.

Most tourist activity occurs in the Antarctic Peninsula, but in 1995-96 some 800 tourists visited the 
Ross Sea region, which has become the second most popular tourist area on the continent.

The majority of Antarctic visitors come by sea (about 95% of the total) aboard commercial cruise ships. 
Traditionally these have been purpose-built vessels carrying 100-150 passengers but recently they have 
been joined by larger (400+ passengers) cruise liners and smaller vessels including Russian icebreakers 
converted for tourist charter. Increasing numbers of private yachts are also visiting the region.

The Ross Sea region is normally accessed from New Zealand and Australian ports and many tours visit 
the Subantarctic islands to break the week-long voyage to the ice.

The most popular tourist attractions are seal and penguin colonies, historic sites, scientific stations and 
areas of spectacular scenery. In the Ross Sea region the most frequently visited sites are on Ross Island, 
including the historic huts at Cape Evans, Cape Royds and Hut Point, and the McMurdo and Scott Base 
stations. Also popular are Cape Hallett and Cape Adare on the western coast of the Ross Sea, which are 
historically important areas and the sites of nesting Adelie penguins.

Tourist landings are normally made by small inflatable zodiac craft. Some vessels are equipped with 
helicopters and provide overflights of remote areas such as the Dry Valleys.

Tourist activity in Antarctica is not only increasing, it is diversifying. While most tourists and visitors 
arrive aboard ships for sight-seeing, increasing numbers are seeking wilderness adventure experiences 
such as mountaineering, skiing, motorised oversnow travel, paragliding and scuba-diving. A small 
number of visitors come by air - particularly from Southern Chile to an airstrip on the South Shetland Is. 
Other private expeditions fly visitors from South America further inland to the blue ice runway at the 
Patriot Hills. There are no airborne tourist landings in the Ross Sea region apart from short helicopter 
excursions. Overflights by commercial jet aircraft from New Zealand and Australia were popular in the 
mid-1970s, but ceased in 1979 after the Mt Erebus accident. Australian based overflights to the 
continent recommenced in 1995-96.
2

Antarctic tourism is now receiving attention from Treaty Parties for its environmental management.
Apart from the disruption and environmental damage accompanying isolated incidents such as the 1979
Mt Erebus aircrash and the 1989 sinking of the "Bahia Paraiso", the detrimental impact of tourist
operations on the Antarctic environment have been minor. Most tours are well organised, their activities
are closely supervised and the great majority of tourists have behaved with care, respect and
understanding for wildlife and the environment. However, the recent substantial and sustained growth in
the numbers of tourists, and the expansion and diversification of activities, give rise to concerns over the
potential for increased and cumulative environmental impact. At some scientific stations on the
Antarctic Peninsula limits have been placed on the number of visitors to reduce congestion and
disruption of scientific programmes. Similar limitations may be required at other popular sites such as
penguin and seal colonies and the historic huts where some degree of overcrowding is occurring. In the
Antarctic Peninsula area there is growing pressure to provide some onshore tourist facilities such as
overnight accomodation, airstrips and wharves.

If tourism in the Ross Sea region is to grow and prosper without detrimental impact on the wildlife and
the environment, or to disrupt scientific research, there must be appropriate management of activities
within a legislative framework to promote the necessary safeguards and enhance responsible tourist
operations.

This document is intended to specify the legal requirements, policies and operational procedures applied
by New Zealand for the management of Antarctic tourism.

1.2     The legal basis for managing tourism

The legal basis for managing the environmental impacts of all human activity in the Antarctic, including
tourism, is the 1991 Madrid Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. New Zealand ratified the Protocol in 1994
through the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act. This Act, which applies particularly to NZ
citizens and to the Ross Dependency, provides for the regulation of human activities and specifies
obligations applying to environmental impact assessment, flora and fauna protection, waste
management, prevention of marine pollution, protected area management, and liability for
environmental damage.

1.3     New Zealand's strategic objectives for Antarctica

New Zealand's strategic objectives for Antarctica state:

New Zealand's vision for Antarctica is the conservation of the intrinsic values of the continent and
the Southern Ocean for the benefit of the world community and for present and future generations
of New Zealanders, reflected in active and responsible stewardship that promotes New Zealand's
interests in:

*   maintaining its long term interest in, and commitment to, the Ross Dependency;
*   national security, through keeping Antarctica as a neutral and non-aligned neighbour;
*   economic well being, through enhancing New Zealand's economic opportunities within the 
parameters of the Antarctic Treaty System;
*   international stability, by enhancing New Zealand's leadership in the governance of 
Antarctica; and
*   advancing New Zealand's values and ideology by promoting Antarctica as a natural reserve 
devoted to peace and science.

1.4     Governance of Antarctica

The legal obligations and procedures applying to tourist activities are detailed below. To place these 
obligations and procedures in context it is also useful to understand the basis of:
*   how Antarctica is governed;
*   New Zealand's Antarctic administrative and management structure; and
*   New Zealand's research activities in Antarctica

For further information on the governance of Antarctica, New Zealand's Antarctic structure and 
research activities see Appendix 1.

There are two principal agencies in New Zealand involved in the management of Antarctic tourism. The 
Antarctic Policy Unit (APU) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) advises the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade on compliance with the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) 
Act. The New Zealand Antarctic Programme (NZAP), a division of MFAT, handles the practical 
procedures associated with visits to the Ross Dependency. From 1 July 1996 a New Zealand Antarctic 
Institute (NZAI) is to be established incorporating the operational functions of NZAP with wider 
science, strategy and planning responsibilities. Additionally the Department of Conservation (DoC) 
controls visits to the Subantarctic Islands which are often incorporated in Antarctic tourist visits.

2       Legal Obligations

2.1     Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994

The New Zealand Government ratified the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty on 22 December 1994. Certain provisions of the Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 
(hereafter referred to as the Act) which implemented the Protocol in New Zealand law, came into force 
on 1 February 1995. These include measures to deal with environmental impact assessment, the 
conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, the management of protected areas and waste disposal. The 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (hereafter the Ministry) is responsible for administering this Act.
2.2     Purpose of the Act

The purpose of the Act is to promote the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and 
the value of Antarctica as an area for scientific research. This means that persons to whom this Act 
applies and who are planning or carrying out activities in Antarctica must act in a manner which is 
consistent with the environmental principles set out in Article 3 of the Protocol, which is scheduled to 
the Act.

The Act applies equally to participants and support staff of the official national Antarctic programme as 
well as all those to all those involved in tourism and non-governmental activities.

2.3     Application of the Act  

The Act applies (s 2 Application) to:

*   New Zealand citizens, whether living within New Zealand or overseas:
*   New Zealand permanent residents, including organisations, in respect of any activities that they 
    intend to undertake in Antarctica;
*   Non-New Zealanders in the Ross Dependency; and
*   Expeditions organised in New Zealand or proceeding from New Zealand to Antarctica (NB 
    Antarctica is defined as the whole area south of 60° south).

The Act does not apply to members of official expeditions of other Antarctic Treaty parties.

2.4     Ministerial Responsibility under the Act  

The Act provides (s 10 Ministerial directions) wide discretion for the Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade (hereafter referred to as the Minister) to:

*   direct that activities in Antarctica by persons covered by the Act are not to be carried out if he 
    or she is not satisfied that the effects of the activities on the Antarctic environment will be consistent 
    with the purpose and principles of the Act (s 9);
*   abide by such conditions as the Minister considers appropriate;
*   establish such procedures as the Minister considers appropriate to monitor, assess and verify the 
    effect of the activity on the Antarctic environment;
*   provide such reports as the Minister considers appropriate;
5

*       modify, suspend or cancel the activity in order to avoid effects on the Antarctic environment 
        inconsistent with the purpose of the Act;

*       pay any bond the Minister considers appropriate in order to ensure that the activity is carried out 
        in accordance with an environmental evaluation or with any directions made by the Minister.

Note that every person commits an offence who does not comply with a direction given by the Minister 
as listed above and is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year 
or to a fine not exceeding $100,000.

2.5     Notification of an activity

Persons proposing to undertake activities should give timely notification to the Minister of their 
proposed activities. This information should be in sufficient detail to allow prior assessments and 
informed judgements about their possible impact on the Antarctic environment.

        In the case of participants and staff in the official national programme, notification of activities will be 
        undertaken by the Chief Executive of the NZAP/NZAI.

        In the case of tourists and other visitors to Antarctica, notification of their activities may be made by the 
        organiser of the expedition or visit. Notifications should be sent to:

        *       Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade
                Parliament Buildings
                Wellington
                New Zealand     or

        *       Head 
                Antarctic Policy Unit
                Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
                Private Bag 18-901
                Wellington.
                New Zealand

        Telephone (64) (4) 494-8500. Facsimile (64) (4) 494-8507.

Notifications should be received no later than 20 days before the proposed activity is expected to 
commence. The Ministry requests that this information be made available by organisers by the 30 
September in any calendar year for those planning to visit the Antarctic during the ensuing summer 
season (see steps contained in Figure 1). Organisers of visits should advise their passengers from other 
nationalities that they may also be subject to specific obligations under their respective national laws. 
Further information and advice are available from the Antarctic Policy Unit, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade.
Figure 1
6

ANTARCTIC EIA STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER PROCEDURES

NOTIFICATION OF ACTIVITY 
TO MINISTER BY 30 SEPT (2.5)
FORMS (3.1 and 4.1)

                  EIA PROCESS (2.6)
APPLICATION FOR TVP TO 
NZAP/NZAI BY 30 SEPT
CONTENT OF AN EIA (2.7)                  
VISITS TO SCOTT BASE (4.2)
HUT VISITOR PERMISSION (4.2)

PEE                  IEE                  DRAFT CEE
MINISTERIAL      MINISTERIAL      MINISTERIAL
CONSIDERATION   CONSIDERATION   CONSIDERATION

APPROVAL (2.8)   APPROVAL (2.8)   CIRCULATE COPY 
                 WITH MINISTERIAL  TREATY PARTIES
                 DIRECTIONS (2.4)

                                  PUBLICLY NOTIFY
                                  FINAL CEE
                                  APPROVAL (2.8)
                                  WITH MINISTERIAL 
                                  DIRECTIONS (2.4)

POST VISIT REPORT (3.2 and 4.1) TO MINISTER AND NZAP/NZAI
2.6     The EIA process under PART III of the Act

All activities must undergo an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), a process used to identify and predict the potential environmental impact of activities and to determine ways of preventing or minimising any adverse effects on environment and biota. This process should be sufficiently in advance of an activity for a proper assessment of its likely impacts to be made. All proposals for an activity, whether Government on non Governmental, will be considered by an EIA Committee.

The objective of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty is to ensure the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associated ecosystems. The environmental principles set out in Article 3 of the Protocol require that the protection of the Antarctic environment be a fundamental consideration in the planning and conduct of activities in Antarctica and that they are planned and conducted on the basis of:

    "information sufficient to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgements about, their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment".

The process to be followed is contained in PART III of the Act (s 17 to 24). It is based on recognition of a hierarchy of effects whereby three stages of EIA are identified to match different levels of predicted impact of proposed activities. These stages are:

  *   a Preliminary Environmental Evaluation (PEE) will be prepared (s 17) if the activity is likely to have less than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment; or
  *   an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) will be prepared (s 18) if the activity is likely to have a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment; or
  *   a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) will be prepared (s 19 and 20) if the activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment.

The level at which an EIA is done depends on a number of factors and circumstances will vary with each case. In deciding on this level three main factors should be considered:

  *   the nature and size of the proposed activity;
  *   the location of the proposed activity; and
  *   the likely effects on the environment from the proposed activity.

Treaty Parties are still discussing how best to define the terms "minor or transitory". In the meantime guidance on the parameters of these terms can be obtained from existing New Zealand Antarctic practice and previously prepared IEEs and CEEs. Appendix 2 to this document gives a guide to an assessment methodology, some definitions and criteria that can be used to help determine the level of environmental impact assessment required in a proposal. Appendix 3 to this document lists some EIA
8
references and contacts that may be consulted by operators in the preparation of their proposal. Note that an EIA should address the likely environmental impacts of that activity and if for example aspects of safety and self sufficiency are relevant to the likely impact they should be included in the EIA.

The Ministry will provide advice and guidance on the likely level of EIA that will be required and can suggest to proposers interested and knowledgeable parties who could assist with advice, comments and suggestions on the type and content of the EIA that is needed. Prospective applicants for approval of an activity are therefore urged to contact the Antarctic Policy Unit (contact address, phone and fax under 2.5) as early as possible to discuss their plans.

2.7     Content of an EIA under the Act

2.7.1   PEE. A PEE should be prepared as per s 17 of the Act.

This should contain:

*     a description of the proposed activity, including its
      -    purpose;
      -    location;
      -    duration;
      -    intensity; and
*     a statement as to whether or not the person (carrying out the activity) considers that the activity has less than a minor or transitory effect on the Antarctic environment; and
*     a statement as to whether or not another Contracting Party is applying, or has applied, the environmental assessment procedures set out in Annex 1 of the Protocol;
*     the name and contact address in NZ of the person carrying out the activity;
*     the number of persons likely to carry out the activity; and
*     the date and place of final departure for Antarctica.

The PEE is then to be sent to the Minister, with any fee that is prescribed, for consideration. If the Minister then determines the activity is likely to have less than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment, the Minister will approve the activity.
9

2.7.2 IEE. If it is considered that an activity will have a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic 
environment then the preparation of an IEE should be proceeded with. In the case of a tourist visit to 
the Ross Sea region where a number of landings are contemplated it is considered that the EIA required 
should be for an activity likely to have a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment - 
therefore an IEE.

When an IEE is done it shall contain sufficient detail to assess whether a proposed activity may have 
more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment (s 18(2)) and shall include:

*   a description of the proposed activity, including its:
        -   purpose;
        -   location;
        -   duration;
        -   intensity; and
*   consideration of alternatives to the proposed activity;
*   any impacts that the activity might have; including
*   consideration of cumulative impacts in the light of existing and known planned activities.

The IEE is then to be sent to the Minister, with any fee that is prescribed, for consideration. At this 
stage the IEE, as per Article 6.2 of Annex 1 of the Protocol, shall be made available on request to the 
public. The applicant must therefore make a copy of the IEE available for inspection during normal 
office hours and provide copies of it to any person, who asks for it in writing, on the payment of a fee, 
to recover costs. If, after consideration, the Minister is satisfied that the IEE indicates that the activity is 
likely to have no more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment then the Minister 
shall notify that the activity can proceed (s 18(4)) subject to any directions made under s 10 of the Act 
(see 2.4 above).

2.7.3 Draft CEE. However, where current levels of operation in Antarctica are considerably 
increased so that the scale and intensity of the impact is deemed to have long term effects and the 
Minister considers that the activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory effect on the 
Antarctic environment the applicant will be notified that a draft CEE, as per s 19, is required.

The draft CEE shall include:
*   all the matters referred to in Article 3 (2) of Annex 1 to the Protocol; and
*   shall be sent to the Minister for consideration, together with any fee that is prescribed.
10

The Minister shall:

*   circulate a copy of the draft CEE to all Parties to the Protocol and, when it is established on the coming into force of the Protocol, to the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP), for consideration;

This will be a lengthy process. To meet Antarctic Treaty requirements the Ministry will need to receive the draft CEE at least 150 days before the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). ATCMs are usually held in April or May of each year and the Ministry will be able to advise applicants of the exact dates. The NZ Government will then need to circulate the draft CEE to other Treaty Governments no less than 120 days before the ATCM.

*   publicly notify the draft CEE in the daily newspapers in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin stating:
    -   where the draft CEE can be inspected;
    -   that any person may make comments on the draft;
    -   that the closing date for comments shall be at least 90 days after public notification; and
    -   the address to which any comments should be sent.

2.7.4   Final CEE. A final CEE may be required by the Minister by notice in writing:

*   once the draft CEE has been considered by the ATCM; or
*   if the Minister is of a view that the ATCM is unreasonably delaying its consideration of the draft.

The final CEE:

*   shall address and include or summarise any comments made by the CEP and the ATCM, by the Minister and by other persons who made comments on the draft; and
*   shall be sent to the Minister for consideration.

The Minister then shall notify the applicant:

*   whether or not the activity may be carried out; and
*   of any Ministerial directions under s 10 (section 2.4) of the Act.

Note that the final CEE should be prepared quickly since the Protocol provides that the decision on whether the proposed activity can go ahead must take no longer than 15 months (Article 3.5 Annex 1) from when the draft CEE is circulated to other Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs).
11

The final CEE is available for inspection by the public on request to the Ministry during normal office 
hours. A notice to this effect will be published by the Ministry in the daily newspapers in Auckland, 
Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin. A copy will be provided to any person who asks for it, subject 
to the payment of a fee to recover costs.

2.8     EIA approval under the Act

Once completed, an EIA is sent to the Minister for consideration with any such fee as may be 
prescribed. A fee shall be charged to cover the cost of having the NZAP/NZAI issue a Tourist Visitor's 
Permission (see 4.1 and 4.2) and for the Ministry to process any EIA application. Such fees as may be 
set by the Ministry will be to recover the actual and reasonable costs incurred in respect of the function 
to which the charge relates and will specify the persons who are liable to pay the charge (usually the 
applicant).

Unless exempted by the Minister (see section 2.9) all activities for which an approval is required under 
the Act will need an EIA. The carrying out of an EIA, including the cost, is the responsibility of the 
applicant. The decision on whether an approval will be granted is the responsibility of the Minister.

Applicants should also be aware that under s 22 of the Act the Minister may require a list of names and 
addresses of every proposed member of the expedition and any such other information as the Minister 
may reasonably require. This means that in order to ensure compliance with the Act the Minister may 
ask for this information to be provided.

2.9     Exemptions from the EIA Part of the Act

Exemptions may be applied as a discretion from the Minister (s 23) if he or she is satisfied that another 
Contracting Party is applying, has applied, or will apply the EIA procedures set out in Annex 1 of the 
Protocol and as scheduled to the Act in the Second Schedule.

2.10     EIA Offences and Penalties under the Act

Offences are committed (s 24) by every person:

*     if the organiser of an expedition fails, without reasonable excuse, to ensure the EIA Part of the 
      Act has been complied with;

*     if an activity is carried out before the Minister has given approval for it;

*     if an activity is carried out otherwise than in accordance with the evaluation;

*     if the organiser of an expedition fails, without reasonable excuse, to inform any member of the 
      expedition proposing to carry out an activity that is the subject of an environmental evaluation 
      under the Act, of the manner in which that activity should be carried out;
12

*       if in a document prepared for this Part of the Act makes a false or misleading statement or omits     
        any matter knowing the omission makes the document false or misleading or fails to supply any     
        information required under s 22 (see 2.8 above).

If an offence is committed then every person is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding one year or to a fine not exceeding $100,000.

2.11   Liability

Under the Protocol this is the one issue left to be concluded by a further Annex. The liability issue raises 
some complex jurisdictional problems for Treaty Parties. It highlights the need, however, for Treaty 
Parties with active Antarctic programmes and for tourist and non-governmental operators to plan for 
contingent liability in the event of damage caused to the environment from their activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty area. At ATCM XIX, in Seoul in May 1995, it was agreed that work on a Liability 
Annex to the Madrid Protocol should continue by way of an inter-sessional working group of legal 
experts.

3       Antarctic Treaty Recommendations

3.1     Recommendation XVIII-I

Pending the coming into force of the Environmental Protocol internationally, Treaty Parties have issued 
guidelines for tourist and non-governmental activities in Recommendation XVIII-I "Tourism and non-
Governmental Activities." These guidelines (see Appendix 4) contain:

*       Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic, intends to ensure that all visitors are aware of, and are     
        therefore able to comply with, the Treaty and the Protocol. Sections in this Guidance deal with     
        protecting Antarctic wildlife, respecting Protected Areas, respecting scientific research, being     
        safe and keeping Antarctica pristine; and

*       Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in     
        the Antarctic, sets out (i) Key Obligations on Organisers and Operators which includes safety,     
        contingency planning and search and rescue. (ii) Procedures to be Followed by Organisers and     
        Operators: when planning to go to the Antarctic (see Attachment A for Information to be     
        Provided in Advance Notice to the Ministry; when in the Antarctic Treaty area; on completion     
        of activities; and Antarctic Treaty System Documents and Information.

Along with other Treaty Parties New Zealand has undertaken to circulate widely the Guidance 
documents and to act as recommended by the XVIII ATCM to urge those intending to visit or organise 
and conduct tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic to act in accordance with the 
attached guidance provisions consistent with the relevant provisions of national law.
3.2     Resolution 3 (1995)

Resolution 3 (1995) from the ATCM XIX in Seoul in May 1995 outlines and consolidates requirements for post-activity reports. Therefore, as contained in Appendix 5, tourist and non-governmental operators should provide a post activity report to relevant national authorities (ie the Ministry) on the completion of their visit to Antarctica.

3.3     Other Recommendations

Although the Recommendation from the XVIII ATCM and the Resolution from the XIX ATCM cover most aspects of interest and concern both to operators, staff and visitors alike, there are a number of prior Antarctic Treaty recommendations concerning Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities. These are detailed in the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System (Eighth Edition, 1994), Part 2 The Antarctic Environment, Section 2.6, p 2601-2608.

4       New Zealand Procedures for Visits to the Ross Sea

4.1     Advance Notification and Post Visit Reporting

The information required for Advance Notification and the Post Visit Report are contained on forms that will be supplied to expedition organisers by the Ministry and included in a schedule to the Tourists Visitor's Permission (see Appendix 6) provided by NZAP/NZAI. The Information on the Advance Notification (see 3.1) is to be supplied by 30 September for the ensuing summer season and the Post Visit Report (see 3.2) is to be provided within three months of the completion of the voyage.

4.2     National Representatives

4.2.1   General requirement for national representatives

By agreement between the New Zealand authorities and the tour operators, it has become established practice for commercial tours to Antarctica that make landings in the Ross Dependency, to be accompanied by a national representative of the New Zealand Government. This agreement should also be extended to non-ship tourist activities when they occur. For the New Zealand subantarctic island nature reserves see the box below.

National representatives undertaking responsibilities in the Ross Dependency may also be required to perform their duties at subantarctic islands, on behalf of the Department of Conservation (DoC). In most cases the latter role would be played by a representative designated by DoC.

Normally only one national representative would be appointed to accompany a tour representing both the NZAP/NZAI and DoC. Where there is more than one national representative on a tour, one would be designated as the senior representative.
14

In the case of tours departing from and re-entering ports outside New Zealand, but visiting and making 
approved landings in the Ross Dependency and/or at the subantarctic islands, the role of a national 
representative may be delegated to a national representative of the country of origin of the tour. Such 
delegation would include all, but no more than, the duties and responsibilities of the New Zealand 
national representative.

In cases where there are national representatives of more than one country on a tour, the New Zealand 
national representative (or officially delegated representative) would have sole jurisdiction while the 
tour was within the boundaries of the Ross Dependency, or (when appropriate) at the New Zealand 
subantarctic islands.

Agreement between the New Zealand Government and a tour operator on appointment of a national 
representative would normally be required to be concluded at least 60 days in advance of the departure 
date of a tour.

Box - The Subantarctic Islands

The New Zealand subantarctic islands - Antipodes Is; Auckland Is; Bounty Is; Campbell Is; Snares 
Is - are strictly protected as national nature reserves, administered by DoC under the Reserves Act 
1977. All tourist landings at the islands are prohibited except under permit from the DoC. Tours 
making approved landings must be accompanied by a representative of the DoC.

Representatives are appointed, by delegated authority from the Minister of Conservation, under the 
terms of reserve management plans, which are legally binding documents prepared and 
administered under s 41 of the Reserves Act. They may also be appointed Honorary Rangers under 
the Reserves Act.

Roles of representatives appointed by DoC, at the subantarctic islands include:
*   oversight of compliance with the legislation, management plans and tourism guidelines;
*   enforcement of plant and animal quarantine procedures;
*   explanation of reserve policy and management to tour operators and visitors; and
*   assistance with visitor education and safety through guiding and site interpretation, and with 
    the monitoring of visitor impacts.

Representatives are required to report to the DoC at the conclusion of the tour.

4.2.1 Roles and responsibilities of national representatives

To observe and report to the Minister on compliance with the requirements of any official policies and 
with any other approvals issued for tourist visits, including:
15

*       any permits issued under provisions of s 28-32 of the Act, relating to conservation of Antarctic 
        fauna and flora and protected areas;
*       any management plans applying to any Antarctic Specially Protected Area or any Antarctic 
        Specially Managed Area (s 27 of the Act), or to any other restricted area or site (see 4.3); and
*       any plant or animal quarantine regulations or procedures (s 32 of the Act);
*       any Ministerial direction in respect of EIA (s 10 of the Act); and
*       to supervise visits to the historic huts and Scott Base (see section 4.4);
*       compliance with Recommendation XVIII-1, (see section 3.1), and Resolution 3 (1995), (see 
        section 3.2).

        To report on the general conduct of tour operators and visitors, including noting any significant 
departures from activities specified in approved environmental impact assessments, or any other 
information supplied by the tour operators.

        To inform and educate tour operators and visitors about the administration and management of 
Antarctica under the Antarctic Treaty System and to promote Antarctic conservation.

        By agreement with the tour operators, and in keeping with their own specialist knowledge and 
experience, to assist in guiding visitors and in site interpretation, and in providing information on the 
history, wildlife, ecology, scientific and management activities, and any other matters of interest to 
visitors.

4.2.3 Appointment of national representatives

        National representatives could be drawn from the ranks of staff of NZAP/NZAI, DoC, members of staff 
of other departments and Crown agencies or institutions, or individuals with relevant qualifications and 
experience. Appointment may be based on staff selection, or on a call for volunteers from within the 
wider New Zealand Antarctic community.

        National representatives may be appointed as general inspectors under the provisions of s 39-41, 44, 49 
and 50 of the Act.

        National representatives would normally be required to be New Zealand residents and to be:

*       knowledgeable about legislation, management, science and conservation applying in Antarctica, 
        and at the subantarctic islands where tours visit the islands;
*       experienced in the Antarctic and/or subantarctic regions, either through previous visits or 
        specialist knowledge of the areas;
*       physically fit and self-reliant;
*       proficient in communication and public relations skills; and
*       experience in outdoor safety requirements (special survival training may be required).

4.2.4 Costs

The costs of salaries and absence from normal duties for staff of NZAP/NZAI, DoC, other departments 
and Crown agencies would normally be borne by those organisations. Salaries or wages for those who 
are not members of staff of NZAP/NZAI, DoC, or other departments and Crown agencies would 
normally be covered by their employer or by a contractual arrangement with MFAT and DoC. Sharing 
of costs may also be arranged.

NZAP/NZAI, and/or DoC (or other departments and agencies where appropriate) would be responsible 
for the costs of any specialised clothing (such as survival suits) or equipment required by the national 
representative. The costs of reporting to the Minister would be covered by MFAT or DoC.

Tour operators would normally provide for:

*       the full cost of board and lodging and appropriate allowances for national representatives while 
        they are on board tour vessels;

*       reimbursement of the full costs of any airfares, accomodation, meals and incidental expenses 
        incurred in getting national representatives to and from the point of embarkation and 
        disembarkation for the tour vessel to their place of work or residence; and

*       free use of radiotelephone, fax, INMARSAT or telex services required by the representative in 
        carrying out their duties.

Liability for causing national representatives to incur other expenses in exercising their duties is covered 
by s 50 of the Act.

4.2.5 Briefing, training and resources

Prior to undertaking their duties, national representatives would be provided with verbal and 
documented briefings by MFAT, NZAP/NZAI, DoC and/or other departments and agencies, as 
appropriate, to explain their roles and responsibilities in respect of their official duties. They would be 
provided with copies of warrants, certificates or other official notices of accreditation authorising their 
appointment, which they would be expected to carry on the tour. They would also normally be expected 
to have with them on the tour:

*       copies of any official permits issued for the tour and any advance notification documents and 
        approved environmental impact assessments;
17

*     copies of relevant national legislation, policies and management plans, including in particular a
      copy of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty and/or a text of the Antarctic Treaty and the
      Madrid Protocol and other legal instruments of the Antarctic Treaty System;
*     copies of any relevant tourist guidelines, handbooks and codes of conduct including the
      Antarctic Treaty tourism guidelines;
*     some information about current scientific and management programmes at areas to be visited;
*     names and contacts (phone and/or radio càll sign) of officers in charge of stations of national
      Antarctic programmes, or other government bases to be visited or in the vicinity of tours; and
*     copies of relevant documents including maps providing information about the areas visited,
      which may be in the form of information packages from NZAP/NZAI, DoC and/or the Antarctic
      Heritage Trust (AHT), such as the NZAP "Procedures for Tourist Visits to the Ross Sea" 1995.
*     Radio units, having access to relevant marine channels and other working frequencies, enabling
      communication with stations, ships and yachts, tour operators and guides.

4.2.6   Reporting

National representatives are required to submit to the Minister a written report on the execution of their
duties. Reports should be submitted within 30 days of conclusion of the tour. Reports will be made
available to the tour operators, and to others on request, at the discretion of the Minister.

4.3     Protected Area Management

Part IV of the Act (Measures for Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora and Protected Areas) gives
effect to both Annex II of the Protocol (Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora) and Annex V of the
Protocol (Area Protection and Management). The main elements contained in Part IV of the Act relate
to Management Plan requirements (see also Article 5 of Annex V of the Protocol), prohibited activities,
permits and offences.

      In s 27 of the Act every person within a protected area shall act in accordance with the requirements of
any management plan for either an Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA), see also Article 3 of
Annex V of the Protocol, or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA), see also Article 4 of Annex
V of the Protocol. In the case of Historic Sites or Monuments, in s 27 of the Act, every person is to
avoid damaging, removing or destroying any of these sites or monuments or their contents, unless the
Minister gives written permission for the purposes of restoration or protection or in the case of an
emergency.

The Act prohibits in s 28 (except in accordance with a permit):

*     the entry, or carrying out of any activity in an ASPA;
18

*   the taking of any native bird or native mammal in Antarctica (subject to the restrictions and conditions in Article 3 of Annex II of the Protocol and in s 31 of the Act);

*   the removing or damaging of native plants so that their distribution and abundance is affected (subject to restrictions and conditions in Article 3 of Annex II of the Protocol and in s 31 of the Act):

*   the harmful interference with native plants, mammals, birds and invertebrates (subject to restrictions and conditions in Article 3 of Annex II of the Protocol and in s 31 of the Act):

*   the introduction of non native animal, plant or micro-organism species to the area (subject to restrictions and conditions set out in Article 4 of Annex II of the Protocol and in s 32 of the Act); and

*   the import of any non-sterile soil into Antarctica (subject to restrictions and conditions set out in Article 4 of Annex II of the Protocol and in s 32 of the Act).

Also in s 28(3) of the Act no person shall introduce dressed poultry into Antarctica knowing that an inspection revealed evidence of avian disease (see Appendix C to Annex II of the Protocol).

When a permit is to be applied for the requirements are outlined in s 29 of the Act. The permit to cover any activity listed in s 28(1) of the Act:

*   shall be in writing to the Minister;

*   shall be accompanied by any fee that may be prescribed;

*   shall give the full name and address of the applicant;

*   shall state the nature and purposes of the activity to which the application relates; and

*   shall state when, where, by whom and how the activity is to be conducted.

A joint application may be made in s 29(4) for members of a party and the Minister may in s 29(5) issue a permit subject to conditions and may at any time revoke or suspend the permit or amend the conditions attached to it in s 29(6). A permit may also not be transferred to any other person except with the written consent of the Minister.

The Act in s 30 sets out the restrictions on permits that apply for entrance into an ASPA to carry out an activity. Basically these must be in accordance with the management plan, see s 30(a), and in accordance with the restrictions and conditions contained in Annex V to the Protocol as well as subject to any other conditions considered appropriate by the Minister so that the activity is not inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the Act in s 9.
19

Every person who commits an offence under Part IV of the Act (s 33) is liable to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding $100,000.

At present there are 15 protected areas in the Ross Sea area (see Table 1). This includes 5 Specially 
Protected Areas (SPA) and 10 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). Upon the Protocol coming 
into force the present SPAs and SSSIs management plans will be revised, they will be redesignated as 
ASPAs and renumbered accordingly. It is also proposed (in addition to the 3 areas contained in Table 1 
below as proposed ASPAs) that the historic sites at Hut Point, Cape Evans, Cape Royds and Cape 
Adare will become designated protected areas (as either ASPAs or ASMAs) and management plans are 
at present being drafted. It is also possible that several additional sites in the Terra Nova Bay region 
may be identified as worthy of specially protected status. Members of the Italian programme have 
developed a draft plan for a marine ASMA close to Terra Nova Bay Station. There are 12 historic sites 
or monuments designated in the Ross Sea area and these are listed in Table 2 below.

It should also be noted that under Article 10(1)(a) of Annex V to the Protocol any visit to an ASPA 
should be reported on. To assist with this SCAR at the XIX ATCM presented a ASPA Visit Report 
Form which could be used in this process to enable Treaty Parties, through a standardised format, to 
build up an information database and to be able to assess the state of the environment in protected 
areas.

• If conducting activities in the proximity of a protected area, visitors should be aware of the values which 
have led to the designation of that area and of the need to take precautions to ensure that these values 
are not endangered by any activity or adjacent activity.
20

Table 1 SPAs and SSSIs in the Ross Sea Region (see Antarctic Treaty Handbook, 8th edn, 1994)

Specially Protected Areas:

No 4. Sabrina I, Balleny Is. An outstanding example of island ecosystems. Important representative samples of vegetation, soil, fauna and birdlife.

No 5. Beaufort I. Large breeding colonies of Emporer and Adelie penguins.

No 7. Cape Hallett. Particularly rich-algae, mosses and lichens and an Adelie penguin colony.

No 20. New College Valley, Cape Bird. Luxuriant stands of algae, mosses and lichens representative of the Ross Sea region.

No 22. Cryptogam Ridge, Mt Melbourne. Unique community of bryophtes, algae and microbiota on geothermal ground.

Sites of Special Scientific Interest:

No 1. Cape Royds. Most southerly known colony of Adelie penguins.

No 2. Arrival Heights. Quiet site for electromagnetic measurements in the upper atmosphere.

No 3. Barwick Valley. Representative of unique polar desert (dry valley) ecosystem.

No 4. Cape Crozier. Southernmost Emporer penguin rookery in Antarctica and large Adelie penguin colony as scientific reference site.

No 10. Caughley Beach, Cape Bird. Most extensive moss, algae and lichen stands in S Victoria Land.

No 11. Tramway Ridge, Mt Erebus. Unique reference site of high altitude fumarolic activity and associated vegetation.

No 12. Canada Glacier, Taylor Valley. Research site on richest beds of algae and mosses in the Victoria Land Dry Valleys.

No 18. North-west White I, McMurdo Sound. Study site of isolated Weddell seal colony.

No 19. Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range. Rich cryptoendolithic biota in sandstone.

No 24. Mt Melbourne. Unique cryptogamic flora and microbiota on warmest ground surrounding volcanic crater.
Proposed ASPAs:

Cape Geology, Botany Bay (Granite Harbour). Abundant lichen and moss stands, large populations of 
invertebrates and historic refuge from Scott's expedition 1910-13.

Tomb, Lewis Bay, Mt Erebus. Site of 1979 DC 10 air crash.

Battleship Promontory, Convoy Range, Victoria land. Unusual rock formations with cryptoendolithic 
communities.

The AHT has also a draft management plan in preparation to designate Cape Evans hut as an ASPA and 
its environs as an ASMA. Similar plans will also then be prepared for the Discovery hut at Hut Point, 
Shackleton's hut at Cape Royds and the huts at Cape Adare.

Table 2 List of Historic Monuments identified and described by the proposing Government or 
Governments in the Ross Sea area

No 14. Site of ice cave and remains of a rock shelter at Inexpressible I, Terra Nova Bay, constructed 
by Campbell's Northern Party, British Antarctic Expedition (BAE) 1910-13.

No 15. Hut at Cape Royds, Ross I. Built 1908 by Ernest Shackleton.

No 16. Hut at Cape Evans, Ross I. Built 1911 by Capt R F Scott.

No 17. Cross on Wind Vane Hill, Cape Evans, Ross I. Erected by Ross Sea Party of Shackleton's 
Trans Antarctic Expedition 1914-16, in memory of 3 party members who died in the vicinity in 1916.

No 18. Discovery hut at Hut Point, Ross I. Erected 1902 by Capt R F Scott.

No 19. Cross at Hut Point, Ross I. Erected 1904 by BAE in memory of T. Vince.

No 20. Cross on Observation Hill, Ross I. Erected 1913 by BAE in memory of Capt Scott's party 
who perished on return from the South Pole, March 1912.

No 21. Stone hut at Cape Crozier, Ross I. Constructed July 1911 by Edward Wilson's party (BAE 
1910 to 1913) during their winter journey to collect Emperor penguin eggs.

No 22. Hut at Cape Adare, N Victoria Land. Built 1899 during Southern Cross expedition led by C E 
Borchgrevink. There are 3 huts at Cape Adare. Two are from Borchgrevink's expedition and one 
from Scott's Northern Party, 1910-11. Only the southern most Borchgrevink hut survives in a 
reasonable state of repair.

No 23. Grave at Cape Adare of Norwegian biologist, Nicolai Hanson a member of Borchgrevink's 
party in 1899-1900. This is the first known grave in the Antarctic.
22

No 24. Rock cairn known as "Amundsen's Cairn" on Mt Betty, Queen Maud Range erected by Roald Amundsen in 1912.

No 54. Richard E Byrd, Historic Monument, McMurdo Station. Erected 1965.

4.4  Procedures for visits to historic huts and Scott Base

Various procedures relate specifically to visits to the historic huts in the Ross Dependency as well as visits to Scott Base. The NZAP/NZAI is the point of contact for gaining permission to visit Scott Base and the historic huts and these approvals should be applied for no later than the 30 September for the ensuing summer season.

NZAP/NZAI issues a Tourist Visitor's Permission (see Appendix 6) once the visit is approved. The permission is carried by the national representative on board the ship (if applicable) for signing off by the ships captain and the expedition leader.

NZAP/NZAI works closely with the Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT) to process approvals for visits to the historic huts. Potential visitors should be aware of the restrictions on numbers permitted to enter each hut and to be ashore at any one time. An indication is required of how the visit will be run, including information on guiding ratios and time spent ashore (especially for very large parties). Specific details for visits and associated requirements are included in a schedule to the Tourist Visitor's Permission (Appendix 6).

The national representative will carry the keys for the historic huts in the Ross Sea and will directly supervise the visits to the huts. The representative will also brief passengers prior to landing on the appropriate conduct for visits to the historic huts. See also section 4.2 ii on the Roles and Responsibilities of National Representatives.

Visits to Scott Base must be arranged in advance and be confirmed no less than 72 hours prior to the visit. The Senior New Zealand Representative (Senzrep) at Scott Base will provide a schedule of times for group visits and the maximum number in each group. Specific details for the conduct of visits are included in a schedule to the Tourist Visitor's Permission (Appendix 6). Note that the Senzrep is also an appointed officer of the Government of the Ross Dependency and has the powers and authorities that may be exercised in New Zealand by a Justice of the Peace and a Coroner.

There are no postal facilities available at Scott Base although there is a full telephone service to the rest of the world. At present levels, visits to Scott Base do not pose a significant burden on NZAP/NZAI. Operators should be aware however, that when they visit the Base in large numbers (usually over 40 people) all other activities need to be suspended for the day. Under normal circumstances Scott Base will not be available for visits on Sundays or during a busy period such as that associated with the ship unloading when all available personnel and transport are in use.
23

The contact for a Tourist Visitor's Permission is:

Director
New Zealand Antarctic Programme
PO Box 14-091
Christchurch, New Zealand

Telephone (64) (3) 358-0200. Facsimile (64) (3) 358-0211.

From 1 July 1996 this will be to:

The Chief Executive
New Zealand Antarctic Institute
PO Box 14-091
Christchurch, New Zealand

Telephone (64) (3) 358-0200. Facsimile (64) (3) 358-0211.
24

Appendices:

1 Governance of Antarctica, NZ Antarctic structure and NZ research in Antarctica.

2 Guide to EIA methodology, definitions and criteria.

3 EIA references and contacts.

4 Guidelines for tourist and non-governmental activities in Recommendation XVIII-1. (not included)

5 Resolution 3 (1995) on requirement for post activity reports. (not included)

6 Tourist Visitor's Permission package from NZAP/NZAI. (available on request)
Appendix 1                                                      25

GOVERNANCE OF ANTARCTICA, NZ ANTARCTIC STRUCTURE, NZ RESEARCH IN 
ANTARCTICA

The Governance of Antarctica

Antarctica is governed under the Antarctic Treaty, an international agreement which entered into force 
in 1961. From the 12 original signatory nations, including New Zealand, there are now 26 countries 
with decision-making Consultative Party status, and a further 13 acceding States. The Treaty Parties 
meet annually, and their decisions, taken by consensus, are expressed in the form of Recommendations. 
These are hortatory obligations only, and require enactment under domestic legislation for enforcement.

The Antarctic Treaty declares that Antarctica is to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes, with 
priority given to "freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation towards that end." The 
establishment of military bases and fortifications, the carrying out of military manoeuvres as well as the 
testing of any type of weapon is prohibited. The Treaty also provides for Contracting Parties to 
designate inspectors who "shall have complete freedom of access at any time to any or all areas of 
Antarctica."

Since the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty in 1961 other agreements have been negotiated and 
institutions formed which together make up the Antarctic Treaty System. These are:

*   The Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora 1964.
*   Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, (CCAS), 1972 (in force but not ratified by 
    NZ);
*   Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, (CCAMLR), 1980;
*   Convention for the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities, (CRAMRA), 1988 (not 
    ratified and not in force);
*   The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, signed in Madrid in 1991.

A key part of the Antarctic Treaty System since its inception is the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR), which is an international body of scientists representing member countries that 
provides scientific advice to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs).

New Zealand's Antarctic Structure

Officials' Antarctic Committee (OAC). A number of Government agencies have interests in New 
Zealand's Antarctic activities. These interests are coordinated by the OAC. The role of the OAC is to 
advise the Government on strategic and policy issues in respect of the Ross Dependency and Antarctica.
26

Chaired by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the OAC comprises representatives from the 
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Ministry of Research, Science and Technology, the 
Ministry for the Environment, the Department of Conservation, the Ministry of Commerce and the 
Treasury.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). MFAT is currently responsible for both policy and 
operational aspects of New Zealand's activities in Antarctica and for maintaining New Zealand's 
interests in the Antarctic Treaty System.

The Antarctic Policy Unit (APU) was formed within MFAT in July 1992 specifically to assist with the 
continuity of New Zealand's scientific effort in Antarctica and to coordinate the internal and external 
aspects of New Zealand's Antarctic policy. Located at Head office, in Wellington, and administratively 
part of the Ministry's Environment Division, APU's responsibilities are to formulate policies in support 
of the Government's vision and strategic objectives for the Ross Dependency and Antarctica.

The New Zealand Antarctic Programme (NZAP) Headquarters, since 1 July 1992 a division of MFAT, 
is located at the International Antarctic Centre, Christchurch Airport. It carries out the planning and 
coordinates and manages all the logistics activities for the national Antarctic science programme. NZAP 
will be absorbed into the New Zealand Antarctic Institute when it is established on 1 July 1996. NZAP 
is also a member of COMNAP (Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes), which meets 
annually, if possible in conjunction with SCAR, to plan programmes which depend on international 
cooperation and major logistic support, exchange information and hold workshops and seminars on 
operational issues of interest and concern to national Antarctic programmes.

The Ross Dependency Research Committee (RDRC) has been the Government's advisory committee 
on Antarctic matters since the establishment of New Zealand's presence in the Ross Dependency. The 
Committee's current terms of reference focus on the management of New Zealand scientific activities in 
Antarctica. The RDRC plays a major role in developing New Zealand's annual scientific research 
programme which it submits to the Government via the Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Made 
up of five ex-officio Departmental representatives and five individuals appointed in their personal 
capacity, one of whom is the Chairperson, the RDRC is serviced by an Executive Officer and secretariat 
located within the APU. The RDRC will be absorbed into the NZAI when it is established on 1 July 
1996.

The New Zealand Antarctic Institute (NZAI). Is to be established on 1 July 1996, as a separate 
Crown entity, to manage the national Antarctic programme and incorporate the functions of the RDRC. 
The NZAI will be charged with developing and managing high quality New Zealand activities to 
maximise the achievement of our national strategic objectives for the Ross Dependency and Antarctica. 
The NZAI will be a focal point and catalyst for national and international activities in Antarctica.

The New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF). The NZDF has traditionally provided essential logistical 
and operational support for New Zealand's Antarctic activities. This includes provision of Hercules 
aircraft and helicopter support as well as personnel as New Zealand's contribution to the joint logistics 
pool operated by New Zealand and the United States.
27

The Foundation for Research, Science and Technology (FRST). FRST administers the investment of the Public Good Science Fund (PGSF) in Antarctic research. This currently amounts to $1.9 million annually with a similar amount being funded from Vote Education for Antarctic research undertaken by university based scientists. FRST runs an annual application round for PGSF Antarctic funding.

The Department of Conservation (DoC). DoC is charged with promoting the benefits to present and future generations of conservation of the natural and historic resources of the Ross Dependency. The Department is closely involved in the management of sub-Antarctic and Antarctic tourism activities.

The Department of Survey and Land Information (DoSLI). DoSLI provides surveyor support for the New Zealand research programme. DoSLI also carries out mapping of Antarctica in collaboration with the US Geological Survey, as part of New Zealand's mapping responsibilities.

The Ministry for the Environment (MfE). MfE provides environmental policy advice to the Government, including Antarctica. MfE in the First Schedule to the Act has a reporting and monitoring function with respect to the Environment Act 1986.

The Antarctic Heritage Trust (AHT). The AHT, an outgrowth of the RDRC, was established in April 1987 to ensure the protection of Antarctica's unique historical heritage. The trust coordinates and raises funds for a programme of conservation and restoration in the Ross Dependency of historic huts built by early expeditions as well as related historic sites and artefacts. The office of the Trust is located at the International Antarctic Centre, Christchurch Airport.

The Royal Society of New Zealand. The Royal Society's Standing Committee for Antarctic Science provides the interface between New Zealand's scientific community and SCAR. It also represents the views of the scientific community within New Zealand.

The International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research (ICAIR). This is an international Antarctic environmental data collection and research centre located at the International Antarctic Centre at Christchurch Airport and owned by the Royal Society. ICAIR is a repository for Antarctic information, particularly environmental management information.

New Zealand Research Activities in Antarctica

The following priority Antarctic research themes have been identified for funding by FRST. They are:
*   Biodiversity and ecosystems (marine, terrestrial and freshwater). This focuses on the range and distinctive nature of the biota of Antarctica, which exists under the extreme physical conditions of the region;
*   Dynamics and evolution of the Antarctic continent. This theme covers the geology and geophysics of the Antarctic region, including the Antarctic continental shelf;
28

*   Global Change and Climate Research. This focuses on the interactive physical, chemical and 
    biological processes which regulate the total earth system as well as an understanding of the 
    processes which govern variability and change in the Antarctic climate.

*   Impact on Antarctica of human activities. This theme covers underpinning research which 
    improves our understanding of the effect on the Antarctic environment of human activities which 
    occur either outside or within Antarctica.

Each year NZAP supports up to 30 science events to address these priority research themes. Many 
involve international scientific collaboration. An example of this is the Cape Roberts Project a five 
nation, $8 million scientific drilling programme due to begin in 1996. It is hoped that core recovered 
from the sedimentary rocks below the sea ice will contribute to an understanding of the causes of global 
sea level change and the origin of Antarctic mountains and basins.
Appendix 2
                  29

Guide to EIA methodology, definitions and criteria

The guidance contained in this appendix is summarised from the New Zealand CEE "Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in the South West Ross Sea Antarctica." (November 1992), the IEE associated with "The Salvage Operation of the Remaining Oil of the Bahia Paraiso" (October 1992), the COMNAP and SCAR guidelines on "The Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process" (March 1992), "Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment" by J Glasson, R Therivel, and A Chadwick (1994) and "Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment of Activities in Antarctica" produced by the Polar Regions Section, South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, July 1995. This Appendix tries, not so much as to interpret Annex I, but to add practicalities which are not contained in the Protocol.

The Protocol specifies three impact categories:

* Likely direct effects. These are first order effects, impacts or consequences that may be associated with an activity. Examples are disturbance to soil by heavy surface vehicles, toxic effects in marine birds, in intertidal limpets, in pelagic krill from fuel spills or by the building of a new research station or the construction of a crushed rock airstrip.

* Possible indirect and second order effects. These are any second order effects, impacts or consequences that may be causally associated with an activity. An example is particulate emissions from combustion leading to melting of ice or snow that subsequently causes loss of ice or snow alga habitat. Even small scale activities can have significant environmental effects in sensitive areas such as those located adjacent to a bird or seal colony, a botanically rich location or a designated specially protected area.

* Cumulative impacts. These are effects, impacts or consequences that may come from similar or varied sources but are additive, antagonistic or synergistic in their effect, impact or consequence. Examples are the significant increase in the number of vehicles in an ecologically sensitive area, the continued addition of major facilities around a research station, or the impacts from tourist visits to the same sites season after season. Taken on their own these activities may be of little consequence, but when taken together they may have a significant cumulative effect.

Therefore the level at which an EIA has to be done (ie a PEE/IEE/CEE, see sections 2.6, 2.7, 2.8) will depend on various factors. Much depends on the circumstances of each activity itself (see section 2.6). For example is the activity of such a size that likely direct effects will be marked, or will the activity be located in a particularly sensitive location and have indirect effects, or will the activity give rise to complex, cumulative, adverse, large scale or irreversible effects?

The "Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment of Activities in Antarctica" gives examples of activities likely to have less than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment (ie a PEE). These could include:
30

*   small, light-weight scientific research projects using tents;
*   aircraft operations using unprepared ice and snow fields;
*   small, light-weight mountaineering/adventure expeditions using tents; and
*   small vessels eg yacht operations.

Activities suggested in the “Guide” likely to have a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment (ie a IEE) could include:

*   the construction of major, new or replacement facilities; and
*   tourist expeditions making landings at a number of different sites.

Activities suggested in the “Guide” likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment (ie a CEE) could include:

*   the construction and operation of a new station;
*   the construction of rock airstrips or runways;
*   major drilling projects, using drilling fluids and muds.

There is no single method or technique for assessing the environmental impact of an activity. Often methods and techniques will depend on the characteristics of the activity and of the environment. The Ministry can give advice as to the best practice. The “Guide” suggests steps to be considered when preparing an EIA such as an IEE or a CEE and these are outlined in the following diagram (figure 1).
31

Figure 1 The steps to be considered when preparing an IEE/CEE for a proposed activity

DESCRIPTION OF THE
ACTIVITY

DESCRIPTION OF THE
ENVIRONMENT

IDENTIFICATION AND
PREDICTION OF IMPACTS

ALTERNATIVES

MEASURES TO MINIMISE
OR MITIGATE IMPACTS

ENVIRONMENTAL
MONITORING

CONCLUSION
PEE/IEE/CEE

Description of the activity:

The description of the activity should include information about the:
*   purpose and need for the activity
*   location of the activity (use maps)
32
*   duration and timing of the activity
*   extent of the activity (eg areas affected)
*   intensity of the activity (numbers involved)
*   proposed access and transport arrangements (eg types and numbers of aircraft, vessels or vehicles)
*   estimates of the types and quantities of emissions if known (eg water, air, soil pollution and noise, light, heat)
*   estimates of the types and quantities of wastes likely to be produced by the activity (non-hazardous and hazardous)

Description of the environment.

Although each locality will be different an accurate description of the local environment likely to be affected by the activity should be referred to. This should include (with maps, graphs, photos etc):
*   physical characteristics
*   flora and fauna
*   protected areas or historic sites
*   human activities (eg logistics, scientific research, tourism)

Identification of impacts.

A first step would be to examine the effects of similar activities in similar environments elsewhere in Antarctica. Although past EIAs are a valuable source of information each activity is unique, with its own set of impacts and so must be assessed individually. Past EIAs are also a source of information predicting what the impacts might be from an activity and the identification of impacts will come more from the monitoring of the activity.

All impacts must be identified in the EIA. This requires a logical step by step approach. There are a number of methods which can help in identifying impacts such as overlay maps, checklists and matrices (see example given below). The assessment methodology will depend on the character of the activity, the environment it is likely to affect and the information which is available.

Some impacts are difficult or impossible to quantify or even predict. For example wilderness, historical and aesthetic values. Such impacts should not be ignored. Instead an objective and qualitative
33

determination of such impacts using value judgements should be made. These should be based on past experiences and on the input of experienced Antarcticians.

Alternatives.

An important element of EIA is the analysis of practical alternatives to the proposed activity. Such an analysis allows a comparison between options. Examples of alternatives include the continuation and use of present facilities, the use of different locations, joint operations with other operators, or the use of different technology or equipment. An alternative which should be addressed is that of not proceeding with the proposed activity. The applicant should indicate the main reasons for the preferred option.

Minimising and mitigating impacts.

Appropriate measures should be included in the EIA to minimise and mitigate identified impacts. Although, such measures will vary both with the project and the environment there are five general types that can be used. These are:

*   developing on site control procedures (eg for waste disposal)
*   establishing the best time for the activity (eg to avoid the breeding season of penguins)
*   provide environmental education and training to all personnel (eg scientific, support, contract, tourists etc)
*   ensuring adequate on site supervision of the activity by senior project staff or environmental specialists
*   producing written contingency plans for emergencies and accidents.

Mitigation measures need to be considered at the start of planning for an activity. At this early stage, minor changes in specifications or procedures can lead to adverse impacts being avoided or minimised.

Environmental monitoring.

Environmental monitoring of key indicators can be used to assess and verify the actual impact of the activity, to check the predictions made in the EIA, detect any unforseen effects and to provide useful information so decision-makers can prevent or minimise any adverse impacts.

Monitoring for EIA normally concentrates around the immediate locality of the activity. But strategies for monitoring will vary with the activity and local environmental circumstances. Before embarking on a monitoring programme expert advice should be sought.
34

The use of the matrix method to identify the impact of an activity

Treaty Parties are still discussing how best to tackle the terms "minor and transitory" (which has relevance to the level of EIA required, ie a PEE, IEE or CEE) as well as the requirements of Article 3 of the Protocol or how to "judge", or take account of impacts once they have been identified (which has relevance to the decision to allow or not to allow activities to take place). However, there are in existence a number of methods by which the impacts of an activity can be identified and mitigation measures taken. Matrices, were used for the Cape Roberts CEE and the Bahia Paraiso IEE to identify the range of cause-effect relationships from an activity and the likely magnitude, extent, duration and probability of an activity's impact. Although the matrix method has been used successfully for EIAs in the Antarctic, there are a number of other valid EIA methods that can be used such as checklists, overlays, scaling and weighting techniques and networks.

Using the matrix method the impact of any proposed activity or activities is cross related with environmental components and factors (see the Cape Roberts CEE and the Bahia Paraiso IEE). Four aspects are measured: Intensity, Extent, Duration and Probability. Impacts are then rated in each cell/interaction point using four symbols: High, Medium, Low, and Nil or Negligible.

Where on the matrix the proposer places the impact of an activity eventually involves professional judgement firstly in the construction of each matrix and then by the listing of the effects. For an impact to be judged its intersection on a matrix is required to have at least one High value or two Medium values for intensity, extent and duration, even if its probability was assessed as Low or Negligible. The figures below list the criteria as first used by the Bahia Paraiso IEE and a suggested overall level of EIA is then added. Over time, and as more EIA proposals use the matrix method, then the assessments and judgements made will be tested so that the parameters for minor and transitory, as contained in Article 8 of the Protocol, can be refined.

Figures 2 and 3 may therefore be a useful starting point for operators to use to assess all impacts of their activities on the environment.
35

Figure 2 Criteria for assessing intensity and individual intersections on an assessment matrix of environmental impact with an overall level for EIA suggested.

| IMPACT        | ENVIRONMENT                                      | ANALYTICAL EQUIVALENT                                    | EIA LEVEL FOR OVERALL ACTIVITY |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Nil or negligible | Little impact detected                          | Measured parameters may not be detectable or altered only marginally | PEE - less than minor or transitory |
| Low or minor  | Low magnitude impact limited in space/time       | Measured parameters would change within natural varaibility | "                             |
| Medium        | Impacted features would recover in the medium time | Measured parameters would change above natural variability but within the limits of the system | IEE - minor or transitory     |
| High          | Impacted features would not recover              | Measured parameters would change above the systems limits | CEE - more than minor or transitory |

Of importance when considering the criteria in Table 1 for either individual intersection points on a matrix or for an overall activity is the choice of what to observe and measure. Also to be determined is who assesses natural variability, the time scale to be used and what are the "limits of the system." Usually the assessment of the impact of an activity is best done by someone who knows the activity not an outsider.

Figure 3 Criteria for assessing duration of general impacts

| IMPACT        | DURATION OR PERSISTENCE OF IMPACT                | EIA LEVEL                     |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Nil or negligible | Seconds to hours                                 | PEE-less than minor or transitory |
| Low or minor  | Days to weeks                                    | "                             |
| Medium        | Months/single season to a few seasons            | IEE-minor or transitory       |
| High          | Several years to several decades/centuries       | CEE-more than minor or transitory |
3

Appendix 3

EIA references and contacts

The EIA documents referred to below can all be accessed through the NZAP/NZAI library.

Of practical guidance is the document produced by COMNAP and SCAR from a workshop in Bologna 
in 1991 called "The Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process - Practical guidelines." This was 
subsequently revised in Washington, D.C., March 4, 1992.

An example by a tour operator of an Environmental Impact Assessment is the IEE prepared Southern 
Heritage Expeditions for the 1994-95 and 1995-96 Antarctic cruise programmes of the Akademik 
Shokalski.

Contact:

    Southern Heritage Expeditions Limited
    PO Box 22
    Waikari
    New Zealand

Other examples of EIAs prepared by tour operators are the IEE prepared by Adventure Consultants Ltd 
to establish new climbing routes on the Vinson Massif and Mount Tyree in 1995 and the IEE prepared 
for the Antarctic cruise of the MV Marco Polo in 1995-96 by Shipping and General Ltd.

Contact:

    Adventure Consultants Ltd                    Shipping and General (UK) Ltd
    PO Box 10-274                               38 Park Street
    Christchurch                                London W1Y 3PF
    New Zealand                                 United Kingdom

For examples of New Zealand practice two IEEs done for the New Zealand Antarctic Programme are 
mentioned for consideration. One is "Decommissioning Vanda Station, Wright Valley" March 1994 and 
the other is a draft IEE "Improvements to Bulk Fuel Storage and Transport Facilities at Scott Base" 
May 1995. New Zealand has also produced a final CEE for an "Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling 
Programme, East of Cape Roberts in the South West Ross Sea" after a draft was presented to the XVII 
ATCM in Venice in 1992.
37

Contact:

        Environmental Officer
        New Zealand Antarctic Programme
        PO Box 14-091
        Christchurch
        New Zealand

The CEE done by New Zealand addressed assessment methodology as did the IEE associated with the salvage operation of the remaining oil from the Bahia Paraiso prepared by the Instituto Antartico Argentino, Argentina and Rijkswaterstaat - Tidal Waters Division The Netherlands.

An example of a non governmental organisation IEE is given by Greenpeace International in November 1991 for "Removal of World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island.

Contact:

        Greenpeace International
        Keizersgracht 176
        1016 DW Amsterdam
        Netherlands
