X U TRECHT  X
29.4.96 - 10.5.96


ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 26

April, 1996
Original: English


ARCTIC ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STRATEGY:
MINISTERIAL MEETING AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS OF INTEREST

(Agenda item 5c)

(Submitted by Canada and The Netherlands)
04/15/98   15:08   0819 997 5813   E.F. ROOTS         2004


XX Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting


Agenda Item 5(c)     Relevance of Developments in the Arctic to the Antar itic


Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy: Ministerial Meeting, and Other Developments of Interest


In accordance with the wishes of the XIX ATCM (Agenda 5(c), para. 35), the Govern nent of Canada
was pleased to present to the Ministers or their representatives of the eight circumpolar Arctic countries
responsible for the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) meeting in Inuvik, Nori hwest Territories,
Canada on 19-21 March, 1996, a copy of the report of the XIX ATCM and associated documentation.
Canada also undertook to make copies of the ATCM documentation available to the accr sdited observers
to the AEPS upon request.


The Third Ministerial Meeting of the AEPS was attended by a representative of the organizing
committee for the XX ATCM in the Netherlands, and by the President of the Antarctic Institu e of Chile. Both
of these representatives addressed the meeting and pointed out the similarities in en vironmental and
international co-operation issues between the Antarctic and the Arctic, the dissimilarities and differences from
which much can be learned, and stressed the value of regular exchanges of information bet een south polar
and north polar developments. All member countries of the AEPS except Iceland are also adherents to the
Antarctic Treaty, and there is considerable overlap and commonality in the compositic n and expertise
between the ATCM and AEPS "families".


The report of the Third Ministerial Conference, with respect to this item, reads as follows:-


"6.3 Antarctic and Arctic Consultations"


The Ministers received with interest and gratitude the report of the XIX Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting (ATCM) and took speci 1 note of the resolution which had been
passed concerning the exchange of information between the Antarc ic and Arctic
Processes. The Ministers thanked the representative from the Netherlan is for attending
the meeting in its capacity as host of the XX ATCM and agreed to undertake to provide
information from the AEPS to the XX ATCM. The Ministers agreed that ti e most efficient
way to promote future co-operation is through the AEPS countries which i re parties to the
Antarctic Treaty".


In accordance with the agreement made by the AEPS Ministers at Inuvik, Canada is pleased to table
before the ATCM the report of the Third Ministerial Conference of the Arctic Environmental Protection
Strategy, and the associated Ministerial Declaration, "The Inuvik Declaration". Selected publications and
documents from the various activities of the AEPS have also been deposited with the XX ATCM organizing
committee for display or perusal. Copies of any of these may be obtained through the representative of
Canada.


It may be noted that Norway has offered to host the next Ministerial Conferences of the Arctic
Environmental Protection Strategy, in about two years' time.


An important current development related to policy and international co-operation in the circumpolar
Arctic that will provide enhanced and co-ordinated environmental protection and resourc s management
is the formation of a Council of eight Arctic countries. The desirability of a senior-level intergovernmental
forum in which all Arctic countries participate, to aid consultation and co-operation on a wide range of Arctic
issues has been recognized for many years. In the past four years a definite proposal has taken shape, to
04/15/96   15:09       0819 997 5813       E.F. ROOTS        2005

 
establish an Arctic Council, and has received intensive bi-lateral and multi-lateral di:cussion among
govemments of Arctic countries, international and national northern indigenous organizations, and non-
govemmental organizations. The commitment of the eight Arctic countries to form the Ar ctic Council was
reiterated strongly by Ministers at the AEPS meeting, by the Second Conference of Parliar ventarians of the
Arctic Region from seven Arctic countries meeting in Yellowknife, Canada in March 1996, a d by the Nordic
Council of Ministers in February 1996.

The Arctic Council will include in its responsibilities supervision and co-ordinat on of the Arctic
Environmental Protection Strategy. The objectives and the programmes of AEPS will be strengthened by
the co-ordination made possible by the Arctic Council, and international coherence and li nkage with other
activities facilitated. The Council will also provide a focus for international activities in the Arctic having to
do with sustainable use of resources (including the work currently undertaken in AEPS through Task Force
on Sustainable Development and Utilization), and the health, social, economic and cultural well-being of
arctic residents, under a new co-ordinated programme known as the Arctic Sustalnable Development
Initiative.

It is hoped that the Arctic Council will come formally into existence, with active involvement of
govemments of all eight Arctic countries and a permanent observer status for major Arctic indigenous
organizations, within the next six months.

 
   
. 

   
.
INUVIK DECLARATION ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN THE ARCTIC

We, Ministers of the Arctic Countries:

Recalling that Ministers of the eight Arctic governments met in Rovaniemi, Finland, in June
1991 and signed the "Declaration on the Protection of the Arctic Environment", establishing
the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS);

Recalling also that Ministers met in Nuuk, Greenland, in September 1993 and signed the
"Declaration on Environment and Development in the Arctic", reaffirming their commitment
to collective action;

Recognizing the importance of the Arctic regions to each Arctic country, to indigenous
peoples and other Arctic residents, and to the world as a whole;

Aware that the economy, health, social and cultural well-being of Arctic people are affected
directly by the condition of the Arctic environment, which is sensitive to changes caused by
both local and distant human activities;

Aware also that environmental changes in the Arctic regions have significant local, regional
and global impact;

Acknowledging the special role and responsibilities of the Arctic Countries with respect to
protection, conservation and restoration of the Arctic environment, the conservation of Arctic
flora and fauna, and the special role of indigenous peoples of the Arctic in pursuit of these
goals;

Acknowledging also the need for sustainable development and use of resources in the Arctic
for the benefit of indigenous peoples and other people living in the Arctic region;

Convinced that the major issues of the protection of the Arctic terrestrial, freshwater, marine
and atmospheric environments require local, regional, circumpolar and global cooperation and
coordination;

Aware of the special needs for investment, scientific and technical assistance and international
cooperation to protect human health and ecosystems in the Arctic;

Recognizing that pollution prevention, often coupled with investments to modernize aging
infrastructure, is essential to the long-term health of Arctic ecosystems, Arctic indigenous
peoples, as well as national and Arctic economies;

Taking into account the need for support of the programmes of the Arctic indigenous
peoples of the Russian Federation in the context of the Proclamation by the United Nations
Decade of the World's Indigenous People;
Reaffirming the support of our countries to the principles of the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development; and the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (London Convention); the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change; the UN Convention on Biological Diversity; the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe's (UN ECE) Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP), and on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context; the Global Programme of Action on Protecting the Marine Environment from Land-based Sources; and other international agreements that are relevant and apply to Arctic regions, and supporting the important contributions being made by the AEPS countries in the promotion and implementation of these agreements;

Encouraging the ratification and compliance with the global and regional international legal instruments referred to in the Third Ministerial Conference Report in the field of the environment of relevance to the Arctic region;

Taking note of the statement and recommendations of the Second Conference of Parliamentarians of the Arctic region held on March 13 - 14, 1996 in Yellowknife, Canada;

Bearing in mind that we agreed to work towards and support international arrangements to control environmentally harmful emissions that may affect the Arctic, to engage non-UN ECE countries in the reduction of global pollution, and to co-operate with other international environmental monitoring, research, conservation and protection activities that are relevant to the Arctic environment; and

Having noted the progress made by the AEPS and its programmes since its beginning in 1991, and in particular the report of the Third Ministerial Conference in Inuvik, Canada, in March 1996.

Hereby make the following Declaration:

1.   We reaffirm our commitment to protection of the Arctic environment as a priority, and to the implementation of the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS), as outlined in the Rovaniemi and Nuuk Declarations.

2.   We adopt the report of the Third Ministerial Conference on the Protection of the Arctic Environment.

2
3. We acknowledge with gratitude the work and reports of the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), the Programme on Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF), the Programme for Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME), the Programme on Emergency Prevention, Preparedness, and Response (EPPR) and the work of the Task Force on Sustainable Development and Utilization (TFSDU).

4. We welcome with appreciation the main report presented by PAME.

5. We recognize that a strong and vibrant AEPS is an essential component of a sustainable development approach in the Arctic, and emphasize the importance of integrating the AEPS Programmes with Arctic economics and social initiatives to uphold the principles of sustainable development. In view of this, we agree to establish a Working Group on Sustainable Development and Utilization (SDU).

6. We set the following priorities for the Senior Arctic Affairs Officials (SAAOs) and the AEPS Programmes.

For SAAOs, the priorities are directing the AEPS process and providing integration, policy and management direction to the AEPS Programmes and the AEPS Secretariat, as well as conducting an assessment of the present organizational structure of the AEPS with a view to ensuring cost-effective and well coordinated programmes; developing a framework and estimate for common-cost sharing, including in-kind contributions for our consideration at the next Ministerial Conference; exploring opportunities for obtaining funds from other international programmes and international financial institutions; and developing new Terms of Reference which would serve the sustainable development work under the Arctic Council once that forum is created. The SAAOs, with the assistance of the Permanent Participants, will also undertake to develop revised Terms of Reference for SDU and an initial workplan for the Arctic Council's sustainable development work, to be presented for discussion to the Arctic Council Senior Arctic Officials (SAOs).

For AMAP, the priorities are publishing in early 1997, the State of the Arctic Environment Report (SOAER) and its accompanying technical document, the Arctic Assessment Report (AAR); holding a symposium in Norway in 1997 to facilitate a senior review of the implications to the AEPS of the AAR; preparing two short papers on i) the feasibility of developing sub-regional cooperative oil-related monitoring and assessment activities, and ii) the state of knowledge concerning organotins in the marine environment; and preparing a discussion and strategy paper evaluating priorities and options for a second phase of AMAP's work.

3
For CAFF, the priorities are continuing the development of the Circumpolar Protected Area Network (CPAN); assisting countries with the implementation of the Circumpolar Murre Conservation Strategy and Action Plan; and developing a draft Arctic strategy relating to the goals of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

For PAME, the priorities are to be delivered by lead countries which will coordinate the following joint efforts: to address the development of an Arctic Regional Programme of Action on marine pollution resulting from land-based activities; to develop, in cooperation with other AEPS Programmes, guidelines for offshore petroleum activities; to collect information on current and future shipping activities and their associated environmental effects; and to maintain an overview of the effectiveness of existing international arrangements relevant to the objectives of the PAME Programme area. PAME will coordinate the lead country progress reports to the next Ministerial Conference.

For EPPR, the priorities are completing the Arctic Guide for Emergency Prevention, Preparedness and Response; contributing to the development of preventative, mitigating and response measures for oil and gas accidental releases in the Arctic; continuing to involve indigenous peoples in accident prevention and response; preparing an analysis of the effectiveness of existing accident reporting systems; refining the Risk Analysis on Environmental Threats to the Arctic, including an assessment of the need for future action; and analysing the adequacy and effectiveness of the existing international agreements and other arrangements in the Arctic within EPPR's area of expertise.

For SDU, the priority is for the Working Group to continue to operate with the current terms of reference of the Task Force on SDU and with specific direction from the SAAOs, pending the expeditious creation of the Arctic Council.

7.    We note with satisfaction the establishment of the Indigenous Peoples' Secretariat and the support it has given to the AEPS Permanent Participants to facilitate their participation in the AEPS. We further note the success of the Seminar on Integration of Indigenous Peoples' Knowledge held in Iceland, and its useful recommendations, and express our thanks to the governments of Denmark and Iceland for moving forward this major component of the AEPS.

8.    We recognize and affirm the right of all Arctic indigenous peoples to be represented in the AEPS. We acknowledge the contributions of the AEPS Permanent Participants, and encourage them and other indigenous peoples' organizations to participate actively in the work of the AEPS. We emphasize the importance of indigenous peoples and their knowledge to the AEPS and its programmes.

4
9. We affirm the need for a clear statement of ethical principles for research, data gathering and dissemination, agreeable to all countries, to Arctic indigenous peoples and to other northern residents and to the scientific community; we note the work underway by the AEPS and the International Arctic Sciences Committee (IASC). We urge that this work be completed and presented at the next Ministerial meeting.

10. We support the efforts of the Russian Federation in addressing the environmental problems in the Russian Arctic bearing in mind the Declaration of the Pan-European Ministerial Conference in Sofia, October, 1995 in which matters concerning environmental financing in the central and eastern European countries for reducing current levels of pollution and the risk of environmental degradation are given particular attention.

11. We support the continuing negotiations and collaboration in relevant international fora to integrate the AEPS with local, regional, circumpolar and global environmental protection activities such as: the work currently undertaken under the auspices of UNEP to prepare for the negotiation of a global legally binding instrument for controlling emissions and discharges of persistent organic pollutants; the protocol negotiations on POPs and heavy metals under the framework of the UN ECE-LRTAP Convention; the International Atomic Energy Agency's International Arctic Seas Assessment Programme; and highly value the contribution being made by the AEPS countries in the evolution of new international agreements.

12. We endorse the EPPR recommendation that where significant accidents occur which directly or indirectly cause, or threaten to cause, environmental or health effects in the Arctic, all Arctic Countries shall, through their National Contact Points, be notified promptly and receive further information as appropriate.

13. We agree to cooperate with the Russian Federation in searching for investments required for implementing programmes and projects aimed at the conservation and restoration of the traditional habitats of the indigenous peoples of the North of the Russian Federation.

14. We agree to ensure implementation of the priorities as listed in the present Declaration and to make every effort to provide and maintain the necessary resources to enable each country and indigenous peoples to participate fully in the activities of the AEPS.

15. We are fully committed to the earliest possible establishment of the Arctic Council.

In witness whereof, we have signed this Declaration.

5
For the Government of Canada                    For the Government of Denmark

Ronald A. Irwin                                  Marianne Jensen
Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern         Minister for Health, The Environment and
Development                                      Research and Nordic Affairs

For the Government of Finland                   For the Government of Iceland

Markku Nurmi                                     Gudmundur Bjarnason
Director General, Ministry of the Environment   Minister of the Environment

For the Government of Norway                    For the Government of the
                                                 Russian Federation

Bernt Bull                                       Victor I. Danilov-Danilian
Deputy Minister, Ministry of the Environment    Minister of the Environment Protection and
                                                 Natural Resources of the Russian Federation

For the Government of Sweden                    For the Government of the
                                                 United States of America

Mats Olsson                                      William E. Martin
Deputy Director General,                         Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Swedish Environmental Protection Agency         International Affairs

                                                Inuvik, March 21, 1996
