ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                          XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                  XX ATCM/INF 113
                                                  May 1996
                                                  Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS: STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR HEIKKI PUURUNEN,
HEAD OF THE FINNISH DELEGATION

(Agenda Item 3)

(Submitted by Finland)
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR
HEIKKI PUURUNEN,
HEAD OF THE FINNISH DELEGATION

Mr Chairman,

Let me first congratulate you on behalf of the Finnish delegation on your election to the Chairman of this XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. I am confident that we will reach tangible results under your good chairmanship at our present meeting. May I also express our gratitude to the Government of the Netherlands for hosting this meeting and for her kind hospitality.

Mr Chairman,

Taking into consideration the large number of important issues to be discussed at our meeting I will confine myself to addressing only a few topics that are important to us.

Finland has noted with great satisfaction the progress made after our last meeting in Seoul in the number of ratifications of the Madrid Protocol. Finland is also determined to join soon those countries that have already completed their national procedures in this respect and, for her part, contribute to our common goal, the entry into force of the Protocol.

As in many other countries the ratification of the Protocol by Finland requires consent of the Parliament. A separate national act on the environmental protection of the Antarctic had also to be drafted in order to ensure effective implementation of the provisions of the Protocol. The draft is now finished and the Government Bill on the ratification as well as on the draft act, which are due to be taken up by the Parliament simultaneously, is about to be submitted to the Parliament.

The draft Annex on Environmental Liability to the Madrid Protocol has been discussed several times by the Legal Experts' Working Group. Progress has been made under the able chairmanship of Professor Rüdiger Wolfrum but central issues still need to be agreed upon. Finland views effective protection of the Antarctic environment as the primary consideration in this respect.
Mr Chairman,

Finland supports international cooperation in Antarctic research and logistics. It is obvious that more results can be achieved by common efforts and equal cost-sharing. This may also cause less environmental disturbance.

As an example of our aspirations for international cooperation I would like to mention a common environmental management plan that is being prepared by Finland and Sweden whose research stations in the Antarctic are located close to each other. Such a common plan will allow us to plan jointly activities in the Nordenskiöld base area and also to better assess and control environmental impacts caused by the stations.

Finland also supports the recently launched "Environmental Monitoring of Impacts from Research and Operations in the Antarctic" as a means to assess in a comprehensive way consequences of human activities carried out by all 26 countries currently involved in Antarctic research.

In the beginning of 1996 the Finnish research vessel "Aranda" owned by the Finnish Institute of Marine Research undertook an expedition to the Weddell Sea in cooperation with Norway and Sweden. Research was focused on marine sciences. The expedition was a continuation of the Finnish-Norwegian-Swedish cooperation on Antarctic transportation.

An automatic weather station is located at the Finnish research station Aboa in the Queen Maud Land. It has been delivered there in order to secure a continuous data flow into the GTS network of the WMO.

The ozone sounding has been continued at the Argentinean Marambio research station in the framework of Finnish-Argentinean cooperation. This research has been scientifically productive in terms of several doctoral and master's theses.

Mr Chairman,

I would like to conclude by noting that Finland - as the initiator of the Rovaniemi-process - has been active in promoting the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy and is pleased with the establishment of contacts between the ATCMs and the AEPS as "interpolar" cooperation. Finland is convinced that this cooperation will continue also in the Arctic Council which will be established this summer.
