ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 61
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English

INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA
BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM
TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(agenda item 9)

(Submitted by Brazil)
INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR RESOURCES OF THE SEA

BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM

TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

Ref.: Item 9 of the Provisional Agenda of the XX ATCM ( Information Paper)

The area of Admiralty Bay, where the brazilian Antarctic Station "Comandante
Ferraz" (EACF) is located, has been receiving a flow of tourism that is causing
concern regarding the environmental protection of the Antarctic, the damage done to
the scientific research in progress, and the security of the resources and people
involved in that activity. Although Brazil doesn't have, up to now, any national
operators which deal with tourism in the Antarctic, the PROANTAR administration
has been observing, with increasing concern, the development of that human activity.

During the last six summers, the EACF received the following visitor flow:
• 1990 / 1991 = 550 tourists;
• 1991 / 1992 = 1100 tourists;
• 1992 / 1993 = 1645 tourists;
• 1993 / 1994 = 1600 tourists;
• 1994 / 1995 = 1200 tourists; and
• 1995 / 1996 = 514 tourists.

Although in the last summer, 1995/1996, there was a reduction of tourism, the
flow is still big, showing the necessity of its regulation. Besides the immediate
consequence, the increase of pollution risk caused by residues left by the visitors, ships
and boats utilized, the appropriated attention given to each ship which visits the EACF,
causes undesired interruptions in the scientific program and the other activities in the
Station, thus damaging the research in progress and  the routine activities of Station
maintenance.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                          1
In order to minimize possible environmental impacts, the Brazilian Antarctic 
Program (PROANTAR) distributes to the tourists who visit the EACF a Visitor's 
Guide to the Antarctic (Annex A). The visit to the Station follows a pre-established 
route (Annex B), and it is preceded by a brief explanation to the visitors about the 
care required with the antarctic environmental and ecosystem. The members of EACF 
(Support Group and/or researchers) are designated to accompany the tourists during 
their visit and pay attention to the keeping of the visitor's rules.

The increment of the tourism in the Antarctic also involves potential risks of 
accidents involving ships and aircrafts, which might bring serious consequences to the 
tourists, to the crew and to the Antarctic environment. These consequences can be 
intensified by the difficulty of SAR and salvage operations in that area.

In consequence of the absence of SAR support in the Antarctic Treaty Area, 
there is a need for the Tourism Operators to be conscious of their responsibilities and 
to be able to give all assistance necessary in an eventual emergency involving boats, 
tourists or crew. In the same way, the tourist ships must have their own resources to 
be able to face the difficulties of diseases and accidents involving their crew and 
passengers.

The topic is controversial because it involves conflicting interests. On one hand, 
the Tourism Operators defend an increase of their activities; on the other hand, the 
administration of the National Antarctic Programs and Non-Governmental 
Organizations are concerned with implementing the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty 
System mainly with regard to the environmental protection, and thus to minimize 
possible tourism interferences over the good progress in research activities.

Independently of the conflicting concepts, it seems clear that the tourist 
activities in the Antarctic involves calculable risks, not only causing damage to the 
environment, but also provoking accidents, with the means of transport and visitors, 
besides, sometimes, causing undesirable intrusions in the scientific activities in 
progress. The solution of the problem involves a growth in consciousness and a 
change in the attitudes of the agents involved: the Tourism Operators, the ship's crew 
and the tourists themselves.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                    2
VISITOR'S GUIDE TO THE ANTARCTIC                                  ANNEX "A"

CARE                                 LITTER                            SAFETY                            SCIENCE STATIONS
FOR THE ENVIRONMENT                 AND HUMAN IMPACT                 



The Antarctic environment can      In Antarctica it can take decades  Antarctica is a very hazardous    Research in Antarctica is making
easily be damaged.                  for human trash or artifacts to   place.                            a special contribution to
Please respect it.                  break down.                                                    international understanding of
                                                                                                      the globe.

- Plants are rare, fragile and      - Take all your litter with you.    - Be alert!                       - Check with the station managers in
  slow growing.                                                    - Plan your activities with safety  the area you are visiting before you
  Avoid walking on moss and lichens.                           in mind at all times.             visit Antarctica. They can inform you
  It takes years for these to recover.                                            - Be prepared to survive in the cold.  of their activities.

- Do not collect organic matter     - Do not throw litter overboard from- Be self-sufficient in your plans and  - Stations are home for antarctic
  such as lichens and mosses.         ships.                            the equipment you carry.         personnel. Please respect their
                                                                                                      property and privacy.
- If birds or seals react to your   - The Antarctic Treaty's Code of  - Do not expect a rescue service.   - Do not disturb sites where scientific
  presence, you are too close. Keep   Conduct on Waste Management                                    research is going on.
  your distance!                     provides solid guidance on minimizing
                                      adverse effects of human presence.                         - Check on the research activities that
- Allow fossils and rocks to remain                                      - Learn about Antarctic hazards.    are underway in the area you are
  undisturbed.                        - Avoid trampling of sites.                                        visiting.

- Keep to established tracks or trails- Please respect historic sites. They are- Always stay with your group.    - Do not automatically expect support
  Avoid walking on undisturbed ground.protected by the Antarctic Treaty.                               from research stations. They are not
                                                                                                      set up as visitor hostels.
- Be sensitive in the way you take  - Emergency depots and refuges must
  photographs. Do not disturb plants ornot be disturbed.
ANNEX "B"

Brazilian Antarctic Station Comandante Ferraz

LEGEND
      --  Visitors Path

1) Start
2) Fuel
3) Old british boat.
4) Take skeleton out together by Coutteau. Nests and lickens.
      Nesting area of Antartic Stern.
5) Derastivated British building known 
      as "Base C"
6) Spanish tower (Belvedere).
7) Spanich tower-VLF science unitl
8) Water pumpe.
9) Crosses after 4 British and 1 Brazilian 
      acreased. Hesting area of Antartic Stern
10) Water pumpe of the South Lake.
11) Ruins of the British radionde 
      station.
12) Unit of meterological support and 
      research.
13) Ruins of an old British whale 
      station known as "The Hotel".
14) Sun-dial.
15) Chemistry laboratory unit.
16) Main station comlex (60 units)1)
      2 laboratories and 1 aquarium for 
      biological research.
      1 laboratory for cosnical sciences.
      11 sleeping rooms for 2 persons eacn.
      Infirmary for 18 persons.
      Outfit room.
      Station facilites (Living room. radio 
      and whale stations, bathrooms, kitchen,
      reading rom, woreshoes. laundry. etc).
17) Skua nesting area.
18) Emergency Refuge.

Along the shore area near the station we 
can find whale stations. Panux. Acelic and 
Chin Strae penguins. Seals and Blue Eycd 
Shags.

The ozone. rado and cosmic researcn units 
are placed in Punta Plaza. 800m Su from 
the main station complex.

Mail Adress: Asplak de Correio Satelitar 
Estacao Antartica Comandante Ferraz 
"Ilhas Shetland do Sul - Ilha dei Gei
CEP 00000
