ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         xx консультативное совещание

                                  XX ATCM/INF 100
                                  May, 1996
                                  Original: English

PHOTODOCUMENTATION OF SURVEY SITES: REPORT OF A COOPERATIVE
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM DURING THE 1995-96 AUSTRAL SUMMER

                                  (Agenda item 9)

(Submitted by United States and United Kingdom)
PHOTODOCUMENTATION OF SURVEY SITES:
REPORT OF A COOPERATIVE INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM
DURING THE 1995-96 AUSTRAL SUMMER
(Submitted by the United States and the United Kingdom)

This Information Paper describes US-UK cooperative efforts during the 1995-96 austral summer field season to achieve oblique aerial photodocumentation of survey sites for the Antarctic Site Inventory project. This program of work required considerable advance planning and ultimately proved to be very successful: 20 of the Inventory's 47 established survey sites were photodocumented, as were an additional 16 sites that will be ground-surveyed in the future and added to the Inventory catalogue. In addition, project investigators were able to achieve an additional ten ground-surveys for the Inventory.

The results from this cooperative program with the UK's ice patrol vessel HMS ENDURANCE advanced substantially the development of the Inventory's database. It is hoped that opportunities for similar work in the 1996-97 field season and beyond will be available.

BACKGROUND

On the basis of a two-year award from the US National Science Foundation's Office of Polar Programs,1 Oceanites began international liaisons regarding the Inventory in August 1994. Field work started in the Antarctic Peninsula in November 1994. In April 1995, the principal investigator scheduled a series of meetings in Cambridge and London, UK. These were to discuss: coordination on data collection aspects of the project; logistics for the upcoming 1994-95 Antarctic field season; and a collaborative work program on HMS ENDURANCE.

1 NSF/OPP Grant Award No. OPP 94-9407212, dated September 29, 1994, to Oceanites, Inc. Ron Naveen of Oceanites is the principal investigator for the project, and he and his principal assistant, Mr. Brent Houston, worked with Captain Bryant and HMS ENDURANCE during the January 7-February 1, 1996 period. The Antarctic Site Inventory project is more fully described in the XIXth ATCM Information Paper: ANTARCTIC SITE INVENTORY: SUMMARY OF PROGRESS DURING TWO SEASONS OF FIELD WORK - 1994 TO 1996.

1
To the extent ENDURANCE would be working in the vicinity of Inventory study sites, there was an opportunity to obtain oblique aerial site photodocumentation that would greatly assist the project's mapping efforts. Importantly, over the longer term, photodocumentation would provide the basis for correlating and comparing ground-survey counts and counts derived from digitized aerial photographs, and for determining whether oblique aerial photography provides an equally or more cost-effective means than ground-surveys for inventorying and monitoring selected sites.

Through a formal bid submitted in July 1995, and after specific consultations and discussions with the Polar Regions Section, South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Inventory investigators were invited to join HMS ENDURANCE during the ship's second work period in the Antarctic Peninsula. The prime objective was to utilize ENDURANCE's helicopters on an opportunistic basis in an attempt to achieve oblique aerial photodocumentation of the project's survey sites.

Inventory personnel joined ENDURANCE in Punta Arenas, Chile on January 7, 1996, and continued work until February 1, 1996, when they were disembarked at the Polish Arctowski Research Station in Admiralty Bay. The January-February time frame is key for collecting data on biological parameters of relevance to the Inventory. This is when penguin chick-creching is at its peak, southern fur seals begin to haul-out on favored beaches, and southern elephant seals collect in wallows to molt.

ENDURANCE planned to place British Antarctic Survey teams on King George Island and at Port Lockroy, before heading through Antarctic Sound and Erebus and Terror Gulf and south to Vega Island, where a major hydrographic survey was planned for the succeeding 2-3 week period. These portions of the Antarctic Peninsula are heavily visited during the austral summer, and ENDURANCE's projected schedule offered an opportunity to obtain oblique aerial photodocumentation of many established and future survey sites for the Antarctic Site Inventory project.

2
GENERAL WORK PLAN AND METHODS

HMS ENDURANCE's principal missions include hydrographic 
surveying, station visits and Antarctic Treaty inspections on 
behalf of the UK Government, and logistics support for British 
Antarctic Survey and other scientific personnel. The 
photodocumentation of Inventory survey sites was done 
opportunistically when the ship's Lynx helicopters were 
available and could be flown without interfering with other 
work.

The project's aerial photodocumentation was obtained using a 
Canon EOS-1N camera, f2.8 28-80mm and f2.8 70-200mm Canon 
lenses, and fine-grained Kodak Lumiere 100 ASA film. To insure 
picture sharpness, shutter speeds of at least 1/1000 of a second 
were used, and the lenses steadied by a handheld and battery-
powered, Ken-Lab gyro stabilizer.

All film canisters were marked in the field according to a 
designation system that enables original slides to be catalogued 
by field season, roll number, and frame-number. This insures the 
correct identification of all photographs of a particular site. 
All original site sketches and maps are digitized and computer-
stored before being similarly filed for safe-keeping. The 
oblique aerial photodocumentation obtained during the 1995-96 
field season will be used to upgrade these site sketches and 
maps.

GUIDANCE TO AVOID HARMFUL INTERFERENCE

All operations by ENDURANCE's helicopters were done in full 
accordance with guidelines established by the Polar Regions 
Section, South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, UK Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office to avoid harmful interference with 
concentrations of Antarctic wildlife. These guidelines flow from 
Article VII(2)(b) of the 1964 Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna, and Articles 1(h)(1) 
and 3(1) of Annex II of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

To minimize disturbance, these guidelines state that: except 
in emergencies or in accordance with a permit, helicopters 
cannot land in, or directly adjacent to, a Specially Protected
3
Area (SPA) or Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI); 
overflying of SPAs and SSSIs is to be done at a minimum height 
of 250 meters (preferably higher); overflying concentrations of 
penguins and seabirds is to be avoided; if such overflying is 
necessary for operational or other reasons, it is to take place 
at a height of 250 meters minimum, and is to be accomplished as 
rapidly as possible; hovering above or close to wildlife 
concentrations is to be avoided; landing in or directly adjacent 
to wildlife concentrations is prohibited, except in emergencies 
or in accordance with a permit; landings close to wildlife 
concentrations are to be as far away as practical and not within 
300 meters; and individual or small groups of wildlife, while 
not considered concentrations, are nevertheless to be avoided if 
at all possible.

To comply with these guidelines, all aerial work for the 
Inventory proceeded at altitudes no lower than 850 feet (greater 
than 250 meters).

ACHIEVEMENTS

Inventory personnel working on board HMS ENDURANCE during the 
period January 7-February 1, 1996 accomplished the following:
 
• oblique aerial photography of 15 study sites where 
ground-surveys had been done previously;

• oblique aerial photography of 16 additional sites 
that had not been surveyed previously; and

• ground-surveys of 5 existing study sites, and 5 new 
sites that were surveyed and added to the 
Inventory.

The 20 study sites where ground-surveys have taken place, and 
which have now been photodocumented include:

AITC     Aitcho Islands                    DEVI     Devil Island
ARCT     Arctowski Station vicinity        DURV     D'Urville Monument
ASTR     Astrolabe Island                  HALF     Half Moon Island   
BAIL     Baily Head, Deception Is.         HANN     Hannah Point
BROW     Brown Bluff, Tabarin Pen.         HOPE     Hope Bay (Esperanza Stn.)

4
JONA Jonassen Island                                  ROBE Robert Point
JUBA Jubany Station                                  SNOW Snow Hill Island
MARA Marambio Stn., Seymour Is.                      TURR Turret Point, KGI
PAUL Paulet Island                                   WHAL Whaler's Bay, Deception Is.
PENG Penguin Island                                  YANK Yankee Harbor

The 16 additional sites that were photodocumented, and where 
ground-surveys will hopefully occur in the future are:

COCK Cockburn Island                                  ROSS James Ross Is.
DUND Petrel Cove, Dundee Is.                         SEYM Penguin Point, Seymour Is.
EDEN Eden Rocks                                      SOBA South Bay, Livingston Is.
HARM Harmony Point, K. Geo. Is.                      THOM Pt. Thomas, K. Geo. Is.
LION Lion's Rump, K. Geo. Is.                        THRE Three Sisters Pt., K. Geo. Is.
MACA Macaroni Point, Deception Is.                   VAPO Vapour Colony, Deception Is.
MAXW Maxwell Bay, K. Geo. Is.                        VEGA Cape Well-met, Vega Island
PUGE Puget Rock                                      VORT Vortex Island

RELATED ACCOMPLISHMENTS

    Brown Bluff, Tabarin Peninsula  (63°32'S, 56°55'W), Devil 
Island (63°48'S, 57°17'W), and Jonassen Island (63°33'S, 
56°40'W) have not been studied previously in depth.

    Brown Bluff is an ice-capped, flat-topped mountain rising to 
a height of 745 meters, with a prominent reddish-brown volcanic 
rock on its north face, located nine miles south of Hope Bay. 
The initial reconnaissance of this site, which is not referenced 
in the latest compilation of Antarctic penguin colonies,2 was 
accomplished by one of ENDURANCE's helicopter teams, Lt. Cmdr. 
Nick Dukes, flight commander and observer, and Lt. Ian Banks, 
senior helicopter pilot, while returning over the Tabarin 
Peninsula from Hope Bay to the ship's position north of Vega 
Island on January 16, 1996. There is an enormous colony of 
Adélie Penguins extending for more than a mile along the north 
beach below Brown Bluff itself, with the Adélie colonies rising

2 E. J. Woehler, The Distribution and Abundance of Antarctic and Subantarctic Penguins, 
(1993).

5
to 145 meters above sea level. On January 22, 1996 this site was 
photodocumented and Inventory investigators were able to also 
spend more than six hours on site sketch-mapping and conducting 
ground-surveys. The Adélie chicks were well creched and 
preliminary counts and initial extrapolations from aerial 
photographs suggest at least 20,000 Adélie chicks. There were 
also small colonies of gentoo penguins on the eastern end of 
this beach, with approximately 200-250 chicks, 4-6 weeks of age, 
in creche.

Jonassen Island lies to the east of Brown Bluff, and is a 
small 2.5 mile-long island that lies just north of Andersson 
Island, in the south entrance to Antarctic Sound. On January 30, 
1996, Inventory investigators were able to survey the small 
gentoo penguin colony on the northwest tip of the island, at 
Cape Chaucheprat, but could not locate the "large" Adélie 
penguin colony reported from Jonassen Island in 1901.

Devil Island, which lies just slightly to the north and east 
of Cape Well-met on Vega Island, also was photodocumented and 
ground-surveyed by Inventory personnel on January 20, 1996. This 
"large" Adélie penguin colony was apparently first reported in 
1945. On the day of the ground-survey, Adélie chicks were just 
beyond the peak of creching and all of them - a total of 10,320 
- were counted.

CONCLUSION

This past season's cooperative effort between the Antarctic 
Site Inventory and HMS ENDURANCE suggests numerous opportunities 
for future work. It certainly indicates how useful and 
desireable international cooperation can be in Antarctica. In 
addition to carrying out a series of activities and priorities, 
and with sufficient advance planning, ENDURANCE also may achieve 
important results for emerging initiatives like the Antarctic 
Site Inventory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Captain B W Bryant, the officers, and entire ship's 
company of HMS ENDURANCE for their assistance in this 
cooperative international program.

6
