ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE      XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕШАНИЕ

                              XX ATCM/INF 69
                              (REV 1)
                              May, 1996
                              Original: English

THE SCAR GLOBAL CHANGE PROGRAMME

(Agenda item 13)

(Submitted by SCAR)
The SCAR Global Change Programme

Information Paper submitted to XX ATCM by SCAR

Agenda item 13

The year since XIX ATCM has seen a significant development for the SCAR global change 
programme. The establishment of the SCAR Global Change Programme Office, hosted by the 
Co-operative Research Centre for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Environment in the 
University of Tasmania, Hobart, and the appointment of the SCAR Global Change Programme 
Coordinator has enabled the establishment of linkages between SCAR programmes with global 
change components and the core projects of the international global change programmes. In 
addition the Programme Office has been involved in the development of proposals for new 
SCAR programmes to address important issues that are not covered by existing programmes.

One of the major activities of the Programme Office has been the development of linkages 
between SCAR's regional scale programmes with global change components and the relevant 
core projects of the global scale global change research programmes - the International 
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the World Climate Research Programme 
(WCRP). The objectives of this activity have been to ensure that issues that are regionally 
important within the Antarctic are represented in the global scale programmes and to ensure that 
regional scale Antarctic programmes are themselves addressing and supporting issues of 
concern to the global scale programmes. These linkages have been developed on two levels:

1. At the institutional level, between SCAR and IGBP and WCRP: This is being facilitated 
through the development of a memorandum of understanding between SCAR and the 
System for Analysis, Research and Training (START) of the IGBP, WCRP and IHDP 
(the International Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change Programme). A 
START Antarctic Regional Committee will be established to promote the principal 
programmes of IGBP and WCRP in the Antarctic, together with the SCAR global change 
programmes. Whilst it is recognised that SCAR has a wider portfolio of interests than 
those of START, there is, however, a close congruence of major interests between the two 
organisations that indicates the value of joint planning and implementation for the good of 
global science.

2. At the programme level, between the core projects of IGBP and WCRP and related 
programmes within SCAR: This is being developed through direct project to programme 
links facilitated by the SCAR Global Change Programme Office and has been greatly 
assisted by a meeting in February 1996 between the SCAR Global Change Programme 
Coordinator and the Directors of the IGBP Core Projects.

The SCAR global change programme is coordinated through its Group of Specialists on Global 
Change and the Antarctic (SCAR-GLOCHANT) assisted by the Programme Office. SCAR-
GLOCHANT has identified two research areas that are important for understanding the role of 
the Antarctic in global change and that are not being addressed by existing programmes. One is 
the role of sea-ice processes in the physical climate system and in biogeochemical cycles, the 
other covers the physical and dynamical processes controlling the Antarctic ice sheet.

SCAR-GLOCHANT has focused its present programme on two major themes through the 
establishment of scientific task groups: "Palaeoenvironmental Records from Antarctic Ice Cores 
(PICE)" and "Antarctic Ice Sheet Mass Balance and Sea-Level Contributions (ISMASS)".

PICE is jointly sponsored by the Global Changes (PAGES) programme of IGBP, which is 
examining global changes over the past 250,000 years. PICE is developing a coherent bi-polar 
strategy for deep ice-coring and ice core analysis. The ISMASS programme is coordinating 
and building upon research objectives that are being undertaken by several national 
programmes on measuring components of the ice sheet mass balance. Remote-sensing is the 
principal method, using data from satellites and radio-echo sounding flights, but ground-truth 
data are also being collected. A major aim is to determine the ice-mass flux outward from the 
ice sheet across the grounding line into the ocean by the measurement of ice thickness around 
the entire Antarctic perimeter.
GLOCHANT is presently developing proposals for two new programmes to cover additional 
priority research areas. A science plan for a programme on Antarctic Sea-ice Processes, 
Ecosystems and Climate (ASPECT) is close to completion. ASPECT will focus on the inter-
relationships between the physical processes controlling the atmosphere and ocean interaction, 
through the development and maintenance of the seasonal sea-ice cover, and the inter-
relationship between sea-ice biota and primary ecological production in the Southern Ocean, 
and their role in global biogeochemical cycling.

ASPECT has potential strong linkages with the WCRP core projects on Climate Variability and 
Predictability (CLIVAR) and the Arctic Climate System Study (ACSYS). It is anticipated that a 
programme called Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution (ANTIME) will be established to coordinate 
research on the Antarctic sedimentary record. This programme will focus on resolving the past 
changes and forcings on the Antarctic Ice Sheet during the Late Quaternary, and enable a 
comparison to be made between these changes and those interpreted from ice cores and deep 
sea sediments. It will allow the development of a better understanding of past changes upon 
which to base future predictions of the responses of the ice sheet and the surrounding oceans to 
future forcings such as global warming. It is intended that ANTIME will be another SCAR 
contribution to the IGBP PAGES core project.

SCAR also has other programmes with a global change emphasis that are the responsibility of 
other SCAR Groups of Specialists or Working Groups. The most important are the Coastal 
and Shelf Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone (CS-EASIZ) and the Biological Investigations 
of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIOTAS). CS-EASIZ has potential links to three of the 
IGBP core projects: Land Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone (LOICZ); Southern Ocean - 
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (SO-JGOFS); and Southern Ocean - Global Ocean Ecosystem 
Dynamics (SO-GLOBEC). BIOTAS has a potential direct link with Focus 4, on Ecological 
Complexity, of the Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) project of the IGBP.

GLOCHANT is also proposing to SCAR that over the next 18 months it carries out an 
assessment of the current status of Antarctic global change science, reporting on the most 
important developments in the understanding of global change in the Antarctic and the role of 
the Antarctic in global change. This will update SCAR's regional research agenda "The Role 
of the Antarctic in Global Change - An International Plan for a Regional Research Programme" 
published in 1993.

GLOCHANT is also investigating the development of closer links with Arctic global change 
programmes under the auspices of the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). 
GLOCHANT considers that there may well be benefits in adopting a bi-polar approach in 
certain areas of global change research.

The structural and organisational issues arising out of the development of linkages to IGBP and 
WCRP, and the requirement to form a START Antarctic Regional Committee were discussed at 
the 4th meeting of GLOCHANT (April 1996). The Group of Specialists concluded that a 
restructuring of the group should take place to ensure that it includes representatives of those 
programmes under SCAR auspices that have a global change component, as well as a number 
of other 'experts'. The latter would bring additional expertise to the group, including an 
understanding of global change processes in the Arctic for a bi-polar viewpoint, and an 
understanding of global change in a world-wide context, to ensure the SCAR programme 
includes a global focus. The revised Group of Specialists will have twin roles:

1. To maintain an overview of Antarctic global change research programmes under SCAR's 
auspices, to ensure that key issues are addressed and to act as the focus for 
interdisciplinary synthesis. The group will also have responsibility for overseeing the 
work of the SCAR Global Change Programme Office.

2. To act as the formal institutional linkage between SCAR and IGBP/WCRP through the 
START framework, by taking on the role of the START Regional Committee for the 
Antarctic.

The proposal for this re-structured Group of Specialists will be submitted to the SCAR 
Executive for discussion by SCAR Working Groups at XXIV SCAR (August 1996) before 
being formally proposed to the XXIV SCAR Delegates Meeting.

2
