ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 68
                                  (REV 1)
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English

ENVIRONMENTAL CODE OF CONDUCT

(Agenda item 15)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
NZAP and Environmental 
Protection

Antarctica is a unique environment with unique 
ecosystems. In accordance with international agreements 
(principally the Environmental Protocol) the New Zealand 
Antarctic Programme (NZAP) is committed to ensuring 
its activities in Antarctica do not harm these ecosystems 
or significantly disturb the environment. The protocol 
designates Antarctica as a natural reserve devoted to peace 
and science.

Environmental protection measures are now an integral 
part of NZAP programme activities. As part of the annual 
New Zealand programme some of the responsibility for 
environmental protection in the Antarctic falls directly 
on you.

This leaflet outlines an environmental code of conduct 
based on NZAP's detailed environmental protection 
measures. You need to be familiar with these measures and 
to be aware of how they affect your activities in Antarctica. 
The leaflet aims to provide you with an accessible and 
easily understandable summary of your responsibilities, 
but it is not a substitute for the legal obligations you must 
meet under the protocol and New Zealand law. It is your 
responsibility to be familiar with these obligations.

Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

The protocol designates Antarctica as a reserve devoted to 
peace and science. The protocol also calls for the 
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment 
and associated ecosystems. As a signatory to 
the protocol, New Zealand is committed 
to its implementation and to the 
protection of the Antarctic 
environment.

"A natural reserve devoted 
to peace and science"

                                  Enjoy your time in Antarctica but be 
                                  aware of your environmental 
                                  stewardship responsibilities 
                                  in this unique environment.

Further Information

Detailed provisions and policies covering NZAP environmental 
protection measures can be found in the NZAP manuals, Waste 
Management Handbook and the policy manual (available at Scott Base 
or in Christchurch). Consult these documents if you are unsure of 
anything or ask your manager, event leader, the Senzrep or the NZAP 
Environmental Officer.

                                  NZ^P
                                  NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC PROGRAMME

                                  International Antarctic Centre, Orchard Road, 
                                  PO Box 14-091, Christchurch, New Zealand
                                  Telephone +64-3-358 0200, Facsimile +64-3-358 0211

NZ^P
NEW ZEALAND ANTARCTIC PROGRAMME

                                                                        
                                                                                       Environmental
                                                                                       Code of 
                                                                                       Conduct
NZAP Environmental Code of Conduct

Protected Areas
Certain areas of Antarctica are set aside for protection as Specially 
Protected Areas (SPA) or Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). 
Management aims to preserve the unique natural and physical values 
of the sites.
  • Be aware of the location of SPAs and SSSIs in the Ross Sea 
    area in relation to your activities.
  • Remember that a permit is required to enter any SPA or SSSI 
    and that this permit must be carried with you in the field.
  • If entering an SPA or SSSI, it is your responsibility to be fully 
    aware of any restrictions on your activities.

Historic Huts and Monuments
The Ross Sea area is rich in history and was the setting for some of the 
world's greatest explorations. The historic sites that remain are a 
valuable record of past activities and are protected under the Antarctic 
Treaty system.
  • If you plan to visit any historic hut make yourself aware of the 
    Antarctic Heritage Trust's Code of Conduct. Copies are 
    available at Scott Base.
  • Do not handle, remove or disturb the contents of historic huts 
    or anything from the environs of a hut or historic site. Take 
    care where you walk.
  • Ensure your boots and clothing are free of grit and snow before 
    entering a hut.
  • Smoking in and around the huts is strictly forbidden.
  • Report any new finds of historic items to the Senrep.

Waste Separation and Disposal
Most activities carried out in Antarctica will produce waste of some 
kind. This waste must be disposed of properly as many waste products 
can be harmful to the Antarctic environment.
  • Waste is disposed of according to whether it is burnable, non 
    burnable or recyclable. It is your responsibility to separate the 
    waste you produce into these categories.
  • Remember: burnables (blue) include paper and cardboard, 
    untreated timber, food wastes and food contaminated plastics; 
    non burnables (green) include all other plastics, treated timber, 
    fabric and non recyclable glass; recyclables include glass, 
    metal, metal cans and aluminium cans.
  • Remember open burning is not permitted.
  • All hazardous waste and should be taken to the cargo handler 
    at Scott Base for correct packaging and labelling and is 
    returned to New Zealand.

Waste in the Field
Maintaining a satisfactory system of waste disposal in the field can be 
difficult but correct disposal of waste is essential. In ice free areas the 
protocol requires removal of all wastes.
  • Separate waste into burnable and non burnable. Include 
    recyclables in the non burnables if it is impractical to separate 
    these items (glass, metal and aluminium cans).
  • Washed, empty food cans should be kept separate for recycling.
  • On or adjacent to the sea, dispose of grey water and human 
    waste directly into the sea through a tide crack or hole or on the 
    shoreline below high tide mark.
  • On permanent snow and ice covered areas bury grey water and 
    human waste.
  • In ice free areas away from the coast, all wastes, including grey 
    water and human waste, must be returned to Scott Base.
  • All other waste must be returned to Scott Base.

Fuel Spills
If working with fuel or oil products it is your responsibility to prevent 
spills and to be aware of what actions you should take if a spill occurs. 
The impacts of fuel spills on the environment can be significant if 
appropriate action is not taken quickly.
  • Minimise the handling and storage of fuel in the vicinity of 
    protected areas, on sea ice, near freshwater lakes and streams, 
    bird and seal colonies and vegetation.
  • Use the sorbant mats provided when refuelling vehicles and 
    other equipment.
  • If a spill occurs ensure personnel safety, stop the flow of oil and 
    follow the procedure for clean up in the Field Manual.

Waste Minimisation and Reuse
Consider opportunities to reduce the volume and types of waste you 
produce before coming to Antarctica.
  • Get rid of excess packaging and any non-essential items before 
    leaving Christchurch.
  • Check that you do not bring to Antarctica prohibited products 
    including PCBs, non-sterile soil, polystyrene beads, chips or 
    similar forms of packaging and pesticides.
  • Minimise the use of any other polystyrene packaging materials. 
    Use bubble wrap or paper wherever possible. Vermiculite 
    should only be used for packaging of chemicals.
  • The reuse of items such as office paper and cardboard (for 
    packaging) is encouraged.

Field Activities
Be aware that your presence in an area can have detrimental 
environmental impacts. Every effort should be made to minimise the 
impact of scientific investigations and camps.
  • When camping in areas used previously,
