ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                  XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE           
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                            XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


XX ATCM/INF 48
April, 1996
Original: English

REPORT OF THE ANTARTIC AND SOUTHERN
OCEAN COALITION (ASOC)

(Agenda item 5b)

(Submitted by ASOC)
ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION
 Private Bag 92/507                     424 C Street NE
 Wellesley Street                       Washington, D.C. 20002
 Auckland                               USA
 New Zealand                            Tel. (202) 544-0236
 Tel. (649) 630-6317                    Fax (202) 544-8483
 Fax (649) 630-7121                     Econet: antarctica@igc.org

REPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION (ASOC)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Agenda Item 5 (b)

April 1996

Printed on recycled paper
REPORT OF THE ANTARCTIC AND SOUTHERN OCEAN COALITION (ASOC)

Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

Agenda Item 5 (b)
April 1996

Since the XIX ATCM in Seoul, ASOC member groups have continued to participate in, and to monitor components of, the Antarctic Treaty system. ASOC member groups have continued to provide educational and public information materials on the Antarctic Treaty system to government and legislative officials, scientists, professional groups, the media and the public in many countries.

● Our primary focus during the past year has been a strengthening of our efforts to encourage individual Parties to ratify the Protocol, and hence bring it into force at the earliest date.

However, more than four and a half years have now elapsed since the signing of the Protocol, and although the past year has seen six further ratifications, four Consultative Parties (Finland, Japan, Russia and the United States) remain to ratify. In at least two of these (Japan and Russia) the process appears to be moving very slowly. ASOC urges all of these Parties to make the commitment necessary to complete ratification within the next year. We also encourage all other Parties to offer whatever assistance they can to facilitate the prompt entry into force of the Protocol.

● The practical implementation of the Protocol is as important as the fact of ratification. Although 22 Parties have ratified the Protocol, only 7 have passed implementing legislation. ASOC hopes that, consistent with each state's legal processes, all Parties will work towards an effective domestic legal basis for their commitments under the Protocol. In many cases this will require Parties to enact enabling legislation to codify these commitments. Effective implementation is the litmus test for this Protocol.

● We urge Parties to facilitate practical implementation by increased sharing of expertise and technology, through both multilateral and bilateral initiatives.

ASOC also urges those Non Consultative Parties which are active in Antarctica, or from which activities in Antarctica are organised, to ratify and implement the Protocol as soon as possible. In particular we urge Ukraine, Bulgaria and Canada to take the necessary legal steps to bring the Protocol into force for their countries.

We have continued to direct substantial attention and resources to the question of a liability annex to the Protocol. An effective liability regime is essential to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Protocol and thus is an imperative in the overall system of "comprehensive" protection promised by the Protocol, and mandated by Article 16.

ASOC congratulates Professor Rudiger Wolfrum for his work in developing the elements of a liability annex, and ushering forward successive "Offerings." We continue to submit
detailed comments on each of these Offerings. ASOC's "Commentary on the Chairman's Fifth Offering" is tabled at this ATCM as an Information paper. However, ASOC is extremely concerned about the slow rate of progress Parties are making towards a completed annex and by several Parties' support for a very weak final instrument, which we believe would undermine the comprehensive nature of the Protocol.

We note with disappointment the continuing failure to establish a Secretariat, which could greatly contribute to the implementation of the Protocol and assist with other aspects of the Treaty's work.

ASOC looks forward to the second meeting of the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG), and hopes that with the experience of its first meeting in Seoul it will now be able to assume the functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection, as a way to ensure a smooth transition to the CEP.

With the burgeoning of Antarctic tourism, we reiterate the urgent need for proper attention to adequate prior EIA by operators, Parties and TEWG, and in particular to the possible cumulative impacts of such activities. ASOC is concerned that a large proportion of tourist expeditions still proceed to Antarctica without any prior, let alone adequate, EIA. We do however acknowledge and welcome the fact that a number of tourist operators are producing EIAs.

In the last six months, SCAR/COMNAP have held two workshops on environmental monitoring supported by the XVIII ATCM. ASOC participated in these workshops, and believes they were most useful. However, the workshops did not address the need to develop monitoring techniques and models for the full range of Protocol obligations. Monitoring for potential impacts from tourism, and upon the intrinsic, wilderness and aesthetic values addressed by the Protocol, were inadequately covered. The monitoring of cumulative impacts for multiple operators in areas of high intensity (such as clusters of stations or sites frequently visited by tourist vessels) was also barely addressed. ASOC believes that these are vital components of the advice on monitoring which Parties and the ATCM require.

ASOC continues to focus significant attention and resources on science. ASOC scientists have participated in meetings of SCAR and some of its Groups, such as GOSEAC and Seals, in addition to the SCAR/COMNAP monitoring workshops. We note the need for adequate resourcing by the Treaty system if SCAR is realistically to be able to provide the advice sought of it.

It is our belief that the best available environmentally sound technologies should be introduced into Antarctic operations as early as possible. These should include renewable energy and minimum impact waste disposal systems. For technologies as yet untested in Antarctic conditions, Parties could undertake in-situ testing as part of their research programmes.

No expeditions to Antarctica were mounted by any ASOC member organisations in the 1995/96 season, but Greenpeace conducted a further series of monitoring investigations at its former base site. This programme, fully funded by Greenpeace, was carried out with

2
logistic support provided by the New Zealand Antarctic Programme. The Greenpeace team 
of two scientists conducted a further series of monitoring investigations at the site of the 
organisation's former World Park Base, at Cape Evans, Ross Island. The results of these 
monitoring investigations are being made widely available.

In the broader context of the Antarctic Treaty system, ASOC continues its keen interest in 
CCAMLR's progress towards precautionary management and conservation of Antarctica's 
marine living resources. ASOC believes that practical application of the significant 
theoretical advances in CCAMLR'S approach to management in recent years, are being 
threatened by unresolved bilateral issues between some Parties, and by the overwhelming 
commercial realities of the burgeoning Patagonian toothfish (black hake) fishery. In this 
fishery CCAMLR faces a challenge which may make or break it as a credible conservation 
and fisheries management regime. ASOC believes that actions to ensure sound management 
and enforcement should, wherever possible, be taken in a truly international manner.

ASOC is disappointed that the problem of seabird mortality in the longline fishery has not 
yet been adequately resolved. Efforts to date to reduce albatross mortality, whilst successful, 
have resulted in a consequential increase in petrel mortality.

We also look to Parties to both the Protocol and CCAMLR to integrate Protocol-type 
measures into CCAMLR. ASOC believes that it is important to ensure that CCAMLR is 
kept up to date and consistent with the newer and more rigorous environmental protection 
initiatives of the Protocol.

This also applies to the International Whaling Commission (IWC). ASOC has continued its 
policy of sending an observer to the annual IWC meetings, and is very concerned that 
despite the Resolution passed at the 1995 meeting, recommending that scientific whaling 
should not be permitted in Sanctuaries, large-scale "scientific" whaling is still being 
conducted by one state in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. In the 1995/95 season, 440 
Minke whales were killed, up from 330 in previous years.

Looking beyond issues arising within Antarctica, ASOC remains concerned about the 
impacts on Antarctica of global environmental problems such as stratospheric ozone 
depletion and anthropogenic climate change. We urge Parties to ratify those Treaties and 
Protocols directed to controlling or minimising these problems, to use their particular 
knowledge of Antarctica to raise awareness of the issues in appropriate fora, and to 
promote further action to ensure the long term protection of the Antarctic environment.

ASOC looks forward to working with delegates at this XX ATCM, and to the successful 
resolution of some of the more contentious issues addressed in this report.

3
