UTRECHT
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/INF 110
                                 May 1996
                                 Original: English

INFORMATION CONCERNING TO THE STATUS OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC IN
ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

(Agenda item 24)

(submitted by the Slovak Republic)
Information

Concerning to the Status of the Slovak Republic
in Antarctic Treaty System

The delegation of the Slovak Republic consider as useful to provide an information concerning to its current status in the Antarctic Treaty System after principal political changes in the year 1993, to make more clear the basis for activities of Slovakia on the field of the ATS system.

The Slovak Republic was born from the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic of January 1, 1993. The Slovak Republic is a successor state to the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic.

Generally, the Government of the Slovak Republic considers itself bound, as of January 1, 1993 by multilateral treaties to which the former Czech and Slovak Republic was a party as of December 31, 1992 including reservations and declarations made earlier, as well as objections made by Czechoslovakia to reservations formulated by other treaty parties. The Government of the Slovak Republic has notified its wishes further to maintain its status as a contracting party as well as the status of a contracting and a signatory state to the treaties which were not yet in the force for Slovakia at the date of the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic.

The Slovak Republic has, in that sens, the status of a non - consultative contracting party to the Antarctic Treaty of December 1, 1959.

The Slovak Republic has the status of a contracting as well as a signatory state to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty of November 4, 1991, including the fact, that the Slovak Republic is bound by the Article 19(1) (a) and (b) in respect of the jurisdiction and the competency of the International Court of Justice and the Arbitral Tribunal according to the Protocol.
2

At last, The Slovak Republic has the status of a contracting and signatory state 
to the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities of June 
2, 1988.

The Protocol and the Convention, mentioned above, are not ratified by the Slovak 
Republic yet, althought that question is a subject of expert`s discusssions.

Althought the Slovak Republic has not demonstrated its interests in Antarctica by 
conduction of a substantial scientific research activity yet, activities of Slovak scientifists are 
not unknown in this field. The Slovak Republic invites every concrete idea creating the 
possibility for Slovakia to be involved to activities in Anctartica.

    The Slovak Republic wants to share the effort of foreign scientifists and 
managers working namely in expeditions and at permanent stations in Antarctica.

    The adress "Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic (International Law 
Department), Stromova 1, 833 16 Bratislava, Slovak Republic" may be the first official 
connecting line for eventual interests in that case.

    The management of concrete Slovak scientific activities in Antarctica belongs to the 
Office for Strategy of the Development of the Society, Science and Technology of the 
Slovak Republic, Lamacska cesta 8, 830 07 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

    The Slovak Republic wants to support the ideas of the dedication of Antarctica for 
peaceful purposes only, the continuance of freedom of scientific investigation and 
cooperation, the liability for caused damages in the region and the protection of the 
Antarctic environment. The Slovak Republic has provided the implementation of majority 
of relevant principles of the international environmental instruments to the internal Slovak 
legal order.

    The Slovak Republic would like to express thanks for an visible approach of delegations 
of the XX. ATCM - to share relevant informations and possibillities for legal and material 
activity in the Antarctic Treaty System.

The Slovak Republic, XX. ATCM, Utrecht, May 1996
