X UTRECHT X
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 71
                                  (REV 1)
                                  MAY, 1996
                                  Original: English

 
SCIENCE IN THE ANTARCTIC

(Agenda item 13)

(Submitted by SCAR)
SCIENCE IN THE ANTARCTIC

Information Paper submitted to XX ATCM by SCAR
Agenda item 13

The SCAR Report to XX ATCM gives a brief summary of the various scientific research
programmes that are currently being undertaken in the Antarctic. This paper provides some
further information on some of these programmes.

Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Sciences

Monitoring of Antarctic ozone levels continues both from ground-based stations and from
satellites. Recent results show that the springtime ozone depletion over the Antarctic is not
deepening significantly from year to year although the area affected is greater in some years.
The situation is forecast to continue for many years yet before a significant improvement is
noted but scientists are reluctant to suggest that the trough of depletion has been reached. The
scientific community continues to express its concerns about ozone depletion and notes that
other compounds (such as methyl bromide) in addition to CFCs are now known to destroy
ozone.

Workshops were held by the First Regional Observing Study of the Troposphere (FROST) and
the Antarctic Geospace Observatory Network (AGONET) programmes of the Working Groups
on Physics and Chemistry of the Atmosphere and on Solar-Terrestrial and Astrophysical
Research respectively. The FROST programme is yielding coordinated synoptic observations
of the Antarctic troposphere for the first time and these are being used to compare weather
prediction schemes over the Antarctic continent. Extra data fed into models for specific periods
have indicated the general reliability of forecasting and has also shown the differences between
forecasts from different sources. The programme has also highlighted the paucity of observing
stations in the Pacific sector of Antarctica and the consequent data void for this region that
presents difficulties for accurate continent-wide forecasting.

An AGONET database has been established, hosted by Italy, and geomagnetic and ionospheric
data are being fed into the system from Antarctic observatories operated by more than seven
countries. From a preliminary inspection of the data, specific periods are being selected for
detailed study. A particular study aspect is the solar wind that has relevance to space weather
and the US Space Weather Initiative. Such studies can help to improve the cost-effectiveness
of space satellite technology. An AGONET workshop will be held in August 1996 in
conjunction with XXIV SCAR.

Biological Sciences

Through its Antarctic Pack-Ice Seals (APIS) Programme, SCAR has developed a five-year
programme of research on Antarctic pack-ice seals. This initiative, that originated with the
SCAR Group of Specialists on Seals, aims to promote studies of the status of Antarctic pack-
ice seal populations and the role they have in the Antarctic ecosystem. The data collected will
provide vital information for the administration of the Convention for the Conservation of
Antarctic Seals (CCAS). To date, 41 research projects involving scientists from 18 nations
have been identified under APIS. The programme plan includes a major proposal to carry out a
circumpolar survey of Antarctic pack ice seals in the 1998-99 field season and significant
levels of ship support are being sought for this. The last planning meeting was held in Seattle
during June 1995 and the next meeting will be in Cambridge during July 1996.

The APIS Programme can be expected to produce information of value to several Antarctic
research programmes and inter-governmental organizations. These include the Committee on
Environmental Protection (CEP), CCAS, Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), including the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring
                                                  1
Programme (CEMP), Southern Ocean – Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics Research (SO-
GLOBEC), Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR), Southern Ocean – Joint 
Global Ocean Flux Study (SO-JGOFS), SCAR Global Change and the Antarctic 
(GLOCHANT) programme, and the International Whaling Commission (IWC).

The Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIOTAS) Programme held its 
first international expedition in the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica during the 1995–96 season. 
The main aims of the expedition were to examine the change in ecosystem abundance from the 
rich coastal regions of the continent to the simple endolithic communities at the edge of the 
polar plateau, and to gather baseline data for long-term research into the effects of climate 
change, with special reference to global warming and increased UV radiation. Studies in 
botany, zoology, microbiology and soil chemistry were undertaken on the coast at Edmonson 
Point, Wood Bay, near Terra Nova Bay, and inland in the dry valley region at the Long-Term 
Ecological Research (LTER) site in Taylor Valley, southern Victoria Land. The occurrence of 
naturally pigmented lichens, indicating the potential for protection against intense sunlight and 
UV radiation, should ensure their survival. Future research will clarify the fundamental 
mechanisms used by different species for dealing with climatic stresses such as desiccation, 
temperature fluctuation and UV radiation.

The Coastal and Shelf – Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone (CS-EASIZ) programme of the 
Group of Specialists on Southern Ocean Ecology has established a Steering Committee for the 
programme. The programme aims to improve our understanding of the structure and dynamics 
of the Antarctic Coastal and Shelf Ecosystem (ACSE), the most complex and productive 
ecosystem in Antarctica, and likely the one most sensitive to global environmental change. 
Particular attention will be paid to those features that make the biology of this ice-dominated 
ecosystem so distinctive, and to understanding seasonal, inter-annual and long-term changes.

The unique character of CS-EASIZ is its coherent approach to the ecology of the coastal and 
shelf marine ecosystem, integrating work on the ice, water-column and benthic sub-systems. 
It will form a potentially major input to the GLOCHANT programme, interface easily with SO-
JGOFS and SO-GLOBEC and relate closely to the International Geosphere-Biosphere 
Programme (IGBP) Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone (LOICZ) programme.

The first field data under the programme were collected during the 1995–96 austral summer 
season. In particular, there was an EASIZ-dedicated cruise by MV Polarstern in the Weddell 
Sea during January and February 1996. A dedicated cruise has also been scheduled for the 
1996–97 season, and a timetable of workshops and symposia has been proposed.

The SCAR Global Change Programme Coordinator at the SCAR Global Change Programme 
Office at the Co-operative Research Centre for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Environment 
in the University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia, is additionally responsible for supporting the 
CS-EASIZ programme. This arrangement is working well and the first issues of an EASIZ 
Newsletter and a SCAR Global Change Newsletter are due to be published in the near future.

Earth Sciences

The VIIth International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences was held in Siena, Italy, 
during September 1995 and attracted more than 200 participants. It was encouraging to note 
the number of younger scientists participating and the new techniques that are being brought to 
bear on the solution of Antarctic geological and geophysical problems.

The Antarctic Offshore Acoustic Stratigraphy (ANTOSTRAT) programme also held a meeting 
in Siena, immediately following the Earth Sciences Symposium. The purpose of this meeting 
was to identify potential sites in the Southern Ocean for the Ocean Drilling Programme (ODP).

The Cape Roberts Project is a multi-national project being coordinated by New Zealand 
scientists that aims to recover up to 1,500 m of drill core from sedimentary strata beneath the 
sea floor off Cape Roberts at the south-western corner of the Ross Sea. The project will 
address two main themes: the early glacial history of Antarctic and its role in determining global 
sea-level changes; and the timing of rifting of the Antarctic continent in order to help 
understand the formation of the Transantarctic Mountains and the Ross Sea.

2
Following SCAR Recommendation XXIII-12, a workshop was held in Cambridge, United Kingdom, during May 1995 to consider all aspects of the reported subglacial lake beneath the deep ice-core drilling site at Vostok Station.

The Workshop reviewed the evidence for the existence of a large body of water beneath the inland ice sheet in the area of Vostok Station and considered the further research that needs to be undertaken in the vicinity of the sub-glacial lake before any decision is taken on penetrating the lake to sample the water and the underlying sediments. It was agreed that the current ice-core drilling at Vostok Station should proceed but terminate at least 25 m above the ice-water interface, and should not penetrate the water beneath the ice. It was also agreed that additional geophysical surveys should be performed to define better the glaciological and geological setting of the lake, with the highest priority being given to seismic measurements in order to confirm the existence of a large body of water and underlying sediments. If the existence of a large water body can be confirmed, then studies must be made to find techniques for accessing and sampling the water and sediments beneath with minimum contamination of this environment. Consideration should be given to testing such techniques at alternative sites where monitoring would be possible.

Acronyms

ACSE        Antarctic Coastal and Shelf Ecosystem
AGONET      Antarctic Geospace Observatory Network
ANTOSTRAT   Antarctic Offshore Acoustic Stratigraphy
APIS        Antarctic Pack-Ice Seals
ATCM        Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
BIOTAS      Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems
CCAMLR      Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCAS        Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
CEMP        CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme
CEP         Committee on Environmental Protection
CFC         Chlorofluorocarbon
CS-EASIZ    Coastal and Shelf - EASIZ
EASIZ       Ecology of the Antarctic Sea-Ice Zone
FROST       First Regional Observing Study of the Troposphere
GLOCHANT    Global Change and the Antarctic
IGBP        International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
IWC         International Whaling Commission
LOICZ       Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone
LTER        Long-Term Ecological Research
ODP         Ocean Drilling Programme
SCAR        Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
SCOR        Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
SO-GLOBEC   Southern Ocean - Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics Research
SO-JGOFS    Southern Ocean - Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
UV          Ultra-violet

3
