ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 132
May 1996
Original: English

OPENING ADDRESS OF THE DELEGATION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AT
THE XX ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

(Agenda Item 3)

(Submitted by Russia)
OPENING ADDRESS OF
THE DELEGATION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
AT THE XX ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Mr.Chairman,

Let me congratulate you on behalf of the delegation of the Russian
Federation on your election as Chairman of the XX-th Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, and, through you, thank the Government of the
Netherlands for the opportunity to meet in the beautiful historic city of
Utrecht to discuss the issues of practical activities and co-operation in far-
away Antarctica.
        The basic principles of the Antarctic Treaty first proclaimed 37 years
ago are still in force as the cornerstone elements of international law for the
southern polar region of our planet. It guarantees successful future co-
operation for the benefit of our countries and the whole of mankind. Even
now research conducted in Antarctica enables us to state that the Antarctic
region plays a major role in understanding many aspects of natural
phenomena in the southern, as well as in the northern hemisphere. Cold
Antarctic which became a priority area for scientific research and
international co-operation through the 1959 Treaty, has turned into a focal
point of warm sincere traditions of understanding, partnership, mutual
assistance and depolitisation.
        At present, Russia among some other countries is forced to reduce its
efforts in implementing the National Antarctic Programme due to some
budgetary constraints though we hope that the process will be soon reversed.
That is why the strategy of our development for the years to come is to
undertake all the necessary efforts to sustain the earlier achieved level of
scientific studies and their logistic support with an aim of strengthening the
integration of the existing national infrastructure of Antarctic activities into
the international community.
The 1991 Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection must become 
one of the most significant elements of the contemporary Antarctic Treaty 
System. This document, conceived to be a warranty of the conservation of 
the unique Antarctic nature for the future of mankind, demands the 
revaluation of many specific practical parameters of our work in the 
Antarctic.

Therefore, the ratification of the Protocol in countries which have 
created a considerable infrastructure in Antarctica depends not only on 
legal issues, but also on a serious increase in budgetary funding of the 
National Antarctic Programmes to meet the environmental requirements of 
the Protocol. The latter has led to a situation when due to budgetary 
problems Russia has not been able to ratify the Protocol. Presently, all the 
necessary legal instruments have been prepared and agreed upon by all 
relevant governmental bodies. The ratification proposal will be soon 
submitted to the Government and then directly to the State Duma, the 
lower chamber of the Russian Parliament. Regardless of the current 
absence of a formal act of ratification of the Madrid Protocol, the Russian 
Antarctic Expedition is taking much effort to clean up the territory of its 
stations and has made a significant progress in it.

The delegation of the Russian Federation would like to express its 
willingness to actively co-operate with other ATCM delegations, find 
common ground and obtain constructive results on all issues currently 
under consideration.

Thank you, Mr.Chairman.
