ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA              

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


                              XX ATCM/INF 76
                              April, 1996
                              Original: English

IAATO MEDICAL EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLAN

(Agenda item 16a)

(Submitted by IAATO)
IAATO MEDICAL EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLAN

1.  Recognizing the need for self-sufficiency as called for in Recommendation XVIII-1, and formal procedures to assist IAATO-member passenger vessels in the Antarctic with critically-injured or sick passengers, IAATO has developed this Medical Emergency Contingency Plan in cooperation with Adventure Network International.

2.  In brief, member vessels in Antarctica will take advantage of Adventure Network International's expertise in aviation logistics and medical evacuation. The office of Adventure Network International in Punta Arenas will act as a 24-hour emergency station from October through mid-February each season.In practice, this Medical Emergency Evacuation Plan will apply to vessels sailing in the Antarctic Peninsula region, which covers some 90 per cent of tourism in the Antarctic.

3.  Furthermore, IAATO-members are committed to thorough medical disclosure by their passengers with an accompanying report from the passenger's home physician. This medical questionnaire and report will be available to the attending physician aboard each vessel. Passengers will be advised that sophisticated medical care is unavailable in the Antarctic.

4.  IAATO Members are further resolved to strongly recommend that its passengers take out comprehensive medical insurance, which will reimburse passengers for the cost of medical evacuation in the event of an emergency.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLAN

In the event of serious accident or life-threatening situation, requiring medical attention beyond the ship's medical capabilities/facilities, the following procedure should be implemented.

ASSESSMENT

Consider the alternatives. A decision is made onboard that the best option for the critically sick or injured individual is emergency evacuation. This decision, by the shipboard physician and patient or family, is made in concert with the expedition leader and captain of the vessel.

INITIAL ACTION

Prior to contacting the Adventure Network International 24-hour emergency station in Punta Arenas, please ensure the following information is available:

1.      Name of the staff member on board who will coordinate the situation.

2.      Current position, route and speed of the vessel.

3.      Current weather and recent forecasts available.

4.      Information on any other vessels in the local area, and the contact details.

5.      Name and precise details of the injured/sick person and their condition, with a complete medical evaluation by the ship's physician in writing. Include the time of the incident, abstract from the ship's log, chronology of intervention and any medical history. Provide the name of the patient's consulting physician at home and emergency contact information for the patient.

6.      How many other persons will accompany the injured party from the vessel and the approximate weight and volume of their luggage?

7.      What medical facilities/anticipated treatment will be required at the destination, and any drugs needed for the patient or to restock the vessel.

8.      The anticipated final destination of the injured/sick person.

SECONDARY ACTION

1.      Contact the 24-hour emergency number and be prepared to provide the above information -- and anything else that may be relevant to the situation.

2.      The emergency station will contact all known means of evacuation and research the availability of aircraft, cost and best available option for the passenger and vessel.
3. The emergency station will advise the contact person aboard the vessel and await a 
   decision regarding the injured party.

4. Once a decision is made for action, the emergency station will contact the 
   transportation company and arrange for evacuation at a specified time and place. A 
   suitable landing site will be agreed and a suggested time, pending weather 
   conditions. Details of how the passenger will be moved will be given to the 
   emergency station.

5. Medical facilities at the destination will be alerted and an ambulance or other 
   requested form of transport will be at the airport upon arrival of the patient.

6. The emergency station will advise the cruise company's home office or 24-hour 
   contact of the situation and provide the patient's emergency contact information.

7. Two copies of a detailed medical report completed by the attending ship's 
   physician must be transferred with the patient for the attention of the emergency 
   station. A copy will be given to the doctor at the destination.

8. Advise the emergency station of any anticipated additional forms or paperwork that 
   may be required by a medical insurance company.

9. Advise the emergency station of any vessels, stations or organizations you have 
   contacted regarding the situation.

10. The vessel will maintain regular contact with the emergency station until the 
    passenger is uplifted from the agreed point and a schedule established with the 
    ship's captain for the preferred means of communication (telephone, fax or radio).

FINAL ACTION

1. Once the uplift of the passenger is completed, the vessel will be informed of the 
   arrival of the aircraft and passenger at the destination.

2. From this point, the emergency station will coordinate directly with the cruise 
   company's home office regarding the ongoing condition of the passenger, providing 
   regular updates.

3. The emergency station will remain in regular contact with the passenger until the 
   situation is normalized or responsibility is transferred to another party.

4. A full report will be submitted by the emergency station to the cruise company 
   regarding the pick-up and services of the station, including an invoice for expenses 
   incurred.
