ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ   


XX ATCM/INF 40
April, 1996
Original: English

AMEN - THE ANTARCTIC MANAGERS ELECTRONIC NETWORK
(Agenda item 11)
(Submitted by COMNAP)
AMEN - The Antarctic Managers Electronic Network
An Information Paper submitted to XX ATCM
by COMNAP

March 20, 1996

Timely and effective information sharing is the lifeblood of the managers' council and the essential first step in international cooperation in science and support. At their meeting in Santiago, Chile in 1995 the members of COMNAP and SCALOP were given a demonstration and briefing on the use and applications of the Internet. It was shown that computer based electronic communications on the Internet can be a powerful tool to serve the main functions and purposes of COMNAP. The use of the Internet provides both a method for easy rapid communications and a better way to distribute and access documents. In addition, by establishing a homepage (website) on the World Wide Web, COMNAP is able to make general information available to the public, while creating a user-friendly information exchange and data base for its members.

The COMNAP secretariat established AMEN, the Antarctic Managers Electronic Network, in early 1994 as a list server function with associated files accessed by computer on the Internet. Members directly access secretariat lists and Notices by initiating an e-mail message and reply sequence.

In 1995 AMEN was expanded to include a homepage on the World Wide Web. This AMEN website contains all the material available in the list server and provides a number of added advantages:
    a.      easier to use and faster than ordinary mail and fax
    b.      linkages to unlimited relevant information networks including stations and field operations
    c.      portions can be limited access to members only
    d.      can include images, graphics, sound, etc.
    e.      information can be updated continuously rather than periodically, no need for annual reporting.

AMEN as the list server version will continue until further notice to be maintained on the Internet to serve those members not yet equipped to access the World Wide Web. Of the 62 individuals who are members of COMNAP and SCALOP, 43 are currently on the AMEN list. They represent 26 of the 30 COMNAP national programs. SCAR has a similar system and is also accessible over AMEN.

All users of the Internet have the possibility of accessing the AMEN homepage. It is located at http://www.agu.org/amen and, when downloaded it appears on the computer screen as in the attached sample.
There are many features and potential applications yet to be developed. Initial plans have been worked out by the Chairman, secretary and members of COMNAP in consultation with the staff at the American Geophysical Union in Washington where the secretariat is situated. High priority will be given to the Advance Exchange of Operational Information. This is already established as a standard procedure, but its annual distribution on paper is expensive, inefficient, incomplete and too slow. The obvious way forward is for members to place their operational information on the AMEN website and maintain it continuously current. Other members can access such reports in the country files arranged under the “Operations” option of the COMNAP branch of the website.

Attachment: Sample of AMEN on the web
MEN Homepage                                          http://earth.agu.org:80/amen/

AMEN - Antarctic Managers Electronic
Network





COMNAP    SCAR   Other Internet Sites   News    Meetings   Antarctic Treaty System


Antarctic Managers Electronic Network
webmaster@kosmos.agu.org

MEN Homepage: Meetings                                http://earth.agu.org:80/amen/mtgs.html

Meetings

  SCAR/COMNAP Workshop on Environmental Monitoring in
Antarctica (March 1996)

  The USAP Polar Aeronomy and Astrophysics Program's annual "Antarctic Experimenter's
Meeting" will be held this year at NSF Headquarters on April 1-3, 1996. This is a meeting of
grantees of the Polar Aeronomy & Astrophysics Program, and others who have close ties to that
program. - Posted 21 Feb 1996

  Call for Titles and Abstracts for the Seventh SCALOP Symposium on Antarctic Logistics and
Operations, Cambridge, United Kingdom 6-7 August 1996 - Posted 29 Jan 1996

  Eighth COMNAP Annual Meeting (in conjunction with SCAR, Cambridge, UK,
4-16 August 1996)

Antarctic Managers Electronic Network

of 1                                                     04/09/96 12:14:50
MEN/COMNAP

COMNAP - The Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programs





General Information  Documents  Operations  Mail

COMNAP

The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs along with its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) were established in 1988 to regularly bring together the national program officials who are responsible for Antarctic operations and science support. The major functions are the effective sharing of information and the realization of international cooperation. The work of COMNAP, under the leadership of a Chairman and Executive Committee and with the support of its secretariat, is undertaken through:

1. formal plenary meetings each year;
2. symposia on timely and relevant topics, for example Antarctic Logistics and Operations in 1990, 1992, 1994 and planned for 1996;
3. workshops; for example Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment, Bologna 1991; Oversnow Traverse Technology, Washington, DC 1994; and Air Transport Networking, Washington, DC 1995;
4. working groups assigned to agenda topics such as: contingency planning, tourism, environmental assessment and monitoring, oil spill prevention and response, air operations, information exchange, and alternative energy; and
5. close cooperation and joint activities with SCAR.

For more information about COMNAP and SCALOP see the COMNAP Organization and Procedures document.

AMEN,

The Antarctic Managers Electronic Network is managed by the COMNAP Secretariat situated at the American Geophysical Union (AGU) in Washington, DC, USA.

AMEN includes:

  A List Server, amen@kosmos.agu.org, limited to members of COMNAP, its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) and their staffs;

The AMEN list currently includes 43 members from 24 countries plus SCAR. A request to subscribe to AMEN should be sent to Al Fowler, COMNAP Secretary at afowler@kosmos.agu.org;
  The List of Notices by date and subject, etc.
  A List of COMNAP/SCALOP Members with contact information, Fax List;

of 2         04/09/96 12:15:11
ttp://earth.agu.org:80/amen/limited/docs.html                         http://earth.agu.org:80/amen/limited/docs.html

COMNAP Documents

□ Notices
□ List of COMNAP and SCALOP Notices
□ Report to XX ATCM (ONE)
□ Report to XX ATCM (TWO):
■ Draft WP on BATs: Best Available Technologies/Techniques
■ Outline of report; portions as drafted/intended content and writing 
      assignments
■ Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in Antarctica - 
      Operational Concerns - Information Paper
■ AMEN The Antarctic Managers Electronic Network - Information 
      Paper
□ Proposal For Joint Support of a Long-Range Radar-Sounding Aircraft
□ Report to XX ATCM (THREE)
□ Report to XX ATCM (FOUR)
□ Antarctic Activities of Member Nations of the Antarctic Treaty [DRAFT]
      Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation, 29 January 1996
□ Annual Meetings DP/IP
■ 1993, 1-125
■ 1994, 1-76
■ 1995

Return to AMEN

Antarctic Managers Electronic Network

ttp://earth.agu.org:80/amen/limited/oper.html                         http://earth.agu.org:80/amen/limited/oper.html

Operations

□ Annual Advance Exchange of Operational Information
□ Seventh Peruvian Scientific Expedition to the Antarctic (ANTAR VII) Commenced - Posted 15 
      Feb 1996

Return to AMEN

Antarctic Managers Electronic Network

of 1                                                         04/09/96 12:15:57
MEN homepage: Other Internet Sites                                  http://earth.agu.org:80/amen/other.html

Other Internet Sites

The following is a selected list of Internet sites containing information related to the management of the Antarctic.

□ Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research
□ Antarctic Support Associates
□ Antarctica Meteorology Research Center has composite satellite weather images updated every three hours
□ Arctic Centre, University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland
□ Arctic Circle, University of Connecticut
□ Arctic Environmental Data Directory (WAIS Retrievals)
□ Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme
□ Arctic Region Supercomputing Center
□ Australian Antarctic Cooperative Research Center for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Environment
□ Australian Antarctic Division
□ Belgian Antarctic Research Programme
□ BIBSYS - Norwegian Libraries Union Catalogue
□ British Antarctic Survey
□ Byrd Polar Research Center
□ Database of Barents Region Projects
□ GRID-Arendal
□ Gateway to Antarctica ICAIR, NZ
□ Ice and Snow - from World Data Centre C (Glaciology)
□ Indian and Northern Affairs, Government of Canada
□ Institute of Antarctic and Southern Ocean Studies (IASOS) Univ. Tasmania
□ International Antarctic Centre
□ International Arctic Environmental Data Directory Norway
□ International Centre for Antarctic Information and Research
□ Italian Antarctic Program
□ Kola Science Centre, Russia
□ Live from Antarctica
□ NASA Images
□ National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs
□ National Snow and Ice Data Center
□ The New South Polar Times
□ Norsk Polarinstitutt
□ Other Antarctic Science Servers
□ Palmer Station (LTER)
□ Polar Libraries Gopher, University of Calagary
□ The Polar Regions
□ Polar Research and Cold Region Technology, Univ. of Lulea
□ Polar Science Center, University of Washington
□ Reports in Cold Climate Technology, Univ. of Lulea (fulltext)
□ Survey of Arctic Meetings
□ UK Antarctic Research Programme
□ University of Lulea Library, Sweden
□ World Data Center - A for Paleoclimatology
□ World Data Centre, C (Glaciology) at Scott Polar Research Institute (UK)

Return to AMEN

of 1                                  04/09/96 12:17:29
