ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/INF 55
                                April, 1996
                                Original: English

INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA
BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM
EDUCATION AND TRAINING

(Agenda item 15)

(Submitted by Brazil)
INTERMINISTERIAL COMMISSION FOR THE RESOURCES OF THE SEA
BRAZILIAN ANTARCTIC PROGRAM

EDUCATION AND TRAINING

REF.: Item 15 of the Provisional Agenda of the XX ATCM ( Information Paper )

The Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR) started in 1982 and has been 
in continuous operation since then. The scientific activities count on the support of the 
National Council of Scientific and Techonological Development (CNPq), an organ of 
the Ministry of Science and Tecnology. The main logistic support is given by the 
Brazilian Navy, including the maintenance of: the brazilian Antarctic Station 
"Comandante Ferraz" (EACF), the four refuge-bases, camps, and the Oceanographic 
and Supply Ship (NApOc) "Ary Rongel".

The PROANTAR is conscious of the need to prepare scientists to guarantee 
the continuity of antarctic research, and to promote a steady improvement in the 
quality of scientific research. It is also aware of the need to increase information to be 
given to the public about the importance of the Antarctic from a planetary viewpoint, 
and its relation to the brazilian biotic and abiotic environment in particular, and the 
necessity to preserve the antarctic environment and ecosystem.

The research projects of PROANTAR are conducted by about 80 scientists 
from 13 brazilian Universities and Research Institutes.  An increasing number of 
projects involves scientific cooperation with other antarctic countries.

Besides the specifc scientific activities, many other projects connected to the 
education of researchers, students training and the spread of antarctic information , are 
carried out, including:
- basic general one-week courses for teachers in primary and secondary 
schools;
- short courses for young pupils;
- seminars and extention courses for undergraduate and graduate students;
and

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                  1
- regular courses at university level in antarctic biology, earth science and 
space science.

In many science exhibitions organized by  students and teachers in both schools 
and universities,  the Antarctic is included and is often one of the most  appreciated 
item.

The results of research in the Antarctic are presented in most of the national 
congresses or symposia, all over the country, in all three main fields of antarctic 
research (biology, earth science and space science), thus helping to spread among the 
national scientific community and the students, well-documented information.

Television,  newspapers  and  magazines  are  important  educational  and 
information media. Interviews and reports about antarctic expeditions are often seen 
throughout the whole country. Regional and national news presented by the media 
brings the Antarctic closer to the general public.

Two essay contests about the Antarctic, at a regional and a national level, were 
promoted  in 1995 and 1996, with the purpose of creating interest and kwowledge 
among the students of schools and universities. A photographic contest on antarctic 
themes was also promoted for all those who had participated in Antarctic Operations.

A training program, known as the Pre-Antarctic Trainig (TPA), is carried out 
hoping to  familiarize the participants of Antarctic Operations with the use of the 
several means of transport, the special equipment available in the antarctic area, and 
also with the basic survival, skills first aid, personal and security installation.

The TPA promotes an integration between military volunteers for the support 
group of EACF and researchers, that will develop scientific work in the  Antarctic, 
and also gives basic knowledges about the antarctic environment.

All those who don't have experience in the Antarctic and those selected to be 
part of the support group of EACF take part in the TPA.

The training is developed in 3 fases:
a) Basic Instruction:

This takes place in the Brazilian Navy installations, located in Marambaia 
Island, Rio de Janeiro, and has the duration of a week. In this fase, all the candidates 
take part, and are given information about terrestrial orientation during the day, 
helicopter use in the Antarctic, interpersonal development, small boat usage, first aid,

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                      2
medical difficulties in the Antarctic, climbing, life in EACF and on board the support 
ship, PROANTAR structure and its internal and external interconnections, as well as 
general knowledge about the Antarctic.

b) Basic Climbing Technics:

This takes place in the National Park of Itatiaia, Rio de Janeiro, and last for 
one week. It is for the candidates who will develop activities in the refuge-bases and 
camps, for the members of the support group of EACF and for the researchers that will 
stay for more than 130 days in the station during the winter. Theoretical and pratical 
aspect are considered about the safest  way of moving on ice or snow covered land, 
basic techniques of climbing up and down and also rescue techniques for accidents in 
crevices.

c) Fire Combat Training (CBINC):

This takes place at the Fire Combat School in the Training Center " Almirante 
Marques Leão ", of the Brazilian Navy, and lasts for one week. Its purpose is to 
create a level of competence in fire combat techniques on the military personal of the 
support group and the researchers that will stay more than 130 days in the EACF 
during the winter.

- Brazilian Antarctic Program                                                    3
