ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L’ANTARTIQUE
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 27
April, 1996
Original: English

LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
(Agenda item 6b)
(Submitted by Italy)
16-APR-1996   07:39   MAE DGRC UFF. UII         + 6 3223795   P.02


LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT

Francesco Francioni (*)

1. Introduction

The past two decades have witnessed an impressive development in 
the number and scope of international treaties dealing with 
environmental protection. Yet, it is no mystery that liability for 
damage to the environment remains a motherless child in this 
important family of international law instruments. States do 
whatever they can possibly do to avoid the inclusion in relevant 
treaties of specific provisions on international liability. 
Examples abound. Suffice it here to recall the unusual footnote 
excluding liability in the 1979 Convention on long range 
transboundary air pollution 1/ or the vague pledge to elaborate 
rules on liability in future negotiations as is found in Article 
10 of the 1972 London dumping convention 2/. The same is true of 
the 1991 Madrid Protocol on the protection of the Antarctic 
environment whose Article 16 simply postpones to subsequent 
negotiations the elaboration and adoption of rules and procedures 
on liability for damage arising from activities covered by the 
Protocol 3/.

The explanations given for such resistance are manifold. At a
16-APR-1996  07:40  MAE DGRC UFF. VII        +6 3223795   P.03


2

theoretical level, one radical view tends to shake the very 
foundation of international responsibility by denying the 
existence of a general obligation of States to make reparation 4 / 
except in very limited cases, such as breach of rules on the 
treatment of aliens and wrongful acts of a violent character 5 /. 
Besides, even if the existence of a general rule on State 
responsibility is accepted, most environmental damage is caused 
by lawful acts. This fact would require the development of special 
regimes of guarantees against the adverse consequences of many 
industrial, commercial and technological activities. However, 
whether such development should follow a unitary model or rather 
produce a plurality of liability regimes ratione materiae still 
eludes the international community. Ample evidence of this can be 
found in the rather slow and difficult progress of the 
International Law Commission's work on this subject 6 /. 

  The obstacles on the way toward a generalized acceptance of 
international environmental responsibility are also technical and 
political. The bilateral-adversarial scheme, plaintiff-wrongdoer, 
is not always suitable to address the issue of environmental damage 
at the level of international law. This is true when the damage is 
caused by a series of indistinct acts whose effects have 
accumulated through a long period of time - as in the case of acid 
rain and marine pollution, as well as in the case of harm to the 
general environment such as ozone depletion and climate change. In 
this field, the doctrine of erga omnes obligations, while giving 
rational support to the notion that the duty to prevent serious
damage to the general environment is owed to the international 
community as a whole, ironically entails a dilution of the 
strength of remedies. The locus standi of the plaintiff becomes 
uncertain, the responsibility becomes "softer" 7 / in so far as 
it is not owed to a specific injured party.

But it is at the political level that the traditional notion of 
State responsibility meets the most serious difficulty. The 
principle of sustainable development and the related concept of 
common but differentiated responsibilities, as enunciated in 
Principle 7 of the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and 
development 8 /, tend to address the enormous substantive 
disparities existing today among States. The varying capabilities 
of States to cope with the emerging regulatory standards in the 
field of environmental protection render the enforcement of 
international responsibility extremely difficult, perhaps illusory. 
This can be seen in cases such as Chernobyl or in cases of large 
scale depletion of natural resources of international significance. 
In such cases, it is no surprise that less developed countries may 
look at international responsibility as an inadequate tool to 
address the issue of environmental quality 9 /. They place more 
emphasis on prevention and international cooperation and 
assistance, rather than upon the duty to make reparation after 
damage has been caused.

Faced with these difficulties, international practice in the 
field of enviromental protection has responded so far with two
- 4

different strategies. The first entails the shifting of the problem
of responsibility from the interstate level to the domestic law
level. Environmental damage must thus be redressed before
competent national courts and through national means of
enforcement. This is a typical application of the dedoublement
fonctionnel technique, which has been successfully tested in the
field of marine pollution and less successfully in the field of
nuclear damage.

The second strategy entails the reinventing of a new form of
"soft" responsibility under the guise of "non-compliance"
procedures. These procedures consists of a mechanism for
ascertaining a situation of non-compliance with treaty obligations
by a State Party without, at the same time, dealing with the
"intractable" issue of liability and reparation of damage. A
specific application of this method is provided by article 8 of the
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer which
reads as follows:

"The Parties, at their first meeting, shall consider and
approve procedures and institutional mechanisms for determining
non-compliance with the provisions of this Protocol and for
treatment of Parties found to be in non-compliance".

This article triggered the establishment of the Implementation
Committee with competence to administer the the non-compliance-
procedure. 10/
16-APR-1996 07:42   MAE DGRC UFF. UII +6 3223795  P.06

2. The Special Character of the Antarctic Environment

Are the above strategies suitable for addressing the issue of 
responsibility for damage to the Antarctic environment? Is one 
preferable to the other? Are there other viable alternatives?

To answer these questions, I think that the following 
considerations are relevant.

  • First, the solution based on a private-municipal law approach 
    raises considerable problems in Antarctica since in this area 
    sovereignty claims - maintained by seven countries - are not 
    generally recognized. Courts do not exist, and the choice of forum 
    and the choice of applicable law become very sensitive issues for 
    they are inextricably connected to the question of territorial 
    control. This is true also of the sea areas adjacent to Antarctica, 
    where most cases of environmental damage are likely to occur. Of 
    the possible jurisdictional criteria - coastal State, port State, 
    flag State - only the latter can be used in the event of damage to 
    the Antarctic marine environment. The first is inapplicable, owing 
    to the absence of recognized coastal jurisdictions, the second is 
    problematic because of the geographic remoteness of Antarctic seas.

  • Although the approach based on some form of non-compliance 
    procedure, following the model of the Montreal Protocol Article 8, 
    is consistent with the Antarctic treaty tradition of cooperation, 
    it is likely to fall short of providing an exhaustive solution to 
    the problem of environmental damage in Antarctica. Unlike the
16-APR-1996  07:43   MAE DGRC UFF. VII     + 6 3223795  P.07

.6 
ozone layer, which requires a complex and prolonged program of 
gradual elimination of harmful substances, the Antarctic 
environment requires prompt and effective response action in case 
of accidents and the reparation of damage including the cost for 
clean up and rehabilitation. In this regard, while instruments 
requiring preparednes, response action and cooperation are 
certainly useful models, we do not see how an institutional 
mechanism that is limited to ascertaining non-compliance, could 
meet the Antarctic requirements requirements.

3. A Liability Regime for Antarctica.

Aware of the above difficulties, the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties avoided the inclusion of a liability regime 
in the text of the 1991 Madrid Protocol. They did adopt, 
however, Article 16, which states that

"Consistent with the objectives of this Protocol for the 
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent 
and associated ecosystems, the Parties undertake to elaborate rules 
and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from 
activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by 
this Protocol".

Preparation for implementing Article 16 started at the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Venice 11-20 November 1992. A 
working group of legal experts was set up, which held its first 
meeting in Heidelberg 18-20 November 1993. At the Eighteenth 
Consultative Meeting held in Kyoto in April 1994, the mandate of 
the working group was extended and a further session was held in 
the Hague November 1994. The subject was taken up again at the
16-APR-1996  07:44   MBE DGRC UFF. VII       + 6 3223795  P.08


Nineteenth Consultative Meeting held in Seoul in May 1995 and
further followed up at an intersessional meeting held in Brussels
in November 1995.

What are the inspiring criteria and the salient issues faced by
the working group? The following section provides an overview of
the task at hand and attempts to delineate the contours of the
future liability regime for Antarctica.

  ●
4. Civil Liability, State Responsibility or Both ?

From a very general point of view, the question arises as to
whether the future instrument should deal only with civil liability
of Antarctic operators or whether it should also include State
responsibility under public international law. No indication in
this respect is provided by Article 16 of the Protocol. It is
evident, however, that an effective system of environmental
remedies for Antarctica requires a combination of both types of
liability. Such combination can be found in the Wellington
Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource
Activities (CRAMRA, Article 8). Following this model, one could
envisage a primary responsibility of the operator and a subsidiary
responsibility, to the extent of the unsatisfied claim, of the
State to be identified under relevant jurisdictional criteria. A
modified version of this model could require that the civil
liability of the Antarctic operator should be attempted first - as
a sort of prior exhaustion of remedies - and the State
16-APR-1995  07:45   MAE DGRC UFF. VII    +6 3223795  P.09

                    8

responsibility would thus become available as a last resort
remedy, to the extent that the respondent State has violated its
obligations under the Protocol. Whether the first or the second
model is accepted, the merging or coordination of the two types of
responsibilty seems necessary in view of the nature of the
activities that are likely to cause damage to the Antarctic
environment. These activities are hardly conducted in a regime of
freedom or laisser faire by private parties. Most of them are
closely related to scientific and logistic programmes of State
Parties. Even non-governmental activities, such as tourism, are
conducted under public control as required by the Protocol,
especially by the environmental impact assessment provisions of
article 8 and Annex I. Therefore, obligations and responsibilities
of the operator and of the State of origin are tightly intertwined.

o   So far, the negotiations within the working group of legal
experts have taken this reality into account and developed a two-
pronged approach that entails primary strict liability of the
operators and secondary "residual" liability of State Parties. The
latter, however, remains controversial with regard to its scope.
Should it arise only in case of failure to adopt legislation and
measures implementing the Protocol and its Annexes, as some States
are inclined to think; or should it be based on a broader notion of
"due diligence" which may be understood to require monitoring and
surveillance of the activities carried out in Antarctica by
relevant operators? It seems clear that for a liability regime to
be really effective the latter solution is necessary. Otherwise 
there would be no incentive for State Parties to see that the 
actual manner in which Antarctic operations are carried out is 
consistent with the Protocol and its Annexes. If we were to absolve 
State Parties from liability simply on the basis of the finding 
that a purely formal requirement of passing laws and regulations 
implementing the Protocol has been satisfied, the notion of "due 
diligence" would become linked to a formal, perhaps perfunctory 
act, and, in the end, would even fall short of the liability 
standard required under customary international law. 11/

5. Scope of the Liability Regime

This question presents two distinct aspects. The first is 
whether the liability regime should be attached only to certain 
activities conducted in Antarctica or whether it should cover all 
activities. Article 16 of the Madrid Protocol refers simply to 
"activities", whereas other Articles speak of "all activities"(e.g. 
Article 3). This inconsistency reflects the political dilemma of 
how far the liability regime should affect the established uses of 
Antarctica. Such uses include, primarily, scientific research, 
recreational activities such as tourism, and commercial activities 
such as fishing. A textual argument supporting a limited exclusion 
can be found only for the latter. In fact, the Final Act of the 
Madrid meeting contains a statement to the effect of removing 
fishing from the scope of the Protocol for the reason that this 
subject is fully covered by the Convention on the Conservation of
16-APR-1996  07:48  MAE DGRG UFF. UII        + 6 3223795  P.02


Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). 12 / Therefore, to the extent that the liability regime must be adopted in the form of an Annex (or more Annexes) to the Protocol, one could argue that it must follow the substantive scope of the Protocol and thus not apply to fishing. However, this conclusion appears to have its drawbacks. Fishing is carried out with vessels and related equipment. Thus, even if fishing activities are exempted from the Madrid Protocol, environmental standards relating to ships safety and navigation, as well as incidents of marine pollution or disposal of waste should not be exempted. These standards ought to be deemed applicable to all vessels notwithstanding the fishing activity in which they may be engaged in the Antarctic seas.

If this position is accepted, however, a further question arises as to whether the mere passage of ships through Antarctic waters, or the overflight by aircraft, should be subject to the Antarctic liability regime despite the fact that such activities are regulated by the customary law principles on the freedom of the high seas and freedom of the air, and by special treaty regimes applicable to the protection of the marine environment ( e.g. the UN Convention on the Law of the sea and MARPOL). 13 / The Madrid Protocol contains provisions to the effect that nothing in the Protocol should be interpreted as a derogation from other international instruments applicable in the Antarctic Treaty area (Article 4). However, it is submitted that such clause should not prevent the adoption of a liability regime when existing treaties provide none. Such conclusion is consistent with the general
16-APR-1996   07:49     MAE DGRC UFF. UII       +6 3223795   P.03

11

notion of subsidiarity and with the character of Antarctica as an
ecologically unique area which requires a special regime of
environmental protection. It would further be reinforced by the
policy consideration that the possibility of applying the future
liability regime also to harm resulting from fishing and connected
activities could work as a stimulus to strengthen the enforcement
mechanism under CCAMLR. A claim to the exclusivity of CCAMLR would
be more acceptable if its system of remedies and enforcement were
as effective as, and thus capable to provide a credible alternative
to, the liability regime under the Madrid Protocol.

The second aspect of the discussion on activities is whether a
single liability regime is appropriate for Antarctica, or whether
different regimes are required in relation to the variable degree
of risk involved in different activities. Although a unitary system
would be preferable for its simplicity and workability, there is no
doubt that different activities in Antarctica pose different
hazards for the environment. Transport of fuel, drilling, use of
explosives are certainly more hazardous than ordinary exploration
and scientific research. Certain logistic support operations such
as overflight, landing of aircraft, building activities may, as well
pose additional risks. A further argument for tailoring the
liability regime to specific types of activities can be found in
the different "social value" of Antarctic activities. There is a
widespread opinion that scientific research takes priority over
other legitimate uses of Antarctica, such as recreational
activities and tourism. The Madrid Protocol gives support to this
16-APR-1996  07:49   MAE DGRG UFF. VII    + 6 3223795  P.04

                                  12

opinion by proclaiming Antarctica "land of science". If this view 
is accepted, one needs to develop a liability system that in effect 
does not deter scientific programs with disproportionate insurance 
and compensation costs but carefully balances the value of such 
programs with the fundamental objective of securing the 
comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment.

6. The Standard of Liability

This issue is closely connected to the previous one in that a 
different standard of liability may be required by different 
activities and actors (i.e. States and operators) in Antarctica. 
Generally, three forms of liability can be distinguished in 
international law: absolute liability, strict liability, and 
liability based on due-diligence. The first allows no excuses. The 
second arises from the causality link between the conduct and the 
relevant damage but permits certain exceptions and defences. The 
third requires proof that the defendant has willfully or 
negligently breached some obligation. It is still unclear which of 
these standards will be the most appropriate and acceptable for 
Antarctica. In Article 8 of CRAMRA strict liability is the 
standard applicable to Antarctic operators. Fault liability, or, if 
we prefer, due-diligence, is the standard applicable to State 
Parties for their failure to fully observe the obligations 
undertaken by that convention with regard to the protection of the 
Antarctic environment. As for absolute liability, the only treaty
16-APR-1996   07:50   MAE DGR[?] UFF. UII        +6 3223795  P.05

13

that incorporates this standard is the the Convention on 
International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (Article 
II) and only in relation to damage caused on the earth surface 
(damage to aircraft in the airspace or to other space objects is 
based on fault under Article III).

The future liability regime for damage to the Antarctic 
environment should be based on a combination of both strict 
liability and liability based on fault, depending on the type of 
obligation laid down in the Protocol and its Annexes. Some 
obligations require a certain result and leave no room for the test 
of due-diligence. For example, Article 8 and Annex I of the 
Protocol impose a precise obligation to carry out environmental 
impact assessment of planned activities in Antarctica. If an 
operator fails to comply with the procedural and substantive 
aspects of this obligation and environmental damage occurs, 
liability will arise without any need to prove fault or breach of 
due diligence. The defendant can avoid liability only by proving 
the existence of a circumstance excluding liability, such as act of 
God, fortuitous event, etc. The same can be said with regard to the 
obligation laid down in Annex II to refrain from introducing 
certain animals in Antarctica. On the contrary, other provisions of 
the Protocol are not consistent with a strict liability regime and 
require the adoption of fault based liability. Examples abound: 
Article 1 of Annex III on waste disposal requires that the amount 
of waste in Antarctica be reduced. This obligation is qualified by
the clause "as far as practicable". Similarly, Article 12 of Annex 
IV on marine pollution requires preventive measures and emergency 
preparedness to cope with accidents and emergency situations 
connected to oil spills and other threats to the marine 
environment. These provisions do not entail an objective 
responsibility to obtain a precise result but rather a commitment 
to engage in appropriate efforts to the end of providing adequate 
prevention and response action in the event of pollution 
emergencies.

To conclude on this point, it seems that 1) at present, the 
adoption of an absolute liability standard is quite unlikely, and 
perhaps inappropriate, for Antarctica; 2) strict liability and due-
diligence should be the applicable standards for damage caused by 
the operator or by the failure of the State Party to enforce the 
Protocol; 3) the choice between one or the other should not be made 
a priori as a matter of principle but should depend upon the 
nature and content of the relevant obligations imposed by the 
Protocol and its Annexes.

7. Circumstances Excluding Liability

Given the high probability that the future liability regime 
for Antartica will not be based on an absolute liability standard, 
the question arises as to what circumstances should constitute a 
defence. The tendency in Antarctic practice has been to construe 
such defences in a rather restrictive manner. The already cited
16-APR-1996  07:52   MAE DGRC UFF. VII     + 6 3223795  P.07

                                  15

Article 8 of CRAMRA contemplated only three possible defences 1)
the intentional or negligent act of a third party, 2) an armed
attack or an act of terrorism; 3) an unforseeable event that, even
in the exceptional circumstances of the Antarctic environment,
transcends the scope of reasonable precautionary measures. These
defences can be maintained in the future liability instrument. With
two caveats: the defence of armed conflict should be limited to the
victim of such attack. The devastating effects of the Gulf war on
the environment and the deliberate pollution and massive
destruction of natural resources by the aggressor State suggest
that in no way should such defence benefit those who are
responsible for the attack. Secondly, these defences should attach
only to that portion of liability arising as a consequence of a
breach of the applicable norms. To the extent that the liability
regime should cover also damage arising out of activities not
prohibited under the Protocol and its Annexes, the duty to respond
to and remedy the damage should not be nullified by allowing
defences.

8. Defining Damage

The definition of what legally constitutes damage is one of the
most difficult issues in the establishment of a liability regime
for Antarctica. First, "damage" is not the object of a general
definition under the Protocol . Therefore, the meaning of damage in
Article 16 is uncertain. Does it cover environmental damage only?
16-APR-1996  07:52   MAE DGRG UFF. VII        +6 3223795   P.08

Or also damage to property or established uses of Antarctica?
Should purely ecological damage entail liability even in the
absence of economic consequence? What about irreparable damage?

To answer these questions, one has to consider that the purpose
of the Antarctic liability regime is to strengthen the protection
of the environment. Therefore the main focus in the definition of
damage should be the adverse effects on the environment rather than
injury to persons or property. This approach entails that the main
elements in the definition of damage are the cost of removal, clean
up, restoration, and remedial action. In this regard the liability
regime must be linked to Article 15 of the Protocol which concerns
response action and contingency planning in case of accidents and
emergencies. This link is very important also because one of the
purposes of the liability regime is to address the issue of
reimbursement and compensation for response action undertaken by a
State Party with respect to damage resulting, or threatening to
result, from activities undertaken by another Party or another
operator. Here the need to ensure equitable compensation of the
responsible Party which undertakes the burden of response action
must be balanced with the need to avoid unwarranted and unilateral
interventions accompanied by the expectation that compensation for
clean up will be guaranteed. To achieve this balance, the liability
regime must incorporate a "rule of reason" so as to make
compensation contingent upon the criterion of necessity and
proportionality of the response action undertaken in a particular
case. 14 /
16-APR-1996  07:53   MAE DGRG UFF. VII   +6 3223795   P.09

- 17

Another problematic aspect involved in the definition of damage 
is the relation that such definition has with prior environmental 
impact assessment (EIA). If a certain activity has been been 
assessed and the relative environmetal impact has been judged 
acceptable under the standards of the Protocol, does this entail 
that no liability issue can arise and no compensation could be 
claimed even if such impact involves significant harm?  The 
Protocol provides no clear answer to this question. One might 
argue that once an impact has been considered and judged 
acceptable under the environmental evaluation procedure provided in 
Article 8 and Annex I, such impact may not be considered "damage" 
and may not give rise to liability. Despite its apparent logic, 
however, this conclusion presents some flaws. First, the Protocol 
provides for national procedure of EIA. An international model of 
EIA, carried out by an inter-governmental committee established 
within the framework of the ATCM, was proposed during the 
negotiations of the Madrid Protocol, but was not accepted. In view 
of this, it seems excessive to attach the power of immunization 
from liability from an an EIA that remains essentially the result 
of a national determination. Secondly, even the most responsible 
and accurate EIA may face unexpected impacts or increased impacts 
that result in significant harm to the environment. Consequently, 
the better solution is to leave to EIA its original role of a 
procedural device intended to _prevent damage_. This would entail a 
strong presumption that environmental impacts judged acceptable 
under the EIA  are not technically to be considered as "damage".
16-APR-1996  07:54  MAE DGRG UFF. UII       +6 3223795  P.10

                                  -18

The EIA, however, would not foreclose liability in the event the 
activities approved under the EIA were found to have produced a 
significant harm to the environment.

As to the threshold of damage, no issue of liability should 
arise when the damage consists of a less than minor or transitory 
impact on the Antarctic environment. If we take these elements into 
account, a definition of damage could be the following: the impact 
caused by human activities on the living and non-living components 
of the Antarctic environment which is not of a less than minor or 
transitory nature and which goes beyond what has been judged 
acceptable under the environmental impact assessment procedure.

9. Response Action and Compensation

When the environmental damage meets such definition, two sets 
of consequences can be envisaged for the purpose of responsibility. 
The first concerns the obligation to undertake "prompt and 
effective response action", as required by Article 15 of the 
Protocol, and to terminate or correct the damaging activity. A 
condition for complying with this obligation is that States 
responsible for the environmental impact assessment ensure also 
that prospective operators maintain technical preparedness and 
adequate financial capabilities to cope with response action in 
case of environmental emergencies.

The second set of consequences concerns restoration and 
compensation. A view has been put forward that attempts to restore 
the Antarctic environment can make things worse than simply letting
16-APR-1996  07:55  MAE DGRC UFF. UII     +6 3223795  P.11

                                  19

the natural processes take care of the cleaning up. 16/ This view 
is convincing in the case of accidents in remote areas for which a 
restoration program, for however well intended, could aggravate the 
situation by adding further adverse impacts by humans and logistic 
means; or in the event of fuel pollution that could be faster 
dispersed by wind and waves than by costly and ineffectual human 
intervention. However, this cannot entail the conclusion that, in 
principle, restoration or remedial action should not be undertaken 
in Antarctica. There are circumstances in which such action is 
necessary, as in the case of the removal of infrastructure that 
causes permanent harm or further threat to the environment, or in 
the case of reasonable restoration of a habitat whose impairement 
would cause significant loss of scientific knowledge.

With regard to the issue of compensation, the diversity of 
criteria adopted in domestic law may render difficult to find 
consensus on what items form the compensable damage and on how the 
quantum should be determined. It seems reasonable, however, to hold 
that essential items of compensantion are 1) the costs sustained 
by a Party for clean up and response action; 2) the costs 
sustained for reasonable remedial measures; 3) the loss or 
impairment of scientific reseasearch. In regard especially of item 
1) and 2) the question arises concerning the compensability of the 
so-called "committed costs", that is, costs represented by the 
seconding to clean up operations of personnel and equipment 
already in Antarctica for different purposes. The answer to this 
question should be in the affirmative because the use of human and
16-APR-1996  07:56   MAE DGRC UFF. UII  + 6 3223795  P.12

                                                         20
technical resources in clean up and restoration activities prevents
or reduces the ability to perform the task to which such resources
were originally attached.  This principle is recognized in the
important decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the
seventh Circuit in the Amoco Cadiz case of 24 January, 1992. 17 /
 
10. An Environmental Protection Fund

    In a unique environment such as Antarctica's it is not
unconceivable that harm to the environment may take the form of an
irreversible or irreparable damage for which restoration is not
physically possible or economically reasonable. Should reparation
be payed in such cases? Although there are no international
precedents on this point 18 /, the answer to this question should
be in the affirmative. First, because even if the damage will in
the end be irreparable, response action, containment of the
adverse effects and attempts to minimize the damage remain
obligatory under article 15 of the Protocol. If the activities are
undertaken by a Party different from the operator causing the
damage, that Party is entitled to reimbursement and compensation.
Secondly, it would be politically unacceptable and inequitable to
exempt from liability the State or person responsible for
irreparable damage while holding liable a State or a person which
has caused less serious damage to the Antarctic environment,
simply because that damage may be restored. Therefore, the correct
solution in this case is to maintain liability for all response
action and clean up costs; further, to the extent that restoration
16-APR-1996  07:56   MAE DGRC UFF. UIN        +6 3223795  P.13

21

is not technically feasible or reasonable, the polluter should be 
required to pay an equitable sum, commensurate to the cost of an 
equivalent restoration, into an environmental protection fund to be 
established under the liability instrument and administered under 
the authority of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. This 
fund could be used also to promote scientific research related to 
environmental protection, to finance remedial action in cases where 
there is no liability under the Protocol, to serve as a contingency 
fund or to provide restoration where the source of the damage 
remains unknown. The idea of such a fund goes hand in hand with the 
progressive institutionalization of the Antarctic Treaty system, as 
shown by the provisions of the Protocol regarding the establishment 
of a Committee on Environmental Protection (Article 11) and the 
plan for the setting up of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. 19 /
Naturally, such a fund needs to be financed. But unlike the 
corresponding models in the area of marine pollution which are fed 
by taxes levied on commercial activities, an environmental fund for 
Antarctica could hardly depend on the taxation of profit producing 
activities. Research and logistic support programs do not certainly 
fall into this category. The only exception could be commercial 
tourism, for which an industry wide environmental tax would be 
possible. However, such measure is still controversial. Besides, if 
applied only by the Parties to the Madrid Protocol, one can easily 
imagine how it could stimulate the registration of ships and 
companies of Antarctic tourist operators in third countries from 
which they could effectively act as free riders. Perhaps, the most
16-APR-1996  07:57   MAE DGRC UFF. VII     +6 3223795   P.14


22
effective instrument to foreclose such eventuality is represented 
by the active cooperation among those Consultative Parties whose 
territories border the Antarctic ocean and whose ports are of 
vital importance for the logistic and support organization of 
Antarctic tourism. I refer particularly to Argentina, Chile, New 
Zealand and Australia, but also South Africa. These countries could 
effectively make it extremely difficult to organize Antarctic tours 
under flags of convenience if they were prepared to deny their 
facilities to vessels and aircraft of tour operators organized 
under the law of countries that refused to participate in a future 
Antarctic environmental protection fund. Such concerted action 
would be a meaningful way to implement the otherwise evanescent 
obligation in Article X of the Antarctic Treaty which states:

" [e]ach of the Contracting Parties undertakes to exert 
appropriate efforts... to the end that no one engages in any 
activity in Antarctica contrary to the principles and purposes of 
the present Treaty"

11. The question of the locus standi

In the traditional paradigm of transboundary environemntal 
harm, normally it is the State in whose territory the harm has 
occurred that has standing to bring a claim for environmental 
damage. However, such paradigm is hardly suitable for Antarctica 
where sovereignty claims have been frozen in view of permitting the 
development of a model of international administration for the 
benefit of humankind. This model, however does not yet possess
16-APR-1996  07:58   MAE DGRG UFF. VII     +6 3223795   P.15


                                                                   23

institutions to which State Parties have attributed functions and 
powers which enable them to undertake independent action on behalf 
of Antarctica. Such functions are discharged by individual States 
along the lines of traditional dedoublement fonctionnel principle. 
In this situation, several solution can be envisaged with regard to 
the question of who should be the proper plaintiff.

When the damage results from a breach of the environmental 
standards laid down in the Madrid Protocol and its Annexes, any 
Contracting Party, other than the transgressor State, may have 
standing to invoke liability. Article 60, paragraph 2 (c) of the 
Vienna Convention on the law of treaties supports this view. The 
remedy contemplated by this article is the unilateral suspension of 
the treaty. Admittedly, this is not appropriate with regard to an 
instrument aiming at the protection of the Antarctic environment. 
Yet, it is a manifestation of the common legal interest that 
underlies a multilateral treaty of this kind and which confers on 
each Party a locus standi to trigger available remedies for breach.

Further, independently of the law of treaties, the locus standi of 
any Antarctic Party to bring a claim for environmental damage may 
be based on the erga omnes character of the obligation. The Madrid 
Protocol and its Annexes establish a system of comprehensive 
protection of the Antarctic environment. The relative obligations, 
although technically owed on a mutual basis to the other Parties, 
in substance have an erga omnes character because they protect the 
general interst of the international community to the preservation 
of Antarctica. 20 /
16-APR-1996  07:59   MAE DGRC UFF. VII        + 6 3223795   P.17

24

To be workable in practice, such theoretical solutions must be 
balanced with the need of attributing standing to those States that 
are specially affected by the environmental damage. These include 
1) the State(s) whose scientific activities or other legitimate 
uses of Antarctica have been directly affected by the damage; 2) 
the State(s) which have sustained the economic burden 
of response action, removal and clean up operations; 3) the 
State(s) whose property, persons or property of nationals were 
incidentally injured in the course of the events that led to the 
environmental damage.

A special problem arises in connection with the hypothesis of 
irreparable environmental damage examined supra in section 10. The 
suggestion made above that in this case a payment should be made 
into an environmental fund presupposes an institution capable of 
activating and managing the fund and of receiving payments as the 
occasion arises. No such institution exists today, unless one were 
to consider the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting as somewhat 
of an equivalent. However such view would be rather exaggerated 
since the Consultative Meeting does not have legal personality, its 
own bureau or even a permanent seat. Therefore, if a future fund 
is to work effectively as a component of the liability regime, it 
will need a minimum of institutional infrastructure. The 
establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat could be the 
response to such need. 21 /
16-APR-1996  08:00   MAE DGRG UFF. VII        +6 3223795   P.18

                                  25

12. Conclusions

Reaching consensus on how to resolve the various issues
related to the establishment of a liability regime for damage to
the Antartcic environment may be difficult and take a considerable
length of time. However, the decision to undertake negotiations for
a liability regime bear witness to the determination of Antarctic
Treaty Parties to strengthen the protection of the Antarctic
environment and to buttress the legitimacy of their claim to be the
trustees of the world community interest over Antarctica. One must
bear in mind, however, that the introduction of a liability regime
into the Antarctic Treaty system would represents a radical
innovation with respect to the practice followed until now - a
practice that is characterized by consultation, diplomacy and
informal settlement of differences on the basis of consensus.
Departure from such established and successful practice, albeit in
the limited field of environmental damage, will require graduality
and realism. Graduality means that at least at the beginning, the
liability scheme should apply to the most common and severe hazards
in Antarctica rather than aiming at ensuring restoration for the
whole spectrum of all possible, even the most tenuous, adverse
effects on the environment produced by human activities. Realism
entails that in pursuing the legitimate goal of laying down rules
on liability one does not inadvertently sacrifice sustained
Antarctic research by adding prohibitive costs in terms of
insurance. Also from this point of view, therefore, it is to be
16-APR-1996  08:01   MAE DGRC UFF. UII        +6 3223795  P.19

                                                             26

wished that clear rules on liability may soon be established so as 
to reconcile the need to effectively deter environmental damage 
with the need to avoid interruption of Antarctic science. Until 
that time, it is to be hoped that scientists will continue to be 
as they have been until now, the best custodians of the Antarctic 
environment.

(*) Professor of international law, University of Siena; member of 
the Italian delegation to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meetings. The views expressed in this article are entirely 
personal.
16-APR-1996  08:01   MAE DGRC UFF. VII        +6 3223795   P.20


NOTES

1) Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution, Geneva,
1979, ILM, 1979, p. 1442. In force 16 March 1983.

2) Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of
Wastes and Other Matter, London, 1972, ILM 1972, p. 1294. In force
11 March 1979; amended 1980, in force 11 March 1981. Further
amended 1989.

3) Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
adopted at the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative
Meeting (Madrid, 4 October 1991 (Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty
System (hereafter Handbook)), part 2, 1994, p. 2023. See F.
FRANCIONI, The Madrid Protocol on the Protection of the Antarctic
Environment, TILJ, 1993, p. 47 ff.; F. ORREGO-VICUNA; The Protocol
on Environmental Protection to the Anatctic Treaty: Questions of
Effectiveness, Georgetown Int. Env. Law Rev., 1994, n.1, p. 1ff.
For the text of article 16, see infra section 3.

4) B.CONFORTI, Do States Really Accept responsibility for
Environmental damage?, in F.FRANCIONI and T.SCOVAZZI (Eds),
International Responsibility for Environmental Harm, London, 1991,
p. 179.

5) M.JOVANE, La Riparazione nella teoria e nella prassi
dell'illecito internazionale, 1990, especially p. 167 ff. and 287
ff.

6) For a critical overview of the ILC work on this subject, see C.
TOMUSCHAT, International Liability for Injurious Consequences
Arising out of Acts not Prohibited by International Law: The Work
of the International Law Commission, in F. FRANCIONI and T.
SCOVAZZI , op. cit. supra note 4, p. 37 ff. and , more recently,
J. BARBOZA, International Liability for the Injurious Consequences
of Acts not Prohibited by International Law and Protection of the
Environment, RCADI, 1994, III, p. 291 ff.

7) This expression is borrowed from A.KISS, Present Limits to the
Enforcement of International Responsibility for Environmental
Damage, in F.FRANCIONI and T.SCOVAZZI, op. cit. supra note 4, p.
12.

8) Principle 7 states: "States shall cooperate in a spirit of
global partnership to conserve, protect and restore the health and
16-APR-1996  08:02   MAE DGRC UFF. VII   + 6 3223795   P. 21

integrity of the Earth's ecosystem. In view of the different
contributions to global environmental degradations, States have
common but differentiated responsibilities. The developed countries
acknowledge the responsibility that they bear in the international
pursuit of sustainable development in view of the pressures their
societies place on the global environment and of the technologies
and financial resources they command". Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, adopted by the UN Conference on
Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992, ILM,
1992, p. 874 ff.

9) Sea M. KOSKENNIEMI, Breach of Treaty or Non-Compliance?
Reflections on the Enforcement of the Montreal Protocol, Yearbook
of International Environmental Law, 1993, p. 123, espec. p. 129.

10) Protocol (to the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the
Ozone Layer) on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, reprinted
in ILM, 1987, p. 1550, in force 1 January 1989; amended in 1990.
Besides the non-compliance-procedure set up under article 10 of the
Montreal Protocol, other mechanisms, which offer an alternative to
sanctions and liability, are the use of commercial measures (Basel
convention on hazardous waste, C.T.E.S.), mutual assistance obligations among
Parties (1992 Biodiversity convention), mutual assistance obligations among
(1990 oil pollution preparedness, response and cooperation)
and trust funds. On these alternative mechanisms, see K KUMMER,
Providing Incentives to Comply with Environmental Agreements. An
Alternative to sanctions?, in European Environmental Law Review,
1994, p. 256 ff.

11) For an in-depth study of the concept of "due diligence", see R.
Pisillo Mazzeschi, Due diligenge e responsabilità internazionale
degli stati, 1989.

12) Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources, Handbook, cit. Part 1, p. 178 ff.; in force 7 April
1981. See contributions by F. Orrego Vicuna and D. Vignes in this
volume.

13) UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, Montego Bay, 1982, ILM,
1982, p. 1261; in force 16 November 1994.

14) Inmternational Convention for the Prevention of Pollution by
Ships (MARPOL), London, 1973, ILM, 1973, p. 1319, with subsequent
amendments. For further reference to treaty practice embodying the
rule that only reasonable costs of reinstatement can be recovered,
A. BIANCHI, The Harmonization of Laws on Liability for
Environmental Damage in Europe: an Italian Perspective, Journal of
Environmental law, 1994, p. 21 ff.
16-APR-1996 08:03   MAE DGRG UFF. VII        + 6 3223795   P.22

15)  The requirement of necessity and reasonableness are 
incorporated in the present draft articles of an Annex on 
environmental liability. See Articles 4 and 5 of the Chairman's 
Fourth Offering, Meeting of Experts Antarctic Treaty, Brussels 27-
30 November 1995. The documents of the meeting are on file with the 
author.

16) This view has been put forward by Russia, China, the United 
Kingdom and other delegations involved in the discussion over the 
liability Annex. See particularly the Discussion Paper 
"Preventative Measures and Response Action" of 16 November 1995 
presented at the Brussels meeting of the group of experts on 
liability. See supra note 15.

17.  Amoco Cadiz, 954 F. 2d 1279, 7th Circuit 1992

18) In domestic law, an interesting precedent is offerd by the 
decision of the Court of Appeals of Messina of 24 December 1993 in 
the case Ministero della marina mercantile e Ministero dell'interno 
c. Patmos Shipping Corp. which has recognized the admissibility of 
a claim for purely ecological damage independently of any possible 
remedial action. Under this decision the amount of the award is to 
be determined on the basis of equity pursuant to article 1226 of 
the Italian Civil Code. The decision can be found in Rivista 
giuridica dell'ambiente, 1994, p. 683 ff.

19) The elements of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat were outlined 
at the Seventeenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, Venise, 
1992 (see Final Report paragraph 49 and Annex E) and have been 
further discussed at the Eighteenth and Nineteenth ATCMs, held, 
respectively in Kyoto (1994) and Seoul (1995). So far, the 
establishment of a Secretariat has been blocked by lack of 
consensus over the choice of the country where it should be 
located.

20) Cfr. J. CHARNEY, Third State Remedies for Environmental Damage 
to The Worlds Common Spaces, in FRANCIONI and SCOVAZZI, op. cit., 
p. 149 ff.

21) See supra note 19.
