X UTRECHT X
29.4.96 - 10.5.96

ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/INF 106
May, 1996
Original: English

FINNARP-95/96
(Agenda item 12)

(Submitted by Finland)
XX ATCM                                                                                   1
Item 12: Antarctic Infrastructures, Technology and Operations

INFORMATION PAPER
by Finland

FINNARP-95/96

EXPEDITION

A marine expedition to the central and eastern Weddell Sea was carried out as an 
eight week long Joint Nordic Expedition in January - February 1996 by the Finnish 
Research Vessel Aranda, owned by the Finnish Institute of Marine Research. The 
scientific personnel consisted of 28 scientists from Finland, Norway and Sweden. 
They entered and left the ship at Cape Town, South Africa.

The scientific program was composed of projects of chemical, geological and 
physical marine science and marine meteorology. The main scientific goaling and 
planning was made in international programs (SCAR, iAnZone IPAB) connected 
with problematics of climate prediction and Global Change.

A failure in the main engines of the vessel forced she to return to Cape Town and 
the expedition was postponed by a few days.

Scientific Program

The expedition was composed of four main scientific tasks:
1) Chemical sampling, ADCP current and Hydrography profiling,
2) Air-sea-ice interaction, sea ice and remote sensing studies in the marginal ice 
zone,
3) Marine geological studies, acoustic sounding and drilling in the continental shelf 
region off the Riser-Larsen Ice shelf,
4) A quick service and the automatic meteorological station maintenance in the 
Finnish Aboa and Swedish Wasa stations.

Chemical program

The program aimed to collect knowledge on heavy metals, especially Cadmium 
and Mercury in the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic waters and in the sediments of the 
the eastern Weddell Sea shelf area. The concentration of these heavy metals is 
generally twice as high as found in the Baltic Sea.

Air-Sea Interaction and Marine Meteorology

The principal aims of the project are studies of 
- exhange of momentum, heat and moisture between the atmosphere and the ocean,
- stratification in the atmosphere and oceanic surface layer and its modification in 
the marginal ice zone,
- factors forcing the ice motion in the Weddell Sea.
The project is planned in cooperation with the international Antarctic Zone group. 
The field program included deployment of Argos buoys, meteorological soundings, 
helicopter measurements, and radiation and turbulence measurements on the sea ice.
2

Remote sensing and sea ice
The main target of the sea ice research were to gain basic data on the physical 
properties of the Antarctic sea ice and to investigate the geometric and 
aerodynamic roughness of the ice fields in the marginal ice zone. Another primary 
goal was to develop satellite image analysis methods, especially those for modern 
radar satellites by using the ground truth field data.

Marine geology
The geological program was a joint Nordic project, participants being from 
Finland, Norway and Sweden. The objective of the program was to study sediment 
deposition on a glaciated continental margin. This was done by detailed acoustic 
and seismic profiling, sediment surface sampling and diamond core drilling in a 
self area in the eastern Weddell Sea. The last one was not managed to carry out 
in the planned way. In addition, bottom photographs were taken at 12 sites.

Visual and acoustic data showed that sediment distribution in this particular area 
is mainly affected by four different factors: 1) sediment input from the glaciers, 2) 
bottomdwelling fauna, 3) waves and tidal currents and 4) iceberg scouring.

Based on the seismic reflection profiles, geology of the shelf can be devided into 
two major phases, the older seaward dipping strata forming the substratum eroded, 
followed by a period of shelf progradation. Topset strata have later been eroded 
and replaced by patches of horizontal or semi-horizontal beds of till or 
glaciomarine sediments.

Physical oceanography
The objectives of the project was to gather standard hydrographic data, data for 
geostrophic calculations, and supporting data for other projects.

Other observations
Motions of a floating ice shelf was measured. Pelagic seabirds were identified and 
counted three times per day; the activity was to increase knowledge of distribution 
and movement of birds and relationship between seabird observations and 
hydrographic and meteorological data.

OTHER FINNARP-95/96 ACTIVITIES
Ozone sounding: Cooperation between Argentina and Finland has been continued 
since 1988 at Marambio station.

Results of the research program will be published in a few years in international publications.
