ANTARCTIC TREATY                         TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                 XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE                 XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/INF 38
April, 1996
Original: English

COMNAP REPORT TO THE XX ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING
(Agenda item 5a, vi)
(Submitted by COMNAP)
REPORT TO THE XXTH ANTARCTIC TREATY
CONSULTATIVE MEETING

April 29 - May 10, 1996     Utrecht, The Netherlands


by the
Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
1.      Introduction

1.1. This report to the XXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is submitted 
      by the Council of Managers of National Programs pursuant to agenda 
      topic 5, Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System; Reports, and to 
      Recommendation XIII-2. The Council of national managers (COMNAP, 
      and its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations, 
      SCALOP) met from July 31 to August 4, 1995 in Santiago, Chile. The 
      officers and members are identified on the last page of this report. All 
      but six of 29 national programs were represented at the 1995 meeting in 
      Santiago. Earlier, in conjunction with the XIXth ATCM in Seoul Korea 
      there was a meeting with 27 members from 22 national programs present.

1.2 The functional basis for a council of national Antarctic operators has 
      grown from their commonality of purpose: the conduct and support of 
      science; the implementation of ATCM recommendations; and the pursuit 
      of safety, efficiency and economy in Antarctic operations. The COMNAP 
      organization, meetings, symposia and workshops, have provided the 
      direct contact, the exchange of experience and ideas and the opportun-
      istic networking that have proven so effective in initiating and enhancing 
      cooperation in these areas of common purpose. In addition, the work of 
      the council is organized to assure the timely sharing of information and 
      the discussion of common concerns, problems and solutions.

1.3 During the past year the topics dealt with at the annual meetings and 
      by the several working groups have included matters arising at, or 
      assigned by, the ATCM. The status of the work by COMNAP is 
      summarized under the topic headings in this report. In one case a 
      working paper is introduced in response to a previous ATCM assignment. 
      In other cases, some jointly with SCAR, COMNAP has introduced 
      information papers.

                                                                                  1
2.       Science Support

2.1     Antarctica is a continent for science. The Antarctic Treaty acknowledges 
        the substantial contributions to scientific knowledge resulting from inter-
        national cooperation in scientific investigation. From a scientific as well 
        as from an operational and logistic point of view, cooperation plays an 
        important role in national Antarctic programs. Furthermore, during the 
        last years most nations have experienced tighter research budgets. Hence 
        the rationale for cost effective ways for implementing science programs 
        and making better use of existing infrastructure has become more promi-
        nent. Together with SCAR, COMNAP is working toward the goal of 
        making international cooperation more efficient. The basic vehicle for 
        this is sharing of information and providing venues for interaction be-
        tween managers and science program leaders.  In August 1996 the 
        annual COMNAP meeting will once again be held in conjunction with 
        the biennial SCAR meeting. Joint sessions and activities will be organized 
        to enhance the information sharing and the opportunities for cooperation. 
        To this end both organizations are also involved in the expanded use of 
        electronic communications.

2.2     Most cooperative programs and activities originate from direct contacts 
        between a small number of scientists and managers from two or more 
        countries. Common scientific and geographical interests evolve into 
        coordinated research and shared logistics. The following paragraphs 
        briefly summarize some current examples of ongoing projects.

Cape Roberts Project

The cooperation between Italy, New Zealand, the United States, Ger-
many, and the United Kingdom in setting up this project was outlined 
in the COMNAP report to the XIXth ATCM. Australia has now joined the 
project. In 1995/96 the final shipment of equipment was transported to 
Cape Roberts in the Ross Sea on board the Italian supply ship, the Italica. 
Planning is now well underway for the first of two years of drilling in 
1996/97. Fifteen hundred meters of core will be recovered from the sea 
floor 500m below the sea ice for research on climate and glacial history 
prior to 40 million years ago and on the tectonic history of the continent.

2
Up to 40 scientists from the six participating nations will be located at 
Cape Roberts where the core will be split and logged, and at Scott Base 
and McMurdo where investigation will be carried out on the core at the 
Crary Laboratory. It is intended to prepare a report of preliminary findings 
before researchers leave the Ice. Representatives of all the participating 
nations met at the 1995 COMNAP meeting in Santiago to review opera-
tional planning for the project. A further planning meeting will be held 
at the SCAR/COMNAP meetings in Cambridge in August 1996.

Dome C Project

The initial cooperation by France and Italy and general concept for the 
Dome C Project were summarized in the COMNAP report to the XIXth 
ATCM. During the 1995/96 season two traverse operations from Dumont 
d'Urville and several Twin Otter flights from Terra Nova Bay have 
supported the development of the Concordia Base. Radio echo sound-
ings were performed and a strain network established for more detailed 
definition of the ice sheet at that location. In addition to glaciology 
cooperative projects in atmospheric sciences, astrophysics, geophysics 
and medicine are being planned. The opportunities for broader interna-
tional scientific cooperation are to be developed at a workshop to be held 
in Sienna Italy 3 to 5 June 1996.

Deep Drilling at Vostok

An international scientific team of 8 Russians, 5 French, and 2 Americans 
continued the deep ice core drilling at Russia's Vostok Station during the 
1995/96 summer, and in January 1996 recovered core from a depth of 
3350m. Study of this core illuminates the paleoclimate record of four 
glacial/interglacial cycles back as far as 420 thousand years. With respect 
to the future of deep drilling at Vostok, there is additional international 
interest and what may be a new challenge in the apparent existence of a 
lake beneath the ice sheet in the area of Vostok. Special seismic 
measurements taken during the 1995/96 summer show the ice extending 
to a depth of 3700m and then water for 200m below. 
3
EPICA

The European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) combines the efforts of ten European nations (Belgium, Britain, Germany, Denmark, France, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland) to undertake deep ice core drilling at two locations in Antarctica: at Dome C and in Dronning Maud Land. The European Commission has approved support for EPICA with the particular target for drilling to 3300 meters at Dome C. The broad aim of the project is to reconstruct high resolution histories, over several hundreds of thousands of years, of the Earth's past climate, climate changes and the associated regional and global processes. EPICA is designed to extend the Vostok record and to provide a Southern Hemisphere complement to the deep ice core through the Greenland ice sheet completed in 1992.

A Life Science Project

The effects of increased ultra violet on Antarctic terrestrial communities were studied by joint effort of scientists from Britain, Italy and the USA at a site on the Victoria Land coast. In a series of co-ordinated studies in December and January they examined the effects of UV-B as well as other effects of global change on bacteria, fungi, algae, nematodes, springtails, mosses and lichens.

3.    Operations, Logistics, and Technology

3.1 BATs

In Seoul, the XIXth ATCM, and earlier in Kyoto the XVIIIth, considered the use of Best Available Technologies or Best Available Techniques in Antarctica. Paragraph (115) of the final report of the XIXth ATCM invited COMNAP to consider the desirability and feasibility of employing the concept of BATs for the protection of the Antarctic environment, and to recommend appropriate action to the XXth ATCM. This matter was taken up at the 1995 COMNAP/SCALOP meeting in Santiago. The meeting noted that logistics and operational support in Antarctica make up a distinct industry and that the COMNAP/SCALOP community is already
4
involved, through the use of symposia, workshops and trade exhibits, in 
the process of searching for the best relevant techniques and technolo-
gies. Of these the most important are the biennial Symposia on Antarctic 
Logistics and Operations that are conducted in conjunction with each 
SCAR meeting. Pursuant to paragraph (115) of the final report of the XIXth 
ATCM, the COMNAP meeting considered the way to focus on the 
environmental protection criteria. A working paper on this topic has 
been submitted for consideration by the TEWG and by the XXth ATCM.

3.2 Contingency planning

COMNAP/SCALOP members have considered contingency planning for 
several years primarily in connection with oil spill prevention and 
response, and during work on air operations safety, environmental 
impact assessment, tourism and, of course, regional contingency plan-
ning. The attention currently being given by COMNAP can be briefly 
summarized as follows: First, there is the continuing practice of oil spill 
prevention and response. The COMNAP Guidelines for Oil  Spill Con-
tingency Planning were included in the report to the XVIIIth ATCM in 
1992. Many oil spill contingency plans for individual stations or ships 
and, in some cases, for entire program areas have been prepared, 
exchanged among the operators, and revised. Consideration has been 
given to multi-operator or regional plans as provided for in the guidelines. 
All the concerned national operators have participated in developing 
such a project for the King George Island area, and a regional plan is 
under consideration for the Ross Sea area.

Second, COMNAP has considered the implementation of the Protocol 
Article 15, Emergency Response Action, and Protocol Annex IV, Article 
12. The task is to extend the guidelines and the existing contingency 
plans that deal with oil spill prevention and response to include other 
environmental threats and emergencies.

Third, members have been asked to consider special needs or opportu-
nities for cooperation or coordination in their contingency planning. In 
many cases the realities of distance, absence of transport and other

5
practicalities in Antarctica preclude the pooling of equipment or joint use 
of response capabilities. The discussions continue, and have been 
extended to consider all life threatening and environmental contingen-
cies, including mass casualty response and the implications of tourism 
and non-governmental activities.

3.3    Fuel Handling and Storage

In addition to the Guidelines for Oil Spill Contingency Planning, the 
SCALOP Working Group on Oil Spill Prevention and Response has 
developed recommended procedures and measures for the prevention 
and control of spills. These were printed in two documents approved by 
COMNAP at its meeting in June 1992: Recommended Procedures for 
Fuel Oil Transfer at Stations and Bases, and Recommendations for Spill 
Prevention and Containment of Fuel at Stations and Bases. These proce-
dures and recommendations identify facility configurations, methods 
and equipment that reduce the likelihood of a spill and control or contain 
the spill until the contingency response plans can be activated. Contin-
gency plans and spill prevention measures are therefor viewed together 
to assure consistency.

The actions taken by COMNAP/SCALOP in the development of spill 
contingency planning and spill prevention measures are part of an 
evolving process. Such plans and measures require periodic updating in 
response to changing requirements and technologies. The results of these 
efforts to date together with the continuing process by COMNAP/SCALOP 
are consistent with the intent of ATCM Resolution 4 (1995).

4.  Environmental Monitoring

Antarctic research activities and related logistic operations may affect the 
environment and are therefore subject to conservation regulations and 
controls as required by the Protocol on Environmental Protection. ATCM 
XVIII asked SCAR and COMNAP to provide technical advice for the 
design of effective and co-ordinated environmental monitoring pro-
grammes. 
6
grams. The wide range of topics and the complexity of the subject made 
it necessary to split the discussions into two linked workshops. The first 
workshop in Oslo, Norway, made optimum use of scientific and logistic 
experience of Antarctic workers and monitoring expertise of invited 
speakers from outside the Antarctic community. The second workshop 
at College Station, Texas, addressed issues related to the practical design 
and implementation of environmental monitoring programs. More de-
tails of the workshops are provided in a SCAR/COMNAP Information 
Paper. The detailed reports of both workshops are not yet available. 
These will be considered at the SCAR and COMNAP meetings in Cam-
bridge in August of this year and a Working Paper with recommendations 
will be provided for consideration of parties at the XXIst ATCM.

5. Information Management

5.1 AMEN

The fastest, least expensive and most reliable way for national program 
managers to share information, to work together on documents or to 
undertake cooperation through dialogue in near real time, is to use 
computer-based electronic networks; i.e. the Internet. While it is still 
(perhaps even more) essential that personal acquaintances and friend-
ships are established and working relationships are nurtured at annual 
meetings, the Internet has rapidly become the preferred way to com-
municate. The original Antarctic Managers Electronic Network was 
established in 1994. Two years later it has been extended to include 
a homepage on the World Wide Web. One of the current objectives 
is to exploit the features of the COMNAP website on the Internet 
to improve and expedite the advance exchange of operational 
information. An information paper on this topic has been submitted 
to the ATCM.

5.2 Logistics Symposia

Antarctic logistics and operational activities account for the major ex-
pense and investment by national operators, leading to expanding levels 
                                                               7
of cooperation and what has grown to be a more than thirty year history 
of information sharing; the main events of which continue to be the 
Symposia on Antarctic Logistics and Operations. The Seventh Sympo-
sium will be at Cambridge England on 6 and 7 August 1995. The list of 
topics being featured this year include:

  • Remote Sensing and the Use of Satellites for Science Support
  • Deep Drilling Technologies
  • Significant and Proven Developments in Operations, Logistics, 
    and Science Support
  • Energy Conservation
  • Best Available Technologies for Waste Management and Environ-
    mental Protection
  • Science Operations Planning and Resource Allocation

In addition to the presentation of papers, there will be a technical 
exposition from manufacturers of products, or providers of services that 
may be of interest to the Antarctic operators.

5.3 Antarctic Data Directory System

Since XIXth ATCM substantial progress has been made by COMNAP and 
SCAR in responding to ATCM recommendations (XIII-5, XV-16 and XVII-1) 
on data management. COMNAP and SCAR have now started development 
of the Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS), composed of an Antarctic 
Master Directory (AMD) and a network of National Antarctic Data Centres 
(NADCs). A joint COMNAP-SCAR exercise inviting interested parties to 
host the AMD and to actively develop the ADDS, through the support of the 
network of NADCs, was completed with the acceptance of a proposal from 
a consortium composed of New Zealand, France, Italy and the United 
States of America. The AMD and ADDS support service will be developed 
and located at the International Centre for Antarctic Information and Re-
search (ICAIR), Christchurch, New Zealand. COMNAP and SCAR have 
formed a steering committee to oversee the implementation and running of 
the ADDS, which includes monitoring the work of the AMD.

8
Development of core AMD software is now underway along with a toolkit to assist NADCs in the generation and maintenance of data set descriptions. In parallel with this COMNAP and SCAR have asked MNAPs and National Committees to identify NADCs. Eleven NADCs have now been formally identified and several others are known to the ADDS Steering Committee but have yet to be formally notified to COMNAP and SCAR.

A joint COMNAP-SCAR information paper on Antarctic Data Management gives further details on the development and implementation of the ADDS and the AMD.

 
6. Impact of Other Activities in the Antarctic on Science Operations

 
        Several issues of importance to both national program and non-governmental operators in the Antarctic were raised at the 1995 COMNAP annual meeting. These issues included adequacy of medical facilities and response to injury and illness, safety procedures when taking passengers ashore, communications with national operators and contingency planning by tour operators. They relate to the ability of operators (government and non-government) to provide support to each other in the case of emergency, and to the diversion of resources away from their primary objective - in the case of the national operators represented in COMNAP, from science support to emergency response.

        These issues are outlined in an Information Paper presented by COMNAP to the XXth ATCM.

        Consideration of these issues is timely in relation to the forthcoming need (once the Protocol is ratified) to provide permits to all Antarctic activities, and the obligations contained in Article 15 and in Article 10 of Annex IV to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

 
9
COUNCIL OF MANAGERS OF NATIONAL ANTARCTIC PROGRAMS

OFFICERS

CHAIRMAN                                  ANDERS KARLQVIST (Sweden)
Members of the Executive Committee
PAST CHAIRMAN (1991-94)                   MARIO ZUCCHELLI (Italy)
MEMBER                                    OSCAR PINOCHET DE LA BARRA (Chile)
MEMBER                                    GILLIAN WRATT (New Zealand)
CHAIRMAN                                  ERICK CHIANG (United States)
(Standing Committee on Antarctic
Logistics and Operations)
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY                       AL FOWLER

Secretariat:   c/o American Geophysical Union
               2000 Florida Avenue, NW
               Washington, DC 20009, USA

MEMBERS
MNAP (M) - SCALOP (S)

ARGENTINA   (M) Brig. Gen. Jorge Leal
            (M) Dr. Carlos A. Rinaldi
            (S) Mr. Luis Fontana                  NETHERLANDS  (M) Dr. Jan H. Stel
                                                 (S) Mr. Raymond M.L. Schorno
AUSTRALIA   (M) Mr. Rex Moncur                  NEW ZEALAND  (M) Ms. Gillian Wratt
            (S) Mr. Jack Sayers                  (S) Mr. Malcolm Macfarlane

BELGIUM     (M) Mr. Serge Caschette            NORWAY       (M) Dr. Olav Orheim.
BRAZIL      (M) RADM Julio Soares de Moura Neto  (S) Mr. Jan-Gunnar Winther
            (S) CDR Luiz Pereira                 (S) Mr. Jan-Erling Haugland
BULGARIA    (M) Dr. Christo Pimperev           POLAND       (M) Prof. Stanislaw Rakusa-Suszczewski
            (S) Mr. Nikolay Stanchev             (S) Dr. Sewervn M. Zalewski
CANADA      (M) Dr. Peter Suedfield            REPUBLIC OF  (M) Dr. Won-Oh Song
            (S) Mr. Dennis Stossel               KOREA        (S) Dr. Dong Yup Kim
CHILE       (M) Amb. Oscar Pinochet de la Barra  REPUBLIC OF  (M) Mr. Dirk van Schalkwyk
            (S) Eng. Patricio Eberhard           SOUTH AFRICA (S) Mr. Richard N. Skinner
CHINA       (M) Mr. Chen Lligi                 RUSSIA       (M) Dr. Peter Nikitin
            (S) Mr. Jia Genzheng                 (M) Mr. Valery V. Lukin
ECUADOR     (M) Capt. Jose Olmedo               (S) Dr. Valery Klokov
            (M) Capt. Femando Zurita Fabre
FINLAND     (M) Prof. Pentti Mälkki            SPAIN        (M) Dr. Juan-Ramón Vericad
            (S) Mrs. Riitta Mansukoski           (S) Mr. Alberto Castejon
FRANCE      (M) Mr. Pierre Lise               SWEDEN       (M) Prof. Anders Karlqvist
            (M) Dr. Roger E. Gendrin             (M) Dr. Olle Melander
            (S) Mr. Patrice Godon                (S) Mr. Ulf Hedman
GERMANY     (M) Prof. Max M. Tilzer            UKRAINE      (M) Mr. Poitr Ghozik
            (S) Dr. Heinz Kohnen
INDIA       (M) Mr. J.V.R. Prasada Rao         UNITED       (M) Dr. Barry Heywood
            (S) Mr. Prabh Das                    KINGDOM      (S) Mr. John Hall
ITALY       (M) Dr. Mario Zucchelli            UNITED STATES(M) Prof. Cornelius W. Sullivan
            (S) Dr. Antonino Cucinotta           (S) Mr. Erick Chiang
JAPAN       (M) Mr. Masayuki Inoue             URUGUAY      (M) Gen. Yelton Bagnasco
            (M) Dr. Takeo Hirasawa               (S) Col. Roque Aita
            (S) Dr. Kazuyuki Shiraishi
