ANTARCTIC TREATY              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING      XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE      
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE      

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/INF 37
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English


TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES
IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

(Agenda item 9)

(Submitted by the United States)
Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities
in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The relationship between the United States Antarctic Program and non-
governmental activities, such as tourism, in the Antarctic has been constantly
improving over the years. With proper coordination and sensitivity to the
requirements of each activity, tourism and research can continue to coexist in
Antarctica without negatively impacting the Antarctic wilderness, its aesthetic
values, or the conduct of scientific research. However, it is increasingly important
to have well-informed tourist clientele and well-prepared tour operators, particularly
considering problems that have arisen in medical care and emergency response.
With appropriate preparation, tourists can become ambassadors for Antarctica,
appreciative of its majestic vistas, exceptional wildlife, and unparalleled scientific
research.

Impact on Scientific and Environmental Activities

McMurdo Station and the Dry Valleys

The impact of tourism on scientific activities and their environment varies with
location. Visits to McMurdo Station, the largest of the U.S. research stations,
cause minimal disruption and minimal impact. Tours of the station are conducted
by volunteers, and scientists working in the lab discuss their work as time permits.
Activities of the tourists are coordinated by a National Science Foundation
representative who is on station during the research season. Impact to the station
infrastructure is minimal, consisting primarily of the use of toilet facilities. The
minor disruption to station activities, minimized by the NSF coordinator, is viewed
as well worth the goodwill and understanding gained as the tourists see what the
science research programs are accomplishing. They become "Antarctic
Ambassadors," aware of the valuable research undertaken in Antarctica and the
care with which the program manages its environmental protection responsibilities.

Tourism in areas in close proximity to McMurdo Station has caused problems. The
nearby Dry Valleys, particularly the Taylor and Wright Valleys, have some of the
most spectacular scenery in the area but are extremely sensitive sites of important
scientific research. Research has demonstrated the fragility of the soils, lakes,
geologic formations and flora, represented by moss and algae that grow in
association with intermittent stream beds; throughout the Dry Valleys. Tour
operators need to be more aware of the sensitivity of this area to avoid impacts to
the environment when passengers from ships are flown via helicopter to view these
spectacular Antarctic vistas. Tourists themselves need to be educated before they
are flown to the sites.

1
To protect sensitive sites from negative impacts of tourists and the helicopters carrying them, the National Science Foundation, in conjunction with the U.S. Geologic Survey and U.S. and New Zealand scientists, has developed maps of the Dry Valleys for the tour operators. These maps identify recommended helicopter landing sites that have scenic views but avoid environmentally or scientifically sensitive sites. Identifying recommended sites has worked well, but maps must be periodically reviewed and revised to reflect changing scientific study locations.

Palmer Station

Because Palmer Station is smaller and has fewer personnel than McMurdo Station, tourism has a more significant impact on science. Impacts on science activities in the Palmer area include unannounced visits to nearby penguin rookeries when scientific observations are being conducted and interference with ongoing laboratory studies when tours enter the laboratory area. In both instances, work is suspended while the tourists are present. The 72-hour advance notification required by Palmer Station has helped ease the problem experienced at the field sites and minimized the interference in the laboratory.

Each tour ship visit to Palmer Station requires an average of 40 person-hours to support. The USAP has allotted 400 hours per season to accommodate ship visits, thereby limiting the total number of ship visits to ten. This has required coordinating tour operators', but it seems to be effective in minimizing the impact on both science and the environment.

The environmental impact of tourist visits to areas within the peninsula is more difficult to assess. Short-term and cumulative impacts of visits to sites such as

1 USAP & IAATO

In July 1989, USAP organized the first annual meeting with Antarctic Tour Operators to: a) coordinate visits to U.S. stations in order to limit impact on scientific research and station operations; b) educate operators on Antarctic Treaty reporting requirements, U.S. laws (primarily the Antarctic Conservation Act) affecting U.S.-based cruise ship operators and American citizens; c) advise operators on upcoming Antarctic Treaty recommendations and U.S. pending legislation that might affect their operations; and d) promote education of passengers about the U.S. Antarctic Program activities. These meetings were held with U.S.- based operators only until interest was expressed by foreign operators wishing to arrange visits to U.S. stations.

As the ATCPs came closer to concluding the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and various operators were called to testify before Congress, the operators saw the need to establish a formal organization providing a responsible and cohesive approach to Antarctic tourism. In 1991, the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) was established to advocate, promote and practice safe and environmentally responsible private-sector travel to the Antarctic. Over the last 5 years, IAATO has become more organized and internationally known, to the point their current membership is comprised of 15 tour operators, approximately half of which are U.S.- based.

USAP's interaction with IAATO has prospered over the last five years, creating a cooperative and beneficial working relationship. USAP continues to hold annual meetings to schedule visits to U.S. stations, educate operators on recent ATCM recommendations and U.S. legislation that affect their operations, providing USAP publications and videos on Antarctic conservation and environmental awareness, and on scientific activities, policies, and procedures of the U.S. Antarctic Program.

2
penguin rookeries, and possible compromise of future scientific value need further study.

Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station

A smaller number of tourists visit Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. The station, because of its location, attracts tourists from around the world. Most tourists arrive by plane; however increasing numbers of solo and team ski expeditions are visiting the station.

The USAP has specific policies that accommodate such visitors but minimize their interference with ongoing station science programs and operations. Upon arrival visitors are given a warm drink, an opportunity to tour the facilities under the dome. They and are allowed to camp in an area away from the science activities and are offered a meal if they will be camping overnight, as well as the use of the sanitary facilities for the duration of their stay. Tourists brought by aircraft normally depart within hours of arrival, whereas skiers are normally picked up within 3 days.

The science areas surrounding the South Pole include a clean air or upwind sector for atmospheric chemistry measurements, where any surface activities can cause interference with air measurements; a dark sector, for astronomy and astrophysics where radio transmissions and other electromagnetic radiation sources can disrupt experiments; and a quiet sector where surface disturbances can interfere with the monitoring of the earth's seismic activity. Access to these areas is restricted. Tourists visiting the station without advance coordination could seriously compromise important scientific work.

Compliance and Enforcement

U.S. citizens, whether in Antarctica for tourism, science, or other purposes, are required to comply with provisions of the Antarctic Conservation Act (ACA) and its associated regulations. The portions of the ACA regulations most pertinent to tourist and non-governmental activities are those sections addressing waste management and the conservation of flora and fauna, which includes the prohibition on taking or harassing native mammals or native birds, and the prohibition on entry into protected areas.

Compliance Requirements

Under U.S. law, U.S. citizens must adhere to waste management regulations, including obtaining a permit for activities where pollutants specifically designated under the ACA may be introduced into Antarctica and where wastes may be generated other than on board ships. For expeditions that are not ship based, such as those involving short-term camping activities in the field, the tour operator, on behalf of any U.S. citizens, must obtain a permit for the use of designated
3
pollutants, such as camp stove fuels. The permit application must include details 
on locations where the activities are proposed, quantities of materials to be used, 
spill contingency preparations, and waste management plans for both solid and 
human waste. An Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) may also be required to 
assess the impact of the proposed activities and mitigating measures. When a 
permit is issued, it contains conditions that must be adhered to in conducting the 
activities, as well as an annual report requirement. Since the waste management 
regulations became effective in 1993, there have been 5 permits issued to tourist 
expeditions.

 Enforcement

Enforcement of Antarctic Conservation Act requirements is accomplished by 
designated enforcement officers and through review of the reports submitted in 
response to permitting requirements. Occasionally observers are designated to 
record and report activities of non-governmental expeditions. No serious infractions 
of waste management or conservation regulations by U.S. citizens have been 
noted. The ability to enforce the requirements, however, is limited due to the large 
number of ships and sites visited by tour companies and other non-governmental 
activities. The tour operators are generally self policing, which emphasizes the 
need to educate tourists on their responsibilities and the activities which could 
negatively impact the Antarctic environment.

  Medical Care, Safety, and Emergency Response

 Medical Care

The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) maintains limited medical 
clinic capabilities at each of its three year-round research stations to provide basic 
and emergency medical care to its researchers and support staff while in 
Antarctica. To minimize the demand on these limited facilities, the USAP requires 
all participants to meet rigorous medical clearance criteria prior to deployment to 
ensure that individuals do not have existing medical conditions which would require 
medical care beyond the capabilities of the clinics. The clinics are staffed and 
equipped to support the USAP population serviced by each facility, and are not 
intended to provide medical care to the general public. Each clinic has, however, 
provided medical support to non-governmental activities at various times in the 
past.

4
Requests for medical care by private groups have included:

-- diagnostic second opinion from the station's resident physician;
-- initial diagnosis and treatment, where the private group had no medical care 
    provider on staff;
-- clinical testing or imaging (e.g., X-rays);
-- medications;
-- emergency medical (e.g., trauma injuries, cold-related injuries, cardiac 
    problems) and dental treatment.

In many cases these requests required minimal resources and could be 
accommodated without major impact. However, there have been circumstances 
where fulfilling such requests have (or would have) depleted medical inventories or 
staff availability. Conversely, there have been several recent instances where tour 
operators have assisted national programs in transporting staff from the Antarctic 
peninsula to South America.

Emergency Response/Search and Rescue

As part of its research support mission, the USAP maintains a response capability 
for emergencies within its program. Use of this emergency capability has been 
requested by other national Antarctic Programs, governmental entities, private 
expeditions and tour groups for medical evacuation, oil spill response, and search 
and rescue (SAR). Initiating any of these activities involves significant cost and 
may involve significant personal risk to the USAP responders. Individual SAR team 
members have been placed at great personal risk in their efforts to rescue 
individuals from hazardous situations, as evidenced during the rescue of the 
Kristensen expedition during the '93 -'94 austral summer season. This effort was 
estimated to cost $133,000, which does not include the impact of diverting 
aviation and SAR resources from normal program activities.

Improvements Needed

To minimize the occasions where already limited national program medical and SAR 
resources are needed by tourists and non- governmental activities, actions must be 
taken to improve their capabilities and preparedness. Currently there are no 
minimum standards of medical care capability used by tour operators and 
expeditions. There is a need for the development and utilization of minimum 
capabilities and preparedness that each expedition or tour operator should maintain 
within its party while in the Antarctic. Each group should be medically self-
sufficient. Tour ships, in particular, with their large number of passengers, should 
be prepared to deal with public health emergencies on- board (e.g., food or water-
borne disease outbreaks arising from poor sanitation or ship-board utilities failures) 
as well as trauma and other emergencies (e.g. heart attacks). Emphasis should be 
placed on the expedition/tour operator making prior arrangements for medical

5
evacuations through private operators. Minimum reliance on national programs for 
medical assistance should be the norm.

It is also essential that private expeditions have appropriate mountaineering and 
survival expertise within their field parties to ensure the safety and well-being of all 
team members. Likewise, tour operators should have and utilize proper procedures 
for ensuring the safety of tour members (e.g., during small boat operations, aircraft 
operations). It may be appropriate for IAATO or the Treaty Parties to develop a set 
of standards that are reviewed and certified by an independent entity with expertise 
in such matters. Requests for emergency assistance or SAR support should be 
made with the understanding that national programs will require reimbursement for 
their expenses if they agree to undertake the mission.

Conclusion

The efforts thus far of the national programs and of IAATO to share information 
and coordinate visits to stations, and IAATO's development and dissemination of 
protection and conservation guidelines for tourists, have gone a long way to reduce 
the conflicts that can arise between science and tourism. There is still much to be 
done, however. Better advance notification by non-governmental expeditions and 
private yachts, improvements in the education of non-IAATO members, and true 
self sufficiency on the part of tour operators are essential to minimize the adverse 
impact of tourists on the environment and scientific activities in Antarctica, and 
reduce the risks to passenger health and safety. Additional preparedness could 
include requirements that tour operators meet some minimum standard for medical 
care capability and small boat safety procedures, that private expeditions have 
appropriate mountaineering/survival expertise within their field party, and that all 
tour operators have adequate means (e.g. insurance) to reimburse national 
programs for expenses incurred for emergency response.

6
