ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE       XX консультативное совещание



XX ATCM/WP 32
(Rev. 1)
May 1996
Original: English


FINAL REPORT OF THE TRANSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL
WORKING GROUP (TEWG)

(Submitted by The Secretariat)
1

Report of the TEWG meeting, Utrecht, 29 April-3 May 1996

Rev 1

The following is a report of discussions by the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) during its meeting from 29 April to 3 May 1996. Before the discussion of the items in the agenda for the TEWG, the chairman explored the possibility of discussing matters related to the topics and methods of work for the TEWG. These included some work of the TEWG in the intersessional period and offering advice on environmental matters to the group of liability experts who had requested it. However, since the plenary had not assigned such a task to the TEWG, there was opposition to doing these things and no decision on this matter could be reached. The TEWG then proceeded to take up the items of the agenda assigned to it.

17/19.    Environmental Protection Measures and their Effectiveness

WP:  11
INF: 35, 45, 66, 74, 78

(1) The delegations of Brazil and COMNAP introduced their papers (XX ATCM/INF 35, XX ATCM/WP 11 respectively).

(2) The Group welcomed the report from Brazil setting out technical aspects of station operations in Antarctica. The TEWG believed that such information exchange was important if ways of minimizing environmental impacts were to be sought. The Group urged that more Parties to the Treaty provide information as to how they have introduced additional technical measures to address the requirements of the Protocol. The Group noted that experience from the Arctic could also be of value.

(3) The United Kingdom suggested that in relation to the information exchange required by article 13 of the Protocol the technical information could be provided to the TEWG whilst that of a legal administrative nature can remain under agenda item 6.

(4) Referring to paragraph 118 of the final report of the XIX ATCM in Seoul, the introduction of non-native species was brought to the attention of the Group. Concerns were also raised about the introduction of non-native species in ballast water and the introduction of non-native species of grasses. Solutions for safer operations should be identified to minimise these introductions as there is evidence that non-native species survive better than expected. Parties to the Antarctic Treaty were encouraged again to take this up and make thorough checks of their facilities in Antarctica. In this respect also reference was made to an information paper tabled by Japan (XX ATCM/INF 66).

(5) The Meeting noted with appreciation the report from COMNAP on Best Available Techniques (XX ATCM WP/11) and endorsed its findings. The TEWG recommended that the ATCM request COMNAP to
2

keep this issue under regular review and to provide further 
reports when appropriate in the light of changing technologies 
which might be applicable to Antarctica. This information 
could be very helpful to assess future EIA reports.

18. Application and Implementation of EIA procedures

WP:  1,  8, 11, 25, 27, 28
INF: 2,  3,  4,  5,  8, 10, 19 rev2, 28, 44, 49, 59, 73, 85

(6) Working papers (XX ATCM/WP 1, 8, 11, 25, 27, 28) were 
table[d] by respectively New Zealand, Italy, COMNAP, the United 
States, South Africa and Uruguay.

(7) It was noted that working paper (XX ATCM/WP 8) might be 
submitted under agenda item 10 concerning shipping regulations 
and could be considered with working papers (XX ATCM/WP 9 and 
17).

(8) New Zealand presented Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 1) on 
follow-up procedures relating to changes in the Cape Roberts 
CEE. The changes were outlined and the delegation commented 
that the process followed had been valuable in the 
implementation of the CEE. Concerning the planned drilling 
operations, the question was raised of what consideration had 
been given to the potential effects on the seafloor and the 
benthic communities. The delegation of New Zealand responded 
that the CEE addressed the question of impacts on the seabed 
and set out the monitoring requirements during the drilling 
programme and would report back to future ATCMs on the results 
of such work.New Zealand also informed the Group about 
Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 3) on its experience and 
practice with preliminary environmental assessment of science 
proposals.

(9) South Africa was congratulated by the TEWG on being open 
and transparent in its report (XX ATCM/WP 27) on the 
construction of the new SANAE IV station, describing the 
detail of conforming to its CEE. This follow-up process 
carried out by South Africa was a valuable example and a 
learning exercise and that this process of reporting should be 
employed by those carrying out CEEs. One delegation expressed 
concern about the reported open burning during the 1995/96 
construction at the old SANAE III station. It was recognised 
by the TEWG that open burning would be phased out  in 
accordance with Annex III Article 3, but this activity at 
SANAE was however undertaken on the basis of safety 
considerations in accordance with Annex III Article 12 and 
only after a supplementing IEE. The fact that the area had 
been thoroughly cleaned up immediately after the open burning 
was also mentioned.

(10) The TEWG agreed that it was important to find mechanisms 
that provide feedback from the work accomplished by different 
countries on environmental impact assessments. The Group 
recommended to the ATCM that post-analyses of environmental 
assessments should become standard practice, and that Parties 
should report on the results of these analyses to the ATCM as
3

to how they have implemented those measures. It was recognised 
that a mechanism to consider these reports needed to be 
developed.

(11) The IEEs submitted by New Zealand tour operators (XX 
ATCM/INF 4 and 5) were welcomed. The Group recommended that 
IAATO should be encouraged to assist its members to produce 
EIAs.

(12) As requested by Resolution 6 (1995) an Information Paper 
(XX ATCM/INF 19) was tabled by the Netherlands. Also, the 
United States introduced a Working Paper (IX ATCM/WP 25) which 
provided a list of environmental assessments (IEEs) prepared 
by the United States in 1995. The Group noted that only a 
small number of Parties had provided lists of IEEs and CEEs 
prepared by or submitted to them since the last ATCM as 
required by Resolution 6 (1995). The TEWG drew attention to 
the fact that provision of such lists in respect of IEEs would 
be an obligation on Parties under Article 6(1) of Annex I when 
the Protocol entered into force. The TEWG stressed that all 
Parties should comply with Resolution 6 (1995) and submit an 
annual return, including nil returns, of IEEs and CEEs. The 
Meeting urged Parties, in accordance with ATCM XIX Resolution 
6, to submit to the host of the next ATCM by ______, a list of 
all IEEs and CEEs prepared by them in the preceding year. 
Further, the Meeting encouraged the host of the next ATCM to 
request and, in advance of the next ATCM, distribute a 
representative sample of IEEs prepared by Parties in 
accordance with Article 2 of Protocol Annex I.

(13) The United Kingdom tabled a paper (XX ATCM/INF 8) which 
undertook a review of EIAs undertaken for proposed activities 
in Antarctica. New Zealand offered to coordinate further work 
on this and report back to the XXI ATCM.

(14) It was suggested that IEEs and CEEs could be made readily 
available by releasing them on the Internet. This practice has 
indeed already been initiated by some Parties. The TEWG 
recommends to the ATCM that it endorse this suggestion.

(15) The TEWG reiterated that in considering potential impacts 
on the environment during the EIA process, the values as 
mentioned in Article 3, paragraph 1 of the Protocol should be 
included.

(16) The TEWG agreed that the paper tabled by New Zealand (XX 
ATCM/INF 2) was valuable and formed an important contribution 
to the understanding and interpretation of the terms "minor" 
and "transitory" as used in the Madrid Protocol.

(17) On the basis of Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 2) an 
open-ended group was assigned the task of discussing and 
developing ideas and suggestions to bring to the TEWG on 
measures to be taken to provide guidance and assistance in the 
process of application and implementation of the EIA 
procedures, and in particular the terms "minor" and 
"transitory".

(18) The TEWG noted that the nature and significance of
possible environmental impacts could be affected by a range of 
variables including the nature, scale, location and timing of 
the activity; the experience of the organization or 
individuals conducting the activity; and other activities that 
have been or are being conducted in or near the area of the 
activity in question. With regard to the last point, it was 
noted that identifications and considerations of possible 
cumulative impacts is an important part of the impact 
assessment.

(19) The terms "minor" and "transitory" are interpreted by the 
Treaty Parties in their implementation of Annex I and a great 
deal of experience in producing IEEs and CEEs has accumulated. 
Many IEEs and CEEs have been presented as Information Papers 
at the ATCM meetings. However, there is at present no 
systematic approach to utilising and learning from this 
experience.

(20) Valuable suggestions were put forward as to how the lists 
and matrices in the Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 2) could be 
developed and expanded. It was recognized that the limited 
time available for discussion did not allow for more than a 
general exchange of views on possible ways forward.

(21) The TEWG noted with appreciation the offer by New Zealand 
to coordinate intersessional work, both on developing a 
further understanding of the terms "minor" and "transitory" 
and a network of Environmental Officers of National Antarctic 
Programmes to enhance the mutual understanding of EIA 
processes. New Zealand will report back to the next ATCM on 
these aspects.

(22) The Groups attention was drawn to IUCNs plans (XX 
ATCM/INF 85) to host a workshop on cumulative impacts in 
Washington DC, USA, in September 1996. The workshop will draw 
on the work of the two SCAR/COMNAP workshops on monitoring 
held in October 1995 and March 1996, and will be designed to 
produce outcomes that are of practical use to Antarctic 
operators and the Antarctic Treaty System. In order to ensure 
maximum usefulness, delegates were asked to send comments on 
content to the workshop organisers.

20. The Antarctic Protected Area System

After the introduction of the relevant papers the meeting had a 
short general debate and decided to organise its work in two open-
ended working groups. One group discussed the papers falling under 
agenda item 20a. Another two groups discussed the papers falling 
under agenda item 20c. The advice of these groups on Resolutions or 
Decisions needed was brought back to the TEWG for general 
discussion and adoption.

a) Proposals for Revised and New Management Plans

WP: 3, 14 rev1, 15 rev1, 24, 26
INF: 30, 80
5

(23) The TEWG noted the growing problem associated with the interim period ahead of the approval of Recommendation XVI-10. 
TEWG recommended that the ATCM urge Parties to consider approval of Recommendation XVI-10 under the terms of Article 
IX of the Antarctic Treaty so that it might become effective at the earliest possible opportunity.

(24) The United Kingdom and the United States of America delegations tabled Working Papers (XX ATCM/WP 3 and 24, 
respectively) which set out revised management plans for the following Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

    SSSI No 9   - Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    SSSI No 19  - Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land

(25) The TEWG recommends that the ATCM adopt Measure... (1996) relating to management plans for the above Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest.

--------------------------------------------------------

Measure...( 1996)

Revised Description and Management Plan for Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest (SSSI)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval 
in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty,

For the Sites of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below.

(i) the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation 
XIII-8 on the Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest to be deleted.

(ii) the relevant Management Plan of the Sites of Special Scien-
tific Interest, annexed to this Measure, be inserted in the 
Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 on the Facilitation of 
scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Sites of Special Scientific Interest concerned are:

    SSSI No 9  Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
    SSSI No 19 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land.

iii) that they ensure their nationals comply with mandatory 
provisions of the new Management Plan

--------------------------------------------------------

(26) The TEWG noted that clear and accurate maps were an 
important part of the Management Plans and recognised that 
there were as yet no guidelines on the preparation of maps for 
protected areas. SCAR was asked to ensure that such guidelines 
be drawn up and included in the Management Plan Handbook, and
6

to consider how high quality maps could be made available.

(27) The delegation of Australia tabled Working Paper (XX 
ATCM/WP 26) which proposed the extension of the date of expiry 
of the management plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest 
No. 25. The meeting noted that the management plans for a 
number of other Sites of Special Scientific Interest expire 
before the year 2000 and that the extensions of Sites 13 and 
20 which had been considered at XIX ATCM had, as a result of 
an oversight, not been included in a relevant Resolution. 
Consistent with Resolution 7 (1995), the Group recommends that 
the ATCM adopt Resolution... (1996) to extend the expiry dates 
of these plans to 31 December 2000.

--------------------------------------------------------

Resolution... (1996)

Extension of the Expiry Dates 
for Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and XII-5, and Resolution 7/1995;

Noting that experience of the practical effect of the Management 
Plans for these sites has shown them to be an effective means of 
reducing the risks of interference with science in areas of special 
scientific interest; and

Conscious of the advantage of further harmonising the expiry dates 
of Sites of Special Scientific Interest pending the entry into 
force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty and Annex V to that Protocol.

Recommend that;

1. The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
numbers 13 and 20 which were considered at XIX ATCM be 
extended to 31 December 2000.

2. The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
numbers 2, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 be extended from 31 
December 1997 to 31 December 2000.

3. The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
numbers 29, 31 and 32 be extended from 31 December 1999 to 31 
December 2000.

4. The Governments of the Consultative Parties should use their 
best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 
4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the Management Plans for these 
sites are complied with.

(28) The delegations of Australia and Norway tabled Working 
Paper (XX ATCM/WP 14 rev1) nominating Mikkelsen Cairn, 
Vestfold Hills as a Historical Site. The meeting recommends 
that the ATCM adopt Measure .... (1996) to add this site to 
the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and Described by
7
proposing Government or Governments".
------------------------------------------------

Measure...( 1996)

Antarctic Protected Area System: New Historic Sites and Monuments

The representatives

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16
and XIV-8, Measures 4 and 5 (1995) and Resolution 8 (1995),

Recommend to their governments that they add the following historic
monuments to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and
Described by the proposing Government of Governments" annexed to
recommendation VII-9, thereby guaranteeing its full protection and
respect as envisaged by the Recommendations noted above.

        Mikkelsen Cairn, Tryne Islands, Vestfold Hills. A rock cairn and a
wooden mast erected by the landing party led by Captain Klarius
Mikkelsen of the Norwegian whaling ship Thorshavn and including
Caroline Mikkelsen, Captain Mikkelsen's wife, the first women to
set foot on East Antarctica. The cairn, at latitude 68°22'34''S
longitude  78°24'33'' E was discovered by Australian National
Antarctic Research Expedition field parties in 1957 and again in
1995.

--------------------------------------------------

(29) The delegations of Brazil and Poland tabled Working Paper
(XX ATCM/WP 15) proposing that Admiralty Bay, King George
Island (South Shetland Islands) be designated as an Antarctic
Specially Managed Area. A contact group was organised to
examine the issue and arrive at an agreed text. The TEWG recommends that the ATCM adopt the proposed Management Plan as
set out in Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 15 rev2), that the plan
be annexed to the report of the ATCM and that Parties agree to
comply with it on a voluntary basis until such time as Annex V
to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty becomes effective under Article IX of the Antarctic
Treaty. The TEWG recommends that the ATCM determine that when
Annex V becomes effective the area covered by the Management
Plan will become an ASMA after an evaluation of the experience
gained and, if necessary, a revision of the Management Plan.

(30) The Group noted Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 30) sub-
mitted by Argentina, which sets out the history of the stone
hut designated as Historic Site No 39 which sheltered three
members of the Nordenskiöld expedition in 1902.
b)     Site Inspections

INF: 79

(31) Since only one Information Paper had been submitted there 
was no particular discussion on this item.

c)     Means for Evaluating Possible Gaps in the System

WP: 5, 13, 16, 18
INF: 12, 42, 64 rev1

(32) The Group examined working papers tabled by the 
Netherlands (XX ATCM/WP 5) and the United Kingdom (XX ATCM/WP 
16) which examine the status of protected areas and how they 
will be affected by the provisions of Annex V. The TEWG noted 
that under the terms of Article 3(3) of Annex V SSSIs and SPAs 
would automatically become ASPAs whilst Historic Sites and 
Monuments could become ASMAs, ASPAs or be simply listed. As 
for the South West Anvers Island MPA and the Dufek Massif SRA 
the United States announced that it would provide Annex V 
Management Plans for these areas at some time after Annex V 
has taken effect, so that the areas can be taken up into the 
new system.

The Group discussed the requirement in Article 6(2) of Annex V 
that no marine area should be designated as an ASPA or ASMA 
without the prior approval of CCAMLR. The Group agreed that a 
list of existing SSSIs containing marine areas be submitted to 
the Commission of CCAMLR for their consideration.

(33) The delegation of Italy tabled Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 
13) on the protection of Historic Sites and Monuments. The 
group considered that a Party intending to nominate a site for 
listing as a Historic Site or Monument, or a Party writing a 
site Management Plan, should consult the originating Party for 
the site. The group considered that the most appropriate way 
of achieving this was through a Resolution. The group 
therefore recommended Resolution... (1996) be adopted by the 
ATCM.
9

Resolution... (1996)

Effective management and conservation of Historic Sites and 
Monuments

The Representatives

Noting the need to ensure the effective management and conservation 
of Historic Sites or Monuments;

Aware that those who originally created Historic Sites or Monuments 
are not necessarily the same as the designators for the Sites or 
the proposers of Management Plans for some sites;

Recognising the particular historic and cultural importance of such 
sites to originating Parties;

Recommend that

During the preparations for the Listing of a Historic Site or 
Monument, or the writing of a Site Management Plan, adequate 
liaison is accorded by the proposing Party with the originator of 
the Historic Site or Monument and other Parties, as appropriate.

--------------------------------------------------------

(34) A proposal for a renumbering of Antarctic protected areas 
was included in a joint working paper tabled by the United 
Kingdom and the Netherlands (XX ATCM/WP 18 rev1). The meeting 
endorsed the renumbering system proposed in this paper, but 
noted that the proposal regarding amalgamating sites should 
not preempt the revision of management plans.

The TEWG recognised that Management Plans for SSSIs designated 
by Recommendation VIII-4, and subsequent Recommendations, have 
been held under voluntary provisions.  Nevertheless, it 
acknowledged that SSSIs renumbered using 3-digit numbers and 
held under revised Management Plans in accordance with Annex V 
contained mandatory provisions and prohibited access except in 
accordance with a permit. The TEWG recommended that such sites 
must be held under a Measure to be approved under the terms of 
Article IX of the Treaty. The net effect of this would be 
that, until such time as Annex V entered into force, two forms 
of SSSI would exist. Sites of a voluntary nature held under 
previous Recommendations and numbered by 2 digits, and sites 
of a mandatory nature held under Measures and numbered with 3 
digits. But until Annex V enters into force, neither type of 
SSSI would require a permit for entry. The TEWG recommended to 
the ATCM to adopt Resolution ... (1996).

--------------------------------------------------------
10

Resolution... (1996)

Revised renumbering of Antarctic Protected Areas

The Representatives

Noting the requirement in Article 3(3) of Annex V that all SPAs and
SSSIs designated as such by past ATCMs should, on entry into force
of Annex V, be renamed and renumbered accordingly;

Acknowledging that at the XIX ATCM the Parties agreed to adopt a
numbering system based on the use of three digits;

Taking account of the gaps in the existing numbering system;

Recommend that:

1.    The numbering system for ASPAs annexed to this Resolution be
      adopted; and

2.    The three-digit numbers should be introduced at the same time
      as an Annex V Management Plan is adopted by the ATCM for any
      protected area.

3.    Where an SPA and SSSI are collocated that they be assigned
      separate numbers so as not to preempt any review of the
      Management Plans for those areas.

--------------------------------------------------------

(35)  Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 16) tabled by the United
Kingdom draws attention to the need for clarification of the
use of mandatory prohibitions within Management Plans for
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas as set out at Paragraphs 111
and 112 of the report of ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994). The United
Kingdom delegation's view is that the intention of the
drafters of the Annex V had been to provide a clear
distinction between ASPAs, held under mandatory provisions and
ASMAs held under exhortatory provisions.

(36) The Australian delegation considers that there are
situations in which mandatory provisions may need to be
applied to ASMAs (eg to prohibit the construction of roads in
a particular zone) and that it may not be practical or
desirable to up-grade the area to an ASPA and thus require all
access to be subject to the issue of a permit. The Australian
delegation considers that Article 5, 3 (f) of Annex V to the
Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty clearly
provides for mandatory provisions under an ASMA. Australia
therefore proposed that in order to make it clear that a
provision in an ASMA is mandatory such provisions (where
required) be included in a separate section of the Management
Plan under the heading "Mandatory Provisions".

(37) Some delegations agreed with the principle that
prohibition of specific activities within ASMAs was a valuable
tool for management. The Group acknowledged that a number of
11

Parties had no legal means in domestic law to address any such 
prohibition.  One delegation had doubts about mandatory 
provisions in ASMAs. The Group considered that further work 
was needed to clarify this matter.

(38) The TEWG considered information papers (XX ATCM/INF 12 
and 42) submitted by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom 
respectively. The United States noted that Management Plans 
for protected areas are included in a document describing 
United States legislation implementing the Agreed Measures and 
other aspects of the Antarctic Treaty System and that the 
document has been provided to United States tour operators and 
is available on request. The Group supported the idea of 
recommending to the ATCM that (XX ATCM/INF 12 rev.1) be 
attached as an Annex to the Final Report. The United Kingdom 
indicated that it would circulate (XX ATCM/INF 42) in due 
course. It was suggested that Parties should analyse this 
Information Paper and send their comments and/or amendments to 
the United Kingdom by 1 September 1996.

(39) An Information Paper submitted by IUCN (XX ATCM/INF 64 
rev2) concerning the protection and conservation of sub-
Antarctic Islands was brought to the attention of the meeting. 
IUCN suggested that Management Plans be developed for such 
Islands that do not have them in order to enhance the 
conservation of the wider Southern region.

21.  Collection, Archiving, Exchange and Evaluation of 
Environmental Information

WP:  22
INF: 

(40) A Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 22) was tabled by Chile 
proposing to concentrate the collection and management of data 
under one agenda item for WG II. The Group noted that it would 
be better to maintain separate the two agenda items 11 and 21 
because the spirit underlying each one was different.  SCAR 
reported that environmental data would be included in the 
Antarctic Master Directory along with other types of data. 
Management of Antarctic environmental data does not differ 
from that of other types of data. Instead the TEWG proposes to 
the ATCM that item 11 be retitled "Antarctic Data Management", 
while item 21 be retitled: "The State of the Antarctic 
Environment" with three sub-items:

a)  "Exchange of Environmental Data and Reference Material".
b)  "Evaluation of Environmental Data".
c)  "Monitoring (climate, biological, chemical and physical)"

(41) Item 11 would remain among the agenda items for WG II, 
while Item 21 would be dealt with by the TEWG. Therefore the 
item on "Environmental Monitoring and the State of the 
Antarctic Environment" of our present agenda, disappears as 
such. In this context it was noted that adding short 
annotations under each specific agenda might be useful.
22. Environmental Monitoring and the State of the Antarctic 
Environment

WP: -
INF: 62, 63, 84

(42) The Republic of Korea, Russia and  ASOC presented 
Information Papers (XX ATCM/INF 62, 63 and 84) on this item.

(43) Several delegations welcomed the ASOC Paper (XX ATCM/INFO 
63) on EIA monitoring at World Park Base. The report noted 
that preliminary analyses from the 1995/96 season data 
indicated that the environmental impact on the site of former 
World Park Base was negligible and within the limits predicted 
in past EIAs. Greenpeace had concluded that as a result no 
further monitoring would be undertaken. TEWG noted this 
information as evidence that monitoring is not necessarily an 
indefinite activity. New Zealand noted that Information Paper 
(XX  ATCM/INF 10) discussed the follow-up to the IEE 
decommissioning of Vanda Station, including monitoring and 
remedial activities.

(44) SCAR and COMNAP (XX ATCM/INF xx) reported on two 
technical workshops on environmental monitoring organised by 
them. Nineteen countries attended these meetings which were 
successful in addressing the terms of reference set out by the 
ATCM. After approval by SCAR and COMNAP a Working Paper with 
recommendations on environmental monitoring, together with any 
necessary supporting Information Papers, will be provided for 
the XXI ATCM.

(45) The suggestion was made that SCAR should examine the 
question of a report on the State of the Antarctic Environment 
and, in consultation with other appropriate organisations, 
provide a proposal on how to prepare such a report to the XXI 
ATCM.

General conclusions and remarks:

The TEWG brought to the attention of the Plenary of WG I that 
its operation was still not wholly effective in respect of the 
functions of the CEP. Issues of the composition of the TEWG, 
timely submission of papers, creation of subgroups  and 
intersessional work had been noted in paragraphs 44-47 of the 
XIX ATCM Final Report. Such issues still remain. Importantly, 
several delegations believed that to be wholly effective in 
its work and provide sound environmental advice to the ATCM it 
must be allowed a proactive role rather than simply reacting 
to the agenda items specifically mandated to it.

During the meeting it was announced that Belgium ratified the 
Protocol on 25 April 1996 and notified the acceptance of Annex 
V.
