ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE         
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/WP 3
                                 March, 1996
                                 Original: English

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SITE OF
SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST (SSSI) NO. 9
ROTHERA POINT, ADELAIDE ISLAND

(Agenda item 19a)

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
DRAFT MEASURE

Revised Description and Management Plan for Sites of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for
approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the
Antarctic Treaty;

For the Site of Special Scientific Interest mentioned
below:

(i)     the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to
Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific
research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest to be deleted;

(ii)    the Management Plan of the Site of Special
Scientific Interest, annexed to this
Recommendation, be inserted in the Annex to
Recommendation XIII-8 Facilitation of scientific
research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Site of Special Scientific Interest concerned
is:

SSSI No. 9 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island.
Management Plan
for Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 9
ROTHERA POINT, ADELAIDE ISLAND

1. Description of Values to be Protected

Rothera Point was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 9) after
a proposal by the United Kingdom that the Site would serve as a biological research site and
control area against which the effects of human impact associated with the adjacent Rothera
Research Station (UK) could be monitored in an Antarctic fellfield ecosystem. The Site itself
has little intrinsic nature conservation value.

2. Aims and Objectives

2 (i) Aims

Management of Rothera Point aims to:

*   avoid major changes to the structure and composition of the terrestrial ecosystems, in
    particular to the fellfield ecosystem and breeding birds, by:
        -   preventing physical development within the site, and;
        -   limiting human access to the Site to maintain its value as a control area for
            environmental monitoring studies;
*   allow scientific research and monitoring studies of breeding birds, terrestrial and
    freshwater biota, and soils, while ensuring as far as possible that the Site is protected
    from over-sampling;
*   allow regular visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the
    management plan.

2 (ii) Objectives

The Site is unique in Antarctica as it is the only protected area currently designated (1995)
solely for its value in the monitoring of human impact. The objective is to use the Site as an
unaffected control area in assessing the impact of activities undertaken at Rothera Research
Station on the Antarctic environment.

The hypothesis being tested is that the activities undertaken at Rothera Research Station have
not caused environmental impact within the Site.

Monitoring studies undertaken by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) began at Rothera Point
in 1976, before the establishment of the station later that year, and have expanded
considerably since 1989. The BAS plans to continue monitoring studies in the future.

The purposes of the monitoring programme (1995) are to:
*   survey the distribution of terrestrial flora and invertebrates every decade;
*   assess heavy metal concentrations in lichens every five years;
*   assess petroleum hydrocarbon concentrations in gravel and soil every other year;
*   survey the breeding bird population annually.

3. Management Activities

The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the Area:

*   signboards illustrating the location and boundary of the Site and stating entry restrictions shall be erected at the major access points and serviced on a regular basis;
*   a map showing the location and boundaries of the Site and stating entry requirements shall be displayed in a prominent position at Rothera Research Station;
*   visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every two years) to assess whether the Site continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management activities are adequate.

4. Period of Designation

Designation for an indefinite period.

5. Maps

Map 1 shows the location of Rothera Point in relation to northern Marguerite Bay. Map 2 shows the Site in greater detail, with an inset showing the Site in relation to Rothera Research Station.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Rothera Point (lat. 67° 34'S, long. 68° 08'W) is situated in Ryder Bay, at the south-east corner of Wright Peninsula on the east side of Adelaide Island, south-west Antarctic Peninsula.

The Site is the north-eastern one-third of Rothera Point (Map 2), and is representative of the area as a whole. It is about 300 m from west to east and 250 m from north to south, and rises to a maximum height of 36 m. At the coast, the Site boundary is the 2.5 m contour. No upper shore, littoral or sublittoral areas of Rothera Point are therefore included within the SSSI. The southern boundary of the Site, running across Rothera Point, is marked by a line of pink fuel drums filled with concrete. The remaining boundary is unmarked. There are two signboards just outside the perimeter of the Site located at the starting points of the pedestrian access
route around Rothera Point.

The Site boundary extends to the 2.5 m contour at the coast. There is unrestricted pedestrian access below this contour height around Rothera Point. The recommended pedestrian access route follows the Mean High Water Mark (MHWM) and is shown on Map 2.

Small areas of permanent ice occur to the north and south of the summit of the SSSI. There are no permanent streams or pools.

The rocks are predominantly heterogeneous intrusions of diorite, granodiorite and adamellite of the mid-Cretaceous-Lower Tertiary Andean Intrusive Suite. Veins of copper ore are prominent as bright green stains on the rock. Soil is restricted to small pockets of glacial till and sand on the rock bluffs. Local deeper deposits produce scattered small circles and polygons of frost sorted material. There are no extensive areas of patterned ground. Around prominent rock outcrops used as bird perches by Dominican gulls (Larus dominicanus) there are accumulations of recent and decaying limpet (Nacella concinna) shells forming patches of calcareous soil. There are no accumulations of organic matter.

There are no special or rare geological or geomorphological features in the Site.

The limited terrestrial biological interest within the Site is confined to the rock bluffs where there is locally abundant plant growth dominated by lichens. The vegetation is representative of the southern "maritime" Antarctic fellfield ecosystem and is dominated by the fruticose lichens Usnea antarctica, U. sphacelata, and Pseudephebe minuscula, and the foliose lichen Umbilicaria decussata. Numerous crustose lichens are associated, but bryophytes (mainly Andreaea spp.) are sparse.

A single very small population of Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis) occurs below the northern cliff of the Site, whilst a few plants of Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) have become established at two locations since 1989.

The invertebrate fauna is impoverished and consists only of a few species of mites and springtails, of which Halozoetes belgicae and Cryptopygus antarcticus are the most common.

There are no special or rare terrestrial flora and fauna in the Site.

Brown and south polar skuas (Catharacta lonnbergii and C. maccormicki) are the most abundant breeding birds found in the Site, with three pairs of skuas recorded nesting in the 1994/95 season. A pair of Dominican gulls (Larus dominicanus) nest in the Site. Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) also breed, but only one nest has been found.

Rothera Research Station (UK) lies about 250 m west of the western boundary of the Site (see inset on Map 2).

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Site

None.
6(iii) Location of structures within the Site

A rock cairn marks the summit of the Site (36 m) and 35 m to the east south east of it there is another cairn (35.4) marking a survey station.

6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity

SPA No. 8, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, lies about 15 km south of Adelaide Island. SPA No. 19, Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, lies about 11 km south of Pourquoi Pas Island. SPA No. 21, Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, lies about 0.25 km south of the south-west tip of Adelaide Island. The locations of these SPAs are shown on Map 1.

7. Permit Conditions

Entry to the Site is prohibited without a Permit. Permits shall be issued only by appropriate national authorities, and may contain both general and specific conditions.

General conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Site may include:

*   activities limited to scientific research or monitoring purposes;
*   the actions permitted will not jeopardize the ecosystems or scientific or monitoring values of the Site;
*   any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
*   the actions permitted are carried out in accordance with this Management Plan;
*   the permit holder must carry the permit, or an authorized copy, within the Site.

National authorities may attach further general and specific conditions to a permit.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Site

Access to the Site shall be on foot.

Landing of helicopters within the Site is prohibited. As far as practicable, helicopter overflight of the Site shall be avoided.

Vehicles are prohibited in the Site.

7(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Site, including restrictions on time and place

Activities which are or may be conducted within the Site are:

*   scientific research or monitoring which will not jeopardise the ecosystems of the Site;
*   essential management activities.
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures

No structures are to be erected in the Site, or equipment installed, except for essential scientific or management activities (eg. signboards, monitoring equipment) as specified in the permit.

All scientific and monitoring equipment, including marker stakes, installed in the Site must be approved by Permit and clearly identified to show principal investigator, project and year of installation. The Permit holder must remove any scientific or monitoring equipment installed as soon as it is no longer required or on the expiry of the permit which ever is the sooner.

7(iv) Location of field camps

Camping in the Site is prohibited. Accommodation may be available at Rothera Research Station.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Site

No non-indigenous living animals, plant material, microorganisms or soil shall be deliberately introduced into the Site.

Any hazardous substances or chemicals, including radioisotopes, which may be introduced for scientific, monitoring or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Site at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted.

Fuel, food and other materials must not be stored in the Site, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such materials introduced shall be removed from the Site at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was granted. Permanent depots are not permitted.

No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be taken into the Site.

7(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna

Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where taking of or harmful interference with animals is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder

Material may be collected and/or removed from the Site only in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Material of human origin not brought into the Site by the Permit holder, or otherwise authorised, which is likely to compromise the values of the Site shall be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ. In the latter case the appropriate authority shall be notified.
7(viii) Disposal of wastes

All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Site.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management 
Plan can continue to be met

Permits may be granted to enter the Site to carry out scientific research, monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of a small number of samples for 
analysis, to erect or maintain signboards, or to carry out protective measures.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each Permit issued submits to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management 
Plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in 
a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of 
the Management Plan and in organising the scientific use of the Site.

RPSSS\19.doc
ADELAIDE
ISLAND

ARROWSMITH
PENINSULA

Avian 
Island
SPA No. 21

Rothera 
Point
SSSI No. 9

Dion Islands
SPA No. 8

POURQUOI 
PAS 
ISLAND

Lagotellerie 
Island
SPA No. 19

MARGUERITE BAY

67°30'S

67°45'S

68°W
67°W

0                  25
         km

Map 1.     Rothera Point Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) in relation to 
           Marguerite Bay and other nearby protected areas.
LEGEND
       
       Permanent snow/ice 
       Ice-free area 
       Artificially levelled area 
       Temporarily flooded area 
       Road (unmetalled) 
                                                Boundary of SSSI
                                                Pedestrian access route
                                                Index contour (10 m)
                                                Contour (5 m)
                                                Survey station

ROTHERA POINT
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 9

                                                                                  67°34'00"S

SSSI sign

Cairn
35.4
Cairn

SSSI sign

Rothera
Research
Station
SSSI

0                             100
METRES

67°34'10"S

Map 2.      Rothera Point Site of Special Scientific Interest
