ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                 XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



                                 XX ATCM/WP 13
                                 April, 1996
                                 Original: English

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS: HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

(Agenda item 20)

(Submitted by Italy)
02-APR-1996  08:27   MAE DGRD UFF. UII        + 6 3223795  P. 05

M. Manzoni. Historic Sites and Monuments                                  pag. 1

ATCM XX                  26/3           Item ...

                                       Working Paper ...

Specially Protected Areas: Historic Sites and Monuments

Presented by Italy

A specific regulatory need in the protection of Antarctic Historic Sites 
and Monuments

Since the early times of operation of the Antarctic Treaty the Antarctic 
Historic Sites and Monuments have been afforded special protection.

Recommendation I-9 established that "Governments intersted in any 
tombs, buildings or objects of historic interest should consult together... on 
their restoration or preservation". Appropriate reports on the conditions of 
such tombs, buildings or objects and measures for their protection from 
damage or destruction were also sought. The word 'object' was given a fairly 
broad significance.

Recommendations V-4 and VI-4 required the interested Governments 
("Proposing Governments") to prepare a list of the Historic Sites and 
Monuments and to mark each of those with a notice. The list of 43 Historic 
Sites and Monuments was annexed to Rec. VII-9 for approval by the Treaty 
Parties. The list was subsequently enriched by new proposals according to 
Recs. XII-7, XIII-16, XIV-8, XV-12, XV-13, XVI-11, XVI-3; 60 such Historic 
Sites and Monuments are now protected according to the Treaty.

Additional protective measures, such as buffer zones or guarding of 
buildings, and further information to be included in the reports of visits to 
such sites were proposed by ATCM XIV. At the same meeting, a debate was 
held on the inclusion of Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments in the 
Antarctic Protected Areas System. A special case was taken into 
consideration by ATCMs XI and XVII on the air disaster on Mount Erebus; to 
the effect that "the northern slopes of Mount Erebus ... be declared a tomb 
and ... the area is left in peace" (Rec. XI-3). This case may be relevant because 
tombs and human bones have been found at some other Antarctic sites.

Historians, archaeolgists, and scientists of a number of disciplines 
including biology, human medicine, and environmental conservation have 
funded important research work on the remains of earlier expeditions left 
in the Antarctic by explorers, whalers, and other visitors.

Some remains, such as abandoned buildings or shelters, were left by 
national expeditons and are of particularly relevant historical interest to 
their respective Parties. In some cases nationals from a number of countries 
have contributed to the features and materials of a same site. In other cases, 
remains, such as ancient whaling or sealing shelters or equipment,
02-APR-1996 08:28           MAE DCRC UFF. VII        +6 3223795  P.06

M. Manzoni. Historic Sites and Monuments         pag. 2

shipwreks, scattered articaft, may be of unknown or mixed national origin,
and can be considered to be of common archeological or historical interest.
Other features, such as cairns, plaques or monuments, were erected
purposefully by national goverments in order to symbolize their heritage
and represent their interest in Antarctica.

A relevant difference between the research carried out on historical
remains and sites in the Antarctic, and the research carried out on physical,
biological, natural, and technologic disciplines, is the humanistic
connotation of the former. Indeed, research on historic remains directiy
involves cultural, political and ethical values, and therefore it is vested of
specific interest by those Parties to the Treaty which launched the
expeditions, or of which the Antarctic visitors were nationals. Such Parties
are called here, for the purpose of this paper, "Originating Parties", as Parties
having generated the historical heritage.

A further relevant difference exists between Historic Sites and Monuments
and other areas protected because of their natural values (commonly of
scientific, natural, environmental, or aestehtical nature). Articarted objects,
buildings, structures, materials, although abandoned, and even human
remains are legally considered, in certain circumstances, as properties;
therefore any protective regulations may be issued and applied without
prejudice on the legal aspects, and in particular on ownership rights.

The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection addresses in its Annex
V the provisions for protected areas. Annex V provides for identification
and designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, including "... sites or
monuments of recognized historical value" (Art. 3.2.1h). Each designated
area shall be managed according to a specific Management Plan whose
requisites are defined in Art. 5. The procedures for designation and approval
of management plans are set forth in Art. 6. Permits for entering and
carrying out activities in protected areas can be issued according to Art. 7.
According to Annex V, (Art. 7.1): "Each Party shall appoint an appropriate
authority to issue permits"; where "appropriate authority" means any
person or agency authorized by a Party to issue permits under Annex V, and
"permit" means a formal permission in writing issued by an appropriate
authority.

Art. 8 of the Annex is devoted to Historic Sites and Monuments, namely
to the procedures for proposal by any party and for designation by ATCM
(Art. 8.2). The approved sites and monuments will be included in a list (Art.
8.3) maintained by the Depositary (Art. 8.5). The concrete protective
measures are very concisely defined in Art. 8.4 as follows: "Listed Historic
Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed".

In the measures of Annex V to the Protocol consideration is given to the
Proposing Party of a protected area, but no specific consideration is given to
02-APR-1996  08:23   MAE DGRG UFF. UII        +6 3223795  P. 07

M. Manzoni. Historic Sites and Monuments                              pag. 3

the Party whose government or whose nationals originated the historical 
remains.

In areas where protected values are of scientific or environmental nature 
each Party, without distinction or privilege, is interested in the protection as 
well as assessment and study of Antarctic natural values. But a Party which, 
through the deeds of its nationals, has built, left, or otherwise originated 
artificial features or objects of historical value in the Antarctic, carries a 
distinct and specific cultural and ethical interest on the conservation and 
protection of such own historical heritage. In order to pursue such interests, 
the important role of Originating Parties could be fulfilled in the 
designation process of the site or monument created by the activity of its 
nationals; in fact the partecipation of all Parties to the designation procedure 
is already granted in Art. 3.2.h, Art. 4.2.b, Art. 6, and Art. 8 of Annex V.

The interests and rights of the Originating Party should be addressed 
more specifically in connection with Art. 5 (Management Plans) and Art. 7 
(Issue of Permits) of Annex V. In fact any passive use of a protected value, 
(such as for instance the mere and non-interfering visit to the site, or the 
use of photographic and other equipment based on passive probes) does not 
involve any alteration, displacement, or taking of protected goods or of 
their parts. On the contrary, any concrete intervention (such as for instance 
the taking of samples or the installation of equipment in close proximity) 
may actively interfere with the object or site and may irrecoverably detratct 
from its original state.

It seem therefore appropriate that Originating Parties be always 
involved:

i -  in the drafting stage of Management Plans of Historic Sites and 
     Monuments created by its government or nationals

ii - in the issuing of permits according to Art. 7 of Annex V, whenever 
     the proposed activity at the site or monument may physically 
     interfere with the site or monument, including the case of research 
     carried out for compelling scientific purpose according Art. 7.2. Such 
     operations include, i.a.:
     -  the installation, modification or removal of structures
     -  the collection, taking, or removal of anything, including samples for 
        scientific analysis, not brought into the area by the permit holder, 
        unless specifically authorized by the Originating Party
     -  actions such as marking, writing, otherwise changing the substance or 
        appearance of the site or monument
     -  any intervention in the buffer zones designated by Management Plans
     -  the diposal of wastes.

Art. 5 and 7 of Annex V should be amended according to the principle 
that the Originating Party be always involved in the drafting and approval 
of Management Plans and in the issuing of Permits referring to Antarctic 
Protected Sites or Monuments belonging to its historical heritage.
