ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ




XX ATCM/WP 11
March, 1996
Original: English


BAT's: BEST AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGIES/TECHNIQUES

(Agenda item 18)

(Submitted by COMNAP)
Working Paper submitted to XX ATCM

BATs: Best Available Technologies/Techniques

Agenda item 18, Specific Environmental Protection Measures

Submitted by COMNAP 14 March 1996

BACKGROUND

In Seoul, the XIXth ATCM, and earlier in Kyoto the XVIIIth, considered the use of Best Available Technologies or Best Available Techniques in Antarctica. Paragraph (115) of the final report of the XIXth ATCM invited COMNAP to consider the desirability and feasibility of employing the concept of BATs for the protection of the Antarctic environment, and to recommend appropriate action to the XXth ATCM.

In this paper the abbreviation BATs will be used to mean either technique or technology or both. The fundamental concept of BATs is familiar to COMNAP/SCALOP members because of the traditional and necessary demand for safety, efficiency and cost-effectiveness in all aspects of Antarctic operations. The question now concerns the use of the BATs concept for the protection of the Antarctic environment. As noted by the ATCM, issues involving economic and logistic feasibility as well as time constraints must be taken into account.

This matter was discussed at the COMNAP/SCALOP meeting in Santiago. The study was then continued by a task group including members from Australia, Brazil and Sweden to which contributions were also made by others.

DEFINITION

As a result of their study and past experience COMNAP members find it necessary to adopt a definition of BATs that applies to environmental protection in Antarctica, as follows:

1.    The use of the best available techniques shall emphasize the use of non-waste technology, if available.

2.    The term "best available techniques/technologies" means the latest stage of development (state of the art) of processes, of facilities, or of methods of operation which indicate the practical suitability of a particular measure for limiting discharges, emissions and waste. In determining whether a set of processes, facilities and methods of operation constitute the best available in general or individual cases, special consideration shall be given to:

      (a) comparable processes, facilities or methods of operation which have recently been successfully tried out under circumstances and in environments comparable to the Antarctic application;

      (b) technological advances and changes in scientific knowledge and understanding;

      (c) the economic and logistics feasibility of such techniques or technologies;

      (d) time limits for installation in both new and existing facilities;

      (e) the nature, volume and potential impact of the discharges and emissions concerned.

3.    It therefore follows that what is "best available techniques/technologies" for a particular process will change with time in the light of technological advances, economic and social factors, as well as changes in scientific knowledge and understanding. It also follows that because BATs selection is dependent on the logistics capabilities available at a particular site, best available techniques/technology may vary across locations and national programs.
4.    If the reduction of discharges and emissions resulting from the use of BATs does not lead to 
      environmentally acceptable results, additional measures have to be applied.

5.    BATs include both the technology used and the way in which the installation is designed, 
      built, maintained, operated and dismantled.

DISCUSSION

Antarctic operations have always been complex, resource intensive, and severely limited by the 
shortened summer operating season, the extreme environment and the expeditionary restraints on transport and 
resupply. Indeed, the necessity to cooperate in solving logistic problems and to share information in the realm 
of what is now referred to as BATs was recognized by each of the first four ATCMs. As a result, the first 
symposia or meetings of experts on Antarctic logistics were held in 1962 and 1968. The practice of sharing 
experience and lessons learned in the design, fabrication, transport, construction and operation of facilities as 
well as vehicles, clothing and equipment was well established. Over the years this was continued by the SCAR 
Working Group on Logistics and, since 1988, by SCALOP.

Progress by SCALOP in recent years has concentrated on the areas of oil spill prevention and 
response, alternative energy, transportation, and waste management. The continuing attention in the 1990s 
given by the national programs to the evaluation and comparative analysis of various commercial products, 
methods, technologies, procedures, materials and equipment is well reflected in the contents of the published 
proceedings of the fourth, fifth and sixth Symposia. This is also shown in the results of the workshops on EIA 
in 1991 and on traverse technology in 1994. A copy of the Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Antarctic 
Logistics and Operations will be distributed to each Treaty Party delegation in Utrecht. Copies of the earlier 
symposia proceedings will also be available at the meeting for reference. In this context it should also be 
noted that the national operators have frequently organized trade exhibits, often in conjunction with the 
symposia, in order to stimulate commercial and industrial organizations to apply their products and 
innovations to Antarctic operations. Good ideas have been shared and adopted, as in this example by the 
member from Germany: One Kaessbohrer snow tractor was modified for the use of oils, greases and hydraulic 
fluids which are naturally degradable and which are environmentally safe with regard to water quality 
standards. The vehicle has been tested during the 95/96 season. It is planned to modify all other vehicles 
accordingly.

During their meetings the members of SCALOP have often returned to the general idea of finding the 
best way to do things in Antarctica. For example, they have considered bench marking as a way to measure 
standards of efficiency and cost for various categories of facilities, energy and water production and 
transportation. In their examination of this, however, they determined that what may be a "benchmark" or 
"best available" in some equipment, installation or method by one or more national programs might not be 
applicable or realistically available to others. This is because, in the first instance, there is such wide variation 
in size location, support and functions of the different stations and field programs. Another factor relates to 
the required life span of facilities; a major consideration in the government investments in Antarctica. Some 
of the national facilities in Antarctica must have life spans of 20 years or more. It is unrealistic to adopt 
criteria, such as BATs, that anticipate early replacement of or major modification to existing facilities. In the 
COMNAP/SCALOP discussions it has also been acknowledged that there are significant differences in the 
levels of financial and technological resources available to the different national programs.

THE WAY FORWARD

In their work together the members of COMNAP/SCALOP have followed an established pattern of 
learning from each other and using the general concept now defined as BATs. In the context of the foregoing 
definition and discussion, and considering that each national program already evaluates its ongoing and 
planned activities to assure safety, to optimize efficiency and economy and to comply with the Treaty. The 
shift in recent years has clearly been to place the emphasis on environmental protection and to do so in a 
manner consistent with the conditions that prevail practices proven succesful and safe in Antarctica. The way
forward is to continue using the symposia and workshop procedures where members share their experience and 
findings with due regard to all the essential criteria including environmental protection. In their discussion 
SCALOP members have considered the use of broad activity categories, such as:

power and water production systems,
liquid waste systems,
solid waste systems,
drilling operation,
science and laboratory facilities,
buildings, and
transportation.

It has been proposed that each future symposium, or in some cases workshops, will feature one or more of the 
activity categories as the theme to which participants are invited to direct their contributions.

RECOMMENDATION

COMNAP recommends that any further action on the matter of employing the BATs concept be 
assigned to COMNAP.
