ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


                                  XX ATCM/WP 4
                                  (REV 1)
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English


ATCM RECOMENDATIONS
(Agenda item 7c)
(Submitted by The Netherlands)
Foreword to the revised edition of WP 4, ATCM Recommenda?ions

On the basis of input from other ATCPs the Introduction has been re-written so as to 
emphasize that no change in the status of Recommenda?ions is intended, and that the work 
done is merely a classifica?on exercise. The original version of the Introduction was 
intended to convey the same message, but obviously this had to be expressed more 
explicitly.

The wording of the original draft Resolu?on was somewhat awkward. Therefore a new 
version has been made with a be?er form. The Resolu?on's inten?on has remained the 
same: it is important to find out what previous Recommenda?ons that have not become 
effec?ve yet, really need to be approved by all ATCPs, and the contents of WP 4 can be 
used as guidance in determining this.

Finally, two correc?ons have been made in the lis?ng of all Recommenda?ons by subject. 
It appeared that two modifica?ons that should have been taken up in an earlier stage, had 
not in fact been introduced in the version that was distributed: Recommenda?ons 04:18 
and 04:19 should have been classified as resolu?on-type instead of measure-type.

In order to limit the amount of paper needed for the revision, the revised version of WP 4 
(WP 4 rev.1) consists of
-  an Introduction replacing the original Introduction entirely;
-  a draft Resolu?on replacing the original draft Resolu?on entirely;
-  a patch for the listings of Recommenda?ons 04:18 en 04:19. 
For all other Recommenda?ons the original version of the listing of Recom-
menda?ons by subject is to be used. As the modifica?ons to the classifica-
?on of Recommenda?ons 04:18 en 04:19 are not concerned with references 
to other Recommenda?ons, the original listing of all Recommenda?ons by 
number remains entirely the same. Do not throw the original listings away!
ATCM Recommendations
Introduction

1.    At ATCM XIX it was decided to replace the system in which any legislative measure,
decision, statement, or call for action by the ATCM had to be expressed in the form of a
Recommendation under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. The new system, laid down in
decision 1/95, distinguishes between provisions intended to be legally binding (measures,
which have to be ratified by the governments of all States that had the consultative status
at their adoption), hortatory texts (resolutions, effective as admonitions from the moment
of their adoption), and decisions on internal organizational matters (decisions, operative
from their adoption or from some other time specified in the decision concerned).

The Working Paper advocating this change (XIX ATCM/WP 1) stated that a comprehen-
sive revision of the relevance of existing Recommendations remained to be undertaken so
as to determine which Recommendations are no longer needed, which are mandatory,
which are hortatory, etc. The present document is an attempt at such a revision. It consists
of this introduction and two lists of individual Recommendations, both of which contain
all Recommendations from I-1 to XVIII-1 (inclusive).

2.    The first of these lists presents all Recommendations in alphabetical order per subject. The
ATS Handbook has been followed in determining what Recommendations belong to the
various subjects. The subjects are printed in boldface and are not repeated. Within any
subject the Recommendations are listed in the sequence of ascending numbers. The listing
per Recommendation includes:

its number, its page in the ATS Handbook, a brief description of its contents, any require-
ments to make information available (preceded by 'info: '), a conclusion (in italics) as to
what the nature of the Recommendation would have been in the new system (measure, re-
solution or decision), followed, where applicable, by an observation stating that the Re-
commendation concerned is no longer relevant, and finally, where necessary, an annotat-
ion preceded by 'note: '.

This list has Working Paper status, as it contains the results of evaluating and interpreting
the Recommendations which may well be discussed. Consequently, it is available in all
ATCM languages.

The second list contains the cross-references between Recommendations. It lists the Re-
commendations in the sequence of ascending numbers. The listing per Recommendation in-
cludes:

its number, its page in the ATS Handbook, its subject, the numbers of any Recommendat-
ions to which it refers (presented above the number of the Recommendation concerned),
and the numbers of any Recommendations referring to it (under it).

This list has Information Paper status. There is nothing in it that can be discussed; it has
been produced for reference purposes only. Consequently, this list is available in its
original language only.

3.    The numbers of Recommendations have the form 'mm:nn', 'mm' being the ordinal num-
ber of the ATCM concerned and 'nn' the number of the Recommendation at that ATCM.
When a number in parentheses follows, this number refers to the page on which the Re-
commendation concerned can be found in the eighth edition (April 1994) of the ATS
Handbook in English.
ATCM Recommendations, introduction 2

Abbreviations and signs used are the following:
AM:   Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.
AT:   Antarctic Treaty.
ATA:  Antarctic Treaty Area.
ATS:  Antarctic Treaty System.
CP:   Consultative Party. Note: In the description of the contents of Recommendations
      'CPs' includes non-Consultative Parties wherever the substance of a Recommend-
      ation could become relevant to such Parties by their accepting the Recommendation
      concerned.
NCP:  non-Consultative Party.
PEP:  Protocol on Environmental Protection and Annexes I to V (inclusive).
RoP:  Rules of Procedure.
TOR:  Terms of Reference.
↓     (followed by the name or abbreviation of an international instrument, which can be
      another Recommendation): the Recommendation concerned or a specified part of it
      has been of will be superseded, made irrelevant, or otherwise invalidated by the
      instrument named.
↓     (not followed by the name of an international instrument): spent (overtaken by
      events).

It has been assumed that abbreviations like ATCM, CCAMLR, CEE, CRAMRA, IEE etc.
need not be explained.

Any enhancements (underline, boldface, etc.) in quotations from Recommendations are the
author's.

4.    This study is not intended to change the status of Recommendations in any way. It is
      intended as an aid in reaching a common understanding of their relevance and nature. In
      discussing the nature of Recommendations, their classification as measures, resolutions,
      and decisions is merely a useful tool. The Recommendations will never become measures,
      resolutions, or decisions, but classifying them as such will clarify for ourselves what we
      expect ATCPs to do about them. This is taken up in paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of this
      Introduction.

      As is only to be expected in a system some 35 years old, many Recommendations have
      become irrelevant, superseded or defunct. Although the author has dutifully given a
      classification to all Recommendations, in such cases it does not matter much whether they
      are now classified measures, resolutions or decisions. In this connection it must be
      emphasized that the present documents are based on the assumption that the Environment
      Protocol and the Annexes will come into force. In the lists of Recommendations all
      Recommendations that are to be superseded by the Protocol and the Annexes have been
      declared defunct in advance. Readers are advised to make the same assumption, as this
      greatly facilitates the exercise: one need not therefore worry whether Recommendations
      that will be defunct upon the Protocol and the Annexes coming into force (and there are
      many of those) should be classified as measures, resolutions, or decisions.
ATCM Recommendations, introduction 4

Recommendations specifying that a particular item will be included into the agenda of the next ATCM, that a meeting of experts will be convened, etc. have been labelled decisions.

8.  Mixtures.
In many cases Recommendations contain a mixture of measure-, resolution- and decision-type elements. In such cases the various elements have been classified separately. If any of them is of the measure-type, it is important that all States that were ATCPs when the Recommendation concerned was adopted should ratify it in order for it to become effective.

9.  SSSIs and Monuments.
SPAs are based on article VIII of the Agreed Measures, which itself would definitely have been a measure under the new system. The Agreed Measures required implementation legislation in the countries for which they became effective. The designation of individual SPAs brings the areas concerned within the purview of such legislation, so that such designations are measure-type Recommendations as well.

The protection of other than biological values was not foreseen in the Agreed Measures, so that the protection of scientific investigations by setting up SSSIs and the protection of Historic Sites and Monuments by including them in a list could not be based on the Agreed Measures. As it is, SSSIs and Historic Monuments have no basis in a measure-type Recommendation. The Recommendations setting up the two concepts (01:09, 05:04 and 06:14 for Historic Monuments; 07:03 and 08:03 for SSSIs) must all be termed resolution-type Recommendations, as they contain hortatory language only. In the Recommendations designating individual SSSIs this was always reflected by the ATCM recommending to the Governments that these voluntarily take account of the management plans concerned. New Historic Monuments were simply added to the list containing the first 43 of them, itself a resolution-type Recommendation.

Annex V, Article 3.3, however states that "Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are hereby designated as Antarctic Protected Areas and shall be renamed and renumbered accordingly." Article 8.3 states that "Existing Historic Sites and Monuments which have been listed as such by previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall be included in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments under this Article." This means that the contents of the Recommendations concerned become binding obligations when Annex V comes into force, even though the Recommendations concerned had no more than a hortatory nature at the time of their adoption. The Governments ratifying Annex V accept this in doing so.
ATCM Recommendations, introduction 3

5. Measures
Classifying a Recommendation as a measure implies that this Recommendation cannot take
effect without having been explicitly approved by the Governments of CPs that were
ATCPs at its adoption. Naturally, the ATCM wants such Recommendations take effect,
i.e. wants them to be approved in this way. As, however, these Recommendations are so
much at the core of the Antarctic Treaty System, it also expects them to be approved
explicitly by the Governments of any States that acquire the Consultative Status thereafter.
In fact this has always been a condition for becoming a Consultative Party, though new
ATCPs have been allowed to take their time over it.

The Recommendations concerned must contain obligations expressed in language more de-
manding than hortatory language, as "a hortatory text ... will be contained in a Resolut-
ion"(decision 1/95 §3). The ATCM's use of language in Recommendations is not always
consistent, however.

An instance of the language not providing good guidance is formed by Recommendations
15:03 (2063) and 15:04 (2073). 15:03 has mandatory text only, 15:04 hortatory text
mostly. Yet both are close forerunners of Annexes III and IV respectively, each of which
is definitely intended to be legally binding. Fortunately this implies that both Recommen-
dations will be superseded.

6. Resolutions.

Calling a Recommendation a resolution-type Recommendation implies that in some cases
the ATCM should like a particular action to be undertaken by CP and other Governments,
whereas in others, such as praising SCAR, it does not, as adopting the Recommendation
itself fulfils the purpose. For such Recommendations there is no point in their being
explicitly approved by the Governments. In the 'Status of Antarctic Treaty Recommendat-
ions' list such Recommendations may henceforward be flagged 'resolution-type', meaning
that, as hortatory statements, from the moment of their adoption they are as effective as
they may ever be and that, in so far as their subject matter is still relevant, the ATCM
would hope for any Government concerned to follow them up.

Text containing finite modal verbs like 'should', 'may', etc., or finite verbs in the
subjunctive mood ('... recommend that the Governments take ...') has been considered
hortatory text characterizing a resolution.

7. Decisions.

Decisions, according to decision 1/95 para 2, refer to internal organizational matters and
will be operative at adoption or at such other time as may be specified. In calling a
Recommendation a decision-type Recommendation, therefore, the ATCM implies that it is
binding upon itself and that no further approval by CP Governments is required. In the
'Status of Antarctic Treaty Recommendations' list, such Recommendations could be
flagged 'decision-type', which, just as in the case of Recommendations flagged 'resol-
ution-type', would release the Depositary Government from providing updates on their
status.
ATCM Recommendations, introduction 5

10. Summary

A. Recommendations adopted before ATCM XIX are classified as measure-type, -
resolution-type, or decision-type Recommendations.

B. This classification is based on the definitions in Decision 1/95.

C. The classification does not change in any way the legal status of any of the 
Recommendations.

D. Where Recommendations contain no measure-type provisions, there is no need for 
ATCPs to approve them in order for them to become effective (even if approval 
has already been given by some ATCPs), and the Depositary will not need to 
provide any information as to the status of such Recommendations.

E. On the coming into force of the Protocol and Annex V, those Recommendations 
which are subsumed by these instruments will become defunct.
DRAFT RESOLUTION

The Representatives

Recalling Decision 1/95;

Recognizing the desirability of determining which Recommendations adopted at ATCMs I 
to XVIII (inclusive) and which are not yet effective, still require to be approved by all 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in accordance with Article IX.4 of the Antarctic 
Treaty;

Recommend that the attached document be used as a guide in making such determinations,
and that a copy of this document be attached to the Final Report of this Meeting.
(annex 2)

04:18 (2053)   CPs to cooperate in limiting the issuance of permits i.a.w. AM VI 
resolution (↓PEP)
note:        The substance of this Recommendation is taken care of by Annex II 
3.3.b.

04:19 (2055)   CPs to use an annexed format for the exchange of information under AM 
XII.1a, and to welcome SCAR studying status species etc. on the basis 
of AM XII 1.b and 1.c
info:        CPs to CPs: cf. subject
resolution (↓PEP)
note:        Annex II.6.c requires that the CPs should adopt a new measure to cover 
the substance of this Recommendation.
