ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE       ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                 ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/WP 8
                                 March, 1996
                                 Original: English


CHECKLIST ON INFORMATION RELEVANT TO 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT EVALUATION 
OF TOURIST ACTIVITIES AT ANTARCTIC LANDING SITES

(Agenda item 18)

(Submitted by Italy and Argentina)
07-MAR-1996 11:38   MAE DGRG UFF. VII        +6 3223795   P.02
07-MAR-1996 11:32   SCIENZE INT.E DIPL. GO   39 481 599104   P.01/03

ATCM XX                                          Item ...

                                                 Working Paper ...

Checklist on information relevant to the Environmental Impact Evaluation
of tourist activities at Antarctic landing sites

Presented by Argentina and Italy

I - Aim and object of a suggested checklist

Tourist activities, as any human activity carried out in the Antarctic, are
subject th the Environmental Impact Evaluation process of Art. 3, Art. 8 and
Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
Commercial tourism differs from other activities, inciuding logistic and
scientific research activities, primarily because various tour operators can be
engaged in similar acivities conducting groups of visitors to a same landing
site again each year and/or several times per year.

Therefore Environmental Impact Evaluations carried out by single
operators, although useful and correctly made, are insufficient to assess the
overall impact on the area inasmuch each EIA takes into consideration a
variable percentage of all the activities carried out at any single site visited by
tourists. As each operator presents a yearly assesment of the possible
impact of its cruises, none of such EIAs takes into consideration the possible
cumulative impacts of all visits at each site.

Because of such operational conditions it is necessary to generate an
information system of basic data necessary for the Antarctic Treaty Parties
and the Transitory Environmental Working Group to analyze the possible
overall environmental impacts by tourism at frequently visited landing
sites.

The aim of such information system is to generate a centralized database
through the information obtained yearly by tourist operators active in the
Antarctic area by means of a suitable checklist. Such checklist should be a
guidance to ATCM Parties and to tour operators for reporting all relevant
data on each visit at each visited site. The checklist is meant mainly to make
available relevant information on the activity. In particular the "description
of the activity" is required under Art. 2.1 (a), Art. 3.2 (a), and the "mitigation
measures of Art. 3.2 (g) of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental
Protection. Scientific and environmental data are not th object of the present
checklist, except for a few items only, proposed in Section II, referring to
evident and easily appraisable conditions of the site.
AR-1996  11:38       MAE DGRG UFF. UII        + 6 3223795  P.03


II - Checklist for tourist operators


I - Data on tourist cruise:

1 Name of ship
2 Name of the operator
3 Time of the visit

II - Data on site:

1 Name of site
2 Location (Latitude and Longitude)
3 Detailed map or sketch of site (order of scale 1: 10,000 or larger)
4 Location map or sketch of site (order of scale 1: 100,000)
5 Approximate number of visits previously done at the site
6 Approximate extension of ice-free area
7 Prevailing type of ground (rock, sediment, soil, snow, ice)
8 ponds or lakes in the proximity (to be marked on map or sketch)
9 Site topography (short descripion or map)
10 Main characteristics of wildlife: bird nesting grounds, mammal breeding 
    grounds, rest or grazing areas , vegetation cover, etc. (when possible, 
    to be marked on map or sketch)
11 Approximate extension of the areas actually visisted by tourists.

III - Scientific or logistic activities

1 Existing scientific and logistic stations, facilities and equipment 
    (permanent or temporary)
2 Presence of scientific and logistic personnel (permanent of temporary)
3 Ohter human presence ( e.g. boats, ohter tourists, etc.) at the time of visit
4 If the management plan of station includes tourist management
5 Permits for visitors issued by station
6 Interrelation with scientific or logistic personnel during the visit

IV - Protected areas

1 Protected Areas in the proximity of the site (mark type, name and number 
    of Protected Area: SSSI, SPA, HSM, CCAMLR reserve)
2 Access of personnel or tourists inside Protected Area and permit(s) issued
3 Description of boundary marks of Protected Area

V - Activities of the visit at a landing site

1 Date of last visit
2 Approximate disembarkation point (mark on map or sketch)
3 Number of landing persons (visitors and personnel)
4 Number of landing tourists
5 Number of guides or tourist assistants
6 Numbre and type of boats used for landing tourists
7 Total numbre of landing trips by boat
8 Sketch of the itinerary of visitors groups on land (mark on map or sketch)
9 Maximum number of persons per group at the site at any single time
10 Personnel of station or camp engaged in accompanying visitors
11 Arrival time of first boat
12 Departure time of last boat
13 Desciption of planned activities of visitors groups on land
14 Organiziation of visitor groups on land (e.g. groups with guide, free walk)

VI - Measures of precautionary environmental protection

1 Instructions given to ship's personnel on the measures according to the
    Protocol on Environmental Protection
2 Availabilty on ship of relevant informationon the Antarctic Treaty and
    related Agreements
3 Information on EIAS carried out for any previous activity at the site
4 Presence of an environmental monitoring plan or environmental
    indicator considered in the planning stage of the visit
5 Action taken to preventthe introduction of non-indigeous species at the landing site
6 Training on waste disposal and measures adopted in order to minimize
    the impact of wastes at the site
