ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



                         XX ATCM/WP 34
                         May 1996
                         Original: English


FINAL REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II

(Submitted by the Secretariat)
REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II
6-9 MAY 1996

Item 9.     "Tourism and Non Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area"

(1)     While considering its paper (XX ATCM/INF 61), Brazil expressed its concerns 
on the disruption of its scientific research at Ferraz station and the growing risk 
of accidents due to the increasing number of visits by tourists. Another Delegation 
suggested that these risks could be minimized by reducing, in consultation with 
the different tour operators, the number of visits allowed to the station. Some 
Some delegations noted that tourism can have positive benefits, creating advocates 
for science and environmental protection in the Antarctic .

(2)     The Delegation of New Zealand drew the Meeting's attention to the proposed 
forms for advance notification and post-season reporting (XX ATCM/INF 13) 
which were submitted as a follow-up to the discussions held during the XIX 
ATCM, and from Resolution 3 (1995). Several Delegations and IAATO supported 
the initiative. The Meeting agreed to adopt the forms for a trial period of one year 
and IAATO offered to provide comment on the use of the form to the next 
ATCM. New Zealand agreed to adapt the forms for general use and distribute 
them to other Parties.

(3)     The Meeting noted the trend whereby tour operators were including new sites in 
their itineraries, as was stated in the papers submitted by New Zealand and 
Argentina (XX ATCM/INF 14 and 29, respectively).
2

ASOC urged tour operators to apply a precautionary approach and not to add new 
sites until in-depth studies have been carried out regarding the impact of these 
visits.

The Meeting recalled the discussions held during the XIXth ATCM about the 
possible environmental impact of tourism, and referred to paragraph 61 of the 
XIX ATCM report, particularly on the possibility that the SCAR/COMNAP 
workshop on environmental monitoring could provide guidance on programmes 
aimed at determining the potential environmental impact of this activity.

The Meeting welcomed the papers submitted by the United States (XX 
ATCM/INF 102), and by the United States and the United Kingdom (XX 
ATCM/INF 100), describing on-going efforts to determine whether small teams 
of researchers on tour ships and other vessels could be a cost-effective way to 
gather the information required to assess and determine how best to avoid the 
potential adverse effects of tourism on the Antarctic environment. The Meeting 
encouraged Parties to consider cooperating in such programmes.

(4)	The United States highlighted in its paper (XX ATCM/INF 37) that members of 
a search and rescue party organized by the United States were placed at a great 
personal risk in their efforts to rescue a Norwegian private expedition, and that 
Norway had reimbursed fully the costs of the rescue. Norway noted that this 
shows the necessity of having sufficient insurance or guarantees for search and 
rescue expenses that might be needed in connection with activities in Antarctica.

(5)	Australia submitted a paper on the 1995-1996 Australian tourist overflights of 
Antarctica (XX ATCM/INF 34).
3

Item 10. "Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty"

a) Inspections during 1995/1996 and those planned for 1996/1997

(6)     The US Delegation informed the Meeting that it had submitted a final report on 
the inspections it had carried out under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty 
between 9 February and 11 March 1995 (XX ATCM/INF 129). A draft of this 
paper was circulated at the XIXth ATCM/Seoul (XIX ATCM/INF 96).

(7)     No inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty were reported by any 
Party since the XIXth ATCM.

        The Delegation of Norway stated that an inspection would be carried out from the 
vessel M/V POLAR QUEEN during the 1996/97 austral season.

b) Inspection checklists

(8)     The Delegation of Italy tabled a document on a checklist for inspection of remote 
camps (XX ATCM/WP 6) as a follow-up to the offer it had made at the XIXth 
ATCM.

        Bearing in mind that Resolution 5 (1995), approved at the XIX ATCM, includes 
four checklists for Permanent Stations, Abandoned Stations, Vessels and Waste 
Disposal Sites respectively, and believing that a remote camp is very difficult to 
define, the Meeting concluded that it was not necessary to have another Checklist 
for remote camps. However, it was suggested that a text be added to the end of
4

Checklist A, agreed under Resolution 5 (1995), which would provide general 
guidance to observers who might inspect remote camps and associated facilities.

The Meeting therefore agreed Resolution...... (1996).

RESOLUTION ... (1996)

The Representatives,

Recalling Resolution 5 (1995) on Antarctic Inspection Checklists;

Considering that under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty inspections of remote field camps 
may be undertaken, and guidance in planning and carrying out such inspections might be 
helpful;

Recommend:

Adding the following text at the end of Checklist A “Permanent Antarctic Stations and 
Associated Installations” attached to Resolution 5 (1995):

“This checklist could be used to help prepare for, and to guide, inspections of remote field 
camps as well as permanent stations and associated facilities. Some items on the checklist 
may not be relevant to the inspection of remote field camps. When planning inspections, 
the checklist should be examined and adapted for the particular facility to be inspected.”

(9) The Meeting noted the suggestion in the report of the XIXth ATCM (paragraph 
80) that the consolidation of individual checklists into an inspection manual would 
be useful. The Meeting agreed to merge the checklists agreed in Resolution 5 
(1995) with the text added to Resolution ... (1996) into a single separate 
publication. However, in the light of a proposal made by the Netherlands to
5

review Checklist B in the context of the existing shipping provisions contained in 
Annex IV to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty at 
the next ATCM. The Meeting agreed to postpone consideration of this publication 
until the next ATCM.

(10) The Delegation of Chile submitted a paper (XX ATCM WP 17), on the 
enforcement of international maritime conventions and domestic standards on the 
inspection of ships that use Chilean ports and travel from there to Antarctica; and 
the Delegation of Brazil submitted a paper (XX ATCM Inf 87) on its own use of 
inspection checklists by its national Antarctic programme.

Item 11. "Data Management"

(11) The Meeting welcomed the work carried out by SCAR and COMNAP in 
preparing the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) and in developing the Antarctic 
Data Directory System (ADDS), which are expected to be operational by 1997 
(XX ATCM/INF 46).

(12) Several Delegations expressed their appreciation to the four Parties (New 
Zealand, France, Italy and the United States) that had contributed funding to 
begin the project, and welcomed the initiatives by New Zealand and France (XX 
ATCM/INF 16) aimed at organizing technical exchanges to promote software 
development.
6

The Meeting encouraged the Parties to complete preparations of National Data Directories (NDDS) as soon as possible and become actively involved in preparing and contributing data set descriptions to the AMD.

The Meeting asked SCAR and COMNAP to report back to the XXI ATCM on progress on AMD and ADDS.

(13) The Meeting welcomed the COMNAP paper describing AMEN (The Antarctic Managers Electronic Network) (XX ATCM/INF 40). According to this report, 26 of the 30 COMNAP members can currently access AMEN through Internet. Since 1995, the network has been expanded through a homepage on the World Wide Web (WWW). Attention was drawn by COMNAP to the many advantages of using the WWW, not least of which is the reduced cost per unit of the information exchanged or accessed.

(14) The Russian Delegation introduced its paper concerning a proposal for an Antarctic station handbook (XX ATCM/INF 78). Several Delegations welcomed this suggestion. However, a number of Delegations were concerned that the proposed handbook might duplicate information already provided in the Annual Exchange of Information under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, and others felt it might be difficult to keep such a handbook up to date. The Meeting noted that this kind of information, including images, could be best presented in an electronic format on the WWW so that it can be easily updated.

The Meeting asked COMNAP to examine this issue further, and report back to the XXI ATCM with advice on how to ensure that the Advance Exchange of
7

Operational Information, including details on research stations, can be made easily 
available on Internet.

One Delegation suggested that this exchange of information should also include 
information on available hydrographic charts as well as the best available 
technologies used to ensure compliance with the Protocol.

(15) The Delegation of Peru submitted a paper on improvements in transmitting and 
receiving meteorological information in the Antarctic (XX ATCM/INF 94).

Item 12.     "Antarctic Infrastructure, Technology and Operations"

(16) The Meeting welcomed a paper submitted by WMO on automatic observing 
systems in support of Antarctic meteorology (XX ATCM/INF 23) which refers 
to the increasing importance of automatic observations due to the fact that the 
conventional staffed surface and upper air observational network is static or 
diminishing. The surface automatic observational systems described were 
Automatic Weather Stations (AWS), drifting buoys deployed in the seasonal sea 
ice zone under the International Program for Antarctic Buoys (IPAB), and 
Upward Looking Sonar (ULS) for measuring sea ice thickness. It was suggested 
that nations with small Antarctic programmes could make a significant, but 
relatively low cost, contribution to science by funding Automatic Weather 
Stations, especially sea ice buoys, that could be deployed for them by other 
nations operating ships or aircraft in Antarctica.

Some Delegations sought further technical information and an indication of costs 
of such work.
8

The Delegation from the United Kingdom provided additional information on meteorological observations from four Automated Geophysical Observatories (AGOs) located south of Halley Research Station.

The Russian Delegation indicated that their national Antarctic program is closely examining the available technology in order to provide automatic surface meteorological observations at Vostok research station.

(17) The Delegation of Australia submitted a paper about the Antarctic Meteorological Centre (AMC) at Casey (XX ATCM/INF 25). It was noted that a broad range of meteorological services is supplied by the AMC for a number of purposes, including information for shipping and aircraft operations. It was noted that an Internet-based broadcast system is planned to be installed in the 1996/97 season.

The Delegation of Uruguay submitted a paper on a meteorological satellite receiving station operated by its national programme in Antarctica (XX ATCM/INF 75).

The Delegation of Brazil submitted a paper on the utilization of some equipment in its station in order to improve the protection of the Antarctic environment (XX ATCM/INF 60).

(18) The Delegations of Germany and Russia presented their paper on the dismantling of Georg Forster Station and the clean-up of Schirmacher Oasis (XX ATCM/INF 82).

The Meeting welcomed this work as a remarkable achievement by the two Parties bearing in mind the distances involved in transporting waste from the station to the coast, and the large quantities of materials removed. It was recognised that
9

Germany and Russia had also carried out an EIA of the removal work, and 
Russia is undertaking environmental monitoring.

The Meeting agreed that the cooperation between the two countries was a model 
example which could be usefully followed by other Parties.

The Delegation of the United Kingdom thanked the Brazilian Antarctic Program 
for completely removing the abandoned British base, Base G, from Keller 
Peninsula, Admiralty Bay, King George Island.

Item 13. "Antarctic Science: Major New Initiatives"

(19)     France/Italy and Japan presented papers on the Concordia project and the 
European Project on Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) (XX ATCM/INF 17) and 
deep ice core drilling at Dome Fuji station (XX ATCM/INF 65), respectively.

The Meeting noted that the exchange of information between these last two 
projects would be interesting and useful.

(20)     The Meeting welcomed the overview of international scientific programmes 
introduced by SCAR (INF 69, 71, 72). The agreement on a Memorandum of 
Understanding had led to the development of closer links between SCAR, the 
World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) and the International Geosphere-

Biosphere Programme (IGBP), highlighting the clear links between Antarctic 
regional studies and global programmes. SCAR has now been recognised as the 
Antarctic regional co-ordinator for these international programmes.  The 
establishment of a SCAR Global Change Programme Office was reported; it 
would be responsible for international co-ordination and dissemination of
10

information within SCAR. Current programmes are now focused on two major 
themes concerned with palaeo-environmental records from ice cores and Antarctic 
ice-sheet mass balance. Two new programmes were under discussion: Antarctic 
Sea Ice Processes, Ecosystem and Climate (ASPECT) and Antarctic Ice Margin 
Evolution (ANTIME). Another recent proposal concerned the possibility of an 
aircraft-based radar survey of ice thickness for the whole of the continental 
perimeter of Antarctica. SCAR also stated its willingness to report to the next 
ATCM on biological diversity , in particular marine biodiversity.

Attention was drawn by the Meeting to the value of the newly published 
proceedings of two SCAR/IUCN workshops which provide current syntheses of 
subantarctic island conservation and environmental education respectively. SCAR 
reported on progress made by the Antarctic Pack Ice Seals programme (APIS), 
Coastal and Shelf Ecology of the Antarctic Sea Ice Zone (CS-EASIZ), Biological 
Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic Systems (BIOTAS), Antarctic Geospace 
Observatory Network (AGONET), and on the workshop on the reported sub-
glacial lake at Vostok Station. Details of the planned drilling at Cape Roberts 
were reported: over the next two Antarctic seasons, the intention is to extract 
cores from the floor of the Ross Sea spanning the period 40–200 million years 
ago. This programme has links with the new proposals for sites for the Ocean 
Drilling Programme (ODP). Concern was expressed by some Delegations about 
the logistic costs of some of these major programmes.

(21)     Further investigations of the subglacial Lake Vostok were reported by Russia (XX 
ATCM/INF 83), which had undertaken detailed seismic and radio-echo sounding
11

investigations as suggested by the SCAR workshop. The importance of this 
multi-disciplinary project was recognised by the Meeting, which encouraged 
international cooperation in its future investigation. It was reported by SCAR that 
the workshop had stressed that before any sampling of the lake could be 
considered both technical developments and an Environmental Impact Assessment 
would have to be undertaken. Several Delegations considered that the value of 
future studies could be compromised if the lake were to be accidentally polluted 
as a consequence of planned ice coring above it. The Meeting urged that Russia 
take the necessary steps to ensure that the planned ice coring is stopped at a safe 
distance above the reported lake so that there is no risk of polluting it.

The United Kingdom drew attention to the extensive discussion held about this 
project as an example of the value of discussing major science issues at the next 
ATCMs.

(22)	The Meeting welcomed the WMO report on the Antarctic ozone current status 
(XX ATCM/INF 22), which indicated that the extent and depth of the 1995 ozone 
hole over Antarctica were similar to those of recent years, but that it persisted 
longer into December. The value of ozone sounding to observe the vertical 
profile of ozone at sub Antarctic islands was emphasized.

The Delegation of Peru submitted a paper on the evaluation of the composition 
of the troposphere and stratosphere (XX ATCM/INF 93), conducted on the basis 
of previous WMO suggestions.

(23)	Finally, several information papers on the major science initiatives being 
undertaken by national Antarctic programmes were presented by the Delegations
12

of Australia (XX ATCM/INF 41), Belgium (XX ATCM/INF 54, Peru (XX ATCM/INF 92 and 95), Bulgaria (XX ATCM/INF 122 and 123), and the United Kingdom (XX ATCM/INF 131).

(24) The Delegation of Peru informed the Meeting about the results of a study on environmental radioactivity in the Antarctic begun during the last austral summer season (XX ATCM/INF 91), and offered to establish an Antarctic programme for environmental radiological monitoring with the participation of other interested Parties.

Item 15. "Education and Training"

(25) Several papers on the training programmes developed by national operators for personnel travelling to Antarctica were presented by New Zealand, Chile, Brazil and South Africa (XX ATCM/INF 9, 31, 55 and 107 respectively). The use of an instructions manual and a code of conduct for visitors to Antarctica was described by Argentina and New Zealand (XX ATCM/INF 86 and 68, respectively). In addition, IAATO presented papers describing an expedition leaders Handbook and a slide presentation on Recommendation XVIII-1 (XX ATCM/INF 99 and 101 respectively).

The Meeting agreed that there is merit in providing information to the general public about Antarctica. Papers were presented by Australia and Brazil as to how they provide such information (XX ATCM/INF 33 and 55 respectively). Several Delegations recognised the importance of retaining education and training as an agenda item.
13

(26) The Meeting welcomed the suggestions presented by SCAR and IUCN (XX 
ATCM INF/70 and 53, respectively). The Meeting recognized the value of having 
“layman’s guides” to the Protocol prepared in various languages to ensure that 
visitors to Antarctica are aware of the intent and general provisions of the 
Protocol. It was noted that such guides might not accurately identify legal 
obligations embodied in the Protocol and national laws. This could be made clear 
in the layman’s guides by adding a disclaimer to the text.

(27) The meeting recognized the need to facilitate public access to Antarctic Treaty 
documentation, but stressed it could be achieved in various ways. The Meeting 
acknowledged that the identification of one national depository library, as 
recommended by SCAR and IUCN, may, in some cases, prove not to be the best 
way to achieve this.

(28) The Meeting encouraged IUCN to update and expand its initial inventory of 
environmental education and training, and present this at the next ATCM. The 
Delegation from the United Kingdom offered to consult with interested Parties, 
and work with SCAR and IUCN to produce substantive proposals in this field for 
discussion at the next meeting.

(29) The Meeting welcomed the developments presented by IAATO on medical 
screening of Antarctic tourists (XX ATCM/INF 77). IAATO thanked COMNAP 
for its constructive expressions of concerns about tour operations.
14

Item 16. "Safety issues"

(30)  On this item, papers were presented on maritime safety in Antarctica by the 
Delegation of Chile (XX ATCM/INF 24); by the Belgian Delegation on oil spill 
modelling in the Weddell Sea (XX ATCM/INF 47); by the Delegation of Brazil 
on contingency planning (XX ATCM/INF 56); and by IAATO on medical 
emergency contingency plans (XX ATCM/INF 76). Several Delegations made 
technical comments on some of these papers.
