ANTARCTIC TREATY               
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING                TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                              XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE               
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                              XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

XX ATCM/WP 1
March, 1996
Original: English

ANTARCTIC STRATIGRAPHIC DRILLING EAST OF CAPE ROBERTS
IN SOUTHWEST ROSS SEA, ANTARCTICA

(Agenda item 18)

(Submitted by New Zealand)
FEB 27 '96 08:27AM MFAT RPU 64 4 4948507                  P.2.

Antarctic Stratigraphic Drilling East of Cape Roberts in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica

Follow up to the
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)

Draft
(1/2/96)

1.0  The Cape Roberts Project

The Cape Roberts Project is a joint operation between scientists and the national Antarctic 
programmes of six countries, Italy, New Zealand, the United States of Am rica, Germany,
Australia, and the United Kingdom. The aim of the project is to recover cores from 
the sedimentary strata beneath the sea floor off Cape Roberts in the Ros: Sea. The cores will 
be studied to date the rifting of the Antarctic continent and to obtain infor nation about past 
climate.

Activities commenced in January 1995 when the first load of materials an equipment was off 
loaded and stored at Cape Roberts. Activities for the 1995/96 season ar summarised below.
Drilling off Cape Roberts is planned to take place in October - November of 1996 and 1997.

In accordance with the requirements of the Protocol, a final Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation (CEE) for the project was completed in January 1994 (tabled a: ATCM XVIII/INFO 
21). This paper reports on follow up to the CEE and identifies changes tiat have been made 
to the project since completion of the evaluation. The presentation of this report is consistent 
with the approach on CEE follow up procedures outlined in Information F aper No. 63 tabled 
by New Zealand and South Africa at the XIX ATCM.

2.0  Summary of Activities Completed in 1995/96 season

One tractor train transported equipment from Scott Base to Cape Roberts via Marble Point in 
October 1995. One trip was made to Marble Point from Cape Roberts to pick up drummed 
fuel. Over a period of five weeks, up to nine personnel pulled the sea ice camp containers 
and equipment out onto the sea ice approximately 600 metres northwest of Cape Roberts.
The camp was commissioned as a trial run for the drill seasons in 1996/9" and 1997/98. In 
total, nine containers were positioned at the site in addition to three an igans. After seven 
days of operation, the camp was decommissioned and pulled back onto Cape Roberts for 
storage over winter.

In January 1996 the Italian Antarctic supply ship 'Italica' completed a sec nd off load of about 
100 tonnes of equipment, comprising the drill rig, sledges and twelve co tainers fitted out as 
sleeping accommodation, workshops and laboratories. The ship off load took place 20km due 
east of Cape Roberts and all equipment was sledged to Cape Roberts w ere it is now stored 
in the designated storage area. A party of up to eight NZAP personnel worked at Cape 
Roberts for three weeks during the off-load period.

Environmental procedures, based on the CEE requirements, were prep ared to cover 
activities during 1995/96 (refer Attachment 1). A monitoring programme and CEE compliance 
check/audit were also carried out at Cape Roberts in 1995/96 (refer Atta hment 2).

There were several visits to Cape Roberts by other field parties over the 1995/96 season.

1
FEB 27 '96 08:28AM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                  P.3


3.0   Compliance with the CEE


The Cape Roberts Project is a multi year activity involving a number of dif erent phases - ie
construction and set up, operational and decommissioning phases. Che ks for compliance
with the CEE will be carried out at each of these phases. Monitoring for c ompliance in this
manner is a specific requirement of the Environmental Protocol for any C EE. The first
compliance monitoring was carried out in November 1995 when the sea i:e camp was
commissioned and trialed for the first time.


A major change to the project timetable has meant that the first drilling se ason has been
delayed a year. Drilling will now commence in 1996/97 due largely to pla nning and resource
constraints. The delay allowed for a trial commissioning of the sea ice camp but has added an
additional year of activities at Cape Roberts with the potential for increasd cumulative
impacts. However, the additional time also enabled a review of environm ental procedures
prior to full scale activities commencing, and the set up and review of mo nitoring programmes
at Cape Roberts.


Operations during the set up phase at Cape Roberts and the sea ice carip generally complied
with the requirements of the CEE. The completed compliance checklist used at Cape
Roberts in 1995/96 is attached (refer Attachment 2).


There were some minor areas of non compliance with the CEE as detaile d below (CEE
reference included in parenthesis):

*   storage area - boundaries of the storage area at Cape Roberts were not marked. A map
    showing the storage area was provided to personnel at the site and vill be included in the
    operational plan for the drill years. The need for boundary markers is being reviewed
    (3.5.2)

*   contingency planning during set up and construction phases - NZAI's standard
    contingency plans as contained in NZAP's Operations and Field Mai uals were
    considered sufficient for these low level phases of the Project (3.5.4)

*   sewage maceration - sewage was disposed of in accordance with NZAP procedures but
    was not macerated (a maximum of nine staff were working at the site at any one time during
    1995/96). The need to macerate sewage is being reviewed (see be ow - section 4.0)
    (3.6, 9.2.3)

*   helicopter operations - no designated heiicopter landing area was e:tablished at Cape
    Roberts (9.2.1)

*   fuel storage - containment systems were not in place around the fue storage area at Cape
    Roberts or generator tanks at the sea ice camp. The risks from fuel :pill have been
    minimised by the use of drummed fuel rather than large tanks, and r sfuelling
    predominantly being carried out on the sea ice (9.2.1, 9.2.3).

*   walking access areas at Cape Roberts - areas were not established or marked off although
    likely routes were identified (9.2.1)

*   restricted areas - restricted areas were not designated but likely are:is were identified
    (9.2.1)

*   sea ice flagged route - flags were not placed between Marble Point and Cape Roberts
    (9.2.2)

*   drip trays - trays were not available early in the season, but were us:d after being delivered
    to the site in January (9.2.3)

*   fire safety controls - no project specific controls were observed how ever personnel had all
    received NZAP fire safety training and fire extinguishers were place d in high risk areas
    (9.2.3)


2
FEB 27 '96 08:28AM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                  P.4

-   Ground Disturbance in CR Storage Area. Although every effort was made to avoid disturbance to the ground inside the designated storage area on CR this proved impossible in January 1996 following the ship off-load. An area of approximately 1,000 square metres immediately to the west and north west of the permar ent NZAP hut was cut up by the tracked vehicles and sledge runners as the 23 contain rs now on site were manoeuvred into position. Unlike the January 1995 (first ship off-load) when there was still plenty of snow to protect the ground surface this was not the case in January 1996 when there was no snow at all. Every effort was made at the time to restore the damaged areas by raking but it is clear a bigger effort will be required once the Project is completed and all equipment removed from the Cape.

The small scale of the operations during the set up and commissioning activities in the 1995/96 season provided a good opportunity for review of environmental management according to the CEE. The non-compliance areas will be reviewed with the project manager prior to drilling commencement in October 1996, their impact assessed, and in some cases changes made to the procedures outlined in the CEE (see section 4 be ow).

4.0   Proposed Changes to the CEE

Three changes have been made to the CEE since it was finalised in January 1994.

-   It is proposed that human waste is not macerated at either the Cape Roberts Camp (ie on the sea ice) or the Drill Site Camp. The intention now is to locate slir gle toilets over 600mm diameter holes drilled in the sea ice, but not all the way through to water. When a hole is filled it will be covered and the contents frozen in. Late in the summer the contents will gradually be dispersed as the ice melts in all probablility over the long period and many kilometres from CR. This method of disposal complies with the Protocol (Article 5, Paragraph 1 (a) and (b)) for a small statich where the average occup ncy over the summer season is less than 30 people.

-   The use of drummed fuel as recommended by the CEE (as opposed to bulk fuel bladders) with no containment provided.

-   The use of explosives for down-hole logging and for cutting the out r drill casing at the completion of each of the four proposed holes.

Environmental evaluations for these changes are under way and will be completed by mid 1996. This process is in accordance with the approach of assessing the level of impact of changes to CEEs by protocol requirements as outlined in Information Faper No. 63 tabled at the XIX ATCM. The evaluations will be reviewed by New Zealand's ind spendent environmental review panel and reported to the XXI ATCM.

5.0   Monitoring and Audit

A monitoring programme was developed and implemented to address the requirements for the CEE for the 1995/96 activities. Monitoring in 1996/97 and 1997/98 will cover all activities during the drill seasons as set out in the CEE. Aspects of the programme involving sites on land at Cape Roberts have been set up anc are ongoing.

For further information contact:

EJ Waterhouse or J Cowie
New Zealand Antarctic Programme
PO Box 14091
Christchurch
New Zealand

3
FEB 27 '96 08:29AM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.5


Attachment 1:


        Environmental Operating Procedures

Cape Roberts Project, Antarctica
(1995/96)

1.0     Introduction

A comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) for the project "Antarc:ic Stratigraphic
Drilling East of Cape Roberts in Southwest Ross Sea, Antarctica " was co?pleted in January
1994. The CEE included a number of detailed provisions for minimising :he environmental
impact of the activities associated with the project.

The procedures set out below have been drawn directly from the CEE a?d their further
development in this document is a specific requirement of the CEE.

These procedures apply to all operations and activities to :ake place during
the 1995/96 season and are to be followed by all personne! involved in the
Cape Roberts project during this time.

2.0     General Environmental Operating Procedures

All personnel should be provided with a copy of the NZAP Environn ental Code of
Conduct and must be familiar with its provisions.

The following procedures are common to all areas of operation of the project. Procedures
specific to operations at Cape Roberts, the sea ice camp and sea ice tra?sport routes are
detailed in section 3.

Transport                                  A designated helicopter landing area is to be est?blished at Cape
                                           Roberts and the sea ice camp if required.

                                           A wind sock or other wind direction indicator is t? be installed.

                                           Smoke grenades are not to be used once the w?nd sock is
                                           established.

Fuel Handling                              All fuel and lubricants are to be stored safely an? securely in
                                           designated and marked areas.

                                           Working quantities of fuel and lubricants are to ?e stored in
                                           designated areas.

                                           Spill response equipment is to be stationed at f?el storage areas to
                                           allow rapid response action in the event of a sp?l.

                                           Refuelling operations are to take place on fast i?e, not on ice free
                                           ground ie Cape Roberts.

                                           All personnel are to receive training in spill prev?ntion and
                                           appropriate clean up actions.

                                           Drip trays and sorbant mats is to be used when refuelling vehicles
                                           and other equipment.

4
FEB 27 '96  08:30AM MFAT APU 64 4 4948507                                  P.6

Refer to the NZAF Operations Manual (p 43-44) for 
actions required in the event of a fuel spill. Always 
record the location of any fuel spill on ice free areas of 
Cape Roberts.

Waste
Management

NZAP waste management procedures are to be followed for all 
operations and activities.
PCBs, non sterile soils, polystyrene beads, chips and similar forms 
of packaging are not to be used during any aspect of the 
operations.

Personnel are to make every effort to minimise the volume and 
amount of waste produced during operations.

All human waste and grey water is to be disposed of into the sea.

All other waste is to be separated into one of four categories (set 
out below) and returned to Ross Island:
- burnable
- non burnable (non hazardous)
- recyclable
- hazardous

Open burning of waste material of any kind is prohibited.

Refer to the NZAP Operations Manual (pp. 41-42), the 
NZAP Field Manual (pp 84-85) and NZAP Waste 
Management Handbook for specific procedures 
required for the handling of waste.

Flora and Fauna

Personnel are to keep a minimum of 5 metres from any animal.

Personnel are not to walk through skua colonies at Cape Roberts or 
aggregations of seals on the fast ice.

Noise is to be kept to a minimum in the vicinity of wildlife.

No vehicle is to be taken within 200 metres of wildlife.

Walking or driving on vegetation (mosses or lichen?) is prohibited.

The removal or disturbance of plants or animals is prohibited 
(except in accordance with an approved permit).

5
FEB 27 '96 08:30AM MFAT RPU 64 4 4948507                                  P.7

3.0  Cape Roberts and Sea Ice Transport Routes

The following procedures apply to all operations and activities at Cape Roberts and on the sea 
ice transport routes as specified.  General procedures for all major ireas of activity 
are detailed in section 2.

Cape Roberts and Vicinity

Storage Areas
               
The use of previously disturbed areas at Cape Roberts is to be 
maximised.

Storage areas are to be located away from skua ne its.

The boundaries of all storage areas are to be clearly narked with 
flags and are not to be crossed.

Vehicles and prime movers are not to move or oper te outside the 
designated and flagged storage area(s).

Transport

All transport to the storage area is to be by the souti ern sea ice 
route onto Cape Roberts. Under no circumstances s access to be 
permitted from the sea from the north of Cape Robe ts.

The designated helicopter landing area is to be loc ted on 
previously disturbed ground and away from skua ne its and areas of 
moss and lichen.

Fuel Handling

Fuel and lubricants are to be stored in areas away fr m and down 
slope of any areas of vegetation and skua territories.

Containment systems for all stored fuel and lubricar is are to be 
installed from the commencement of the project.

Refer to the NZAP Operations Manual (pp 43-44) for 
actions required in the event of a fuel spill.

Waste
Management

No human or other solid or liquid waste is to be dis osed of onto 
land at Cape Roberts.

All such waste is to be disposed of through a tide c ack into the sea.

NB The procedures in section 2 also apply at all operations at Cape Roberts.

Sea Ice Transport Routes

Transport

Flagged routes are to be established between McM urdo 
Station/Scott Base and Cape Roberts.

No vehicles are to be driven within 200 metres of wi dlife.

NB: The procedures in section 2 also apply to all sea ice tra nsport 
operations.

6
Attachment 2:
Cape Roberts Project - CEE Compliance Checklist 1995/96

(NB: Checklist only includes aspects of the CEE that apply directly to activities carried out at Cape Roberts during 1995/96)

| Proposed Action                                  | CEE Ref | Comments on Compliance with CEE                                                                                                                                                           |
|-------------------------------------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Camp transportation &                           | 3.5.2   | (1-3) One cargo train from MSSB - Oct 95, 2 ship offloads (1) Jan 94 (2) planned for Jan 95.                                                                                              |
| construction                                    | 3.5.5   | (4) 8 persons on cargo train, specialists brought in for plant commissioning.                                                                                                            |
| (1) tractor trains from MSSB                    |         | (5) All equipment & buildings staged in sea ice in front of storage area - from both MSSB & Cape Roberts storage area.                                                                   |
| (2) 4-5 cargo trains                            |         | (6) All materials, equipment and buildings bought onto Cape Roberts from the South. No vehicle access from the north.                                                                   |
| (3) possible movement by ship                   |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (4) max. 8 people                               |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (5) equipment, buildings, fuel &                |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| consumables staged through Cape Roberts storage |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| area                                            |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (6) materials brought onto Cape Roberts from    |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| the south                                       |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Support camp size                               | 3.5.2   | (1) 7 containers set up on sea ice in Oct/Nov 95, 3 sleeping wannigans for construction staff also set up on sea ice. Various equipment and storage containers on sea ice in front of Cape Roberts. |
| (1) 12-20 buildings                             |         | (2) Total area occupied to be assessed when fully operational ie drilling season.                                                                                                       |
| (2) occupy 1000 -1500 square                    |         | (3) System of containers and wannigans used in 95/96.                                                                                                                                    |
| metres (20mx 60m)                               |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (3) combined prefabricated and                  |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| dismountable                                    |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Storage area                                    | 3.5.2   | (1) All buildings and equipment stored on flat storage area at Cape Roberts.                                                                                                            |
| (1) buildings and equipment stored              |         | (2) Approx. area of 150 x 300m occupied in Oct-Dec '95 before ship offload.                                                                                                              |
|                                                 |         | Storage and tracking continued almost totally in areas covered in snow. Flat area occupied and site of previous disturbance.                                                            |
| (2) 5000 square metres (70x700m)                |         | (4-5) Boundaries to be marked with flags at beginning of first drilling season in late 1996.                                                                                             |
| required                                        |         | (6) No evidence of vehicle use outside storage area.                                                                                                                                     |
| (3) maximise use of already disturbed area      |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (4) mark boundaries                             |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (5) boundaries not to be crossed                |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| (6) no vehicles outside designated storage area |         |                                                                                                                                                                                          |

1                                                    P.8
Fuel                                         3.5.2    (1) Mogas, JP8 and Jet A fuel used.
(1) single fuel policy                        (2) all fuel drummed (44 gallon drums).
(2) drummed fuel                             (3) Approximately 170 drums stored at Cape Roberts on at 14 Nov '95.
(3) estimate >200 drums needed at            (4) Appears to be one area designated for fuel storage.
    Cape Roberts                             (5) Oct/Nov refuelling operations confined to sea ice in front of Cape Roberts.
(4) designated storage areas                 (6) No specific contingency plans developed, see Environmental Procedures 95/96 and NZAP Oil
(5) fuelling only in designated               Spill Policy.
    areas                                    
(6) contingency plans developed              
                                             
Waste disposal                               3.6      (1) No incineration.
    9.2.3                                        (2) All solid waste returned to Scott Base with construction party or on resupply back flights.
(1) no incineration                          (3) No disposal to ice free areas observed.
(2) all solid waste removed to ship          
    or Ross Island                           
(3) no disposal to ice free areas            
(4) waste minimisation & separation          
    procedures                               
(5) grey water & sewage                      
    macerated & into sea                     
                                             
Main potential impacts at                    6.1      (1) Snow covered approximately 95% of storage area in November - December 1996. Small area
Cape Roberts                                 (15m x15m) of ice free area has been tracked. Tracking occurred during ship offload when less
(1) disturbance in storage area              snow cover.
(2) fuel spills                              (2) No evidence of fuel spills.
(3) noise & other emissions                  (3) no evidence of significant disturbance to biota through noise emissions although approach paths
(4) helicopter operations (biota,            to Cape Roberts huts do pass over skua territories.
    skuas, soils)                            (4) No reports of bird strikes by helicopters.
                                             No observable impacts from other emissions.
Main potential impacts on                                                                                
fast ice                                     6.2      (1) Staging area established on fast ice close to Cape Roberts, increased number of buildings,
(1) transport routes & sea ice camp          generator working and traffic/human movements to and from Cape Roberts and the sea ice camp.
    (building presence, human                
    activities: exhaust, access              
    holes)                                   
(2) disturbance to ice biota and             (2) Seal population in vicinity probably disturbed during activities especially through increased vehicle
    seals                                    movements.
(3) sewage & grey water                  
    contamination to basal ice               
(4) transport systems (tracking,             
    emissions, fuel spills)                  
                                             (3) sewage and greywater all disposed at tide crack.
                                             (4) Transport all on sea ice or snow, increased emissions from vehicles and generator, no evidence of
                                                 fuel spills observed.
                                             
2                                            5
Main potential impacts on marine ecosystem
(1) sewage and grey water
6.2
(1)	Sewage to sea ice hole in accordance with NZAP waste management procedures - maximum 9 
      persons at camp during Oct/Nov with disposal to tide crack (also greywater).
      greywater to intake hole (discharged to surface of RO intake at the sea ice camp).
      small numbers of personnel at camp unlikely to have significant impacts and in accordance with 
      protocol requirements.

Indirect effects at Cape Roberts
(1) casual human visitations at Cape Roberts (outside the storage area)
(2) litter & emissions
7.1
(1)	maximum 9 persons on site at any one time. Increased visits likely to trig and tide gauge (walking 
      access). Skua activity minimal during November operations. Other visitations (ie non-
      construction) included visit by NZAP Environmental Officer, media and NZAP distinguished 
      visitors, and US field parties.
(2)	No evidence of litter from operations (sawdust observed around Cape Roberts huts, later cleaned 
      up.

Indirect effects on marine environment
(1) increased ship and aircraft traffic (emissions, fuel consumption, illegal waste dumping, visitations from crews)
7.2
(1)	Increased traffic movements especially between sea ice camp and Cape Roberts and to Cape 
      Roberts by helicopter. Approximately three-four weeks duration - past numerous seal haul out 
      areas.
      One ship visit to ice edge approximately 20km from Cape Roberts in mid January.

Cumulative Impacts
(1) other planned activities at Cape Roberts
(2) storage area and fuel handling areas
(3) vehicles in transport corridor
(4) helicopter landings
(5) impact on skuas, soil and flora
(6) impacts on sea floor
6.1
6.2
(1)	No other science activities were planned at Cape Roberts during 1995/96.
(2)	Some additional surface tracking where not snow covered.
(3)	Increased vehicle movements in transport corridor - potential impacts on wildlife, largely snow 
      covered in Oct/Nov.
(4)	Increased helicopter movements over four week period.
(5)	Snow cover prevents skuas taking up traditional nesting sites although pairs were observed to 
      nest in alternative locations.
(6)	Sea floor impacts unable to be assessed in 95/96, no reason for any significant impacts.

Control measures
(1) develop & implement for operational phases
9.1.3
(1)	Environmental procedures developed for activities in 1995/96.

Monitoring
(1) environmental monitoring of key parameters
(2) operational monitoring (safety, operational continuity & environmental protection)
(3) compliance monitoring (control measures in place and followed)
9.1.4
(1)	Monitoring carried out November and December 95 included establishment of vegetation plots, 
      skua observations and counts, assessment of surface disturbance, and fuel spill.
(2)	Environmental procedures developed.
(3)	Compliance assessment carried out in Nov/Dec 1995.

P.10.
Contingency planning                   |9.1.5  | (1)  No specific contingency plans in place during 1995/96 operations. NZAP fuel spill and other  
(1) plans prepared                    |       |       environmental procedures adhered to.                                          
Control measures at Cape             |9.2.1  | (1)  Storage area centred on flat area adjacent to huts.                             
Roberts                               |       | (2)  Storage area boundaries unmarked.                                               
(1) storage area set up in disturbed  |       | (3)  No helicopter landing area designated at Cape Roberts.                          
area as much as possible             |       | (4)  Windsock on one of the existing Cape Roberts huts.                               
(2) mark boundaries of storage area   |       | (5)  No smoke grenades used.                                                         
(3) helicopter landing area          |       | (6)  Fuel storage in one area (refer map).                                           
designated                            |       | (7)  No containment observed at fuel storage area. NZAP spill kits available.        
(4) wind sock at helicopter pad       |       | (8)  All fuelling operations conducted on sea ice in front of Cape Roberts.          
(5) no smoke grenades                 |       | (9)  No evidence of waste disposal to any ice free area.                             
(6) fuels and lubricants stored in    |       | (10) Walking access areas unmarked.                                                  
designated areas                     |       | (11) No areas marked off limits on maps or the ground.                               
(7) containment systems and          |       | (12) No "no go" or restricted areas established.                                     
absorbent material available & to be |       |                                                                                      
used                                 |       |                                                                                      
(8) where possible all fuelling       |       |                                                                                      
operations to take place on fast ice |       |                                                                                      
(9) no waste disposal onto ice free  |       |                                                                                      
area                                 |       |                                                                                      
(10) mark walking access areas       |       |                                                                                      
(11) mark off (maps & on the ground) |       |                                                                                      
sensitive areas (moss, lichen, skuas)|       |                                                                                      
(12) establish no go or restricted   |       |                                                                                      
areas                                |       |                                                                                      
Control measures re transport routes |9.2.2  | (1)  Route flagged in Marble Point. no flagging between Marble Point and Cape Roberts.
(1) flagged route from MSSB          |       | (2-3) Sea ice travel and procedures as per NZAP Handbook and field manual.          
(2) ice crack examination            |       |                                                                                      
(3) all vehicle operations as per    |       |                                                                                      
NZAP Handbook & Field Manual        |       |                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                        P.11
FEB 27 '96
08:32AM WFA1 RPU 64 4 4948507
Control measures at camp 
sites
(1)	waste procedures in 
accordance with 
protocol/NZAP procedures
(2)	minimisation/separation
(3)	sewage & grey water 
macerated & disposed to sea 
on down current side of 
activities
(4)	all other solid waste returned 
to ships or Ross Island
(5)	no incineration
(6)	working supplies of fuel & 
lubricants stored in contained 
& designated areas
(7)	drip trays and absorbent 
materials available & used
(8)	personnel trained on safety & 
spill prevention
(9)	designate helo landing area 
with wind sock
(10)	fire safety controls

Unavoidable impacts
(1)	impacts on skuas
(2)	damage to terrestrial vegetation
(3)	cumulative impacts in already 
disturbed area

Effects on other science 
research
(1)	look of cooperation for other 
projects
(2)	impacts on other science or 
support activities in the area
(3)	impact of accidents

Effects on other uses/values
(1)	fuels spills & other accidents
(2)	impact on wilderness, scenic, 
historic & other aesthetic values

9.2.3

(1)	Waste management procedures as per NZAP policy.
(2)	Waste separated as per NZAP waste management policy and procedures.
(3)	Sewage to ice hole (max 9 persons), grey water to top of RO intake. No maceration.
(4)	All other solid waste returned to Scott Base.
(5)	No incineration observed at sea ice camp.
(6)	Fuels and lubricants stored on designated sled and in workshop container.
(7)	No drip trays observed - NZAP spill kits available at camp. Drip trays provided in January.
(8)	Briefings given to all staff as part of NZAP training.
(9)	Designated helo landing site set up with flag as wind director.
(10)	Extinguishers present at sea ice camp and in all huts, personnel received NZAP fire safety training.

10

(1)	Up to 4 nests unable to be occupied due to maintenance of snow cover to reduce physical 
disturbance although pairs observed to take up alternative nesting sites.
(2)	No damage observed to terrestrial vegetation, snow covered in October/November - impacts 
possible during ship off-load in mid January 1996.
(3)	Some tracking of disturbed surface area in vicinity of Cape Roberts buildings.

11.1

(1)	NZAP heavy plant stored at Cape Roberts over winter. USAP support required to move NZAP 
science event to sea ice location in October.
(1)	No other NZAP science events conducted in area during October/November 95.
(3)	No accidents reported during October/November 95.

11.2

(1)	One small (>300ml) fuel spill reported by camp personnel.
No other evidence of fuel spills or accidents observed.
(2)	Increased presence at Cape Roberts and vicinity, including visits to Granite Harbour during 
occupation.

5
6
P.12
FEB 27 '96
08:33AM MFAT RPU 64 4 4948507
