ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/WP 20
                                  April 1996
                                  English
                                  Original: Spanish

OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM:
     "Organizational Aspects"
     (Agenda Item 7a)
     (Submitted by Chile)
OPERATION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM:
Organizational Aspects

1. Notwithstanding the fact that the situation of the Secretariat may be resolved in a timely manner, in the meantime the Antarctic system cannot remain paralysed; in addition, there seems to be quite a bit of room for improvement in the administrative processes which, though adequate in 1961, cannot meet the requirements of a modern and consolidated entity such as the Consultative Meetings.

2. This 35-year old tradition has remained unchanged; its procedural modes are simple and at times vary significantly between different host countries. In order to improve these standards and take advantage of the new advances in the field of computers and technology, the following proposal is submitted.

DECISION:

1. At the end of a Consultative Meeting and, at the latest, in the following three months, the host government will send to all Governments Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, especially to the host government of the next Consultative Meeting (whether regular or special): (a) the final report in the official languages; (b) a comprehensive list of the working and information documents that have been officially circulated; (c) a list of all documents issued by the TEWG; and (d) to the extent possible, a copy and computer diskette of all documents circulated at the TEWG and Consultative meetings, in the languages requested by the Parties at the beginning of the meeting.

2. The government organizing the Consultative meeting should keep a special computer file of all documents mentioned in the previous paragraph, and provide copies of these documents to any member of the Antarctic Treaty that requests them.

3. All governments preparing a Consultative meeting should begin receiving and translating documents in accordance with the guidelines that deal with the presentation and distribution of documents, adopted in Seoul by the XIXth ATCM, as follows: (a) the working and information documents should be delivered 45 days before the meeting for translation purposes (information documents should be no longer than 30 pages); (b) these translated documents shall be distributed to Consultative and non-Consultative members 30 days before the meeting; (c) the documents sent beyond these deadlines will only be circulated in their translated version during the meeting; (d) documents generated during the meeting will be immediately translated and circulated; (e) documents not translated into the official languages of the meeting shall not be circulated.
