ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                  ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/WP 5
                                  March, 1996
                                  Original: English

AREAS, SITES, MONUMENTS, AND ANNEX V

(Agenda item 20)

(Submitted by The Netherlands)
Areas, Sites, Monuments, and Annex V.

This Paper is an attempt to determine what happens to SPAs, SSSIs, MSSSIs, MPAs, SRAs and Historic Sites and Monuments when Annex V takes effect.

No draft Decision, draft Resolution or draft Measure has been added. It is thought that any conclusions reached on its contents may just as well be taken up into the Final Report of this ATCM.

For SPAs and SSSIs this is easy.
Annex V, Article 3.3, states that 'Specially Protected Areas and Sites of Special Scientific Interest designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are hereby designated as Antarctic Protected Areas and shall be renamed and renumbered accordingly.'
An interesting point is what the Annex does not say. It does not require the Recommendations concerned to have taken effect: designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings is enough.

In the absence of other time-indicators the interpretation of the word 'past' in 'designated as such by past Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings' hinges on 'hereby'. As this word cannot take effect before the entire Annex does, it must be taken to refer to the moment Annex V takes effect. This means that at the moment Annex V takes effect, the SPAs and SSSIs designated by any ATCMs before this moment, will become ASPAs. For MSSSIs there is a complication, which is explained below.

The case for Historic Sites and Monuments is similar.

Annex V, Article 8.3 states that 'Existing Historic Sites and Monuments which have been listed as such by previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings shall be included in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments under this Article.' Here we also find the absence of the requirement for the Recommendations concerned to have come into effect. The criterion is listed as such by previous Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings. As for 'previous', this word , in the absence of other time-indicators, must be taken to refer to the moment at which the sentence in which it is contained, comes into effect. The ensuing situation is the same as for SPAs and SSSIs: when Annex V takes effect, all Historic Sites and Monuments listed by any ATCM before this moment, are included in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments under Annex V.

Multiple-use Planning Areas (MPAs) and Specially Reserved Areas (SRAs).

MPAs and SRAs were instituted at ATCM XV, in Recommendations 15:11 and 15:10 respectively. At the next ATCM proposals for an MPA (South West Anvers Island) and an SRA (Dufek Massif) were discussed. Although ATCM XVI did not find fault with the proposals, it was felt they could not be formally adopted as the Recommendations 15:11 and 15:10, upon which the designations would have to be based, had not come into effect yet. As ATCM XVI did adopt Annex V, there was little expectation of Recommendations 15:11 and 15:10 coming into effect; they would be replaced by Annex V anyway. As it was, it was decided to take up the management plans concerned in Annexes to the Final Report of ATCM XVI and to comply with these on a voluntary basis.

Annex V makes no provision for MPAs and SRAs to become ASPAs of ASMAs. In fact it does not mention MPAs and SRAs at all. If we want the management plans concerned to be complied with on a basis firmer than a voluntary one, we shall have to adopt them as ASPAs or ASMAs after Annex V has come into effect. For an MPA adoption as an
ASMA would seem to be the more appropriate option.

MSSSIs.
The concept of MSSSIs was instituted by Recommendation 14:06, after which two areas were designated MSSSIs: western Branfield Strait (MSSSI 35) and East Dallman Bay (MSSSI 36), both in Recommendation 16:03. If MSSSIs are a sub-set of SSSIs, Article 3.3 of Annex V applies and they become ASPAs when the Annex takes effect. If they are something different from SSSIs, they are not provided for under Annex V and, just as in the case of SRAs and MPAs (see above), the management-plans concerned will have to be re-adopted as ASPAs after Annex V has taken effect.
In either case, however, the consent of the CCAMLR Commission will have to be sought first: Annex V, Article 6.3 states that '... no marine area shall be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area or an Antarctic Specially Managed Area without the prior approval of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.'
This is also true for SSSIs 26 (Chile Bay), 27 (Port Foster) and 28 (South Bay). These have not been called MSSSIs (Marine SSSIs), but they certainly are marine SSSIs. The ATS Handbook points at this nomenclatural inconsistency on page 2084 under d.
In view of the facts that some marine SSSIs are called SSSIs and others MSSSIs, and that the MSSSIs are not numbered separately (or they would have been called MSSSIs 1 and 2), it would seem to be reasonable to treat them all in the same way. That means that CCAMLR's consent should be sought for all of them, preferably before Annex V takes effect (if this is still possible), that those of them for which CCAMLR does not require changes become ASPAs automatically on Annex V taking effect, and that the others become this only after they have been modified according to CCAMLR's wishes.
