ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING        XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


XX ATCM/WP 15
(REV 2)
May 1996
Original: English

A PROPOSAL PREPARED BY BRAZIL AND POLAND, IN COORDINATION WITH
ECUADOR AND PERU, THAT ADMIRALTY BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND
(SOUTH SHETLAND ISLAND) BE DESIGNATED AS AN ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY
MANAGED AREA (ASMA)

(Agenda item 20a)

(submitted by Brazil)
1

A PROPOSAL PREPARED BY BRAZIL AND POLAND, IN COORDINATION WITH ECUADOR AND PERU, THAT ADMIRALTY BAY, KING GEORGE ISLAND (SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS) BE DESIGNATED AS AN ANTARCTIC SPECIALLY MANAGED AREA (ASMA)

PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLAN

Taking into account Arts 2 and 4-6 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Brazil and Poland, the two countries which operate year-round stations at Admiralty Bay, King George Island (South Shetland Islands), propose that the area of Admiralty Bay, hereinafter referred to as the Area, and its associated topographical drainage basin be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) and that activities in this area be governed by the enclosed code of conduct.

1. Objectives

During the past 15 years, Admiralty Bay has become an area of increasingly diverse human activities which will tend to grow and become even more complex in the near future. Better planning and coordination of the existing and future activities will help to avoid or to reduce the risk of mutual interference and minimize environmental impacts, thus providing an effective mechanism for the conservation of those valuable features that are characteristic of the area, such as magnificent glaciated mountainous landscape, rich sea-bird and mammal breeding grounds, marine and freshwater ecosystems, and terrestrial plant habitats (see Annex 1).

Five parties: Poland, Brazil, United States, Peru and Ecuador; have active research programs in the area. They operate two permanent, all-year stations (Poland: Henryk Arctowski Station at Point Thomas; and Brazil: Comandante Ferraz Station at Keller Peninsula), one permanent summer station (Peru: Machu Picchu at Crépin Point) and two permanent summer camps (USA: Pietr J Lenie at Llano Point; and Ecuador: at Point Hennequin). There are several small removable and permanent installations elsewhere. There is a lighthouse at Arctowski Station operating year-round. The Area includes one SSSI (No 8) on the west coast of Admiralty Bay and an Historical Monument (No 51: a grave) at Arctowski Station.

The area of Admiralty Bay is visited by scientific expeditions and tourists, the latter mainly as organized tourist ship expeditions and yachts.

With regard to the provisions of Arts 4-6 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection on Area Protection and Management, the two proponent Parties agreed on the following Code of Conduct to guide:

• On-going and future research and logistic operations of the Parties which have permanent and/or summer installations in the Area;
• Similar activities of other Parties; and of Visitors, including tourists entering the Area;

Taking into account the possibility that the Area, because of its outstanding environmental, scientific, scenic and historic values will be the site of continuous activities which will tend to become even more intense and diverse in the near future, the Management Plan is designated to provide mechanisms for:

• Improving the level of mutual assistance and co-operation among Parties operating in the Area;
• Avoiding or minimizing the risk of mutual interference and cumulative impacts on the terrestrial and marine environments;
• Improving the understanding of natural processes at work in the Area, which in turn will help protect the environment from unnecessary disturbance;
2

- Protecting important physiographic features, and the outstanding biological, ecological,
historical and aesthetic values of the Area; and
- Safeguarding the long-term scientific research in the Area.

2. Management activities

With regard to the basic guidelines as provided by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
the Antarctic Treaty, and its Annexes I-V, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals
(CCAS), and the relevant ATCM recommendations, the following management activities are
proposed for the Area:

2.1. The Parties that have active research programmes in the Area shall manage activities of
their nationals in the ASMA and request that other Antarctic Treaty Parties undertake to
manage the activities of their nationals when in the Area in accordance with the Code of
Conduct.

2.2. The Parties that have active research programmes in the Area should consult among
themselves with a view to:

      - Designating a person to coordinate the implementation of the management plan in
        the area;
      - Holding joint periodical meetings for reviewing the functioning and implementation
        of the Management Plan;
      - Developing contingency plans for each station, as well as for the whole Area, for oil
        spills and any other accident with possible significant impact on the environment,
        including the attendance in emergency;
      - Establishing a waste management plan for the whole Area;
      - The Parties that have active research programmes in the Area will keep other Parties
        informed as to the name and address of their coordinator.

Wherever feasible, markers delimiting boundaries of protected areas, and of zones of
scientific and/or ecological interest, and warnings for visitors about their nature will be
provided.

2.3. The Parties that have active research programmes in the Area should make arrangements
with other Parties which have installations and/or structures now abandoned to consider
their value. Conservation plans should be formulated if any of the installations are
assessed to be of historical value. If not, plans should be formulated for their removal
in accordance with the provisions of Annex III on Waste Disposal and Waste
Management to the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

3. Proposals for designation of new protected areas

None at the moment.

4. Description of the area

4.1. Geographical coordinates

The proposed ASMA Admiralty Bay (62°05'S, 58°30'W) comprises the area considered
to be immediately within the glacial drainage basin of Admiralty Bay (Fig 1). In
addition, it includes that part of the present SSSI No 8 which is adjacent to this region
but outside the drainage basin.

The Area is bounded by a line extending from Telefon Point in the south, to The
Tower, and then toward Jardine Peak intersecting the ice divide of the Warszawa ice
field, thence following this divide to the west of Ezcurra Inlet, north-eastward to
enclose Mackellar and Martel inlets, and then southward through Ternyck Needle to
3

Cape Syrezol on the eastern shore of Admiralty Bay. The waters of Admiralty Bay, 
and a small part of Bransfield Strait north of a straight line between Cape Syrezol and 
Telefon Point, are also included in the ASMA. There are no fixed survey points 
available at the Area boundaries, but markers indicating an ASMA will be fixed at 
appropriate arrival points on land.

The total area of the proposed ASMA is approx. 370 km², including 122 km² of 
Admiralty Bay waters and an adjoining 8 km² of the Bransfield Strait (Admiralty Chart 
No 6258, 1968, London; Polish Chart Admiralty Bay, King George Island, 1:50,000, 
Battke, S, Warszawa, 1990; Brazilian Chart, No 25121 Baía do Almirantado, 
1:40,000, 1984, Rio de Janeiro).

Approximately 90% of the land area within the proposed ASMA is ice-covered, the ice-
free areas representing about 37 km².

4.2. Climate.

Climate of the Area is typical of maritime Antarctica. Based on data of more than 15 
years obtained at the Polish Arctowski Station and the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz 
Station, the local microclimate is characterized by an average annual temperature of 
around -1.8°C and an average annual wind speed in the order of 7 ms¯¹. Annual average 
precipitation is 570 mm, humidity is 82% and pressure of 999 hPa. The waters of 
Admiralty Bay have an average annual temperature range of -1.9° to +4°C being well-
mixed by tides, and strongly influenced by currents from the west of Bransfield Strait.

5. Access by land, sea and air

In order to minimize the risks of accidents, environmental damage or harmful interference with 
research activities, the following guidelines should be followed by pedestrians, ships, small 
boats, aircrafts and land vehicles entering and/or operating in the Area (Figs 1–4).

5.1. Ships

Anchoring inside Mackellar Inlet should be made with caution because of the large 
number of rocks in its central part. It is recommended that only one ship at a time 
should anchor in the inlet.
        • Anchoring inside Martel Inlet should be limited to three ships as follows: two 
          immediately off-shore from Ferraz Station, and the third at the eastern end of the 
          inlet;
        • Anchoring inside Ezcurra Inlet should be limited to two ships, one immediately east 
          of Dufayel Island, and the other south of Dufayel Island opposite Italia Valley;
        • Caution should be exercised when anchoring near Arctowski Station due to strong 
          currents and winds from different directions.

5.2. Small boats

        • Landing on the shore in front of Arctowski Station (Arctowski Cove and Halfmoon 
          Cove), Ferraz Station (Visca Anchorage) and the other installations should be made 
          at the appropriate places shown in Figs 2 and 3;
        • In addition to the provisions applicable to SSSI No 8, and except in case of 
          emergencies and activities related to research, monitoring or replacement of survival 
          food and fuel storage, small boats should keep out of the areas of scientific and/or 
          ecological interest identified in Fig 1.

5.3. Aircraft)

        • Except in emergencies, or in the course of carrying out inspections under Article 7 
          of the Antarctic Treaty, helicopters ferrying scientists and visitors to and from 
          Arctowski, Ferraz and Machu Picchu stations and Ecuador field camp should notify 
          the relevant station/camp leader well in advance of the estimated time of arrival. 
          They should land only on helicopter pads/landing sites indicated at each of the 
          stations (Figs 2 and 4). There are no refuelling facilities at the stations;
4

- In addition to the provisions applicable to SSSI No 8, and except in case of emergency or research activities, no helicopter should land in or nearby, or fly at altitudes of less than 600 m over the areas of biological/ecological interest shown in Fig 1;
- There are no landing sites for fixed-wing aircraft in the Area.

5.4. Land vehicles
- Areas used by land vehicles for station and station-supported research operations should in general be restricted from Arctowski up to Point Thomas, and between Ferraz Station and the isolated modular laboratories around Ferraz and refuges on Keller Peninsula. Areas within which most vehicle operation are constrained and routes between Ferraz Station and the modular laboratories and refuges are shown in Figs 3 and 4;
- No land vehicles should enter SSSI No 8;
- Use of station vehicles to visit Plaza Point laboratory and refuges on Keller Peninsula should be conditional on previous arrangement with the station leader at Ferraz Station.

5.5. Pedestrians (including members of private and tourist expeditions)
- Areas of pedestrian activity associated with stations and station-supported research operations roughly coincide, and should in general be kept within the ones described in section 5.4.
- Members of non-governmental and tourist expeditions visiting Arctowski and Ferraz stations should use the routes shown in Figs 2 and 4. These routes give the opportunity to observe wildlife and the stations installations, while minimizing disturbance to stations activities and the environment degradation;
- No person should enter SSSI No 8, except to conduct scientific research in accordance with a permit issued under Art 3 of Annex 2 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and with the approved management plan for the area.

6. Location of permanent structures

The following are the main permanent structures in the Area (Figs 1-4).

6.1. Henryk Arctowski Station (Poland)

The station was established by Poland at Point Thomas in 1977 as a base for continuous scientific research and associated logistic operations of the Polish Antarctic Programme, and has been in year-round operation since. It has dormitories with 60 berths in summer and up to 20 in winter, biological, meteorological and geophysical laboratories, storage facilities, a small hospital unit, double walled fuel tanks with total capacity of 1,000 tonnes, hangars for boats and land vehicles, etc. The station operates a year-round lighthouse and is equipped with two helicopter pads.

6.2. Comandante Ferraz Station (Brazil)

The station was established in 1984 on the east coast of Keller Peninsula (Visca Anchorage) as the base for scientific research and associated logistic operations conducted by the Brazilian Antarctic Programme. It started year-round operations in 1986. The station consists of several containers including laboratories, dormitories with a capacity of 25 berths in summer and 13 in winter, storage facilities, garage for land vehicles, diesel generators, etc. Water is obtained from two glacier-fed lakes near the station. Fuel is stored in 17 large double-walled steel tanks with a total capacity of 316,000 litres of diesel and in a small tank (3,000 l) for gas. A contingency plan has been developed for oil spills and a septic tank system is used for sewage, the sludge being retrograded. General maintenance and up-grading of buildings and equipment are
routinely conducted every summer at Ferraz, but no extension of the installations beyond their present area is planned.

6.3.  Machu Picchu Station (Peru).

It was built in 1988 at Crépin Point, Mackellar Inlet. At present it is used for summer operations. The station comprises an area of 204,75 m
2
 and consists of three metallic modules including a dormitory, laboratory and workshop.

6.4.  Summer field camp at Point Hennequin (Ecuador)

Built in 1989 has occasionally been used since then during summer.

6.5.  Pietr J Lenie field camp (United States of America)

Colloquially called Copacabana, at Llano Point, has been in use during the summer since 1978.

7.    Location of minor and/or semi-permanent structures

There are a number of minor structures in the Area, such as (Figs 1-4):

a. the remains of Italian hut Campo Bove at Italian Valley, Ezcurra Inlet;

b. an old whaling boat;

c. an assembled whale skeleton on Keller Peninsula;

d. wooden barrels from whaling period at Barrel Point, Ezcurra Inlet;

e. a collection of whaling harpoons assembled on the shores of Admiralty Bay, exhibited at Arctowski Station;

f. a group of five crosses and graves. Two of these are British graves, with crosses erected in memory of members of British expeditions who perished at sea and on ice, and one was erected in honour of a deceased member of the Brazilian military;

g. a wooden cross on top of Mount Flagstaff on Keller Peninsula;

h. two Brazilian emergency refuges on Keller Peninsula;

i. removable caravans or containers functioning as summer field laboratories (eg at Demay Point).

8.    Protected areas within the ASMA

The following designated protected areas are present within the proposed ASMA.

8.1.  SSSI No 8

Western shore of Admiralty Bay (expiring on 31 December 2000) (Fig. 1) is the site of long-term studies on bird biology performed by the US Antarctic Program.

8.2.  Historic Site No 51, at Arctowski Station (Fig.1)

This is the grave with a cross of Eng W. Puchalski, an internationally acclaimed Polish nature photographer and director of Arctic and Antarctic nature films.

The SSSI and Historic Site mentioned above shall in the future be redesignated in accordance with Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

In the future it is recognized that the group of crosses, near Ferraz Station, may be considered for designation as Historic Site under Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

In addition to these, several zones have been identified as representing special scientific and/or ecological value (Fig. 1). Designation of other zones is not considered necessary at the present time. However, all activities, including scientific activities, in
these zones should be carried out with extreme care to avoid disturbance of wildlife and 
to minimize impact on vegetation, as specified in section 9

9. Areas in which activities should be regulated

In addition to the areas of SSSI No 8 and Historic Site No 51, and to the sites specified in 
section 5, the following zones were identified within the ASMA as being zones in which 
activities should be managed (Fig. 5)

9.1 Zones visited by tourists and other visitors:
  - Arctowski and Ferraz Stations: movement of tourists and other visitors should 
    follow the pre-established tour routes (Figs. 2-4). In the future, routes for tourists 
    may be established at Machu Picchu Station and Ecuador field camp;
  - Isolated laboratory modules, refuges and the area behind Ferraz Station: visits 
    should only by small accompanied groups.

9.2 Zones of scientific and/or ecological interest where access of tourists and other visitors 
should be managed (Fig. 5):
  a. Fresh water lakes around Arctowski Station: example of freshwater environment;
  b. Italian Valley: concentration of seals;
  c. Dufayel Island: concentration of seals;
  d. Crépin Point: concentration of seals;
  e. Area north-west of Ferraz Station: concentration of seals;
  f. Area west of Ferraz Station: concentration of seals
  g. Coastal area from Refuge No 1 (Ferraz Station) to Plaza Point: concentration of 
     seals and penguins;
  h. Northern flank of Base "G" hill on Keller Peninsula: concentration of terns;
  i. Coastal area up to 7 m in shore, north of Base "G" hill: presence of vegetation 
     banks;
  j. Freshwater lakes near Arctowski and Ferraz stations: example of freshwater 
     environment;
  k. Ullman Point (Ullman Spur): concentration of seals;
  l. Point Hennequin: concentration of seals; plant fossil localities;
  m. Cape Vaureal - Chabrier Rock: breeding area for penguins, southern giant petrels 
     and blue-eyed shags;
  n. Shallow marine waters down to 100 m in front of SSSI No 8, Martel Inlet and 
     Mackellar Inlet: diverse benthic communities.

Although not officially designated as protected areas under Annex V of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the zones listed above have 
considerable scientific/ecological interest as supporting breeding sites and/or 
concentrations of birds and/or mammals, as feeding sites for birds and marine mammals 
or as sites of typical vegetation cover.

In addition to SSSI No 8, already protected under the Antarctic Treaty Protected area 
system, some of the zones listed above such as Point Thomas, on the western shore, 
and Chabrier Rock and Vaureal Cape, on the eastern shore of Admiralty Bay (Fig.5) are 
of relevance for monitoring studies in connection with the objectives of CCAMLR.

Except for the shallow marine zone in front of SSSI No 8, identification of marine 
zones of scientific and/or ecological relevance in which activities should be specifically 
regulated is not deemed necessary at the present stage.

Activities in all zones should be carried out with particular care to avoid or minimize 
disturbance of the wildlife, trampling of vegetation and interference with on-going 
research. Except in connection with scientific activities, survival cache replacement, or
7

emergencies, and essential station operations, the relevant zones on land above should 
not be visited during the critical bird breeding season from 1 October to 1 March. 
Freshwater lakes around Arctowski and Ferraz stations should be used only for the 
purpose of water supply and associated station operations, and for relevant scientific 
research.

The marine benthic and pelagic organisms are of considerable scientific interest and are 
fundamental links in the marine food chain of the area. They are critically linked to 
maintenance of the ecological balance including that of birds and marine mammals.

Some general guidelines related to operation of ships and small boats in the marine area 
comprised within the ASMA are provided in section 5. In addition to these guidelines, 
the following provisions are considered relevant for achieving the aims and objectives 
of the Management Plan:
-   Capture of marine organisms for scientific purposes should be limited to that strictly 
    necessary to meet the purpose of the research;
-   Seismic operations, particularly with the use of explosives should be avoided and 
    geological sampling of bottom sediments, particularly in shallow waters, should be 
    carried out with extreme care so as to avoid adverse impact on the environment, or 
    interference with other scientific research under way on benthic ecology.

10. Installation, modification, or removal of structures and location of field camps

Installation of new stations/refuges and modifications, or removal of already existing 
installations or other facilities in the Area, and location of field camps should be done only after 
consultation with the Parties that have active research programmes in the Area, and in 
conformity with provisions of Article 8 and Annex 1 of the Environment Protocol.

11. Taking or harmful interference with native fauna and flora

Taking or harmful interference with native fauna and flora shall only occur in accordance with a 
permit issued under Art 3 of Annex 2 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

12. Collection and removal of anything not brought into the area by the visitor

In accordance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection souvenirs, specifically rocks, 
minerals, fossils, eggs, flora and fauna, or any other material not brought into the area by the 
visitor, shall not be collected in, or removed from, the Area.

13. Visits by tourists and non-governmental expeditions

13.1. Leaders of tourist and non-governmental expeditions wishing to visit Arctowski, Ferraz 
or Machu Picchu stations shall contact the Department of Antarctic Biology, Polish 
Academy of Sciences (02-141 Warsaw, Poland,Ustrzycka,10), the Comissão 
Interministerial para os Recursos do Mar (Ministério da Marinha, Esplanada dos 
Ministérios, 70055-900, Brasília, DF, Brazil), or the Dirección de Asuntos Antarticos, 
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores del Peru, (Lima, Peru) respectively, at least three 
months in advance of the planned visit to make the necessary arrangements. This does 
not preclude visits in emergency situations.

13.2. The State Party responsible for tour operators should ensure that tour operators, their 
staff, tourists and other visitors are fully informed of, and comply with, the provisions 
of this Management Plan.

13.3. Tourists and other persons visiting the two stations should be directed to the established 
tour routes (section 5: Access).
13.4. Station personal and all visitors, including tourists, should avoid walking on 
    vegetation.

13.5. In order to avoid environmental impact, disturbance of wildlife and interference with 
on-going research, landing at or entering the zones listed in section 9.2 should not take 
place, except in connection with scientific research, operations of the nearby stations, 
survival cache replacement or emergencies. Further guidelines for these zones are 
contained in section 9.

14. Disposal of waste

Disposal of waste generated by scientific research programmes, tourism and all other 
governmental or non-governmental activities in the ASMA shall be carried out in compliance 
with the provisions of Annex III on Waste Disposal and Waste Management to the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

15. Notifications and Reports

15.1. Parties proposing to conduct, support, or authorize research or other activities in the 
Admiralty Bay ASMA are requested to consult with the Parties currently conducting 
scientific research in the Area as far in advance as possible of their planned activities. 
This will enable greater integration to be achieved between research programmes. 
Where applicable, provisions related to environmental impact assesment as established 
in the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty should be followed.

15.2. Parties issuing permits to authorize:
      a. entry into a designated protected area within the ASMA for carrying out research;
      b. taking of bird or seal, and/or collecting plants;
are requested to provide the Parties that have active research programmes in the Area 
with copies of all permits issued in this regard in advance of the activities being 
undertaken.

15.3. The on-site coordinator shall maintain a record, and provide summary descriptions of 
such activities in the Area, in the Annual Exchange of Information under the Antarctic 
Treaty for the preceding year.

15.4. The on-site coordinator shall maintain a record of such notifications and provide 
information when requested.

15.5. At the end of each summer field season, Parties shall notify other Parties of:
      a. any activities carried out by its nationals or those of another Contracting Party in the 
ASMA contrary to the provisions of this Management Plan or other relevant 
regulations under the Antarctic Treaty; and
      b. steps taken to enforce the provisions of this Management Plan.

16. Review procedures

This Management Plan will be reviewed every five years, and up-dated as required. Proposed 
revisions will be provided to the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and other 
relevant components of the Antarctic Treaty System for comment, and shall be submitted to the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for adoption in accordance with established procedures.
ANNEX I

9

1. Physiography and Geology

Admiralty Bay has basic physiographic and scenic values as one of the most typical examples 
of bay/fjord settings in the South Shetland Islands. The glacial drainage basin is formed mainly 
by the main ice cap of King George Island which flows from north, east and west toward the 
trough of Admiralty Bay. At the head of the bay, the ice cap spills into three inlets: Ezcurra, 
Mackellar and Martel inlets. Heavily crevassed outlet glaciers descend toward the sea 
becoming tidewater glaciers. Along the west coast, in the area of SSSI No 8, some glaciers 
descending from Warszawa Peninsula (ice cap) terminate on land; others form tidewater ice 
cliffs. The east coast of the bay, from Cape Syrezol to Point Hennequin, is bordered mainly by 
ice-cliffs of tidewater glaciers descending from Krakow Ice Field, and by rocky spurs and 
narrow beaches (Fig 1).

The ice-free areas within Admiralty Bay are formed by recent and raised pebble-cobble 
beaches, recent and sub-recent moraines, mountainous peninsulas, rocky islets, spurs and 
nunataks. The terrain is heavily shaped by glacial, nival and coastal marine processes. These, 
together with the geological features of the area, add to the great scenic beauty of the landscape.

The geological history of the Admiralty Bay area spans about 80 million years, from Late 
Cretaceous to the present. The bay offers many excellent sections of predominantly volcanic 
rocks, mainly stratified basaltic and andesitic lavas and tuffs. They are pierced by feeder veins 
(plugs and dykes of similar petrography), and by diorite and gabbro plutons which form sharp 
peaks and attractive nunataks. At numerous sites the tuffs have yielded well-preserved 
Nothofagus (Southern beech) and other plant imprints which have helped reconstruct 
palaeoclimatic conditions during Late Cretaceous and Early Tertiary times, and the character of 
forests which once covered the island. At the entrance to Admiralty Bay (Vauréal Peak), 
remains of Tertiary glacial deposits have been found.

2. Biology

The area of Admiralty Bay is representative of the terrestrial, limnic, coastal, near-shore, 
pelagic, and fjord-bottom ecosystems of King George Island.

The marine ecosystem of the bay is influenced by its topographic, bathymetric and 
hydrographic conditions, in conjunction with the seasonal variability in the sea-ice cover. Its 
benthic and most of its pelagic ecosystems largely reflect the general environmental conditions 
prevailing in the South Shetland Islands.

The shallow water ecosystem of the bay is more characteristic, being largely influenced by its 
benthic community, the abundance and growth rate of which is mainly determined by the 
variation in the availability of different kinds of organic matter.

Macroalgae predominantly Phaeophyta and Rhodophyta characterize the shallow water bottom 
community down to a maximum depth of 50–60 m. They increase the available substratum and 
are an important source of elements essential to animal metabolism. Pebbly bottoms of the tidal 
and adjacent areas and pebbly mud and sand in deeper waters provide a succession of shelters 
for the fauna. With the exception of Nacella concinna, sessile epifauna is practically absent in 
the intertidal zone. The vagrant benthos is abundant with a high variety and density of 
Amphipoda. Below 4–5 m, substrata are typically sandy and dominated by Isopoda, 
particularly the genus Sterolis. Laternula elliptica, tunicates, polychaeta and small bivalves 
(Misella sp and Yoldia eightsi) are rare.

As a rule, bottoms down to 15–18 m show evidence of gouging by icebergs. The resulting 
relief offers adequate habitats for vagrant species such as Sterechinus, Neobuccinum and 
Parborlasia. In deeper waters, sessile forms include sponges and tunicates, besides high-
density concentrations of echinoderms such as Amphiplus acutus and Odontaster sp. 
Scavenger invertebrates include Labidiaster annulatus, Gliptonoplus antarcticus, Parborlasia 
corrugatus and Neobuccinum eatoni which play an important role in the local ecosystem.
10

When katabatic winds are blowing, water turbulence increases with the lateral advection of 
surface waters and the removal of the planktonic biomass into Bransfield Strait.

A typical regenerative community, formed by nano- and micro-sized flagellates and ciliated 
protozoans, then appears in the water of the bay. The abundance of macrozooplankton is also 
poor. The populations are represented by larval stages of copepods and krill.

The increase of water residence and stability during calm periods allow the development of the 
microzooplankton in the upper euphotic layers. However, the phytoplankton may not 
accumulate during these periods if production is not sufficient to support the grazing pressure 
of tintinnids and heterotrophic dinoflagellates. On the other hand, the sub-surface autotrophic 
biomass may be high in late summer due to the accumulation of benthic diatoms, previously re-
suspended by turbulence.

Krill and various amphipod genera live near the bottom, on algae and in shallow waters, being 
important components of the local food chain.

Fish are represented by nine Nototheniidae, mainly Notothenia neglecta, N gibberifrons, N 
coriiceps, Nototheniops nudifrons, Trematodus newnesi, T borchgrewinki and Pleuragramma 
antarcticum, two Channichthydae species, Hapagiferidae and Zoarcidae. Specimens varying in 
size from fingerlings up to adults with a length of 40 cm are found in Admiralty Bay, where 
they feed on algae, plankton, benthos or other fish, using varied strategies and being part of a 
complex food web.

Wherever edaphic conditions are favorable, mosses form strands which also contain lichens 
and fungi. Near the Brazilian station, two of these areas occur, each one almost 300 m long.

Within the Area, 13 species of birds breed (Fig 5; Table 1). Three sympatrically breeding 
pygoscelid penguins make up 91% of the number and up to 95% of the biomass of the 
breeding community. The average numbers of each species in the period between 1979-90 
were: Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) 20,905 pairs; chinstrap penguin (P antarctica) 4,629 
pairs; gentoo penguin (P papua) 1,699 pairs (on Cape Vauréal and in SSSI No 8); 279 nesting 
pairs of the giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus); 99-110 pairs of blue-eyed shag 
(Phalacrocorax atriceps); 58-80 pairs of skua (Catharacta spp); more than 2,000 pairs of 
Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus); and several breeding pairs of black-bellied storm 
petrel (Fregetta tropica), were counted in Admiralty Bay. Numerous breeding sites of Cape 
pigeon (Daption capense), Kelp gull (Larus dominicanus), Antarctic tern (Sterna vittata) and 
American sheathbill (Chionis alba) were also noted.

The areas of SSSI No 8, Cape Vauréal, Chabrier Island and their surroundings, are the most 
important bird breeding places at Admiralty bay. Around Cape Vauréal may be found nests of 
all species of birds mentioned, including all the blue-eyed shags and 50% of the giant petrels.

Occasionally Neotropical and/or Nearctic birds, such as the cattle egret (Bubulcus ibis), 
Magellanic penguin (Spheniscus magellanicus), white-rumped sandpiper (Calidris fuscicollis), 
South Georgia pintail (Anas georgica) and others can be observed in the Area.

Ornithogenic soils are being formed at and around rookeries of penguins, eg at SSSI No 8.

Six species of pinnipeds are occur in the Area. The most frequent mammal during the winter is 
usually the crabeater seal (Lobodon carcinophagus) with up to 1,843 individuals being located 
on the pack ice. During summer, within SSSI No 8, up to 678 elephant seals (Mirounga 
leonina) have been observed, (with approximately 50 on Cape Vauréal. Also during the 
summer, up to 30 Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) are present. The peak numbers of 
the leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx) occur in October, with around 60 individuals. The 
number of fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) has increased. The Ross seal
11

Thomas and Keller Peninsula. Larus, Chionis, Sterna and Catharacta feed inside the bay, while Oceanites, Fregatta and Daption forage both inside and outside it. Foraging area for Macronectes is probably mostly outside Admiralty Bay. Seals feed inside, but must complete their diet by also feeding outside the immediate vicinity of the bay.

3. History

Sheltered deep harbours and accessible beaches ensured an early start to activities in Admiralty Bay. The bay offered protection for ships in the area during the sealing and whaling periods in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and ruins of installations related to the latter period still exist.

The Area was visited by the second French Antarctic Expedition in Pourquoi Pas?, under Dr J B Charcot (1908-10), and by D Ferguson (1913-14), a geologist who took part in a British whaling expedition. The reports on mineral and rocks collected during these expeditions, published between 1910 and 1921, are among the first Earth-science reports from Admiralty Bay and the South Shetland Islands as a whole. The famous Discovery voyages of 1934 and 1937 brought more rock, as well as plant and animal collections from the Area, and British scientific work from 1948 to 1964 was a substantial contribution to knowledge of the geology of Admiralty Bay.

During the third International Geophysical Year (1957-58), the UK Base "G" (opened in 1941 and closed in 1961) on Keller Peninsula, Admiralty Bay, was the centre of meteorological observations and geological research.

Argentina established a refuge hut at Keller Peninsula in 1948, since dismantled. Work of Argentine geologists in Admiralty Bay (Bahia Lasarre) in 1953 concentrated on the fossil plant collections of Tertiary age.

Establishment of the Polish Arctowski Station in 1977 at Point Thomas, and of the Brazilian Ferraz Station at Keller Peninsula in 1984, has provided a sound basis for permanent research in biological and Earth sciences, which continues at both stations. Ornithological research by US biologists began in 1976.

4. Continuing and planned scientific research

In addition to biological and geological aspects described above, other features of the Admiralty Bay area are of considerable interest to science. The glacio-marine setting of the bay has attracted oceanographers, geophysicists and sedimentologists using multichannel seismic reflection and piston coring of bottom sediments (USA, Poland, Brazil, The Netherlands).

Diverse and continuous scientific activities have been under way in the Area for over 15 years, supported by the Polish Henryk Arctowski Station and the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz Station, and by the US Antarctic Program at SSSI No 8. Research activities at the Peruvian Machu Picchu Station (at Point Crépin) and at the Ecuadorian refuge (at Point Hennequin) have occurred intermittently in the area during the summer. A Dutch expedition based at Arctowski in 1990-91 worked on the biology and geology of Admiralty Bay.

Both the Arctowski and Ferraz stations have hosted many foreign scientists (Argentinian, Belgian, Chilean, Soviet and Russian, New Zealand, American, Uruguayan and others). There is a strong tradition of co-operation between Polish and Brazilian scientists in matters relating to Admiralty Bay and the South Shetland Islands as a whole.

Marine and terrestrial biology, including physiology and adaptation of Antarctic fish, migration and dispersion of birds, taxonomy of the benthic fauna, vascular plants, mosses and lichens, biology and physiology of krill and fish, terrestrial and marine ecology are the main themes of field and laboratory research at the Polish and Brazilian stations. A long-term research project (since 1976) by the US Antarctic Program continues on the biology and dynamics of bird populations (mainly Pygoscelid penguins). Geological and palaeontological (palaeobotanical) research is active, as are astrophysics and meteorological-climatological studies related to the ecology of the area.
12

Glaciological and palaeoclimatological investigations in ice-cap glaciers of King George Island, with simultaneous study of glacio-marine sedimentation in Admiralty Bay, are planned at Ferraz Station. These will be supported by seismic and Earth-magnetism studies. A permanent year-round Seismic and Earth-magnetism observatory was established at Arctowski Station as early as 1978, the only station of its kind in the South Shetlands Islands.

Studies on atmospheric composition, geomagnetism, the ionosphere and astrophysics have been conducted year-round at Ferraz Station since 1984. A meteorological station has been operational at Ferraz Station since 1984 to provide basic data and to support logistic operations.

Environmental monitoring activities are under way in Ferraz Station on the levels of biogenic hydrocarbons and PCBs in Admiralty Bay since 1987. Research on bird population performed by the US Antarctic Program since 1976 is of relevance for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP).

Research on upper atmosphere winds is developed at Machu Picchu Station using radar MST.

• 5. Logistic operations

For their scientific research and logistics, Poland charters various vessels to carry out yearly exchange of personnel and to re-supply Arctowski Station. These ships may also be used by expeditions of other countries working at that station.

Brazil and Peru use their own supply ship for logistic support of Ferraz and Machu Picchu stations and to exchange their personnel. These duties are performed in a complementary fashion by the Brazilian and Peruvian Air Forces which fly between Rio de Janeiro and Lima respectively to the nearby Chilean airstrip of Teniente Marsh at Maxwell Bay, King George Island.

The United States and Ecuador utilize their research vessels to provide logistic support for their summer camps.

• 6. Tourism

Admiralty Bay is one of the most visited tourist attractions on King George Island, and the South Shetland Islands as a whole. The number of visitors, mainly in yachts and as organized tourist ship expeditions, shows a continuous increase. An average of 1,730 tourists per year is reported to have visited Arctowski Station each summer during the last 3 years. The number of visitors to Ferraz Station is similar, with 1,260 tourists in 1991-92 and around 1,500 in 1992-93.
7. Selected references

Arnaud, P M, Jazdzewski, K, Presler, P & Sicinski, J, 1990. Preliminary survey of benthic 
invertebrates collected by Polish Antarctic Expeditions in Admiralty Bay (King George 
Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica). Polish Polar Research. 7: 7–24.

Bacila, M, Rodrigues, E, Rosa, R & Lucchiari, P H, 1990. Developmental biology of 
Antarctic birds in regard to the organic phosphate compounds of erythrocytes. Korean 
Journ Polar Res, 2: 37–42.

Barton, C M, 1988. The geology of South Shetland Islands: III. The stratigraphy of King 
George Island. British Antarctic Survey Sci Reports, 44: 33 pp.

Birkenmajer, K. (ed), 1980–1988. Geological results of the Polish Antarctic Expeditions, Pts. 
I–VIII. Studia Geologica Polonica, 64 (1980), 72 (1981), 74 (1982), 79 (1984), 81 
(1985), 90 (1987), 93 (1987), 95 (1988).

Birkenmajer, K, 1980. Geology of Admiralty Bay, King George Island (South Shetland 
Islands). An outline. Polish Polar Research, 1: 29–54.

Donachie, S P,1993. Scientific and tourist activites. In Rakusa-Suszczewski, S. (ed), The 
maritime Antarctic coastal ecosystem of Admiralty Bay, 213–14.

Fanta, E, Lucchiari, P H & Bacila, M, 1989. The effect of temperature increase on the 
behavior of Antarctic fish. In Proceedings NIPR Symposium on Polar Biology, Tokyo 
2: 123–30.

Fanta, E, Lucchiari, P H & Bacila, M, 1990. Circadian rhythm of oxygen consumption and 
oxygen levels in the muscle of Notothenia neglecta (Pisces, Teleostei). Comparative 
Biochemistry and Physiology, 96C: 151–55.

Furmanozyk, K & Ochyra, H, 1982. Plant communities of the Admiralty Bay region (King 
George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica). 1. Jasnorzewski Gardens. Polish 
Polar Research, 3: 25–40.

Harris, C, 1991. Environmental effects of human activities on King George Island, South 
Shetland Islands, Antarctica. Polar Record, 27: 193–204

Harris, C,1991. Environmental management on King George Island, South Shetland Islands, 
Antarctica. Polar Record, 27: 313–24

Jabionski, B, 1984. Distribution, numbers and breeding preferences of penguins in the region 
of the Admiralty Bay (King George Island, South Shetland Islands) in the season 
1979/1980. Polish Polar Research, 2: 143–52

Krzeminski, W, 1981. Southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina L.) of Admiralty Bay (King 
George Island, South Shetland Islands), its numbers and activity during the moulting 
period in Summer 1978/1979. Polish Polar Research, 2: 143–52.

Lara, W H, Barreto, H H C, Inomota, O N K, Weber, R R & Montone, R C, In press. 
Organochlorine residues in Antarctic penguins. Pesquisa Antártica Brasileira, 
Academia Brasileira de Ciências.

Lipinski, M & Woyciechowski, M, 1981. Cephalopods in the food of Weddell seals from the 
Admiralty Bay (King George Island, South Shetland Islands). Polish Polar Research, 
2: 163–67.

Myrcha, A & Telega, K, 1980. Observation of pinnipedian mammals in the vicinity of 
Arctowski Station (King George Island) in 1978. Polish Polar Research, 1: 117–26

Montone, R C, Weber, R R, Lara, W H, Barreto, H H C & Inomota, O N K, 1991. 
Organochlorine residues in Antarctic marine sediments. In II Simpósio sobre 
Oceanografia, Cad. Resumos, São Paulo, Instituto Oceanográfico, Universidade de 
São Paulo, p 13.

Pecherzewski, K, 1980. Distribution and quantity of suspended matter in Admiralty Bay 
(King George Island, South Shetland Islands).
14

Phan, V N, Gomes, V, Suzuki, H & Passos, M J A C R , 1989. Preliminary study on 
chromosome of Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba Dana). Polar Biology Research: 75-
82

Pruszak, Z, 1980. Currents circulation in the waters of Admiralty Bay (region of Arctowski 
Station on King George Island). Polish Polar Research, 1: 55–74.

Rakusa-Suszczewski, S, 1980. Environmental conditions and the functioning of Admiralty 
Bay (South Shetland Islands) as part of the nearshore Antarctic ecosystem. Polish 
Polar Research, 1: 11–27.

Rakusa-Suszczewski, S, 1995. Flow of matter in the Admiralty Bay area, King George 
Island, maritime Antarctica. In Proceedings NIPR Symposium on Polar Biology, 8: 
101-13.

Rakusa-Suszczewski, S & Krzyszowska, A, 1991. Assessment of the environmental impact 
of the "H. Arctowski" Polish Antarctic Station (Admiralty Bay, King George Island, 
South Shetland Islands). Polish Polar Research, 12: 105-21.

Sierakowski, K, 1991. Birds and mammals in SSSI No 8 in the season 1988/1989. (South 
Shetland Islands, King George Island, Admiralty Bay). Polish Polar Research, 12: 
25-54

Stepnik, R, 1982. All-year population studies of Euphausiacea (Crustacea) in the Admiralty 
Bay (King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica). Polish Polar Research, 
3: 49-68.

Szafranski, Z & Lipski, M, 1982. Characteristics of water temperature and salinity at 
Admiralty Bay (King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica) during 
Austral summer 1978/1979. Polish Polar Research, 31: 7-24.

Trivelpiece, W Z, Trivelpiece, S G, Geupel, G R, Klejmer, J & Volkman, J, 1990. Adélie and 
chinstrap penguins: their potencial as monitors of the Southern ocean marine ecosystem. 
In Kerry, K R & Hempel, G (ed), Ecological change and Conservation, Springer, 
191-202.

Trivelpiece, W Z, Trivelpiece, S G & Volkman, N J, 1987. Ecological segregation of Adélie, 
Gentoo and Chinstrap penguins at King George Island, Antarctica. Ecology, 68: 351-
61.

Zielinski, K, 1981. Benthic macroalgae of Admiralty Bay (King George Island, South 
Shetland Islands) and circulation of algal matter between the water and the shore. 
Polish Polar Research, 2: 71-94.

Figures

Figure 1   Map showing boundaries and main features of the proposed ASMA.

Figure 2   Map of Arctowski Station and surrounding features.

Figure 3   Map of Ferraz Station and surrounding features.

Figure 4   Map of Keller Peninsula showing acess to refuges nearby Ferraz Station.

Figure 5   Location of breeding areas of birds and other areas of scientific and/or ecological 
interest.

Table

Table 1   List of bird species and of bird breeding places in the area
KING GEORGE ISLAND

62 00'S                           62 00'S
                     
                     58 30'W                  0     10 Km

EXPLANATION

--- Area of the proposed ASMA
___ Boundary of SSSI No 8
::: Zones of scientific /
    ecological interest
!   Historic Site No 51
~~~~~~ 100m Elevation contours (ice)
....... Inland ice limit
-.- Ice cliff
..  Buildings
oo  Abandoned buildings

Installations

1   Site of the former Base "G" (UK)
2   Comandante Ferraz (Brail)
3   Laboratory
4   Italian Hut Campo Bove
5   Henryk Arctowski (Poland)
6   Machu Picchu (Peru)
7   Pietr J Lenie (USA)
8   Refuge (Ecuador)
9   Refuge (Brazil)
10  Refuge (Poland)
62°30'
 
Bransfield Strait
 
0    1    2    3    4    5 Km
 
Warszawa Icefield
 
The Tower
 
Hanka Point
 
Demay Point
 
Cape Vaquelin
 
Cape Chlamydophor
 
Point Hennequin
 
Fig.2
 
Admiralty Bay
 
Kraków Icefield
 
King George Bay
 
Hornsund
 
Escarpment Inlet
 
Martel Inlet
 
Mackellar Inlet
 
Tully Valley
 
Point Thomas
 
Arctowski Station
 
62°09'30"W
62°09'30"W
 
62°10'
 
62°10'
 
62°11'
 
62°11'
 
62°12'
 
62°12'
 
King
 
George Island
 
58°30'
 
58°30'
 
6203 
 
100
 
200
 
500
 
1000
FIG. 2

 
                                 0      50     100    150


                      Admiralty Bay


62°09'35"                                  62°09'


58°28'20"                                  58°28'00"


 
EXPLANATION                  ARKTOWSKI STATION (Poland)
---- Track                   — Water pipeline
→→ Electric line            ~ Stream
++++ Dyke                    H  Helipad
FIG.3

COMANDANTE FERRAZ STATION (Brazil)

EXPLANATION                                      
Route to Plaza Point and                  
---                                        
Refuges                                    
+                                          
Anchoring area                             
                                          
Contour lines (metres)                     
—50                                        
Bathymetric contour lines (metres)         
..........                                 
Bathymetric contour lines (no metres)     
----------                                
FIG. 4

COMANDANTE FERRAZ STATION
(BRAZIL)

EXPLANATION

 Limit for vehicles and
pedestrians
-------- Water pipeline (surface)
- - Sewage (underground)
-.-.-. Fuel (underground)
- - - Tour route

1   Disembarkation point
2   Old whaling boat
3   Fuel tanks
4   Assembled whale skeleton
5   Site of former Base "G" (UK)
6   "Spanish tower"
7   Geomagnetism - VHF unit
8   North lake and water pump
9   Crosses and graves
10  South lake and water pump
11  Ruins of old British radiosonde
12  Meteorological unit
13  Old buildings
14  Sun dial
15  Chemistry lab
16  Main station complex
17  Refuge 1
18  Helicopter pad
Fig.5

Breeding areas of birds
Other areas of scientific 
and/or ecological interest

■     Station / camp / refuge
-----     Limit of SSSI No 8
— —     Southern limit of 
proposed ASMMA

Numbers refer to the zones 
listed in item 9.2 of the 
Management Plan

                      MACKELLAR 
                      INLET

            5                  6
                             Machu     
                             Picchu Sta.  

                      10       7        
                             Ferraz Sta.  
                             Plaza Pt.      8

                             MARTEL INLET           9
                                                              11

Creplin Pt.         4

Hennequln Pt.
12
Ecuador 
Refuge

Pond Hill               Dufayel Is.              3
                                                E ZCURRA 
                                                INLET

Point 
Thomas                  2                Italian 
                                                Valley

Arctowski Sta.  
                             Sphynx 
                             Hill

                             Llano Pt. 
                             Pietr J Lenie 
                             Refuge

                             Refuge 
                             Poland

                             Uchatka Pt.  
                             Demay Pt.

                             Blue Dyke

                             Telefon Pt. (Patelnia)

                             1000

                      0        1       2        3        4km

                                                Cape Vaureal
                                                13
                                                Chabrier Rock
                                                Cape Syrezol

ADMIRALTY BAY
Table 1. Breeding species and areas


                                 Breeding areas
 Breeding species                 


                                 
 Point Thomas   Llano Point   Sphinx Hill   Demay Point   Uchatka Point   Blue Dyke   Patelnia Point   Chabrier Rock   Cape Vaureal
Pygoscelis adeliae               X             X                                                                         
Pygoscelis antarctica            X             X             X                                   X             X             X       
Pygoscelis papua                 X             X                                                                         
Macronectes giganteus            X             X                                                                 X       
Daption capense                                          
                                  |             |             X                                   X             |             X       
Oceanites oceanicus              X             X             X             X             X             X             X             X       
Fregatta tropica                 X                                   X                                                                 
Phalacrocorax atriceps                                                                                                          X       
Chionis alba                     X             X             X                                                                 X       
Catharacta maccormicki           X             X             X             X                                   |             |       
Catharacta antarctica            X             X             X             X             X             X             X             X       
Larus dominicanus                X             X             X             X             X             X             X             X       
Sterna vittata                   X             X             X             X             X             X                                   X       

Other species recorded

Bubulcus ibis                    Spheniscus magellanicus          Eudyptes chrisolophus
Calidris fuscicollis             Anas georgica                    Fulmarus gacialoides
Anas sibilatrix                  Anas georgica                    Diomedea melanophris
                                                         Phoebetria palpebrata
                                                         Pogodroma nivea      
