ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING          XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[?]TIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE         XX консультативное совещание



XX ATCM/WP 10
(Rev. 1)
April, 1996
Original: English



THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS OF A GLOBAL OR REGIONAL SCOPE

(Agenda item 6c)

(Submitted by the United Kingdom)
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS OF A GLOBAL OR REGIONAL SCOPE

Summary

1.  In general there does not appear to be any significant conflict between the Environmental Protocol, and other treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system, and treaties of a more general scope. Where there may be some conflict, or where a possible lacuna has been identified (e.g. paragraphs 17, 50 and 58 below), it is suggested that these be studied further.

(References to paragraphs are, unless otherwise stated, to paragraphs of the 1995 Chilean paper.)

Introduction

2.  The paper submitted by Chile in 1995 (XIX ATCM/WP20) dealt with the important question of the relationship between the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the "Environmental Protocol"), and other treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system, and other international agreements of global or regional scope. It also considered the compatibility of the Environmental Protocol with the concept of the "common concern of humanity". The United Kingdom wishes to express its gratitude to Chile for its comprehensive study.  It has prompted the United Kingdom to focus on this topic.  The present paper assesses the main findings, concentrating in particular on any conflicts which may have been identified, and any gaps which may have been revealed.  For ease of reference, the issues are dealt with in the same order as in the 1995 Chilean paper.

General Points

3.  Applicability to Antarctica.  The threshold question is whether a particular treaty (or concept) applies to Antarctica.  Although a treaty may assumed to be global, it does not follow that it is or, even if it is of general
application, that it necessarily applies to Antarctica.  There are doubts as to the applicability to Antarctica of the following treaties: the Agreement relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks; the Convention for the Protection of Birds; and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals. Whether they apply to Antarctica depends partly on the intention of the States adopting the treaty and the nature and content of the treaty. The concept of the "common concern of humanity" would seem to have no application to Antarctica.

4. A related question is how certain obligations imposed by global treaties are to be complied with in the Antarctic context where, as framed, they do not easily fit the special circumstances of Antarctica.

5. Conflicts. There do not appear to be any conflicts between global treaties which apply to Antarctica and the treaties adopted under the Antarctic Treaty system. An examination of these treaties reveals the following:

(a) in some cases, there is no apparent possibility of a conflict (as in the case of, for example, the treaties on the ozone layer or global climate).

(b) where there is a possibility of conflict or incompatibility it is resolved in one of three ways:

    i) certain obligations in the Environmental Protocol incorporate by reference standards as they develop under the other treaty (eg MARPOL 1973/78);

   ii) a specific provision gives priority to the rights and obligations arising under one treaty over those arising under the other;  or

  iii) the treaties are silent, in which case the matter falls to be resolved by operation of the principles of lex specialis and/or lex posterior.
6. Lacunae. There may be certain lacunae in the protection 
of the Antarctic environment.  These fall into two main 
categories:

(a) situations in which the Environmental Protocol prevails, 
but lays down less stringent standards or obligations 
than the relevant global treaties.  Such gaps are, 
however, deliberate and reflect the especially difficult 
physical conditions in Antarctica.  But, as a practical 
matter, the inconsistencies may not in fact be a 
problem.  For example, States which become parties to 
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 (UNLOSC) 
may be obliged to adopt the (evolving) standards set out 
in the London Dumping Convention and the MARPOL 
Convention 1973/78, even if they are not parties to 
them;

(b) liability for damage to the Antarctic environment. 
There may be certain deficiencies in the existing 
regime which may need to be considered in connection 
with the rules on liability being elaborated under the 
Environmental Protocol.

Discussion

I. Compatibility of the Environmental Protocol with the 
concept of the "Common Concern of Humanity"

7. This new concept (paragraph 5(a)) has been used in a UN 
General Assembly resolution and in recent global environmental 
treaties regulating areas or matters of "common concern", such 
as the ozone layer, the global climate and global biological 
diversity.  Its primary significance is to indicate the common 
legal interest of all States in protecting these aspects of 
the environment, and in enforcing rules concerning their 
protection.  But the legal status of the concept is unclear. 
Nor is it apparent how the concept is relevant in the context 
of Antarctica.  The Environmental Protocol does not refer to 
it.  It is notably absent from the environmental principles
set out in Article 3. Although the preamble records that "the development of a comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems is "in the interest of mankind as a whole", this is distinct from the more specialised notion of "common concern" of mankind, humankind or humanity. There is no common legal interest in the protection of the environment of Antarctica. On the contrary, the Antarctic Treaty Parties believe that this matter is one which should be regulated by them. The Environmental Protocol does not, in its Article 6, give effect to the "common concern" concept. The provision imposes obligations to co-operate only on Parties to the Protocol, which are restricted to Antarctic Treaty States.

II. Relationship between the Environmental Protocol, and other treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system, and other global environmental treaties

A. The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 and related agreements

8. UNCLOS is relevant to the protection of the marine environment of Antarctica. It is, however, important to distinguish those provisions of UNCLOS which formulate and elaborate upon a rather general obligation to protect the marine environment, from those which deal with specific sources of pollution by establishing more concrete principles. One also needs to address the question of the relationship of UNCLOS with the treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system.

9. The proposition articulated in Article 192 of UNCLOS that "States have the obligation to protect and preserve the marine environment" is a very general one. It is widely viewed as representing customary law (see, eg, Boyle, "Marine Pollution under the Law of the Sea Convention", 79 AJIL (1985) p.347). UNCLOS accords this duty priority over the sovereign right of States to exploit their natural resources (Articles 192 and 193). The content of the obligation is elaborated upon in Article 194 and subsequent provisions. It is Article 194 which formulates the obligation of environmental protection in
terms which are comprehensive of all sources of environmental 
pollution - from ships, land-based sources, sea-bed 
operations, dumping and atmospheric pollution.  As the 1995 
Chilean paper says, UNCLOS 1982 may be said to provide a 
"framework for international environmental law regarding the 
oceans" in that it provides a basis for a series of treaties 
both global and regional on each of these topics.

10. Article 194 is also significant because it incorporates 
due diligence as the standard of conduct.  It refers, in 
paragraph (1), to the need for States to take "all measures 
necessary" to prevent, reduce and control pollution of the 
marine environment from any source;  but it moderates this 
requirement by allowing use of the "best practicable means at 
their disposal and in accordance with their capabilities". 
This wording implies a degree of flexibility and discretion, 
particularly for developing countries, whose interests 
received particular attention in the drafting of this part of 
the Convention.  The significance of this point can be seen 
more clearly in the provisions dealing with pollution from 
land-based and atmospheric sources of pollution (Articles 207 
and 212).  These provide that account is to be taken of 
economic capacity, development needs and "characteristic 
regional features".  In other words, the Convention's 
treatment of both these issues largely defers to the 
priorities set by individual States or groups of States.

11. These generalities are absent, however, in the provisions 
dealing with pollution from ships, dumping and sea-bed 
operations (Articles 208, 210 and 211).  In each of these 
cases States must give effect to or apply rules and standards 
no less onerous than generally recognised international rules 
and standards.  Although the wording varies in each of the 
three articles, and not all writers are agreed on their 
effect, these provisions would seem to have the effect of 
incorporating, inter alia, the London Dumping Convention of 
1972 and the MARPOL Convention 1973/78 (see, Birnie and Boyle, 
International Environmental Law and the Environment (1992),pp 
94 and 256).  The Consultative Meeting of IMO has expressed 
the view that the reference in Article 210 of UNCLOS to 
"global rules and standards" refer to the rules and standards 
of the London Dumping Convention (5 Yearbook of International
Environmental Law (1995) pp 192-3).  If this view is correct,
then States Parties to UNCLOS are obliged to adopt the basic
standards set out in such treaties even if they are not
parties to them.  (See, further, below, paragraphs 29-34
below.)

12.  As regards the relationship between UNCLOS and the
treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system, Article 311 of the
former provides that UNCLOS shall not alter the rights and
obligations of States under other treaties compatible with
it.

Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the
UNCLOS 1982 adopted on 28 July 1994.

13.  Part XI of UNCLOS, and the Agreement relating to its
Implementation of 1994, govern the exploitation of mineral
resources of the deep seabed.  The Convention on the
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities 1988 (the
"Minerals Convention"), on the other hand, would have applied
to mineral resource activities taking place on the continent
of Antarctica and islands south of 60 degrees South latitude,
and in the adjacent continental shelf "up to the deep seabed"
(Article 5, emphasis added).  It would also have applied in
two other situations:  (i) where the continental shelf of
Antarctic land extends north of 60 degrees South latitude and
(ii) where land situated north of that parallel has an
appurtenant continental shelf extending south of 60 degrees
South (see Watts, International Law and the Antarctic Treaty
System (1992) pp 154-55).  The Environmental Protocol
prohibits "any activity relating to mineral resources, other
than scientific research" (Article 7).  By its terms, the
prohibition would appear to apply to the area south of 60
degrees South latitude.  The 1995 Chilean paper suggests that
this could be interpreted to include the deep seabed.  But,
the better view would seem to be (as the Chilean paper
concludes) that the prohibition relates to mineral activities
in the same geographic area as covered by the earlier Minerals
Convention, and thus applies only "up to the deep seabed".
There should therefore be no conflict here between this
Agreement and the Antarctic Treaty system.
14. The 1995 Chilean paper suggests however (paragraph 9 (b)) 
that the Antarctic Treaty regime should have a role to play in 
the development of mineral resources south of 60 degrees South 
latitude, but beyond the Antarctic "continental shelf" area 
i.e. on the deep seabed.  It suggests consultations, 
including a system of prior notification, with respect to 
resource deposits.  The juridical basis for this is unclear. 
The suggestion may be to revive an argument made at the time 
of the drafting of the Minerals Convention, but which proved 
controversial. Some States then took the view that mineral 
resource activities in the deep seabed under the Antarctic 
high seas came within the competence of the International 
Seabed Authority. Others argued that such activities were 
governed exclusively by the Antarctic Treaty regime.  There 
was no unanimity of view on this question and the difference 
was unbridgeable; the matter was accordingly left 
intentionally ambiguous in the Minerals Convention (Watts, op 
cit pp 161-62).

Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of UNCLOS 
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling 
Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, 1995.

15. The term "straddling stocks" has come to refer to the 
stocks defined in Article 63 of UNCLOS.  These are stocks 
that either occur within the exclusive economic zones ("EEZs") 
of two or more coastal States, or "straddle" the line that 
separates an EEZ from the high seas beyond.  Part of the 
Antarctic Treaty area is undoubtedly high seas.  "Highly 
migratory" species are defined as species which travel between 
adjacent areas of the EEZ and high seas (UNCLOS, Article 64).

16. The problem of conserving fish stocks in the Antarctic 
region is addressed specifically in the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 1980 
(CCAMLR).  This charges the CCAMLR Commission with drawing up 
conservation measures.  In doing so, it is required to take 
full account of any relevant measures or regulations 
established or recommended by ATCMs or by existing fisheries 
commissions responsible for species which may enter the 
Convention area, so as to avoid inconsistency between the 
rights and obligations of a Party under those measures or
regulations, and conservation measures adopted by the
Commission (Article IX.5). The Commission is also required to
seek to co-operate with Contracting Parties which may exercise
jurisdiction in marine areas adjacent to the Convention area
in respect of the conservation of any stock of associated
species which occurs both within those areas and the
Convention area, with a view to harmonizing the conservation
measures adopted in respect of such stocks (Article XI).

17. The possible implications of the 1995 Agreement for
CCAMLR might be studied further by the CCAMLR Commission.

B. Global environmental treaties

The Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992 (the
"Biological Diversity Convention").

18. The Biological Diversity Convention clearly applies to
activities carried out in Antarctica. Its application derives
from Article 4, which provides that the provisions of the
Convention apply, in relation to each Contracting Party:  in
the case of processes and activities, regardless of where
their effects occur, carried out under its jurisdiction or
control ....  beyond the limits of national jurisdiction"
(emphasis added).

19. It is clear that the Environmental Protocol, like the
Biodiversity Convention, has as a purpose the conservation of
"biological diversity" (defined in the Convention as diversity
within species, between species, and of ecosystems).  This
objective is reflected, notably, in the first preambular
paragraph of the Environmental Protocol (which speaks of the
need to "enhance the protection of the Antarctic environment
and dependent and associated ecosystems");  in the
environmental principles set out in Article 3 to accomplish
this purpose;  and in Annex II (on the conservation of
Antarctic fauna and flora.

20. The relationship between the Protocol and the Convention
is governed by Article 22 (1) of the Convention.  This
stipulates that the provisions of the Convention "shall not
affect the rights and obligations of any Contracting Party
deriving from any existing international agreement, except 
where the exercice of those rights and obligations would cause 
a serious damage or threat to biological diversity" (emphasis 
added).

Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, 1985 
and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone 
Layer, 1987.

21.  It was scientific observation of the depletion of the 
ozone layer over Antarctica which provided the impetus for the 
adoption of the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol. 
The former imposes obligations on States Parties to co-operate 
in the conduct of various aspects of scientific research and 
observations relating to the ozone layer.  Effect is given to 
such co-operation within the Antarctic Treaty system.  There 
is no suggestion (or appearance) of any conflict here.

The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1992 (the 
"Climate Change Convention").

22.  There is a certain overlap in the coverage of the Climate 
Change Convention and the Environmental Protocol.  But there 
does not appear to be any conflict between the two treaties; 
on the contrary, the Protocol complements the Convention.

23.  The Climate Change Convention sets out as a (non-binding) 
guideline to be followed by States Parties that they "should 
take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize 
the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects" 
(Article 3 (3)).  And it obliges States to establish a process 
by which they can monitor (and control) greenhouse gas 
emissions (Article 4).

24.  The Environmental Protocol goes further in this respect. 
It requires that "activities in the Antarctic Treaty area 
shall be planned and conducted so as to avoid adverse effects 
on climate or weather patterns" (Article 3 (2) (a) and (b) 
(i)).  It requires also regular and effective monitoring for 
two purposes:  "to allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing 
activities" and "to facilitate early detection of the possible 
unforeseen effects of activities carried on both within and
outside the Antarctic Treaty area on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems" (Article 3 (2) (d) and (e)).

C. Transboundary movement of waste

The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, 1989 (the "Basel Convention").

25. The Basel Convention and Annex III to the Environmental Protocol are consistent in the general obligations they impose regarding the generation and disposal of hazardous and other wastes.

26. The export of wastes for disposal in the Antarctic Treaty area is prohibited by the Basel Convention. Pursuant to Article 4 (6), the Parties agree "not to allow the export of hazardous wastes or other wastes for disposal within the area south of 60 degrees South latitude, whether or not such wastes are subject to transboundary movement". ATCPs participating in the negotiation of a Convention on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management are currently promoting a provision to prohibit the export of radioactive waste or spent fuel for disposal in the Antarctic Treaty area, whether or not there would be transboundary movement.

27. The 1995 Chilean paper asserts that the obligation under Basel is unenforceable, since no liability attaches in the event of a contravention. However, States Parties are expressly obliged to take "appropriate legal, administrative and other measures to implement and enforce the provisions of th[e] Convention, including measures to prevent and punish conduct in contravention of [it]" (Article 4 (4)).

28. The disposal of radioactive waste within the Antarctic Treaty area (from whatever source) is expressly prohibited by Article V of the Antarctic Treaty.
D. Treaties relating to the marine environment

The Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by 
Dumping of Wastes and other Matter, 1972 (the "London Dumping 
Convention").

29.  It is clear that dumping at "sea", as defined by the 
Convention, would include dumping in Antarctic waters.  It is 
also clear that waste for dumping in Antarctic waters which 
either (i) leaves the territory of a party to the Convention, 
outside the Antarctic Treaty area or (ii) is carried in the 
vessels or aircraft of a State party, would be covered by the 
Convention (Article VII).  It may be questioned, however, 
whether the Convention applies to loading in Antarctica for 
disposal in Antarctic waters or elsewhere.

30.  The 1995 Chilean paper suggests that there may be three 
lacunae between this Convention and the Environmental 
Protocol.  These relate to:  (a) the dumping of radioactive 
waste;  (b) the dumping of industrial waste;  and (c) the 
incineration of waste at sea.

(a)  As regards radioactive waste, in November 1993, an 
amendment to Annex I to the London Dumping Convention 
was adopted, prohibiting the dumping of all radioactive 
waste at sea.  Although it may not have been possible to 
include such a prohibition in Annex IV to the 
Environmental Protocol, the same end is accomplished by 
other means.  As noted in paragraph 28 above, Article V 
of the Antarctic Treaty prohibits the dumping of 
radioactive waste in the Antarctic Treaty area.  And 
Article 2 (1) (a) of Annex III to the Environmental 
Protocol requires that radioactive materials be removed 
from the Antarctic Treaty area.

(b)  As to industrial waste, another amendment to Annex I to 
the London Dumping Convention, adopted in November 1993, 
prohibits the dumping of industrial wastes at sea.  
These are defined as waste materials generated by 
manufacturing or processing operations.  Although on 
this subject, too, it may not have been possible to 
include such a prohibition in Annex IV to the
Environmental Protocol, it would seem, however, that the Protocol requires that industrial-type waste be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposed of by incineration (Articles 2 and 3 of Annex III).

(c) As regards incineration of waste at sea, the 1995 Chilean paper notes that incineration at sea of industrial waste and sewage is now prohibited under the London Dumping Convention, by virtue of another amendment to Annex I adopted in November 1993.  Parties to the Environmental Protocol, on the other hand, are only required to phase out "open burning" of wastes by 1998/99 (Annex III, Article 3 (2)).  Waste disposal by incineration is expressly permitted in incinerators "which to the maximum extent practicable reduce harmful emissions" (Article 3 (1)).

31. There does, therefore, appear to be a possible lacuna in the Environmental Protocol insofar as the incineration of waste in Antarctic waters is concerned.  The problem arises because, in the absence of any clause stipulating which instrument is to prevail, the later in time would.  In this case, that would (for most States) be the Environmental Protocol, which has not yet entered into force.  As a practical matter, however, this may not be a problem.  It would seem that States Parties to UNCLOS will be obliged to adopt the basic standards set out in the London Dumping Convention, even if they are not parties to it (see above, paragraph 11).

The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as amended by the Protocol of 1978 ("MARPOL 73/78").

32. Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol was designed to be complementary to the MARPOL system.  This is reflected in various provisions. There is an incorporation by reference to the standards set out in MARPOL 73/78 regarding the discharge of oil (Article 3), the disposal of garbage (Article 5), and the discharge of sewage (Article 6).  Article 13 requires the
Annex to be kept under review in the light of, eg, any
amendments and new regulations adopted under MARPOL 73/78.

33. The question of potential conflict is specifically
addressed in Article 14 of Annex IV to the Environmental
Protocol.  This provides that for those States which are also
Parties to MARPOL 73/78 nothing in the Annex derogates from
their specific rights and obligations thereunder.

34. There is possibly room for concern where a Party to the
Environmental Protocol is not party to MARPOL 73/78, in that
the Protocol appears to impose less stringent obligations than
MARPOL 73/78 in two respects.  The first concerns Article 6(1)
of Annex IV which contains provisions governing the discharge
of sewage, but which do not apply "where it would unduly
impair Antarctic operations". The second less onerous
obligation relates to compliance.  Parties to MARPOL 73/78
must prohibit and sanction violations.  The Environmental
Protocol, by contrast, only requires States Parties to take
"appropriate measures" to ensure compliance (Article 13 of the
Protocol), and provides for inspection by observers (Article
14).  But the matter may be resolved by Article 211 of UNCLOS:
see paragraph 11 above.

The International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness,
Response and Cooperation, 1990 ("the Oil Pollution
Preparedness Convention").

35. The 1995 Chilean paper implies that the Oil Pollution
Preparedness Convention, which promotes international
co-operation in the event of a major oil pollution threat,
applies in Antarctica because it is a global convention.
Its potential application rests more precisely on the fact
that its provisions are concerned with preparation for and
response to "oil pollution incidents" involving, inter alia,
ships.  Such incidents are defined to include occurrences
which result, or may result, in a discharge of oil and which
pose, or may pose, a threat to the marine environment, and
which require emergency action.  The term ship is broadly
defined as a vessel of any type operating in the marine
environment (though the Convention does not apply to warships
or State-owned ships used on non-commercial service).
36. Article 15 of the Environmental Protocol likewise makes 
provision for emergency response action in the case of 
environmental emergencies in the Antarctic Treaty area, 
committing Parties, in general terms, to provide for prompt and 
effective response to such emergencies.  It is supplemented by 
Article 12 of Annex IV to the Protocol.  It is this provision 
which covers similar ground to the Oil Pollution Preparedness 
Convention.  It requires States Parties to develop contingency 
plans for marine pollution response in the Antarctic Treaty 
area, and to establish procedures for co-operative response to 
pollution emergencies.

37. There is, on their face, no conflict between the two 
treaties, but the obligations under the Environmental Protocol 
may be expected to be more specific and exacting.  In any 
event, Article 11 of the Oil Pollution Preparedness Convention 
resolves the matter by providing that "nothing in the 
Convention shall be construed as altering the rights and 
obligations of any Party under any convention or international 
agreement" (emphasis added).  In the event of a conflict, 
therefore, obligations under the Environmental Protocol would 
prevail.

E.  Wildlife conservation agreements

The International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, 
1946 (the "Whaling Convention").

38. The Whaling Convention is a global treaty regulating 
whaling in Antarctic waters, as elsewhere.  But there is no 
conflict between it and CCAMLR.  The Whaling Convention deals 
directly with the regulation of whaling; CCAMLR takes whales 
into account in the application of its conservation standards, 
as part of the Antarctic marine ecosystem.

39. The Antarctic Treaty system has not sought to establish a 
separate regime for the regulation of whaling.  It has left 
this to the International Whaling Commission established by 
the Whaling Convention.  Thus, Article VI of CCAMLR expressly 
provides that nothing in the Convention derogates from the 
rights and obligations of the Parties under the Whaling
Convention. Annex II to the Environmental Protocol contains 
an equivalent provision in Article 7. This approach followed 
the requirement in paragraph III 3(f) of Recommendation IX-2, 
which set out as one of the basic elements of a future marine 
living resources regime that it should not apply to species 
already regulated pursuant to existing treaties, but should 
take into account the relationship of such species to those 
species which were covered by the future regime.

40. Close co-operation between the Whaling Convention and the 
Antarctic Treaty system is specifically provided for in the 
work of the Scientific Committee for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Resources established by CCAMLR (Articles XIV 
and XV).

Convention for the Protection of Birds, 1950.

41. There are only ten States Parties to this Convention, of 
which four are Antarctic Treaty States. Its applicability to 
the Antarctic would appear, therefore, to be theoretical.

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora, 1973 ("CITES").

42. CITES is global in scope and therefore applicable to 
Antarctica because the Convention lists a number of species 
found in Antarctic waters. It would be applicable to the 
taking of listed species in Antarctic waters which are to be 
transported to a State Party.  In such a case, the 
authorisation for the taking of a specimen of species included 
in Appendix I to CITES (those threatened with extinction) 
could only be given if it would not be detrimental to the 
survival of the species, and it was not to be used for 
primarily commercial purposes.  The same standard would apply 
for Appendix II species (those which may become threatened) 
(Articles III (5) and IV (6)). Reservations are permitted 
with regard to the species listed in the Appendices.  The 
latter are amended, from time to time, by the Conference of 
the CITES Parties.
43. Annex II to the Environmental Protocol imposes a general 
prohibition on the taking of, or harmful interference with,
native Antarctic fauna and except in accordance with a permit
for scientific purposes (Article 3). (Stricter conditions
apply in the case of "specially protected species".) A
fortiori, it would thus appear, as the 1995 Chilean paper
concludes, that this rules out trade in such species, which is
the purpose of CITES.

44. As to the relationship between the two treaties, Article
XIV of CITES is relevant. Subsection (2) provides that the
provisions of CITES shall in no way affect "the obligations of
Parties deriving from any treaty, convention, or international
agreement relating to other aspects of trade, taking,
possession, or transport of specimens which is in force or
subsequently may enter into force for any Party ..." (emphasis
added). The effect of this language is in the event of a
conflict to give priority to a State's (stricter) obligations
under the Environmental Protocol.

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild
Animals, 1979 ("Migratory Species Convention").

45. 1995 The Chilean paper considers that, since many of the
Antarctic species may qualify as "migratory", this Convention
may be of certain interest to the Antarctic Treaty system.

46. The Convention is intended to conserve species which
cross one or more "national jurisdictional boundaries".  To
that end, under Article III "Range States" are obliged to
conserve the habitats and prohibit the taking of migratory
species listed in Appendix I to the Convention (endangered
species).  And, in respect of Appendix II species (those which
have an unfavourable conservation status), they are to
"endeavour to conclude" agreements for their protection
(Article IV).  A "Range State" is defined as a State (i) that
exercises jurisdiction over any part of the range of land and
water crossed by a migratory species, or (ii) whose flag
vessels are engaged, outside national jurisdictional limits,
in taking the migratory species in question.
47. The applicability of the Convention to Antarctica would depend, in the first instance, on its listing of species which migrate into Antarctic waters.  But it would only come into play in two situations.  The first would be where a State Party were exercising jurisdiction over the species outside Antarctica with a range extending into Antarctica.  The second situation would be where the flag vessels of a State Party were taking such species in Antarctic waters.  It would seem then that, while the Convention might be stretched to provide a basis for conserving listed species which migrate into Antarctic waters, it is not well-designed (or indeed intended) for that purpose.

Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 1972.

48. It has sometimes been suggested that there should be a formal link between this Convention and the Antarctic Treaty system.  However, as the 1995 Chilean paper points out, this would appear to be unnecessary;  Annex V to the Environmental Protocol is compatible with, but more detailed than, the Convention.  And, in any case, under the World Heritage Convention a World Heritage Site can be proposed only for a site within the territory of a party (c.f. also the Ramsar Convention on Wetland Sites).  Such proposals would therefore be problematic in the special circumstances of Antarctica.

IV.  Liability for damage to the Antarctic environment

49.  The 1995 Chilean paper identifies three possible lacunae as regards liability for damage to the Antarctic environment:

    (a) liability for damage from accidents occurring during the maritime transport of radioactive materials;

    (b) liability for damage from the disposal of hazardous and other wastes brought from outside the Antarctic Treaty area; and

    (c) liability for pollution by leak or discharge of oil from ships.
50. The first-mentioned may be a lacuna, for the reasons stated in the 1995 Chilean paper (paragraphs 38-39). This might be studied by the Group of Legal Experts on Liability. There may be a partial gap with respect to the second kind of damage. But there appears to be no lacuna with respect to the third.

51. As regards (b) - liability for the disposal of hazardous and other wastes brought from outside the Antarctic Treaty area - liability could arise under the Basel Convention if the damage resulted from a "transboundary movement" (Article 12). But it would not do so if a single State were involved. In that case, the action would essentially be one of disposing or dumping of waste. If the dumping were carried out at sea, it would be covered by the London Dumping Convention, whose Contracting Parties undertake to develop procedures for the assessment of liability regarding such dumping (Article X). It would also be covered by Articles 4 and 5 of Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol (on the discharge into the sea of noxious liquid substances and garbage). Liability for damage arising from the discharge of such substances may be expected, therefore, to be covered by the rules on liability to be elaborated under Article 16 of the Environmental Protocol. If, on the other hand, in the unlikely event of the dumping being carried out on Antarctic land by an entity other than a Party to the Antarctic Treaty, no liability for resulting damage would appear to arise under the Antarctic Treaty.

52. With regard to (c) - liability for pollution by leak or discharge of oil from ships - the matter is dealt with not only in the various conventions referred to in the 1995 Chilean paper, but also in Article 3 of Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol. This prohibits the discharge (broadly defined) of oil into the sea of the Antarctic Treaty area. Liability for damage arising from such action will no doubt be covered by the rules on liability being elaborated under Article 16 of the Environmental Protocol.

Antarctica: Treaties:UK paper:12.3.96
