ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
                                 TRATADO ANTARTICO              
                                 XX REUNION CONSULTIVA              

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARTIQUE              
XXème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
                                 ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
                                 XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              


                                 XX ATCM/WP 9              
March, 1996              
Original: English              


INSPECTION OF SHIPS IN GATEWAY PORTS TO ANTARCTICA ON THE BASIS              
OF MARPOL 73/78, AND IN ANTARCTIC PORTS UNDER THE              
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL (ANNEX IV) TO THE              
ANTARCTIC TREATY              

(Agenda item 10)              

(Submitted by The Netherlands)              



•
Inspection of ships in gateway ports to Antarctica, on the basis of MARPOL 
73/78, and in Antarctic ports under the Environmental Protocol (Annex IV) to 
the Antarctic Treaty

Introduction

The XIXth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), held in Seoul from 8 
to 19 May 1995, decided to include the topic of compliance enforcement by 
gateway ports as a separate agenda item for the XXth ATCM. (See Final Report, 
Part I, item 7 (59).)

Port state control (PSC) as a complement to flag state control

PSC both complements and succeeds flag state control. At the outset, the flag 
state must establish whether a vessel sailing under its flag complies with 
international requirements. If so, the flag state issues a certificate for the vessel, 
which is, in theory, recognised by other states. The flag state must of course 
conduct regular checks to ensure that the vessel continues to comply with all 
operational requirements.

If this system worked properly, port state control would be quite unnecessary. 
However, ships sometimes go for long periods without calling at their home 
ports. During these intervals, things can go wrong, and it must be 
acknowledged that not every flag state is equally strict when it comes to regular 
inspections of the vessels that fly its flag.

PSC is therefore an essential instrument over and above certification and control 
by the flag state. PSC inspections are restricted in the first instance to checks 
on the certificates issued by the flag state. More thorough inspections follow 
only if the port state finds clear grounds for conducting them.

The annex to this memorandum contains examples drawn from chapter 2.3 of 
the annex to IMO Assembly Resolution A.787 (19), which has now been

AVT96/BZ43813                  - 1 -
contain provisions similar to those in the Environmental Protocol. However, this 
is not the case with all gateway ports and, in any event, regulations on certain 
matters - such as the discharge of sewage - are included in annex IV to the 
Environmental Protocol but have not yet entered into force under MARPOL 
73/78.

In all such cases, a gateway port has no choice but to allow the ship to depart.

The following solutions to this problem are proposed.

1. The ATCPs should agree, at the XXth ATCM, that ATCP states with gateway 
ports should inspect ships for breaches of annex IV to the Environmental 
Protocol if clear grounds, as defined above, are found to exist. If they are party 
to MARPOL 73/78 and its annexes, they may, on the basis of any breaches 
found, prevent the ship from leaving port until the defects (of such a nature as 
to preclude departure pursuant to article 5, paragraph 2 of MARPOL 73/78) 
have been repaired, provided the defects are also in breach of MARPOL. 
Reporting to the flag state is the only action that can be taken in respect of 
breaches that have taken place outside the jurisdiction of the flag state.

2. In addition, a voluntary agreement should be reached to the effect that the 
port authorities will notify the captain of any defects they have found, having 
regard to annex IV to the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, and 
will also notify the international observers in Antarctica forthwith. An annual 
report of such findings could also be made to the ATCM, on a voluntary basis 
and without consequences being attached to it.

3. Consideration could also be given to an annual report on ships sailing from 
Antarctica. There needs to be sound coordination and exchange of information 
among the international observers responsible for supervising compliance with 
annex IV to the Environmental Protocol in the Antarctic ports and the inspectors 
responsible for port state control checks in the gateway ports if the Antarctic

AVT96/BZ3813                                 - 3 -
Memoranda of Understanding (where applicable) and Port State Control in 
relation to the inspection of ships on their way to and from Antarctica 
which call at the said ports.

(c) If the inspections of ships in Antarctica on the basis of annex IV to the 
Environmental Protocol are required to be more thorough in respect of 
certain points than inspections normally carried out on ships in the 
gateway ports of port states, the latter keep an extra list of such points 
on a voluntary basis. How do the ATCPs feel about this?

(d) Although the port authorities cannot stop ships which do not comply with 
non-MARPOL requirements from leaving port on the basis of the 
Environmental Protocol, they can inform the captain that defects which 
have been identified will immediately be passed on to the international 
observers in Antarctica and likewise be included in the annual report to 
the ATCM. The captain will then of course be able to remedy such 
defects before leaving. If such a procedure is under consideration, it 
would be advisable to embody it in an ATCM regulation.

(e) Consideration should be given to reviewing Checklist B, as adopted at the 
XIXth ATCM, in the light of the provisions of annex IV to the 
Environmental Protocol, which were drawn up to protect the vulnerable 
Antarctic marine environment. However, a better idea would be to draft a 
triple checklist, containing the relevant provisions of:

      1. MARPOL 73/78, with annexes;
      2. Annex IV to the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty and
      3. the other agreements reached in this connection.

(f) The United Kingdom has drafted a Working Paper. The Netherlands 
recommends that the XXth ATCM endeavour to integrate the two 
Working Papers.

The Netherlands requests the XXth ATCM to discuss the following items:

- the view of gateway countries on port state control;
- what additional institutional arrangements are required;
- the checklist;

AVT96/BZ43813                                     - 5 -
