ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTACTIQUE          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ



XX ATCM/WP 37
May 1996
Original: English

FINAL REPORT OF THE XX ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

(Submitted by the Secretariat)
●   Final Report of the XX Antarctic Treaty
    Consultative Meeting

●
Final Report of the XX Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting

(1)  Pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty, Representatives of the
Consultative Parties (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador,
Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, the Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, and Uruguay) met in Utrecht from 29 April to 10 May 1996 for the purpose of
exchanging information, holding consultations, and considering and recommending to
their governments measures in furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Treaty.

(2)  The Meeting was also attended by Delegations from Contracting Parties to the
Antarctic Treaty which are not Consultative Parties (Austria, Bulgaria, Canada,
Colombia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Greece, Guatemala, Rumania, the Slovak
Republic, Turkey, Switzerland and Ukraine).

(3)  A preparatory Meeting with Embassy Representatives was held in The Hague on
16 January 1996.

(4)  The Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR) were invited to attend the Meeting as observers in accordance with
Rule 2 of the Revised Rules of Procedure 1992.

(5)  Pursuant to paragraph 25 of the Final Report of the XVIIIth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programmes (COMNAP) was also invited to attend the Meeting to present a report on the
activities of COMNAP on the same basis as Recommendation XIII-2.

(6)  Pursuant to Rule 38 of the Revised Rules of Procedure 1992, several
international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica were
invited to designate experts to attend the XX ATCM and to assist in discussion of specific
agenda items. The following organisations participated in the proceedings: ASOC,
IAATO, IHO, IOC, IUCN, UNEP and WMO.

(7)  IMO, PATA, and WTO were also invited, but were unable to take part.

(8)  The Meeting was opened by Ms. Margaretha de Boer, Minister of Housing,
Spatial Planning and the Environment, on 6 May 1996 during the Ceremonial Plenary.

(9)  Deputy Director of the Scientific Cooperation Department of the MFA, Jan Peter
Bosman of the delegation of the Netherlands, was elected Chairman of the Meeting. Mr.
Bosman expressed his appreciation to the Delegations for electing him Chairman.

2
(10) In accordance with the decision taken at the XVIII ATCM, the Meeting was 
organised to reflect the objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty for improving the way in which the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Mechanism works. To this end, the Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) 
met during the first week of the ATCM, whilst Working Groups I and II met during the 
second week.

(11) Following the suggestion of the Chairman the Meeting elected Dr. Vicente 
Sanchez of Chile Chairman and Dr. Pietro Giuliani of Italy Vice-Chairman of the TEWG.

(12) Ambassador Jan Arvesen of the Kingdom of Norway was elected Chairman of 
Working Group I, and Dr. Roberto Puceiro of Uruguay was elected Chairman of 
Working Group II.

(13) In addition to the three Working Groups, a Meeting of Legal Experts on 
Liability, headed by Professor Rüdiger Wolfrum (Federal Republic of Germany), met 
during the first week of the XX ATCM and discussed the draft Liability Annex to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

(14) The Chairman proposed that Mr. Robert Jumelet be appointed Executive 
Secretary of the Meeting. The delegations adopted this proposal.

(15) In order to save time and to follow the practice of previous Meetings, 
Delegations did not deliver opening statements. Instead, they provided the texts for 
circulation and inclusion in the Final Report. The texts of the opening statements are 
reproduced in Annex......

(16) The following Agenda was adopted:

1.  Opening of the Meeting

2.  Election of Officers

3.  Opening Addresses

4.  Adoption of Agenda

5.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

    a) under Recommendation XIII-(2):

         i)  the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his 
             capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the 
             Antarctic Treaty

         ii) the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
              Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

3
iii)     the Head of the Delegation of Australia in his capacity as 
        Representative of the Depositary Government for the Convention on 
        the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Reources (CCAMLR)

iv)    the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as 
        Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for 
        the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

v)     the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 
        (SCAR)

vi)    the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic 
        Programmes (COMNAP)

b)      in relation to the article III(2) of the Antarctic Treaty

c)      relevance of developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic

6.  Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

    a)  Implementation

    b)  Liability Annex

    c)  Relation with other environmental treaties

7.  Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

    a)  Organizational Aspects (including Secretariat)

    b)  Operation of TEWG

    c)  Examination of Recommendations

    d)  Exchange of Information

8.  Questions related to the Exercise of Jurisdiction in Antarctica

9.  Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

10. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

    a)  Inspections during 1995/96 and those planned for 1996/97

4
b) Inspection Checklists

11. Data Management

12. Antarctic Infrastructures, Technology and Operations

13. Antarctic Science: Major New Initiatives

14. Cultural and Aesthetic Values of the Antarctic (proposed by Chile)

15. Education and Training

16. Safety Issues
    a) Contingency Planning
    b) Fuel Handling

17. Environmental Protection Measures and their effectiveness

18. Application and Implementation of EIA procedures

19. Specific Environmental Protection Measures (included in item 17)

20. The Antarctic Protected Area System
    a) Proposals for Revised and New Management Plans
    b) Site Inspections
    c) Means for Evaluating Possible Gaps in the System

21. Collection, Archiving, Exchange and Evaluation of Environmental Information

22. Environmental Monitoring and the State of the Antarctic Environment

5
23.     Preparation of the XXI Consultative Meeting

        a)	Date and place of the XXI ATCM

        b)	Invitations of International and Non-Governmental Organizations

        c)	Preparation of the Agenda of the XXI ATCM

24.     Any other Business

25.     Adoption of the Report

26.     Closing of the Meeting

(17)	In accordance with the decision made at the XIX ATCM and at the Chairman's 
        suggestion:

        a)	discussion of items 1 to 5b, and 23 to 26 took place during the plenary 
              session.

        b)	the remaining items were remitted to three working groups:

              i)	Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) discussed 
                    items 17, 18, 20, 21 and 22;

              ii)	Working Group I (WG I) discussed items 5c,6,7,8,9 and 14;

              iii)	Working Group II (WG II) discussed items 10,11,12,13,15 and 16.

Item 5.

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

a)	Reports under Recommendation XIII-2

(18)	Pursuant to Recommendation XIII-2, the Meeting received reports from the 
        following organisations:

        a)	the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his capacity 
              as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty;

        b)	the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
              Living Resources (CCAMLR);

        c)	the Head of the Delegation of Australia in his capacity as Representative of 
              the Depositary Government for the Convention on the Conservation of 
              Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR);

6
d) the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as 
Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for the 
Conservation Antarctic Seals (CCAS);

e) the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR);

f) the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic 
Programmes (COMNAP).


(19) The Head of the U.S. Delegation, Mr. R. Tucker Scully, presented a report in 
his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty. He 
reported on the current status of the Antarctic Treaty. In the period that has elapsed since 
the XIX ATCM, Turkey acceded to the Treaty on 24 January 1996. With regard to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, six Consultative Parties 
(Belgium, Brazil, India, Poland, Republic of Korea and South Africa) and one non-
Consultative Party (Greece) have ratified the Protocol since the XIX ATCM, bringing the 
total to 22 out of the 26 Consultative Parties. He noted that 10 out of the 22 Consultative 
Parties have explicitly approved Annex V of the Protocol.

(20) The report of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (CCAMLR) was presented, on behalf of its Chairman, by its Executive 
Secretary Mr. Esteban de Salas. The report is appended in Annex..................

(21) The Head of the Australian Delegation, Mr. Paul O'Sullivan, in his capacity as 
Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention on the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), presented a report. The report is 
appended in Annex.....

(22) The Head of the U.K. Delegation, Dr. Michael Richardson, in his capacity as 
Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Seals (CCAS), presented a report. The report is appended in Annex............

(23) The report of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) was 
presented by its President, Professor Antonio C. Rocha Campos. Delegations expressed 
their gratitude to SCAR for the vital work it has done on behalf of the ATCM. The 
SCAR report is appended in Annex.......

(24) The report of COMNAP was presented by its Chairman, Prof. Dr. Anders 
Karlquist. The report is appended in Annex.....

(25) The Meeting expressed its appreciation for the reports which made an important 
contribution to the understanding of developments affecting the Antarctic Treaty System. 
The presentations also provided an opportunity for delegates to make general observations 
on the operation of the Treaty System.

b) Reports in Relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

                                  7
(26)	The Meeting also received reports from a number of experts representing international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica who had been invited to attend and to assist in the discussion of specific agenda items.

(27)	The Representative of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), Mr. James Barnes, presented a report to the meeting on the activities of ASOC in relation to Antarctica.

(28)	The Representative of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO), Mr. John Splettstoeser, presented a report to the meeting on the activities of IAATO in relation to Antarctica.

(29)	The Representative of the International Hydrographic Organisation (IHO), Commodore Egon Bakker reported on the recent activities of the IHO Permanent Working Group (PWG) on Antarctica. The report is appended in Annex..............

(30)	The Representative of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), Dr. Jan Stel, reported on the activities of the IOC in relation to Antarctica.

(31)	The Representative of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), Ms. J. Dalziell presented a report on the activities of the IUCN in relation to Antarctica.

(32)	The Representative of the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), Dr. Neil A. Streten, presented a report to the Meeting on the activities of the WMO in relation to Antarctica. The report is appended in Annex . . .

c)	Relevance of developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic

(33)	Various countries congratulated Canada on its successful chairmanship of the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) and the productive Third Ministerial Meeting of the AEPS which was held in Inuvik, Canada, from 19 to 21 March 1996. This Meeting was attended by a representative from the Netherlands in its capacity as host of the XX ATCM. The statement by the Netherlands as the next ATCM's host Government and the report of the third Ministerial Conference were distributed at the XX ATCM (XX ATCM/INF 26). The hope that co-operation between the Arctic countries might soon culminate in the formal establishment of the Arctic Council was expressed.

(34)	The Meeting emphasised the desirability of information exchange between the Antarctic and Arctic Processes. The Meeting was pleased to note that since 1994 - the year in which this item was placed on the ATCM agenda - much had been done to ensure co-ordination in this area. It supported the view of the Netherlands that the most appropriate means of achieving effective exchange of information was via the AEPS host Government. It noted that seven of the eight Arctic States are also Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

8
(35) The Meeting therefore agreed that the established procedure to ensure the timely exchange of information on Arctic and Antarctic issues should be continued and expanded. To that end, the Meeting agreed that the Government of Norway, as Host Government of the next Ministerial Meeting of the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy, should ensure that the Final Report, as well as other relevant documents of the XX and XXI ATCMs be made available to the Ministerial Meeting, and requested that relevant documents from the next AEPS Ministerial Meeting as well as other important Arctic Meetings be made available to participants at the XXII ATCM.

(36) Emphasis was placed on the need to bear in mind that, as far as co-ordination was concerned, the political and legal context governing activities in the Arctic and the Antarctic differed considerably.

(37) Furthermore, the Meeting believed that exchange of information should not be confined to the exchange of information on issues referred to in paragraph (5). It noted the considerable range of technical and scientific projects being undertaken in the Arctic and recommended that the exchange be broadened to address these issues. Accordingly, the Meeting recommended that in considering any further agenda items on this issue, their environmental, technical, scientific or logistic aspects be dealt with as well as their political and administrative aspects. The agenda item could be entitled:

"Relevance of developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic."

Item 6.

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a) Implementation

(38) The Meeting was encouraged by the fact that 22 of the 26 Consultative Parties had now ratified the Protocol. The remaining four Consultative Parties indicated that while the rapid entry into force of the Protocol is desirable, it is difficult for them to give an exact timeframe for ratification.

(39) Given the desirability of exchanging information on the implementation of the Protocol within national legal systems, Chile and/the United Kingdom were thanked for the information provided in XX ATCM/WP 19.V XX ATCM/INF 6 and XX ATCM/INF 7, respectively. Various other delegations provided a verbal summary of the way in which national implementing legislation pertaining to the Protocol had been enacted.

b) Liability Annex

(40) Professor Wolfrum of Germany summarised the deliberations of Group of Legal Experts on liability which met during the first week of the ATCM. The discussion of the Group proceeded on the basis of the "Fifth Offering" submitted by Professor Wolfrum and a draft submitted by the United States Delegation on "Annex VI" to the Protocol on 
9
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (XX ATCM/INF 43). Professor 
Wolfrum stressed that substantial progress had been made during the intersessional 
meeting in Brussels, which was held from 27 through 30 November 1995, and during the 
first week of the XX ATCM. He noted, as on a previous occasion, that, in future 
meetings, the participation of experts with directly relevant scientific, technical and 
logistic experience in Antarctica will be most desirable.

(41)	The Meeting expressed its sincere gratitude to the Government of Belgium for 
hosting an intersessional meeting of the Group of Legal Experts in November 1995 and to 
Professor Wolfrum for his untiring efforts to resolve pending issues concerning liability.

(42)	In order to continue the work on an Annex on liability to the Protocol, Germany 
submitted a proposal (XX ATCM/WP 31). The Meeting took note of the work of the 
Group of Legal Experts on liability, and extended the mandate of the Group of Legal 
Experts based on Recommendation IV-24. The Meeting agreed to convene an 
intersessional Meeting of the Group of Legal Experts during the XXI Consultative 
Meeting, and another meeting immediately before the XXI Consultative Meeting. The 
basis for discussions during those meetings will be further Offerings of the Chairman of 
the Group of Legal Experts, the draft submitted by the United States (XX/ATCM/INF 
43), as well as drafts which might be submitted by other delegations. The Meeting urged 
that Governments arrange for legal experts to be accompanied by experts having directly 
relevant scientific, technical and logistic experience in Antarctica. The results of the 
meetings of the Group of Legal Experts will be reported to, and considered by, the XXI 
Consultative Meeting.

(43)	Several delegations furthermore raised the question whether it would be 
appropriate for the Group of Legal Experts to work on the basis of all four official 
languages of the Antarctic Treaty. This was felt to be necessary by these delegations in 
view of the importance of the work of the Group of Legal Experts and the fact that the 
outcome of its work should be a binding instrument which would in any case have to be 
concluded in the four languages.

(44)	Some delegations expressed the opinion that, as a first step, all documents 
relating to the Group of Legal Experts, chaired by Professor Wolfrum, should be 
translated in the four languages.

(45)	Reservations were expressed on this subject by other delegations. It was their 
opinion that translation of all documents of the Group of Legal Experts as well as 
simultaneous interpretation of its debates would impose too heavy a burden on the 
Government hosting its meetings. They noted that so far, the Group of Legal Experts had 
worked well without any translations.

(46)	A third group of delegations was of the opinion that the Group of Legal Experts 
should continue to work using one language until some point in the future, when formal 
negotiations would make it necessary to proceed on the basis of the four Antarctic Treaty 
languages.

10
(47) The Meeting agreed that further consideration on the matter of interpretation and 
translation in the Group of Legal Experts should be given at the XXI ATCM with a view 
to reaching an appropriate decision.

c)      Relation with other Environmental Treaties

(48) The Meeting expressed its sincere appreciation for the two Working Papers 
under this item: XX ATCM/WP 10 Rev.1, submitted by the United Kingdom, and XX 
ATCM/WP 30, submitted by Chile. These Working Papers addressed the question of the 
relationship between, on the one hand, the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty and other treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system, and, on the other hand, 
other international agreements of a global or regional scope.

(49) Some delegations emphasised the need to bear in mind that consideration of the 
application to the Antarctic of general Conventions on environmental protection could 
raise questions relating to Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.

(50) The Meeting agreed to draw the attention of the Group of Legal Experts on 
liability to paragraphs 49 and 50 of XX ATCM/WP 10 Rev.1, expressing the fact that in 
certain cases existing international instruments relating to liability might not cover liability 
for damage to the Antarctic environment.

(51) The Meeting recognised the value of the two Working Papers for the 
consideration of the issue by each Consultative Party, and decided to include this item in 
the Agenda of the next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, with a view to having a 
further exchange of views on that occasion.

Item 7.

Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

a)      Organisational Aspects (including Secretariat)

(52) The Contact Group on Organizational Aspects of the Establishment of an 
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat convened under the chairmanship of Professor Wolfrum in 
Utrecht on 3 May 1996. Professor Wolfrum gave a brief report of the discussion which 
took place. A document drawn up by Professor Wolfrum entitled "Legal Status, 
Privileges and Immunities of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat" formed the basis of the 
Contact Group's discussion. This discussion focused on the question what instruments 
were necessary for the establishment of a Secretariat (a Protocol or a Measure) and on the 
question whether the Secretariat should enjoy privileges and immunities in the Host State 
only or also in all the other ATCPs. No agreement could be reached on the subjects in 
question yet. However, the Chairman of the Contact Group expressed confidence that an 
agreement could be reached if the necessary political will existed to do so, since the issue 
did not raise complicated legal problems.

11
(53) Professor Wolfrum indicated that he would draw up and distribute a new document, based on the discussion, six weeks after the ATCM. This document could contain the following elements:

-   Status of the Secretariat (legal personality under national or international law);
-   Functions of the Secretariat;
-   Staff;
-   Contributions to the Budget;
-   Privileges and Immunities.

(54) With regard to privileges and immunities, the document would comprise two alternatives, namely:

a)  Privileges and immunities for the Secretariat in the Host Country only;
b)  Privileges and immunities for the Secretariat in all Consultative Parties.

(55) The Parties would subsequently be requested to make their views known within six weeks. Professor Wolfrum could then distribute an amended version of the document for the XXI ATCM. Professor Wolfrum expressed the hope that this discussion could be concluded during the XXI ATCM.

(56) Professor Wolfrum's proposals as set out above met with the approval of the Meeting and were agreed to.

(57) Under the same agenda item, the Meeting considered a Working Paper submitted by Chile (XX ATCM/WP 20) concerning the circulation of documents by the host Government before and after the Consultative Meetings, until such time as the Secretariat would be established.

(58) Many delegations referred to the Guideline concerning pre-sessional document circulation and document handling at the XX ATCM (this Guideline appears in Annex D to the Final Report of the XIX Consultative Meeting). They expressed their satisfaction with the Guideline as it had been implemented by the Host Government of the XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

(59) A number of delegations nevertheless emphasised that the Guideline should be looked at critically and that improvements could still be made. In this respect mention was made of the great number of Information Papers which had been made available during the Meeting.

(60) The Meeting agreed to extend the Guideline's application to the preparation and conduct of the XXI Consultative Meeting.

(61) The Meeting also acknowledged that it would be useful to provide guidance to the Host Government on document handling after the Consultative Meeting. The Meeting supplemented the Guideline with the following paragraphs to that effect:

12
7. The Host Government should, within three months of the end of the 
Consultative Meeting hosted by it, or, where this is not practicable, as soon 
as reasonably possible afterwards, circulate through diplomatic channels:
    - the Final Report of that Meeting, in the official languages;
    - a comprehensive list of that Meeting's officially circulated Working 
and Information Papers.

8. The Host Government should provide any Party to the Antarctic Treaty 
with copies of documents mentioned in the previous paragraph at the 
request of that Party.

(62) The Guideline on Pre-Sessional and Post-Sessional Document Circulation and 
Document Handling at the XXI ATCM is attached to this Report in Part ..., Annex ....

(63) The Meeting considered an Information Paper submitted by Australia (XX 
ATCM/INF 32) pointing out errors in transcription of the Rules of Procedure in the 1994 
edition of the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty system.

(64) It was agreed that the Host Government of the next ATCM should circulate a 
corrected version of the Rules of Procedure at that ATCM. This should be appended to 
the Final Report of that Meeting.

b) Operation of the TEWG

(65) "Operation of the TEWG" was the subject of a Working Paper submitted by 
Chile (XX ATCM/WP 21). The Working Paper recalls the background to the 
establishment of the TEWG and the discussions at previous ATCMs, notably as regards 
the idea of holding intersessional Meetings. Building on these previous discussions, 
Working Paper 21 proposes that the TEWG should enhance its efforts through the 
establishment of sub-groups aimed at designing and planning the future Committee's 
work.

(66) In introducing the Working Paper, Chile emphasised the success of the second 
Meeting of the TEWG in Utrecht, where the pragmatic approach in particular was seen as 
very positive. The establishment of a open ended contact group, co-ordinated by New 
Zealand, which was agreed in the TEWG tied in well with the spirit of Working Paper 
21. As a result, Chile was of the opinion that it was no longer necessary to discuss the 
draft Decision laid down in that Working Paper. It was decided instead that states 
concerned would send New Zealand the names of their respective experts.

(67) Furthermore, the temporary role of the TEWG was emphasised. As it is quite 
conceivable that the Protocol will enter into force before the XXI ATCM, it must be 
borne in mind that a start will be made on setting up the Committee for Environmental 
Protection (CEP) at that ATCM. In that case priority ought to be accorded to the 
operation of the CEP, for example by adopting its Rules of Procedure, the election of 
officers and its work programme. These matters should be taken into account under this 
and other agenda items.

13
c)      Examination of Recommendations

(68) Discussion of this agenda item proceeded on the basis of Working Papers (XX 
ATCM/WP 4 and XX ATCM/WP 4 Rev.1), submitted by the Netherlands. When 
introducing these Working Papers, the Netherlands made clear the fact that it was a study 
which did not affect in any way the status of Recommendations adopted in the past. The 
aim of the document was to clarify the intended effect of the many Recommendations that 
had been adopted from the first up to the XVIII ATCM, notably in the light of Decision 1 
(1995), taken at the XIX ATCM in Seoul. To this end all Recommendations had been 
examined in light of Decision 1 (1995). In the opinion of the Netherlands, the study was 
particularly important from the point of view of making it clear which Recommendations 
might still require approval by the Consultative Parties.

(69) Many delegations expressed their appreciation for the considerable and extremely 
useful task undertaken by the Netherlands. However, it was necessary to bear in mind the 
fact that there was no easy way of uniformly classifying Recommendations, one reason 
being that the approval procedures and the attendant requirements in the various 
Consultative States differ. Accordingly, the list ought not to be given official status. It 
was nevertheless a useful guide for determining which Recommendations adopted before 
the XIX ATCM still require approval by Consultative Parties.

(70) In view of the foregoing paragraph, the Meeting agreed to attach the list to the 
Final Report of the XX ATCM. The list is included in Part .. , Annex .. .

d)     Exchange of Information

(71) The Meeting considered an Information Paper submitted by Argentina and 
Australia, on Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Future of the Antarctic 
Treaty system (XX ATCM/INF 36). Attention was drawn by one delegation to the many 
different provisions in the Antarctic Treaty system requiring information exchange on a 
wide variety of subjects. This delegation invited reflection on the scope of the obligations 
to exchange information as compared to the practical purpose served by these obligations.

(72) The Meeting agreed to take up this question once the Secretariat had been 
established.

Item 8.

Questions Related to the Exercise of Jurisdiction in Antarctica

(73) The Chairman reminded the Meeting of the discussion which this agenda item 
had received during the XVIII ATCM, and of the agreement of that ATCM to defer 
further discussion of this subject to the XX ATCM, so that all Parties would have 
sufficient time to elaborate ways and means of approaching the question in order to find 
an agreeable solution.

14
(74)  The Meeting agreed that the delegations had not yet had sufficient time to duly 
consider the issue, and decided to omit the item from the Agenda of the following 
Consultative Meetings until a request was made by a Consultative Party to reinclude it.

Item 9.

Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

(75)  While considering its paper (XX ATCM/INF 61), Brazil expressed its concerns 
on the disruption of its scientific research at Ferraz station and the growing risk of 
accidents due to the increasing number of visits by tourists. Another Delegation suggested 
that these risks could be minimized by reducing, in consultation with the different tour 
operators, the number of visits allowed to the station. Some Some delegations noted that 
tourism can have positive benefits, creating advocates for science and environmental 
protection in the Antarctic .

(76)  The Delegation of New Zealand drew the Meeting's attention to the proposed 
forms for advance notification and post-season reporting (XX ATCM/INF 13) which were 
submitted as a follow-up to the discussions held during the XIX ATCM, and from 
Resolution 3 (1995). Several Delegations and IAATO supported the initiative. The 
Meeting agreed to adopt the forms for a trial period of one year and IAATO offered to 
provide comment on the use of the form to the next ATCM. New Zealand agreed to 
adapt the forms for general use and distribute them to other Parties.

(77)  The Meeting noted the trend whereby tour operators were including new sites in 
their itineraries, as was stated in the papers submitted by New Zealand and Argentina 
(XX ATCM/INF 14 and 29, respectively). 
ASOC urged tour operators to apply a precautionary approach and not to add new sites 
until in-depth studies have been carried out regarding the impact of these visits. 
The Meeting recalled the discussions held during the XIXth ATCM about the possible 
environmental impact of tourism, and referred to paragraph 61 of the XIX ATCM report, 
particularly on the possibility that the SCAR/COMNAP workshop on environmental 
monitoring could provide guidance on programmes aimed at determining the potential 
environmental impact of this activity. 
The Meeting welcomed the papers submitted by the United States (XX ATCM/INF 102), 
and by the United States and the United Kingdom (XX ATCM/INF 100), describing on-
going efforts to determine whether small teams of researchers on tour ships and other 
vessels could be a cost-effective way to gather the information required to assess and 
determine how best to avoid the potential adverse effects of tourism on the Antarctic 
environment. The Meeting encouraged Parties to consider cooperating in such 
programmes.

(78)  The United States highlighted in its paper (XX ATCM/INF 37) that members of 
a search and rescue party organized by the United States were placed at a great personal 
risk in their efforts to rescue a Norwegian private expedition, and that Norway had 
reimbursed fully the costs of the rescue. Norway noted that this shows the necessity of
15
having sufficient insurance or guarantees for search and rescue expenses that might be 
needed in connection with activities in Antarctica.

(79)  Australia submitted a paper on the 1995-1996 Australian tourist overflights of 
Antarctica (XX ATCM/INF 34).

(80)  The Meeting expressed its great appreciation for the Working Paper introduced 
by New Zealand (XX ATCM/INF 1). Information Paper 1 is an internal working 
document confined in scope to tourism from New Zealand or tourists resident in New 
Zealand, and to tourism in the Ross Sea area. The document describes how New Zealand 
intends to deal with its responsibilities in respect of tourism. The document describes a 
national legal framework for tourism, notably in the Ross Sea area, opting for an 
integrated approach to the Antarctic region and New Zealand’s sub-Antarctic islands. 
Information Paper 1 ties in directly Information Paper 2, submitted by New Zealand (XX 
ATCM/INF 2), since it describes New Zealand’s national Environmental Impact 
Assessment procedure.

(81)  An Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom (XX ATCM/INF 15 and 
Amendment) was also greatly appreciated for the updated picture it provided of trends in 
Antarctic tourism. The Meeting noted the reported increase in the number of shipborne 
tourists going to Antarctica and that the number of sites being visited by tourists was also 
increasing, including more remote sites in the interior of Antarctica. The information was 
supplemented by Information Paper 96 submitted by IAATO (XX ATCM/INF 96). This 
document contained the provisional data on tourism for the 1995/96 season, as well as an 
assessment for the 1996/97 season. The Meeting was, however, particularly interested in 
IAATO’s prediction that the number of tourists for next season would, according to the 
provisional figures, decline somewhat.

(82)  COMNAP presented a paper (XX ATCM/INF 39) outlining safety, contingency 
planning and medical concerns based on direct experience with tour operators in the field. 
Several delegations commended COMNAP for the practical interaction with tour 
operators. The Meeting encouraged continuing efforts by COMNAP to draw the attention 
of tour operators to their potential impact on science and logistics.

(83)  The Meeting agreed that management and regulation of tourism was best 
achieved by effective implementation of the Protocol and its Annexes (through domestic 
implemeting legislation). However, the Meeting recognised that complete regulation of 
Antarctic tourism could not be achieved with elements of the tourist industry not subject 
to effective enforcement by Treaty Parties. It was noted that a number of tourist vessels 
operating in Antarctica fly the flag of non-Treaty Parties and that tour operators were not 
necessarily based in the territory of Parties to the Protocol.

(84)  In this regard, the Meeting stressed the importance of effective self-regulation by 
the tourist industry. To this end, the Meeting urged IAATO to:

    (a) ensure that its members conform fully with the provisions of the Protocol;
    (b) disseminate ATCM Recommendations and other texts relevant to tourism;
    (c) produce further guidelines and codes of conduct where appropriate;

16
(d) encourage all tour companies operating in Antarctica to become members 
of the Association.

(85) Furthermore, the Meeting called upon non-Consultative Parties with a particular 
interest in, or responsibility for, tourist companies operating in Antarctica to ratify the 
Protocol and its Annexes at the earliest opportunity and to introduce any necessary 
domestic enabling legislation to ensure compliance.

(86) One delegation pointed out that the Environmental Impact Assessments carried 
out for tourist activities varied widely in terms of both quality and scope. In the opinion 
of the Meeting this gave cause for concern; the highest standard should be aimed for. 
Cooperation between State Parties was vital in this regard.

(87) ASOC noted the information about future tourism activities and urged all non-
governmental operators to start producing Environmental Impact Assessments consistently 
now as the best way to be prepared when the Protocol comes into force. ASOC also 
urged the Parties to use all possible means to encourage compliance with the provisions of 
Annex I, for instance by making station visits conditional upon such compliance.

Item 10.

Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

a) Inspections during 1995/1996 and those planned for 1996/1997

(88) The US Delegation informed the Meeting that it had submitted a final report on 
the inspections it had carried out under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty between 9 
February and 11 March 1995 (XX ATCM/INF 129). A draft of this paper was circulated 
at the XIXth ATCM/Seoul (XIX ATCM/INF 96).

(89) No inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty were reported by any 
Party since the XIXth ATCM.

The Delegation of Norway stated that an inspection would be carried out from the vessel 
M/V POLAR QUEEN during the 1996/97 austral season.

b) Inspection checklists

(90) The Delegation of Italy tabled a document on a checklist for inspection of remote 
camps (XX ATCM/WP 6) as a follow-up to the offer it had made at the XIXth ATCM. 
Bearing in mind that Resolution 5 (1995), approved at the XIX ATCM, includes four 
checklists for Permanent Stations, Abandoned Stations, Vessels and Waste Disposal Sites 
respectively, and believing that a remote camp is very difficult to define, the Meeting 
concluded that it was not necessary to have another Checklist for remote camps. 
However, it was suggested that a text be added to the end of Checklist A, agreed under 
Resolution 5 (1995), which would provide general guidance to observers who might 
                                                                             17
inspect remote camps and associated facilities. The Meeting therefore agreed 
Resolution...... (1996).

(91)    The Meeting noted the suggestion in the report of the XIXth ATCM (paragraph 
80) that the consolidation of individual checklists into an inspection manual would be 
useful. The Meeting agreed to merge the checklists agreed in Resolution 5 (1995) with the 
text added to Resolution ... (1996) into a single separate publication. However, in the 
light of a proposal made by the Netherlands to review Checklist B in the context of the 
existing shipping provisions contained in Annex IV to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty at the next ATCM, the Meeting agreed to postpone 
consideration of this publication until the next ATCM.

(92)    The Delegation of Chile submitted a paper (XX ATCM WP 17), on the 
enforcement of international maritime conventions and domestic standards on the 
inspection of ships that use Chilean ports and travel from there to Antarctica; and the 
Delegation of Brazil submitted a paper (XX ATCM Inf 87) on its own use of inspection 
checklists by its national Antarctic programme.

(93)    Under this item, the Meeting also examined a Working Paper submitted by the 
Netherlands (XX ATCM/WP 9), on the inspection of ships by port states in order to 
ensure compliance with the requirements of MARPOL 73/78 and Annex IV to the 
Protocol, on the prevention of marine pollution.

(94)    The Meeting expressed its gratitude to the Netherlands for preparing this paper. 
According to some delegations, it should not be excluded that, in principle, some form of 
harmonised inspection by port states might serve a useful purpose. All delegations agreed, 
however, that this issue raised a great many intricate and sensitive questions, and further 
consideration of this subject could be undertaken only after the governments of all 
Consultative Parties would have had the occasion to study the issue in depth. The Meeting 
accordingly decided to further discuss the issue at the XXI ATCM.

(95)    The Meeting furthermore took note of a Working Paper presented by Chile (XX 
ATCM/WP 17), describing Chilean domestic experience with inspections of ships setting 
out to the Antarctic. It was agreed that the making available of experience by individual 
states on conducting inspection of ships in ports was useful and could provide assistance 
to states in determining their national policies on the matter.

(96)    Several delegations expressed the opinion that this matter should be discussed 
under a different agenda item, since inspections by port states would be of a different 
nature than inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, to which this item 
referred. It was accordingly decided to discuss this subject as an agenda item at the XXI 
ATCM.

Item 11.

Data Management

18
(97)	The Meeting welcomed the work carried out by SCAR and COMNAP in preparing the Antarctic Master Directory (AMD) and in developing the Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS), which are expected to be operational by 1997 (XX ATCM/INF 46).

(98)	Several Delegations expressed their appreciation to the four Parties (New Zealand, France, Italy and the United States) that had contributed funding to begin the project, and welcomed the initiatives by New Zealand and France (XX ATCM/INF 16) aimed at organizing technical exchanges to promote software development.

The Meeting encouraged the Parties to complete preparations of National Data Directories (NDDS) as soon as possible and become actively involved in preparing and contributing data set descriptions to the AMD.

The Meeting asked SCAR and COMNAP to report back to the XXI ATCM on progress on AMD and ADDS.

(99)	The Meeting welcomed the COMNAP paper describing AMEN (The Antarctic Managers Electronic Network) (XX ATCM/INF 40). According to this report, 26 of the 30 COMNAP members can currently access AMEN through Internet. Since 1995, the network has been expanded through a homepage on the World Wide Web (WWW).

Attention was drawn by COMNAP to the many advantages of using the WWW, not least of which is the reduced cost per unit of the information exchanged or accessed.

(100)	The Russian Delegation introduced its paper concerning a proposal for an Antarctic station handbook (XX ATCM/INF 78). Several Delegations welcomed this suggestion. However, a number of Delegations were concerned that the proposed handbook might duplicate information already provided in the Annual Exchange of Information under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, and others felt it might be difficult to keep such a handbook up to date. The Meeting noted that this kind of information, including images, could be best presented in an electronic format on the WWW so that it can be easily updated.

The Meeting asked COMNAP to examine this issue further, and report back to the XXI ATCM with advice on how to ensure that the Advance Exchange of Operational Information, including details on research stations, can be made easily available on Internet.

One Delegation suggested that this exchange of information should also include information on available hydrographic charts as well as the best available technologies used to ensure compliance with the Protocol.

(101)	The Delegation of Peru submitted a paper on improvements in transmitting and receiving meteorological information in the Antarctic (XX ATCM/INF 94).

Item 12.

Antarctic Infrastructure, Technology and Operations

                                  19
(102) The Meeting welcomed a paper submitted by WMO on automatic observing 
systems in support of Antarctic meteorology (XX ATCM/INF 23) which refers to the 
increasing importance of automatic observations due to the fact that the conventional 
staffed surface and upper air observational network is static or diminishing. The surface 
automatic observational systems described were Automatic Weather Stations (AWS), 
drifting buoys deployed in the seasonal sea ice zone under the International Program for 
Antarctic Buoys (IPAB), and Upward Looking Sonar (ULS) for measuring sea ice 
thickness. It was suggested that nations with small Antarctic programmes could make a 
significant, but relatively low cost, contribution to science by funding Automatic Weather 
Stations, especially sea ice buoys, that could be deployed for them by other nations 
operating ships or aircraft in Antarctica.

Some Delegations sought further technical information and an indication of costs of such 
work.

The Delegation from the United Kingdom provided additional information on 
meteorological observations from four Automated Geophysical Observatories (AGOs) 
located south of Halley Research Station.

The Russian Delegation indicated that their national Antarctic program is closely 
examining the available technology in order to provide automatic surface meteorological 
observations at Vostok research station.

(103) The Delegation of Australia submitted a paper about the Antarctic Meteorological 
Centre (AMC) at Casey (XX ATCM/INF 25). It was noted that a broad range of 
meteorological services is supplied by the AMC for a number of purposes, including 
information for shipping and aircraft operations. It was noted that an Internet-based 
broadcast system is planned to be installed in the 1996/97 season.

The Delegation of Uruguay submitted a paper on a meteorological satellite receiving 
station operated by its national programme in Antarctica (XX ATCM/INF 75).

The Delegation of Brazil submitted a paper on the utilization of some equipment in its 
station in order to improve the protection of the Antarctic environment (XX ATCM/INF 
60).

(104) The Delegations of Germany and Russia presented their paper on the dismantling 
of Georg Forster Station and the clean-up of Schirmacher Oasis (XX ATCM/INF 82).

The Meeting welcomed this work as a remarkable achievement by the two Parties bearing 
in mind the distances involved in transporting waste from the station to the coast, and the 
large quantities of materials removed. It was recognised that Germany and Russia had 
also carried out an EIA of the removal work, and Russia is undertaking environmental 
monitoring.

The Meeting agreed that the cooperation between the two countries was a model example 
which could be usefully followed by other Parties.

The Delegation of the United Kingdom thanked the Brazilian Antarctic Program for 
completely removing the abandoned British base, Base G, from Keller Peninsula, 
Admiralty Bay, King George Island.

20
Item 13.

Antarctic Science: Major New Initiatives

(105)  France/Italy and Japan presented papers on the Concordia project and the 
European Project on Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) (XX ATCM/INF 17) and deep ice 
core drilling at Dome Fuji station (XX ATCM/INF 65), respectively. The Meeting noted 
that the of information between these last two projects would be interesting and useful.

(106)  The Meeting welcomed the overview of international scientific programmes 
introduced by SCAR (INF 69, 71, 72). The agreement on a Memorandum of 
Understanding had led to the development of closer links between SCAR, the World 
Climate Research Programme (WCRP) and the International Geosphere-Biosphere 
Programme (IGBP), highlighting the clear links between Antarctic regional studies and 
global programmes. SCAR has now been recognised as the Antarctic regional co-
ordinator for these international programmes. The establishment of a SCAR Global 
Change Programme Office was reported; it would be responsible for international co-
ordination and dissemination of information within SCAR. Current programmes are now 
focused on two major themes concerned with palaeo-environmental records from ice cores 
and Antarctic ice-sheet mass balance. Two new programmes were under discussion: 
Antarctic Sea Ice Processes, Ecosystem and Climate (ASPECT) and Antarctic Ice Margin 
Evolution (ANTIME). Another recent proposal concerned the possibility of an aircraft-
based radar survey of ice thickness for the whole of the continental perimeter of 
Antarctica. SCAR also stated its willingness to report to the next ATCM on biological 
diversity , in particular marine biodiversity.

Attention was drawn by the Meeting to the value of the newly published proceedings of 
two SCAR/IUCN workshops which provide current syntheses of subantarctic island 
conservation and environmental education respectively. SCAR reported on progress made 
by the Antarctic Pack Ice Seals programme (APIS), Coastal and Shelf Ecology of the 
Antarctic Sea Ice Zone (CS-EASIZ), Biological Investigations of Terrestrial Antarctic 
Systems (BIOTAS), Antarctic Geopase Observatory Network (AGONET), and on the 
workshop on the reported sub-glacial lake at Vostok Station. Details of the planned 
drilling at Cape Roberts were reported: over the next two Antarctic seasons, the intention 
is to extract cores from the floor of the Ross Sea spanning the period 40–200 million 
years ago. This programme has links with the new proposals for sites for the Ocean 
Drilling Programme (ODP). Concern was expressed by some Delegations about the 
logistic costs of some of these major programmes.

(107)  Further investigations of the subglacial Lake Vostok were reported by Russia 
(XX ATCM/INF 83), which had undertaken detailed seismic and radio-echo sounding 
investigations as suggested by the SCAR workshop. The importance of this multi-
disciplinary project was recognised by the Meeting, which encouraged international 
cooperation in its future investigation. It was reported by SCAR that the workshop had 
stressed that before any sampling of the lake could be considered both technical 
developments and an Environmental Impact Assessment would have to be undertaken. 
Several Delegations considered that the value of future studies could be compromised if
21
the lake were to be accidentally polluted as a consequence of planned ice coring above it.
The Meeting urged that Russia take the necessary steps to ensure that the planned ice
coring is stopped at a safe distance above the reported lake so that there is no risk of
polluting it.

The United Kingdom drew attention to the extensive discussion held about this project as
an example of the value of discussing major science issues at the next ATCMs.

(108) The Meeting welcomed the WMO report on the Antarctic ozone current status
(XX ATCM/INF 22), which indicated that the extent and depth of the 1995 ozone hole
over Antarctica were similar to those of recent years, but that it persisted longer into
December. The value of ozone sounding to observe the vertical profile of ozone at sub
Antarctic islands was emphasized.

The Delegation of Peru submitted a paper on the evaluation of the composition of the
troposphere and stratosphere (XX ATCM/INF 93), conducted on the basis of previous
WMO suggestions.

(109) Finally, several information papers on the major science initiatives being
undertaken by national Antarctic programmes were presented by the Delegations of
Australia (XX ATCM/INF 41), Belgium (XX ATCM/INF 54, Peru (XX ATCM/INF 92
and 95), Bulgaria (XX ATCM/INF 122 and 123), and the United Kingdom (XX
ATCM/INF 131).

(110) The Delegation of Peru informed the Meeting about the results of a study on
environmental radioactivity in the Antarctic begun during the last austral summer season
(XX ATCM/INF 91), and offered to establish an Antarctic programme for environmental
radiological monitoring with the participation of other interested Parties.

Item 14.

Cultural and Aesthetic Values of the Antarctic

(111) Chile introduced working paper 23 (XX ATCM/WP 23) stressing the symbolic
value of Antarctica. The purpose of the Working Paper was to raise the question of how
the cultural and aesthetic values of the Antarctic could be highlighted. The Working Paper
also contained a draft Resolution to that end.

(112) There was consensus that these issues raised in the Working Paper are of great
importance, a fact which is also reflected in various parts of the Protocol. Therefore, a
Resolution was adopted. It is attached to this Final Report in Part .., Annex .. .

(113) It was generally recognised that the special value of Antarctica could be
promoted by educating young people and by the work of artists.

(114) As regards the possible role to be played by the Parties, several delegates
indicated their support for measures to actively promote trips by writers and artists in
general. Some delegates suggested, however, that in order to focus attention on the
cultural and aesthetic values, writers and artists could be included in national expeditions.

22
In so doing, the Parties should concentrate particularly on those forms of artistic and cultural expression which could convey the beauty of Antarctica to people who had not been there.

(115)  The ASOC delegate noted that in the discussions on practical matters such as monitoring, liability and Environmental Impact Assessment, factors such as intrinsic, aesthetic and wilderness values were too often considered too complex; ASOC expressed the hope that future discussion of this agenda item would contribute to a better understanding of how to deal with these values, as required by the Protocol (notably Article 3(1) and Annex I, Article 3).

Item 15.

Education and Training

(116)  Several papers on the training programmes developed by national operators for personnel travelling to Antarctica were presented by New Zealand, Chile, Brazil and South Africa (XX ATCM/INF 9, 31, 55 and 107 respectively). The use of an instructions manual and a code of conduct for visitors to Antarctica was described by Argentina and New Zealand (XX ATCM/INF 86 and 68, respectively). In addition, IAATO presented papers describing an expedition leaders Handbook and a slide presentation on Recommendation XVIII-1 (XX ATCM/INF 99 and 101 respectively).

The Meeting agreed that there is merit in providing information to the general public about Antarctica. Papers were presented by Australia and Brazil as to how they provide such information (XX ATCM/INF 33 and 55 respectively). Several Delegations recognised the importance of retaining education and training as an agenda item.

(117)  The Meeting welcomed the suggestions presented by SCAR and IUCN (XX ATCM INF/70 and 53, respectively). The Meeting recognized the value of having "layman's guides" to the Protocol prepared in various languages to ensure that visitors to Antarctica are aware of the intent and general provisions of the Protocol. It was noted that such guides might not accurately identify legal obligations embodied in the Protocol and national laws. This could be made clear in the layman's guides by adding a disclaimer to the text.

(118)  The meeting recognized the need to facilitate public acces to Antarctic Treaty documentation, but stressed it could be achieved in various ways. The Meeting acknowledged that the identification of one national depository library, as recommended by SCAR and IUCN, may, in some cases, prove not to be the best way to achieve this.

(119)  The Meeting encouraged IUCN to update and expand its initial inventory of environmental education and training, and present this at the next ATCM. The Delegation from the United Kingdom offered to consult with interested Parties, and work with SCAR and IUCN to produce substantive proposals in this field for discussion at the next meeting.

23
(120) The Meeting welcomed the developments presented by IAATO on medical screening of Antarctic tourists (XX ATCM/INF 77). IAATO thanked COMNAP for its constructive expressions of concerns about tour operations.

Item 16.

Safety Issues

(121)  On this item, papers were presented on maritime safety in Antarctica by the Delegation of Chile (XX ATCM/INF 24); by the Belgian Delegation on oil spill modelling in the Weddell Sea (XX ATCM/INF 47); by the Delegation of Brazil on contingency planning (XX ATCM/INF 56); and by IAATO on medical emergency contingency plans (XX ATCM/INF 76). Several Delegations made technical comments on some of these papers.

Items 17/19.

Environmental Protection Measures and their Effectiveness

(122) The delegations of Brazil and COMNAP introduced their papers (XX ATCM/INF 35, XX ATCM/WP 11 respectively).

(123) The Meeting welcomed the report from Brazil setting out technical aspects of station operations in Antarctica. It believed that such information exchange was important if ways of minimising environmental impacts were to be sought. The Meeting urged that more Parties to the Treaty provide information as to how they have introduced additional technical measures to address the requirements of the Protocol. The Meeting noted that experience from the Arctic could also be of value.

(124) The United Kingdom suggested that in relation to the information exchange required by article 13 of the Protocol the technical information could in the future be provided to the TEWG whilst that of a legal administrative nature can remain under agenda item 6.

(125) Referring to paragraph 118 of the final report of the XIX ATCM in Seoul, the introduction of non-native species was brought to the attention of the Meeting. Concerns were also raised about the introduction of non-native species in ballast water and the introduction of non-native species of grasses. Solutions for safer operations should be identified to minimise these introductions as there is evidence that non-native species survive better than expected. Parties to the Antarctic Treaty were encouraged again to take this up and make thorough checks of their facilities in Antarctica. In this respect also reference was made to an information paper tabled by Japan (XX ATCM/INF 66).

(126) The Meeting noted with appreciation the report from COMNAP on Best Available Techniques (XX ATCM WP/11) and endorsed its findings. It requested COMNAP to keep this issue under regular review and to provide further reports when appropriate in

24
the light of changing technologies which might be applicable to Antarctica. This 
information could be very helpful to assess future EIA reports.

Item 18.

Application and Implementation of EIA procedures

(127) Working papers (XX ATCM/WP 1, 8, 11, 25, 27, 28) were tabled by 
respectively New Zealand, Italy, COMNAP, the United States, South Africa and 
Uruguay.

(128) It was noted that working paper (XX ATCM/WP 8) might be submitted under 
agenda item 10 concerning shipping regulations and could be considered with working 
papers (XX ATCM/WP 9 and 17).

(129) New Zealand presented Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 1) on follow-up 
procedures relating to changes in the Cape Roberts CEE. The changes were outlined and 
the delegation commented that the process followed had been valuable in the 
implementation of the CEE. Concerning the planned drilling operations, the question was 
raised of what consideration had been given to the potential effects on the seafloor and the 
benthic communities. The delegation of New Zealand responded that the CEE addressed 
the question of impacts on the seabed and set out the monitoring requirements during the 
drilling programme and would report back to future ATCMs on the results of such 
work.New Zealand also informed the Meeting about Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 
3) on its experience and practice with preliminary environmental assessment of science 
proposals.

(130) South Africa was congratulated on being open and transparent in its report (XX 
ATCM/WP 27) on the construction of the new SANAE IV station, describing the detail 
of conforming to its CEE. This follow-up process carried out by South Africa was a 
valuable example and a learning exercise and that this process of reporting should be 
employed by those carrying out CEEs. One delegation expressed concern about the 
reported open burning during the 1995/96 construction at the old SANAE III station. It 
was recognised that open burning would be phased out in accordance with Annex III 
Article 3, but this activity at SANAE was however undertaken on the basis of safety 
considerations in accordance with Annex III Article 12 and only after a supplementing 
IEE. The fact that the area had been thoroughly cleaned up immediately after the open 
burning was also mentioned.

(131) The Meeting agreed that it was important to find mechanisms that provide feedback 
from the work accomplished by different countries on environmental impact assessments. 
The Meeting suggested that post-analyses of environmental assessments should become 
standard practice, and that Parties should report on the results of these analyses to the 
ATCM as to how they have implemented those measures. It was recognised that a 
mechanism to consider these reports needed to be developed.

25
(132) The IEEs submitted by New Zealand tour operators (XX ATCM/INF 4 and 5) were welcomed. The Meeting took the view that IAATO should be encouraged to assist its members to produce EIAs.

(133) As requested by Resolution 6 (1995) an Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 19) was tabled by the Netherlands. Also, the United States introduced a Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 25) which provided a list of environmental assessments (IEEs) prepared by the United States in 1995. The Meeting noted that only a small number of Parties had provided lists of IEEs and CEEs prepared by or submitted to them since the last ATCM as required by Resolution 6 (1995). Attention was drawn to the fact that provision of such lists in respect of IEEs would be an obligation on Parties under Article 6(1) of Annex I when the Protocol entered into force. The Meeting stressed that all Parties should comply with Resolution 6 (1995) and submit an annual return, including nil returns, of IEEs and CEEs. The Meeting urged Parties, in accordance with ATCM XIX Resolution 6, to submit to the host of the next ATCM by 1 March 1997, a list of all IEEs and CEEs prepared by them in the preceding year. Further, the Meeting encouraged the host of the next ATCM to request and, in advance of the next ATCM, distribute a representative sample of IEEs prepared by Parties in accordance with Article 2 of Protocol Annex I.

(134) The United Kingdom tabled a paper (XX ATCM/INF 8) which undertook a review of EIAs undertaken for proposed activities in Antarctica. New Zealand offered to coordinate further work on this and report back to the XXI ATCM.

(135) It was suggested that IEEs and CEEs could be made readily available by releasing them on the Internet. This practice has indeed already been initiated by some Parties.

(136) The Meeting reiterated that in considering potential impacts on the environment during the EIA process, the values as mentioned in Article 3, paragraph 1 of the Protocol should be included.

(137) The Meeting agreed that the paper tabled by New Zealand (XX ATCM/INF 2) was valuable and formed an important contribution to the understanding and interpretation of the terms "minor" and "transitory" as used in the Madrid Protocol.

(138) The Meeting noted that the nature and significance of possible environmental impacts could be affected by a range of variables including the nature, scale, location and timing of the activity; the experience of the organization or individuals conducting the activity; and other activities that have been or are being conducted in or near the area of the activity in question. With regard to the last point, it was noted that identifications and considerations of possible cumulative impacts is an important part of environmental impact assessment.

(139) The terms "minor" and "transitory" are interpreted by the Treaty Parties in their implementation of Annex I and a great deal of experience in producing IEEs and CEEs has accumulated. Many IEEs and CEEs have been presented as Information Papers at the ATCM meetings. However, there is at
26
present no systematic approach to utilising and learning from 
this experience.

(140) Valuable suggestions were put forward as to how the 
lists and matrices in the Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 2) 
could be developed and expanded. It was recognized that the 
limited time available for discussion did not allow for more 
than a general exchange of views on possible ways forward.

(141) The Meeting noted with appreciation the offer by New 
Zealand to coordinate intersessional work on the basis of 
Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 2), both on developing a 
further understanding of the terms "minor" and "transitory" 
and a network of Environmental Officers of National Antarctic 
Programmes to enhance the mutual understanding of EIA 
processes. New Zealand will report back to the next ATCM on 
these aspects. It was decided that states concerned would send 
to New Zealand the names of their respective experts.

(142) The Meeting's attention was drawn to IUCN's plans (XX 
ATCM/INF 85) to host a workshop on cumulative impacts in 
Washington DC, USA, in September 1996. The workshop will draw 
on the work of the two SCAR/COMNAP workshops on monitoring 
held in October 1995 and March 1996, and will be designed to 
produce outcomes that are of practical use to Antarctic 
operators and the Antarctic Treaty System. In order to ensure 
maximum usefulness, delegates were asked to send comments on 
content to the workshop organisers.

Item 20.

The Antarctic Protected Area System

a) Proposals for Revised and New Management Plans

(143) The Meeting noted the growing problem associated with 
the interim period ahead of the approval of Recommendation 
XVI-10. It urged Parties to consider approval of 
Recommendation XVII-10 under the terms of Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty so that it might become effective at the 
earliest possible opportunity.

(144) The United Kingdom and the United States of America 
delegations tabled Working Papers (XX ATCM/WP 3 and 24, 
respectively) which set out revised management plans for the 
following Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

SSSI No.  9     - Rothera Point, Adelaide Island
SSSI No. 19     - Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria 
Land
                 27
(145) The ATCM adopted Measure... (1996) relating to 
management plans for the above Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest.

(146) The Meeting noted that clear and accurate maps were an 
important part of the Management Plans and recognised that 
there were as yet no guidelines on the preparation of maps for 
protected areas. SCAR was asked to ensure that such guidelines 
be drawn up and included in the Management Plan Handbook, and 
to consider how high quality maps could be made available.

(147) The delegation of Australia tabled Working Paper (XX 
ATCM/WP 26) which proposed the extension of the date of expiry 
of the management plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest 
No. 25. The meeting noted that the management plans for a 
number of other Sites of Special Scientific Interest expire 
before the year 2000 and that the extensions of Sites 13 and 
20 which had been considered at XIX ATCM had, as a result of 
an oversight, not been included in a relevant Resolution. 
Consistent with Resolution 7 (1995), the ATCM adopted Resol-
ution... (1996) to extend the expiry dates of these plans to 
31 December 2000.

(148) The delegations of Australia and Norway tabled Working 
Paper (XX ATCM/WP 14 rev1) nominating Mikkelsen Cairn, 
Vestfold Hills as a Historical Site. The ATCM adopted Measure 
.... (1996) to add this site to the "List of Historic 
Monuments Identified and Described by proposing Government or 
Governments".

(149) The delegations of Brazil and Poland tabled Working 
Paper (XX ATCM/WP 15) proposing that Admiralty Bay, King 
George Island (South Shetland Islands) be designated as an 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area. A contact group was 
organised to examine the issue and arrive at an agreed text. 
The ATCM adopted the proposed Management Plan as set out in 
Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 15 rev2), that the plan be annexed 
to the report of the ATCM and that Parties agree to comply 
with it on a voluntary basis until such time as Annex V to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
becomes effective under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. 
The ATCM decided that when Annex V becomes effective the area 
covered by the Management Plan will become an ASMA after an 
evaluation of the experience gained and, if necessary, a 
revision of the Management Plan.

(150) The Meeting noted Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 30) 
submitted by Argentina, which sets out the history of the 
stone hut designated as Historic Site No 39 which sheltered 
three members of the Nordenskiöld expedition in 1902.

b) Site Inspections
                                                                             28
(151) Since only one Information Paper had been submitted there was no particular discussion on this item.

c)  Means for Evaluating Possible Gaps in the System

(152) The Meeting examined working papers tabled by the Netherlands (XX ATCM/WP 5) and the United Kingdom (XX ATCM/WP 16) which examine the status of protected areas and how they will be affected by the provisions of Annex V. It noted that under the terms of Article 3(3) of Annex V SSSIs and SPAs would automatically become ASPAs whilst Historic Sites and Monuments could become ASMAs, ASPAs or be simply listed. As for the South West Anvers Island MPA and the Dufek Massif SRA the United States announced that it would provide Annex V Management Plans for these areas at some time after Annex V has taken effect, so that the areas can be taken up into the new system. The Meeting discussed the requirement in Article 6(2) of Annex V that no marine area should be designated as an ASPA or ASMA without the prior approval of CCAMLR. It agreed that a list of existing SSSIs containing marine areas be submitted to the Commission of CCAMLR for their consideration.

(153) The delegation of Italy tabled Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 13) on the protection of Historic Sites and Monuments. The Meeting considered that a Party intending to nominate a site for listing as a Historic Site or Monument, or a Party writing a site Management Plan, should consult the originating Party for the site. It considered that the most appropriate way of achieving this was through a Resolution. The Meeting adopted Resolution ... (1996).

(154) A proposal for a renumbering of Antarctic protected areas was included in a joint working paper tabled by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands (XX ATCM/WP 18 rev1). The Meeting endorsed the renumbering system proposed in this paper, but noted that the proposal regarding amalgamating sites should not preempt the revision of management plans. The Meeting recognised that Management Plans for SSSIs designated by Recommendation VIII-4, and subsequent Recommendations, have been held under voluntary provisions. Nevertheless, it acknowledged that SSSIs renumbered using 3-digit numbers and held under revised Management Plans in accordance with Annex V contained mandatory provisions and prohibited access except in accordance with a permit. It decided that such sites must be held under a Measure to be approved under the terms of Article IX of the Treaty. The net effect of this would be that, until such time as Annex V entered into force, two forms of SSSI would exist. Sites of a voluntary nature held under previous Recommendations and numbered by 2 digits, and sites of a mandatory nature held under Measures and numbered with 3 digits. But until Annex V enters into force, neither type of SSSI would require a permit for entry. The Meeting adopted Resolution .... (1996). 
29
(155) Working Paper (XX ATCM/WP 16) tabled by the United Kingdom draws attention to the need for clarification of the use of mandatory prohibitions within Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas as set out at Paragraphs 111 and 112 of the report of ATCM XVIII (Kyoto, 1994). The United Kingdom delegation's view is that the intention of the drafters of the Annex V had been to provide a clear distinction between ASPAs, held under mandatory provisions and ASMAs held under exhortatory provisions.

(156) The Australian delegation considers that there are situations in which mandatory provisions may need to be applied to ASMAs (eg to prohibit the construction of roads in a particular zone) and that it may not be practical or desirable to up-grade the area to an ASPA and thus require all access to be subject to the issue of a permit. The Australian delegation considers that Article 5, 3 (f) of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty clearly provides for mandatory provisions under an ASMA. Australia therefore proposed that in order to make it clear that a provision in an ASMA is mandatory such provisions (where required) be included in a separate section of the Management Plan under the heading "Mandatory Provisions".

(157) Some delegations agreed with the principle that prohibition of specific activities within ASMAs was a valuable tool for management. The Meeting acknowledged that a number of Parties had no legal means in domestic law to address any such prohibition. One delegation had doubts about mandatory provisions in ASMAs. The Meeting considered that further work was needed to clarify this matter.

(158) The Meeting considered information papers (XX ATCM/INF 12 and 42) submitted by the Netherlands and the United Kingdom respectively. The United States noted that Management Plans for protected areas are included in a document describing United States legislation implementing the Agreed Measures and other aspects of the Antarctic Treaty System and that the document has been provided to United States tour operators and is available on request. The Meeting decided that (XX ATCM/INF 12 rev.1) would be attached as an Annex to the Final Report. The United Kingdom indicated that it would circulate (XX ATCM/INF 42) in due course. It was suggested that Parties should analyse this Information Paper and send their comments and/or amendments to the United Kingdom by 1 September 1996.

(159) An Information Paper submitted by IUCN (XX ATCM/INF 64 Rev.2) concerning the protection and conservation of sub-Antarctic Islands was brought to the attention of the Meeting. IUCN suggested that Management Plans be developed for such Islands that do not have them in order to enhance the conservation of the wider Southern region.

30
Item 21.

Collection, Archiving, Exchange and Evaluation of Environmental 
Information

(160) Under this agenda item a discussion took place about the 
structure of the agenda. In this context it was noted that 
annotating the agenda items might be useful.

Item 22.

Environmental Monitoring and the State of the Antarctic 
Environment

(161) The Republic of Korea, Russia and ASOC presented 
Information Papers (XX ATCM/INF 62, 63 and 84) on this item.

(162) Several delegations welcomed the ASOC Paper (XX ATCM/INFO 
63) on EIA monitoring at World Park Base. The report noted that 
preliminary analyses from the 1995/96 season data indicated that 
the environmental impact on the site of former World Park Base 
was negligible and within the limits predicted in past EIAs. 
Greenpeace had concluded that as a result no further monitoring 
would be undertaken. The Meeting noted this information as 
evidence that monitoring is not necessarily an indefinite 
activity. New Zealand noted that Information Paper (XX ATCM/INF 
10) discussed the follow-up to the IEE decommissioning of Vanda 
Station, including monitoring and remedial activities.

(163) SCAR and COMNAP (XX ATCM/INF xx) reported on two technical 
workshops on environmental monitoring organised by them. Nineteen 
countries attended these meetings which were successful in 
addressing the terms of reference set out by the ATCM. After 
approval by SCAR and COMNAP a Working Paper with recommendations 
on environmental monitoring, together with any necessary 
supporting Information Papers, will be provided for the XXI ATCM.

(164)  The suggestion was made that SCAR should examine the 
question of a report on the State of the Antarctic Environment 
and, in consultation with other appropriate organisations, 
provide a proposal on how to prepare such a report to the XXI 
ATCM.

Item 23.

Preparation of the XXI Consultative Meeting

a)  Date and Place of Next Meeting

(165)  Under this agenda item the UK tabled XX ATCM/WP 2. This 
paper set out the reasons for having ATCMs in April or May. The 
                                                                 31
Meeting noted that the paper gave convincing arguments, but that host countries may have reasons for somewhat deviating from the schedule presented in the paper.

(166)     The Meeting very much welcomed the invitation of New Zealand to host the XXIth Consultative Meeting in Christchurch from 19 - 30 May 1997.

(167)     The Meeting also welcomed the invitation of the UK to host the next intersessional meeting of the Group of Legal Experts on Liability in Cambridge from 7 - 11 October 1996.

b) Invitations of International and Non-Governmental Organizations

(168)     The Meeting decided that the following international and non-governmental organizations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica shall be invited to designate an Expert to the XXIth ATCM in order to assist it in its substantive work: UNEP, ASOC, IHO, IMO, IOC, IUCN, WMO, WTO, IAATO and PATA.

(169)     With reference to Rule 41 of the Revised Rules of Procedure of 1992, it was decided that these experts could attend the Meeting during the discussion of all items on the Preliminary Agenda of the XXI Consultative Meeting except for the following:
    4.      Adoption of Agenda
    7.      Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System
    16(b)  Preparation of the XXII Consultative Meeting

c) Preparation of the Agenda of the XXI Consultative Meeting

(170)     The Meeting decided to
-    take up environmental matters as much as possible under agenda items reflecting issues that will be addressed by the Protocol and its Annexes after these have come into force;
-    take up the issues discussed by WG II in the present Meeting under four new agenda items: inspections, operations issues, science issues, and education issues;
-    let the allocation of agenda items to Working Groups be the subject of a proposal by the Host Country concerned at a later stage.

(171)     The Meeting felt there is a need for agenda items to be annotated. It was recognized this would put an additional burden on Host Countries. The most efficient as well as effective way to deal with this would be for ATCPs to indicate in advance what, if any, issues they should want to be discussed under the various agenda items. ATCPs should do this at the same time they may propose additional agenda items, i.e. no later than 180 days

32
before the next Consultative Meeting (Rule 36). Although ATCPs 
might use this opportunity to announce their intention to produce 
Working Papers on the issues concerned, the indication that they 
should like to see an issue discussed should in no way entail an 
obligation to come up with a Working Paper on the subject. On the 
basis of the indications received the Host Country could then 
produce an annotated provisional agenda to be sent to the other 
ATCPs no later than 120 days before the Meeting (Rule 37).

(172)	The Meeting observed that in the Draft Preliminary 
Agenda submitted to it a number of agenda items are followed by 
text in parentheses. It noted that such text is not an 
annotation: it is merely an explanation of the sort of issues 
that could be discussed under the agenda item concerned and it 
is not intended to convey the message that such issues should be 
discussed. It was noted that port state control would be dealt 
with under agenda item 6.e of the preliminary agenda.

(173)	The Meeting approved the Preliminary Agenda of the 
XXIth Consultative Meeting, appended as Annex .

Item 24.

Any Other Business

(174)	The Chairman read out the text of a message from the 
Meeting to the Stations in the Antarctic.

(175)	The Delegation of Chile tabled XX ATCM/WP 20 which 
contained a draft resolution on a nuclear-test ban treaty and 
cooperation by Antarctic Treaty Parties with an international 
monitoring system to ensure compliance with the CTBT. The Meeting 
gave its support to the sentiment expressed by the paper, it was 
glad to note that the negotiations in Geneve progressed well, and 
it hoped that they would soon come to a successful conclusion.

(176)	The Delegation of the UK asked for more innovative and 
creative thinking on the part of the ATCM. It would be good to 
have a full day of brainstorming by the Heads of Delegations at 
the next ATCM. The Delegation of New Zealand expressed its 
readiness to allocate time for this purpose.

Item 25

Adoption of the Report

Item 26

Closing of the Meeting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        33
Draft Resolution .. (1996)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties:

Noting that Antarctica has been the subject of significant 
works of art, literature and music;

Recognising that the unique character of Antarctica itself 
represents an inspiration for protecting its values;

Recommend:

Promotion of understanding and appreciation of the values of 
Antarctica,  in particular its scientific,  aesthetic and 
wilderness values, including through:

    a)  Educational opportunities,  in  particular  for young 
        persons, and
    b)  The contribution of writers, artists and musicians.

 
                                                                 34
RESOLUTION ... (1996)

The Representatives,
Recalling Resolution 5 (1995) on Antarctic Inspection
Checklists;
Considering that under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty
inspections of remote field camps may be undertaken, and
guidance in planning and carrying out such inspections
might be helpful;

Recommend:
Adding the following text at the end of Checklist A
"Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations"
attached to Resolution 5 (1995):

"This checklist could be used to help prepare for, and
to guide, inspections of remote field camps as well as
permanent stations and associated facilities. Some
items on the checklist may not be relevant to the
inspection of remote field camps. When planning
inspections, the checklist should be examined and
adapted for the particular facility to be inspected."



35
Measure...( 1996)

Revised Description and Management Plan for Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval 
in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic 
Treaty,

For the Sites of Special Scientific Interest mentioned below.

(i)     the Management Plan inserted in the Annex to Recommendation 
        XIII-8 on the Facilitation of scientific research: Sites of 
        Special Scientific Interest to be deleted.

(ii)    the relevant Management Plan of the Sites of Special Scien-
        tific Interest, annexed to this Measure, be inserted in the 
        Annex to Recommendation XIII-8 on the Facilitation of 
        scientific research: Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

The Sites of Special Scientific Interest concerned are:

SSSI No 9 Rothera Point, Adelaide Island        
SSSI No 19 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land.

iii)    that they ensure their nationals comply with mandatory 
        provisions of the new Management Plan

36
Resolution... (1996)

Extension of the Expiry Dates 
for Sites of Special Scientific Interest

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties,

Recalling Recommendations VIII-3 and XII-5, and Resolution 
7/1995;

Noting that experience of the practical effect of the Management 
Plans for these sites has shown them to be an effective means of 
reducing the risks of interference with science in areas of 
special scientific interest; and

Conscious of the advantage of further harmonising the expiry 
dates of Sites of Special Scientific Interest pending the entry 
into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty and Annex V to that Protocol.

Recommend that;

1.    The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
      numbers 13 and 20 which were considered at XIX ATCM be 
      extended to 31 December 2000.

2.    The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
      numbers 2, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 be extended from 31 
      December 1997 to 31 December 2000.

3.    The date of expiry of Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
      numbers 29, 31 and 32 be extended from 31 December 1999 to 
      31 December 2000.

4.    The Governments of the Consultative Parties should use 
      their best endeavours to ensure, in accordance with 
      paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation VII-3, that the 
      Management Plans for these sites are complied with.

      
37
Measure...( 1996)

Antarctic Protected Area System: New Historic Sites and 
Monuments

The representatives

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16 
and XIV-8, Measures 4 and 5 (1995) and Resolution 8 (1995), 
Recommend to their governments the following Measure for approval 
for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the 
Antarctic Treaty

to add the following historic monuments to the "List of Historic 
Monuments Identified and Described by the proposing Government 
of Governments" annexed to recommendation VII-9, thereby 
guaranteeing its full protection and respect as envisaged by the 
Recommendations noted above.

Mikkelsen Cairn, Tryne Islands, Vestfold Hills. A rock cairn and 
a wooden mast erected by the landing party led by Captain Klarius 
Mikkelsen of the Norwegian whaling ship Thorshavn and including 
Caroline Mikkelsen, Captain Mikkelsen's wife, the first women to 
set foot on East Antarctica. The cairn, at latitude 68°22'34''S 
longitude 78°24'33''E was discovered by Australian National 
Antarctic Research Expedition field parties in 1957 and again in 
1995.

 
                                                                 38
Resolution... (1996)

Effective management and conservation of Historic Sites and 
Monuments

The Representatives

Noting the need to ensure the effective management and 
conservation of Historic Sites or Monuments; 
Aware that those who originally created Historic Sites or 
Monuments are not necessarily the same as the designators for the 
Sites or the proposers of Management Plans for some sites;

Recognising the particular historic and cultural importance of 
such sites to originating Parties;

Recommend that

During the preparations for the Listing of a Historic Site or 
Monument, or the writing of a Site Management Plan, adequate 
liaison is accorded by the proposing Party with the originator 
of the Historic Site or Monument and other Parties, as 
appropriate.

39
Resolution... (1996)

Revised renumbering of Antarctic Protected Areas

The Representatives

Noting the requirement in Article 3(3) of Annex V that all SPAs 
and SSSIs designated as such by past ATCMs should, on entry into 
force of Annex V, be renamed and renumbered accordingly;

Acknowledging that at the XIX ATCM the Parties agreed to adopt 
a numbering system based on the use of three digits;

Taking account of the gaps in the existing numbering system;

Recommend that:

1.    The numbering system for ASPAs annexed to this Resolution 
      be adopted; and

2.    The three-digit numbers should be introduced at the same 
      time as an Annex V Management Plan is adopted by the ATCM 
      for any protected area.

3.    Where an SPA and SSSI are collocated that they be assigned 
      separate numbers so as not to preempt any review of the 
      Management Plans for those areas.

 
40
Preliminary agenda of the XXI ATCM

1.      Opening of the Meeting

2.      Election of Officers

3.      Opening Addresses

4.      Adoption of Agenda

5.      Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports

      a)      under Recommendation XIII-(2):

            i)      the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty

            ii)      the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

            iii)      the Head of the Delegation of Australia in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government for the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

            iv)      the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as Representative of the Depositary Government of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

            v)      the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)

            vi)      the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP)

      b)      in relation to the Article III(2) of the Antarctic Treaty

6.      Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

      a)      General Matters (implementation by ATCPs, relation with other treaties)

      b)      Matters covered by Annex I (EIAs)

      c)      Matters covered by Annex II (fauna and flora)
d)   Matters covered by Annex III
      (waste)

e)   Matters covered by Annex IV
      (marine pollution)

f)   Matters covered by Annex V
      (areas, sites, monuments)

g)   Matters related to Article 16 of the Environmental Protocol

7.   Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

8.   Relevance of Developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic
      (political and administrative aspects; environmental, technical, scientific and logistic
      aspects)

9.   Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area

10.  Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty
      (inspections and inspection checklists)

11.  Operations Issues
      (data management; collection, archiving, exchange and evaluation of environmental
      information; infrastructure and technology; safety issues)

12.  Science Issues
      (status of present programmes, future actions and programmes, recent developments
      of importance, plans for cooperation)

13.  Education Issues
      (education, training, public awareness)

14.  Environmental Monitoring and the State of the Antarctic Environment

15.  Specific Environmental Protection Measures

(15bis Contingent upon the Protocol's having come into force)
(     Starting up the Committee for Environmental Protection)
16. Preparation of the XXII Consultative Meeting
    a)	Date and place of the XXII ATCM
    b)	Invitations of International and Non-Governmental Organizations
    c)	Preparation of the Agenda of the XXII ATCM

17. Any other Business

18. Adoption of the Report

19. Closing of the Meeting
