ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE        XX КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/WP 35
                                  May 1996
                                  Original: English

 
FINAL REPORT OF WORKING GROUP I

(Submitted by the Secretariat)
Draft Report of Working Group I to the XX ATCM

(1) The following items were on the Agenda of Working Group 
I:

5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:
      Reports

      c) Relevance of developments in the Arctic 
         and the Antarctic

6. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
   Antarctic Treaty

      a) Implementation

      b) Liability Annex

      c) Relation with other Environmental Treaties

7. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

      a) Organisational Aspects (Including 
         Secretariat)

      b) Operation of the TEWG

      c) Examination of Recommendations

      d) Exchange of Information

8. Questions Related to the Exercise of 
   Jurisdiction in Antarctica

9. Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the 
   Antarctic Treaty Area

1
10. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty
(as far as related to port state control)

14. Cultural and Aesthetic Values of the Antarctic
[Proposed by Chile]

(2) Working Group I recommends to the Plenary of the XXI ATCM that the following paragraphs be included in the Final Report of that Meeting.

Item 5.
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports
c) Relevance of developments in the Arctic and the Antarctic

(3) Various countries congratulated Canada on its successful chairmanship of the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS) and the productive Third Ministerial Meeting of the AEPS which was held in Inuvik, Canada, from 19 to 21 March 1996. This Meeting was attended by a representative from the Netherlands in its capacity as host of the XX ATCM. The statement by the Netherlands as the next ATCM's host Government and the report of the third Ministerial Conference were distributed at the XX ATCM (XX ATCM/INF 26). The hope that co-operation between the Arctic countries might soon culminate in the formal establishment of the Arctic Council was expressed.

(4) The Meeting emphasised the desirability of information exchange between the Antarctic and Arctic Processes. The Meeting was pleased to note that since 1994 - the year in which this item was placed on the ATCM agenda - much had been done to ensure co-ordination in this area. It supported the view of the Netherlands that the most appropriate means of achieving effective exchange of information was via the AEPS

2
host Government. It noted that seven of the eight Arctic 
States are also Parties to the Antarctic Treaty.

(5) The Meeting therefore agreed that the established 
procedure to ensure the timely exchange of information on 
Arctic and Antarctic issues should be continued and expanded. 
To that end, the Meeting agreed that the Government of Norway, 
as Host Government of the next Ministerial Meeting of the 
Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy, should ensure that 
the Final Report, as well as other relevant documents of the 
XX and XXI ATCMs be made available to the Ministerial Meeting, 
and requested that relevant documents from the next AEPS 
Ministerial Meeting as well as other important Arctic Meetings 
be made available to participants at the XXII ATCM.

(6) Emphasis was placed on the need to bear in mind that, as 
far as co-ordination was concerned, the political and legal 
context governing activities in the Arctic and the Antarctic 
differed considerably.

(7) Furthermore, the Meeting believed that exchange of 
information should not be confined to the exchange of 
information on issues referred to in paragraph (5). It noted 
the considerable range of technical and scientific projects 
being undertaken in the Arctic and recommended that the 
exchange be broadened to address these issues. Accordingly, 
the Meeting recommended that in considering any further agenda 
items on this issue, their environmental, technical, 
scientific or logistic aspects be dealt with as well as their 
political and administrative aspects. The agenda item could be 
entitled:

    "Relevance of developments in the Arctic and the 
Antarctic."

Item 6
                                 3
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a)     Implementation

(8) The Meeting was encouraged by the fact that 22 of the 26 
Consultative Parties had now ratified the Protocol. The 
remaining four Consultative Parties indicated that while the 
rapid entry into force of the Protocol is desirable, it is 
difficult for them to give an exact timeframe for 
ratification.

(9)     Given the desirability of exchanging information on the 
implementation of the Protocol within national legal systems, 
Chile and the United Kingdom were thanked for the information 
provided in XX ATCM/WP 19, XX ATCM/INF 6 and XX ATCM/INF 7, 
respectively. Various other delegations provided a verbal 
summary of the way in which national implementing legislation 
pertaining to the Protocol had been enacted.

b)     Liability Annex

(10) Professor Wolfrum of Germany summarised the deliberations 
of Group of Legal Experts on liability which met during the 
first week of the ATCM. The discussion of the Group proceeded 
on the basis of the "Fifth Offering" submitted by Professor 
Wolfrum and a draft submitted by the United States Delegation 
on "Annex VI" to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty (XX ATCM/INF 43). Professor Wolfrum 
stressed that substantial progress had been made during the 
intersessional meeting in Brussels, which was held from 27 
through 30 November 1995, and during the first week of the XX 
ATCM. He noted, as on a previous occasion, that, in future 
meetings, the participation of experts with directly relevant 
scientific, technical and logistic experience in Antarctica 
will be most desirable.

                                                  4
(11) The Meeting expressed its sincere gratitude to the 
Government of Belgium for hosting an intersessional meeting of 
the Group of Legal Experts in November 1995 and to Professor 
Wolfrum for his untiring efforts to resolve pending issues 
concerning liability.

(12) In order to continue the work on an Annex on liability to 
the Protocol, Germany submitted a proposal (XX ATCM/WP 31). 
The Meeting took note of the work of the Group of Legal 
Experts on liability, and extended the mandate of the Group of 
Legal Experts based on Recommendation IV-24. The Meeting 
agreed to convene an intersessional Meeting of the Group of 
Legal Experts during the XXI Consultative Meeting, and another 
meeting immediately before the XXI Consultative Meeting. The 
basis for discussions during those meetings will be further 
Offerings of the Chairman of the Group of Legal Experts, the 
draft submitted by the United States (XX/ATCM/INF 43), as well 
as drafts which might be submitted by other delegations. The 
Meeting urged that Governments arrange for legal experts to be 
accompanied by experts having directly relevant scientific, 
technical and logistic experience in Antarctica. The results 
of the meetings of the Group of Legal Experts will be reported 
to, and considered by, the XXI Consultative Meeting.

[For inclusion in the Final Report of the Plenary:

( ) The Meeting welcomed the invitation of the United Kingdom 
to host the next intersessional meeting of the Group of Legal 
Experts on liability from 7 to 11 October 1996 to be held in 
Cambridge.]

(13) Several delegations furthermore raised the question 
whether it would be appropriate for the Group of Legal Experts 
to work on the basis of all four official languages of the 
Antarctic Treaty. This was felt to be necessary by these 
delegations in view of the importance of the work of the Group 
of Legal Experts and the fact that the outcome of its work 
            5
should be a binding instrument which would in any case have to 
be concluded in the four languages.

(14) Some delegations expressed the opinion that, as a first 
step, all documents relating to the Group of Legal Experts, 
chaired by Professor Wolfrum, should be translated in the four 
languages.

(15) Reservations were expressed on this subject by other 
delegations. It was their opinion that translation of all 
documents of the Group of Legal Experts as well as 
simultaneous interpretation of its debates would impose too 
heavy a burden on the Government hosting its meetings. They 
noted that so far, the Group of Legal Experts had worked well 
without any translations.

(16) A third group of delegations was of the opinion that the 
Group of Legal Experts should continue to work using one 
language until some point in the future, when formal 
negotiations would make it necessary to proceed on the basis 
of the four Antarctic Treaty languages.

(17) The Meeting agreed that further consideration on the 
matter of interpretation and translation in the Group of Legal 
Experts should be given at the XXI ATCM with a view to 
reaching an appropriate decision.

c) Relation with other Environmental Treaties

(18) The Meeting expressed its sincere appreciation for the 
two Working Papers under this item: XX ATCM/WP 10 Rev.1, 
submitted by the United Kingdom, and XX ATCM/WP 30, submitted 
by Chile. These Working Papers addressed the question of the 
relationship between, on the one hand, the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and other 
treaties of the Antarctic Treaty system, and, on the other 
6
hand, other international agreements of a global or regional 
scope.

(19) Some delegations emphasised the need to bear in mind that 
consideration of the application to the Antarctic of general 
Conventions on environmental protection could raise questions 
relating to Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty.

(20) The Meeting agreed to draw the attention of the Group of 
Legal Experts on liability to paragraphs 49 and 50 of XX 
ATCM/WP 10 Rev.1, expressing the fact that in certain cases 
existing international instruments relating to liability might 
not cover liability for damage to the Antarctic environment.

(21) The Meeting recognised the value of the two Working 
Papers for the consideration of the issue by each Consultative 
Party, and decided to include this item in the Agenda of the 
next Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, with a view to 
having a further exchange of views on that occasion.

Item 7 
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System 
a) Organisational Aspects (including Secretariat)

(22) The Contact Group on Organizational Aspects of the 
Establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat convened 
under the chairmanship of Professor Wolfrum in Utrecht on 3 
May 1996. Professor Wolfrum gave a brief report of the 
discussion which took place. A document drawn up by Professor 
Wolfrum entitled  "Legal Status, Privileges and Immunities of 
the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat" formed the basis of the 
Contact Group's discussion. This discussion focused on the 
question what instruments were necessary for the establishment 
of a Secretariat (a Protocol or a Measure) and on the question 
whether the Secretariat should enjoy privileges and immunities 
in the Host State only or also in all the other ATCPs. No 
                                                                             7
agreement could be reached on the subjects in question yet.
However, the Chairman of the Contact Group expressed
confidence that an agreement could be reached if the necessary
political will existed to do so, since the issue did not raise
complicated legal problems.

(23) Professor Wolfrum indicated that he would draw up and
distribute a new document, based on the discussion, six weeks
after the ATCM. This document could contain the following
elements:

-   Status of the Secretariat (legal personality
    under national or international law);

-   Functions of the Secretariat;

-   Staff;

-   Contributions to the Budget;

-   Privileges and Immunities.

(24) With regard to privileges and immunities, the document
would comprise two alternatives, namely:

    a)  Privileges and immunities for the Secretariat
        in the Host Country only;
    b)  Privileges and immunities for the Secretariat
        in all Consultative Parties.

(25) The Parties would subsequently be requested to make their
views known within six weeks. Professor Wolfrum could then
distribute an amended version of the document for the XXI
ATCM. Professor Wolfrum expressed the hope that this
discussion could be concluded during the XXI ATCM.

(26) Professor Wolfrum's proposals as set out above met with
the approval of the Meeting and were agreed to.

(27) Under the same agenda item, the Meeting considered a
Working Paper submitted by Chile (XX ATCM/WP 20) concerning

8
the circulation of documents by the host Government before and after the Consultative Meetings, until such time as the Secretariat would be established.

(28) Many delegations referred to the Guideline concerning pre-sessional document circulation and document handling at the XX ATCM, which was agreed to by the XIX ATCM (this Guideline appears in Annex D to the Final Report of the XIX Consultative Meeting). They expressed their satisfaction with the Guideline as it had been implemented by the Host Government of the XX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

(29) A number of delegations nevertheless emphasised that the Guideline should be looked at critically and that improvements could still be made. In this respect mention was made of the great number of Information Papers which had been made available during the Meeting.

(30) The Meeting agreed to extend the Guideline's application to the preparation and conduct of the XXI Consultative Meeting.

(31) The Meeting also acknowledged that it would be useful to provide guidance to the Host Government on document handling after the Consultative Meeting. The Meeting supplemented the Guideline with the following paragraphs to that effect:

7.    The Host Government should, within three months of the end of the Consultative Meeting hosted by it, or, where this is not practicable, as soon as reasonably possible afterwards, circulate through diplomatic channels:
-    the Final Report of that Meeting, in the official languages;
-    a comprehensive list of that Meeting's officially circulated Working and Information Papers.

9
8. The Host Government should provide any Party to the 
Antarctic Treaty with copies of documents mentioned 
in the previous paragraph at the request of that 
Party.

(32) The Guideline on Pre-Sessional and Post-Sessional 
Document Circulation and Document Handling at the XXI ATCM is 
attached to this Report in Part ..., Annex ..

(33) The Meeting considered an Information Paper submitted by 
Australia (XX ATCM/INF 32) pointing out errors in 
transcription of the Rules of Procedure in the 1994 edition of 
the Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty system.

(34) It was agreed that the Host Government of the next ATCM 
should circulate a corrected version of the Rules of Procedure 
at that ATCM. This should be appended to the Final Report of 
that Meeting.

b) Operation of the TEWG

(35) "Operation of the TEWG" was the subject of a Working 
Paper submitted by Chile (XX ATCM/WP 21). The Working Paper 
recalls the background to the establishment of the TEWG and 
the discussions at previous ATCMs, notably as regards the idea 
of holding intersessional Meetings. Building on these previous 
discussions, Working Paper 21 proposes that the TEWG should 
enhance its efforts through the establishment of sub-groups 
aimed at designing and planning the future Committee's work.

(36) In introducing the Working Paper, Chile emphasised the 
success of the second Meeting of the TEWG in Utrecht, where 
the pragmatic approach in particular was seen as very 
positive. The establishment of a open ended contact group, co-
ordinated by New Zealand, which was agreed in the TEWG tied in 
well with the spirit of Working Paper 21. As a result, Chile
                                                  10
was of the opinion that it was no longer necessary to discuss 
the draft Decision laid down in that Working Paper. It was 
decided instead that states concerned would send New Zealand 
the names of their respective experts.

(37) Furthermore, the temporary role of the TEWG was 
emphasised. As it is quite conceivable that the Protocol will 
enter into force before the XXI ATCM, it must be borne in mind 
that a start will be made on setting up the Committee for 
Environmental Protection (CEP) at that ATCM. In that case 
priority ought to be accorded to the operation of the CEP, for 
example by adopting its Rules of Procedure, the election of 
officers and its work programme. These matters should be taken 
into account under this and other agenda items.

c)   Examination of Recommendations

(38) Discussion of this agenda item proceeded on the basis of 
Working Papers (XX ATCM/WP 4 and XX ATCM/WP 4 Rev.1), 
submitted by the Netherlands. When introducing these Working 
Papers, the Netherlands made clear the fact that it was a 
study which did not affect in any way the status of 
Recommendations adopted in the past. The aim of the document 
was to clarify the intended effect of the many Recommendations 
that had been adopted from the first up to the XVIII ATCM, 
notably in the light of Decision 1 (1995), taken at the XIX 
ATCM in Seoul. To this end all Recommendations had been 
examined in light of Decision 1 (1995). In the opinion of the 
Netherlands, the study was particularly important from the 
point of view of making it clear which Recommendations might 
still require approval by the Consultative Parties.

(39) Many delegations expressed their appreciation for the 
considerable and extremely useful task undertaken by the 
Netherlands. However, it was necessary to bear in mind the 
fact that there was no easy way of uniformly classifying 
                                                                 11
Recommendations, one reason being that the approval procedures and the attendant requirements in the various Consultative States differ. Accordingly, the list ought not to be given official status. It was nevertheless a useful guide for determining which Recommendations adopted before the XIX ATCM still require approval by Consultative Parties.

(40) In view of the foregoing paragraph, the Meeting agreed to attach the list to the Final Report of the XX ATCM. The list is included in Part .. , Annex . . .

d) Exchange of Information

(41) The Meeting considered an Information Paper submitted by Argentina and Australia, on Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Future of the Antarctic Treaty system (XX ATCM/INF 36). Attention was drawn by one delegation to the many different provisions in the Antarctic Treaty system requiring information exchange on a wide variety of subjects. This delegation invited reflection on the scope of the obligations to exchange information as compared to the practical purpose served by these obligations.

(42) The Meeting agreed to take up this question once the Secretariat had been established.

Item 8.
Questions Related to the Exercise of Jurisdiction in Antarctica

(43) The Chairman reminded the Meeting of the discussion which this agenda item had received during the XVIII ATCM, and of the agreement of that ATCM to defer further discussion of this subject to the XX ATCM, so that all Parties would have
12
sufficient time to elaborate ways and means of approaching the 
question in order to find an agreeable solution.

(44) The Meeting agreed that the delegations had not yet had 
sufficient time to duly consider the issue, and decided to 
omit the item from the Agenda of the following Consultative 
Meetings until a request was made by a Consultative Party to 
reinclide it.

Item 9.
Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area

(45) The Meeting expressed its great appreciation for the 
Working Paper introduced by New Zealand (XX ATCM/INF 1). 
Information Paper 1 is an internal working document confined 
in scope to tourism from New Zealand or tourists resident in 
New Zealand, and to tourism in the Ross Sea area. The document 
describes how New Zealand intends to deal with its 
responsibilities in respect of tourism. The document describes 
a national legal framework for tourism, notably in the Ross 
Sea area, opting for an integrated approach to the Antarctic 
region and New Zealand's sub-Antarctic islands. Information 
Paper 1 ties in directly Information Paper 2, submitted by New 
Zealand (XX ATCM/INF 2), since it describes New Zealand's 
national Environmental Impact Assessment procedure.

(46) An Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom (XX 
ATCM/INF 15 and Amendment) was also greatly appreciated for 
the updated picture it provided of trends in Antarctic 
tourism. The Meeting noted the reported increase in the number 
of shipborne tourists going to Antarctica and that the number 
of sites being visited by tourists was also increasing, 
including more remote sites in the interior of Antarctica. The 
information was supplemented by Information Paper 96 submitted 
by IAATO (XX ATCM/INF 96). This document contained the
13
provisional data on tourism for the 1995/96 season, as well as 
an assessment for the 1996/97 season. The Meeting was, 
however, particularly interested in IAATO's prediction that the 
number of tourists for next season would, according to the 
provisional figures, decline somewhat.

(47) COMNAP presented a paper (XX ATCM/INF 39) outlining 
safety, contingency planning and medical concerns based on 
direct experience with tour operators in the field. Several 
delegations commended COMNAP for the practical interaction 
with tour operators. The Meeting encouraged continuing 
efforts by COMNAP to draw the attention of tour operators to 
their potential impact on science and logistics.

(48) The Meeting agreed that management and regulation of 
tourism was best achieved by effective implementation of the 
Protocol and its Annexes (through domestic implemeting 
legislation). However, the Meeting recognised that complete 
regulation of Antarctic tourism could not be achieved with 
elements of the tourist industry not subject to effective 
enforcement by Treaty Parties. It was noted that a number of 
tourist vessels operating in Antarctica fly the flag of non-
Treaty Parties and that tour operators were not necessarily 
based in the territory of Parties to the Protocol.

(49) In this regard, the Meeting stressed the importance of 
effective self-regulation by the tourist industry. To this 
end, the Meeting urged IAATO to:

    (a) ensure that its members conform fully with the 
         provisions of the Protocol;

    (b) disseminate ATCM Recommendations and other texts 
         relevant to tourism;

    (c) produce further guidelines and codes of conduct 
         where appropriate;

    (d) encourage all tour companies operating in Antarctica 
         to become members of the Association.

14
(50) Furthermore, the Meeting called upon non-Consultative Parties with a particular interest in, or responsibility for, tourist companies operating in Antarctica to ratify the Protocol and its Annexes at the earliest opportunity and to introduce any necessary domestic enabling legislation to ensure compliance.

(51) One delegation pointed out that the Environmental Impact Assessments carried out for tourist activities varied widely in terms of both quality and scope. In the opinion of the Meeting this gave cause for concern; the highest standard should be aimed for. Cooperation between State Parties was vital in this regard.

(52) ASOC noted the information about future tourism activities and urged all non-governmental operators to start producing Environmental Impact Assessments consistently now as the best way to be prepared when the Protocol comes into force. ASOC also urged the Parties to use all possible means to encourage compliance with the provisions of Annex I, for instance by making station visits conditional upon such compliance.

Item 10.
Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty
(as far as related to port state control)

(53) Under this item, the Meeting examined a Working Paper submitted by the Netherlands (XX ATCM/WP 9), on the inspection of ships by port states in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of MARPOL 73/78 and Annex IV to the Protocol, on the prevention of marine pollution.

(54) The Meeting expressed its gratitude to the Netherlands for preparing this paper. According to some delegations, it should not be excluded that, in principle, some form of
15
harmonised inspection by port states might serve a useful 
purpose. All delegations agreed, however, that this issue 
raised a great many intricate and sensitive questions, and 
further consideration of this subject could be undertaken only 
after the governments of all Consultative Parties would have 
had the occasion to study the issue in depth. The Meeting 
accordingly decided to further discuss the issue at the XXI 
ATCM.

(55) The Meeting furthermore took note of a Working Paper 
presented by Chile (XX ATCM/WP 17), describing Chilean 
domestic experience with inspections of ships setting out to 
the Antarctic. It was agreed that the making available of 
experience by individual states on conducting inspection of 
ships in ports was useful and could provide assistance to 
states in determining their national policies on the matter.

(56) Several delegations expressed the opinion that this 
matter should be discussed under a different agenda item, 
since inspections by port states would be of a different 
nature than inspections under Article VII of the Antarctic 
Treaty, to which this item referred. It was accordingly 
decided to discuss this subject as an agenda item at the XXI 
ATCM.

_Item 14._

Cultural and Aesthetic Values of the Antarctic [Proposed by 
Chile]

(57) Chile introduced working paper 23 (XX ATCM/WP 23) 
stressing the symbolic value of Antarctica. The purpose of the 
Working Paper was to raise the question of how the cultural 
and aesthetic values of the Antarctic could be highlighted. The 
Working Paper also contained a draft Resolution to that end.

16
(58) There was consensus that these issues raised in the Working Paper are of great importance, a fact which is also reflected in various parts of the Protocol. Therefore, a Resolution was adopted. It is attached to this Final Report in Part . . , Annex . . .

(59) It was generally recognised that the special value of Antarctica could be promoted by educating young people and by the work of artists.

(60) As regards the possible role to be played by the Parties, several delegates indicated their support for measures to actively promote trips by writers and artists in general. Some delegates suggested, however, that in order to focus attention on the cultural and aesthetic values, writers and artists could be included in national expeditions. In so doing, the Parties should concentrate particularly on those forms of artistic and cultural expression which could convey the beauty of Antarctica to people who had not been there.

(61) The ASOC delegate noted that in the discussions on practical matters such as monitoring, liability and Environmental Impact Assessment, factors such as intrinsic, aesthetic and wilderness values were too often considered too complex; ASOC expressed the hope that future discussion of this agenda item would contribute to a better understanding of how to deal with these values, as required by the Protocol (notably Article 3(1) and Annex I, Article 3).
Draft Resolution .. (1996)

The Representatives of the Consultative Parties:

      Noting that Antarctica has been the subject of 
significant works of art, literature and music;

      Recognising that the unique character of Antarctica 
itself represents an inspiration for protecting its values;

Recommend:

Promotion of understanding and appreciation of the values of 
Antarctica, in particular its scientific, aesthetic and 
wilderness values, including through:

      a)  Educational opportunities, in particular for young 
persons, and

      b)  The contribution of writers, artists and musicians.

18
MESSAGE FROM THE XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING TO STATIONS IN THE
ANTARCTIC

The Parties to the Antarctic Treaty have just completed two
weeks of discussion at their XX Consultative Meeting, which
was hosted by the Netherlands government in Utrecht.

The early entry into force of the Environmental Protocol to
the Antarctic Treaty and of its five Annexes remains the
priority objective. The Meeting noted with satisfaction that
since the last Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) 6
Consultative Parties (Belgium, Brazil, India, Poland, Republic
of Korea, South Africa) have ratified the Protocol, bringing
the total to 22 out of 26 States. It is now conceivable that
the Protocol will be in force before the next ATCM, which will
be held in New Zealand in 1997.

Valuable exchanges took place on tourism, education and train-
ing, and on the cultural and aesthetic values of the Antarct-
ic. Reports on current and proposed activities at Antarctic
stations, presented to the Meeting, demonstrated the continu-
ing benefit of Antarctic scientific research and the valuable
work undertaken by all Member States.

During this ATCM a Group of Legal Experts met again in order
to continue discussions on a sixth Annex to the Environmental
Protocol. This is to deal with Liability for environmental
damage. The ATCM was pleased to learn from the Group's chair-
man that the Group had made substantial progress.  Further
discussions are scheduled before the XXI ATCM.

The Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) met for
the second time. This interim body addresses the functions of
the Committee for Environmental Protection, which will come
into being when the Protocol enters into force. The TEWG had
an in-depth discussion on Environmental Impact Assessments
required by the Protocol. The TEWG also discussed the conse-
quences for the protected area system of the Protocol's entry
into force. On the basis of its work the ATCM revised various
management plans and took decisions on the designations of an
Antarctic Specially Managed Area and an Historic Site.

The ATCM agreed on a mechanism for the exchange of information
with the Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS)
Conference for the benefit of both parties.

As the Antarctic year moves into another winter, delegations
participating in the XX Consultative Meeting send their
warmest greetings to all in Antarctica. We wish you every
success in your important scientific endeavours during the
coming months.
