ANTARCTIC TREATY                  TRATADO ANTARTICO
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING         XX REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITE SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE         
XXe REUNION CONSULTATIVE         ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                 ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                 XX ATCM/WP 30
                                 May 1996
                                 English
                                 Original: Spanish

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TREATIES

(Agenda Item 6 c)

(Submitted by Chile)
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE PROTOCOL ON
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TREATIES

Under Agenda Item 6c of the XIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM), Chile 
submitted an updated report about the relationship between the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and other international environmental agreements. In paragraph 
52 of the Final Report the Meeting expressed, both its appreciation for document XIX 
ATCM/WP 20, and its interest in an updated version.

The above-mentioned document gave an overview of the content and scope of the 
environmental agreements of greatest interest to the Madrid Protocol and the Antarctic Treaty as 
a whole. An emphasis on antarctic marine environmental protection and on the question of 
liability for damage to the Antarctic area is still valid. With regard to other questions, the 
updating efforts should be aimed at reviewing developments in each category of the international 
agreements that have a direct impact on the Madrid Protocol or its Annexes. In general, this 
review follows the same general lines as document WP 20.

I.    United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)

Part XI of the Agreement on the implementation of the 1982 UN Convention on the Law 
of the Sea was signed on July 29, 1994; its implementation began on an interim basis. The 
Agreement, which settled pending questions regarding the extraction of minerals from the deep 
seabed (Part XI) that had prevented the 82 UNCLOS from being fully accepted, contributed to 
the entry into force of the Convention on November 16, 1994 and was instrumental in its 
becoming universal in its scope. After taking this far-reaching step, the International Seabed 
Authority met on several occasions in New York and in Kingston, Jamaica; it set up its Council 
and elected a Secretary General, Ambassador Satja Nandan from Fiji. The resources needed to 
establish the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea were authorized; it was also decided 
that during the first stage, subjects related to the law of the sea would continue under the 
responsibility of the UN Secretary General, assisted by the Office for Ocean Affairs, and that the 
General Assembly plenary, in its discussions on the law of the sea would be the 
intergovernmental forum in charge of monitoring and review. The substance of the activities 
begun by a Preparatory Committee of the International Authority covers the regulation of 
exploration and exploitation of polymetallic nodes in the International Zone. Since the 
International Zone is adjacent to the implementation area of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol, 
or overlaps that area, the activities in question are of great interest to the Madrid Protocol. 
Regulatory activities in the International Zone aimed at protecting the marine environment from 
risks produced by underwater mining, are of special importance.

The Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of UNCLOS relating to the 
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks was 
signed in New York on December 4, 1995. The Official Document was signed by 46 states, 
while 25 signed the Agreement. Since 30 states must ratify the Agreement for its entry into force, 
we anticipate that 2 to 3 years will be required to reach that number. No nation made a statement 
to the effect that it would implement the Agreement on an interim basis.
2

Even though the Agreement refers specifically to two large fish populations (straddling 
fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks), the principles contained in it apply to all fisheries. 
This is especially true for the provisions which include an environmental dimension, such as 
those covering the marine ecosystem and the precautionary approach. The main linkage with the 
Antarctic Treaty System is through the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine 
Living Resources (CCAMLR) and it is two-tiered: first, the Implementation Agreement is based 
on the ecosystem approach contained in Article 2 of the CCAMLR; second, at the XIV 
CCAMLR Meeting, provisions were added regarding inspection, monitoring and control of 
Antarctic fisheries, based directly on the new Agreement's standards.

II. Biodiversity Convention

The main decision adopted by the I Conference of the Parties (COP I) of the Convention 
on Biological Diversity (Bridgetown, Bahamas, November 1994) was that the provisions of 
Article 18, paragraph 3 of the Convention (related to the setting-up of a Clearing-House) would 
be used to promote scientific and technical cooperation under the direct authority of the 
Conference of the Parties. COP II (Jakarta, Indonesia, November 1995), in keeping with 
Decision II/3, resolved to begin the Clearing-House pilot phase. The Convention Secretariat will 
prepare a comprehensive review with specific suggestions, to guide the COP on the start-up of 
the Clearing-House, while taking into account the experience acquired by existing international 
structures and the opinions given by the Parties at COP I.

In September 1995, the Convention's Subsidiary Scientific and Technical Advisory Body 
(SBSTA) held its first meeting in Paris. Among the recommendations it adopted, aimed at 
defining SBSTA's Working Program for 1996, a decision was made to establish a Panel of 
Experts to review the scientific and technological aspects of the conservation and sustainable use 
of coastal and marine biodiversity. COP II welcomed the proposal and resolved to begin electing 
the Panel members. Several members were reluctant to adopt this decision, pointing out that there 
are many international agreements and mechanisms covering marine and coastal biodiversity. 
Nonetheless, the Convention's objectives can be used as a framework to approach biodiversity 
from a comprehensive perspective, including its marine and coastal components. The Panel will 
make recommendations to SBSTA on the following aspects:

a. Periodic evaluations of the status of the world's marine biodiversity.
b. Determination of the marine biodiversity components that are under threat.
c. Transfer of technology for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.
d. International cooperation for research activities on seas and coasts.
e. Evaluation of measures adopted under the Convention.
f. Cooperation with other international instruments.
g. Reports to the Commission on Sustainable Development.
h. Advice to the countries in accordance with Article 6.

III. Global Program of Action on Protecting the Marine Environment from Land-based 
Sources

In May 1993, the Executive Council of the United Nations Environmental Program 
(UNEP) decided to begin a preparatory process leading to an intergovernmental meeting to be 
held at the end of 1995, aimed at adopting a program of action on protecting the marine 
environment from land-based sources. As a result of that decision, meetings were held in
3

Montreal (1994) and Reykjavik (1995), as well as the Intergovernmental Conference hosted by 
the United States government held in Washington, D.C. in November 1995. In addition to the 
revisions made to the Montreal Guidelines, at the preparatory meetings some of the priorities of 
the Program of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island States, adopted at the 
Barbados Conference, were incorporated into the program of action; the provisions on the 
Program of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Coasts held in the Netherlands, were 
also included.

The legal basis of the Global Program of Action on Protecting the Marine Environment 
from Land-based Sources are: Agenda 21 (Chapter 17), the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of 
the Sea (Parts XII, XIII and XIV, and Articles 207 and 213), the Biodiversity Convention, and 
the various conventions of the International Maritime Organization aimed at preventing marine 
pollution. It also has special links with the system for the protection of regional seas, sponsored 
by UNEP, which has given rise to a number of regional conventions aimed at protecting the 
marine environment from land-based pollutants. It has been conceived as an instrument to render 
assistance to states for purposes of individual or joint adoption, under their respective policies, 
priorities and resources, of measures aimed at preventing, reducing, controlling and/or 
eliminating marine environmental degradation, recovering from the impact of land-based activities 
and restoring the productive capacity and biodiversity of the marine environment.

In addition to the Program of Action, the Intergovernmental Conference adopted the 
Washington Declaration, which formalizes the Governments' commitment to the Program's 
objectives.

IV.    The London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Waste 
       and Other Matter

The Scientific Group of the 1972 London Convention has carried out important work on 
its Agreement's annexes. There were difficulties in implementing the annexes, which had been 
prepared on the basis of black and grey lists shortly after the Convention was developed, 
especially with regard to the interpretation of a number of key terms having to do with 
substances, such as "traces", "substantial amounts", "which rapidly become safe substances" and 
other similar expressions. A Waste Assessment Framework (WAF) prepared by a group of 
experts distinguished "wastes" from "substances"; in addition, its waste-management approach 
was based on prevention. The London Convention Consultative Meeting supported the opinion 
expressed by the Scientific Group to the effect that the implementation of the WAF was 
scientifically and technically feasible.

In parallel with the technical work, the Convention's Consultative Meetings have 
gradually begun to adopt new approaches to preventing marine pollution. The Contracting Parties 
approved amendments to prohibit dumping of industrial waste and other radioactive waste and 
substances into the sea and incinerating industrial waste and waste-water sludge at sea. All these 
decisions have specific implications with regard to marine pollution prevention in the 
implementation area of the Antarctic Treaty and of Annex IV of the Madrid Protocol, especially 
in connection with the absolute prohibition to dump radioactive waste into the sea. In an even 
more ambitious step, the Parties are undertaking a systematic review of the London Convention 
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matters; as a matter of 
fact, its main proposals, which are listed in a rolling-text, will be discussed at the next 
Consultative Meeting, in November.
4

V.    Montreal Protocol

The VII Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol was held in Vienna, Austria, 
from November 28 to December 7, 1995.

Important decisions on control were adopted, which define more precisely the treatment 
to be given to the various substances that presumably deplete the ozone layer, as well as the 
terms and form of the prohibitions to be applied. The goals to be achieved are:

a.    CFCs: for the countries governed by Article 5 of the Protocol, the Copenhagen 
Amendment was maintained; it provides for the total elimination of these 
substances by the year 2010.

For the countries governed by Article 2, the goal to totally eliminate the 
production and consumption by January 1, 1996 (except for the 15% needed to 
supply the basic domestic needs of Article 5 countries) is maintained.

b.    HCFCs: total elimination in Article 2 countries by the year 2020 (a ten-year grace 
period for services with a maximum consumption of .5%).

In Article 5 countries, freezing by the year 2016 on the basis of previous year 
indexes. Total elimination by the year 2040.

c.    Methyl Bromide: In Article 2 countries, elimination of 25% by the year 2001, 
50% by the year 2005, and total elimination by the year 2010.

For Article 5 countries, freezing is envisaged at a level determined by the 
1995-98 statistical average. A review will be carried out in 1997 in order to 
adopt a timetable for this substance's gradual elimination, on the basis of the 
Report to be prepared by the Technical and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP).

VI.    The Framework Convention on Climate Change

The I Conference of the Parties to the Climate Change Convention, held in Berlin from 
March 28 to April 7, 1995, defined within the terms of the "Berlin Mandate", a process for the 
assessment and adjustment of the Parties' commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions which 
provides for the possibility of preparing a Protocol or Amendment to the Convention. To that 
end, it established an Ad Hoc Group responsible for the development of a plan of action; the 
Group has already held several arduous sessions. The island states of the Pacific, grouped in 
AOSIS, have suggested elements for inclusion in the future Protocol. Germany, supported by the 
European Union, is also in favour of an additional Protocol which would include quantified 
emission objectives by the years 2005, 2010 and 2020.

In successive meetings of the Ad Hoc Group there has been a consensus on the need to 
reduce greenhouse gases through the adoption of common policies, reducing and harmonizing 
their differences. In addition, a consensus was reached on the advisability of making progress in 
the selection of sector-based measures that would include appropriate instruments and 
technologies based on each country's individual circumstances. Mention was also made of the fact 
that negotiations on a future instrument should take into account its relationship with the
5

Convention, with the Convention's Secretariat and its subsidiary bodies, and should provide for 
the adjustment of the commitments, reports and review mechanisms.

       The COP has set up a Subsidiary Scientific and Technical Advisory Body (SBSTA) and 
a Subsidiary Body on Implementation (SBI), to give advice to member countries of the 
Convention on how to develop national inventories of greenhouse gas sources, emissions and 
sinks. SBSTA works in close cooperation with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC); reference to its second report will be made separately. However, due to the objections 
of several countries, the COP has not been able to establish a technical advisory panel.

VII.    The Basel Convention

At its first meeting, the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention adopted 
Decision I/22 whereby the COP requests the industrialized countries to prohibit all transboundary 
movements to developing countries, of hazardous wastes and their disposal, and requests 
developing countries to prohibit the importation of hazardous wastes from industrialized 
countries. COP II (held in Geneva on March 21–25, 1994) ratified the decision, and COP III 
(Geneva, September 18–22, 1995) formalized the decision as an amendment to the Convention's 
text.

       The most relevant activity from the perspective of the Antarctic Treaty System is being 
carried out by the Group of Specialists on Legal and Technical Matters who will be developing 
a draft Protocol on liability and compensation for damage resulting from transboundary 
movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal. However, in keeping with Article 12 of the 
Convention, the preliminary draft Protocol could not be submitted to COP III. As described in 
WP 20, that instrument would not settle the problem arising from the disposal of hazardous waste 
and other wastes south of 60° S., a matter which in fact could be included in the efforts being 
carried out to improve the London Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by 
Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter.

General Observations

Developments after the XIX ATCM show that there is great interest in protecting the 
atmosphere and oceans, in the phenomenon of global change, in the vulnerability of the marine 
ecosystem and in the subject of liability for damage to the environment. Paragraph 130 of the 
XIX ATCM Report recommends: the strengthening of scientific links with, among others, the 
various bodies of the Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPPC); linking the review of Antarctic marine and land biodiversity with 
BIODIVERSITAS; and the acknowledgement by the Parties to the IPPC Treaty and to the 
Framework Convention, of the importance of the Antarctic when considering the subject of global 
change. Since the Antarctic Treaty does not have a Secretariat, the Transitional Environmental 
Working Group (TEWG) could make suggestions to the Parties on how to establish beneficial 
links and on the appropriate coordination for questions that are beyond SCAR's purview.

       Another possible mechanism is the coordination of positions provided for by Resolution 
2 (1995) on the disposal of nuclear waste. As previously mentioned, due to the deficiencies of 
the standard included in Article 4.6 of the Basel Convention, the disposal of nuclear waste in the 
implementation area of the Antarctic Treaty is not punishable under that instrument; also, it 
cannot be regulated by the Liability Annex that will bring Article 12 into being. Nonetheless, the
6

objective of the convention to be negotiated within the IAEA is to govern nuclear waste 
management only from the perspective of safety. The correct response to the concerns that led 
to Resolution 2 (1995) is to amend the London Convention which prohibits dumping of nuclear 
waste, an action more important than controlling its transboundary movements.

This coordination should also apply to other areas of international environmental 
negotiations which are of great interest to the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. A review of the 
reports about Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty provides a basis for reflection on this 
question: in addition to the Antarctic Treaty’s traditional cooperation relationship with WMO, 
IHO and IMO, the statements made by ASOC, UNEP and IUCN are relevant; with regard to the 
latter, it would be advisable to consider a dual relationship, i.e., on the one hand, through the 
Transitional Environmental Working Group (TEWG) in the spirit of Articles 11 and 12 of the 
Madrid Protocol; on the other hand, this interaction can only be effective if there is prior 
agreement by the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty on the position they will take in the institutions 
created by the various international environmental protection agreements and in any relevant 
negotiations to be carried out in the future.

Consultative Meetings had acknowledged this reality by including in their Agenda, under 
the item on the operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: the reports submitted on Article III (2) 
of the Treaty and relevant developments in the Arctic; a separate item on the relationship between 
the Madrid Protocol with other environmental treaties; and, in the past, the topics of international 
scientific cooperation and global change, which are not separate items in the Utrecht Agenda. 
However, questions such as environmental monitoring and the status of the Antarctic 
environment, and the effectiveness of environmental protection measures and their 
implementation, must be dealt with in the context of the global environment. Even more 
significant is the relationship between Agenda items 11 and 20 (Data Management, and the 
Exchange of Environmental Information) and developments with regard to the Biodiversity 
Convention’s Clearing-House.

Finally, a subject that should be reviewed in the light of the report submitted by the 
Convenor of the Informal Group of Treaty Parties in the United Nations, is the implementation 
of Resolution 49/8 D, adopted by consensus by the UN General Assembly on December 15, 
1994, which most likely will be followed up during this year’s Assembly; attention should be 
drawn to its operative paragraphs, in particular to those dealing with UNEP and the results of 
the Rio Conference on Environment and Development. Regarding this point, account should be 
taken of the fact that in 1996 the UN Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) will study 
the subjects of the Atmosphere and Oceans and all types of Seas. It might be appropriate to 
include in the draft resolution to be adopted in the General Assembly some mention of these 
questions; it may also be advisable to underline the importance of the five Principles of Antarctic 
Environmental Protection recommended by SCAR.
