ANTARCTIC TREATY
XX CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              TRATADO ANTARTICO
XXe RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              XX REUNION CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ХХ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  XX ATCM/WP 24
                                  April, 1996
                                  Original: English

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST (SSSI) NO. 19
LINNAEUS TERRACE, ASGARD RANGE, VICTORIA LAND
(Agenda item 20a)

(Submitted by the United States of America)
Management Plan for

SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST (SSSI) NO. 19
LINNAEUS TERRACE, ASGARD RANGE, VICTORIA LAND

Having been reviewed and accepted by the Twenty-third meeting of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research held in Rome, Italy, in September 1994, and having been revised to follow the format adopted by the XIX ATCM, the attached updated management plan for Linnaeus Terrace, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 19 is hereby submitted.
Management Plan
for Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 19
LINNAEUS TERRACE, ASGAARD RANGE, VICTORIA LAND

1. Description of Values to be Protected

Linnaeus Terrace was originally designated in Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 19) after
a proposal by the United States of America on the grounds that the Area is one of the richest
known localities for the cryptoendolithic communities that colonize the Beacon Sandstone.
Exposed surfaces of the Beacon Sandstone are the habitat of cryptoendolithic microorganisms,
which may colonize a zone of up to 10 millimeters deep below the surface of the rocks. The
sandstones exhibit a range of biological and physical weathering forms, as well as trace fossils,
and many of the formations are fragile and vulnerable to disturbance and destruction by
trampling and sampling. Cryptoendolithic communities are known to develop over time periods
in the order of tens of thousands of years, and damaged rock surfaces would be slow to
recolonize. The excellent examples of these communities found at the site are the subject of the
original detailed Antarctic cryptoendolithic descriptions. As such, Linnaeus Terrace is
considered a type locality with outstanding scientific values related to this ecosystem. These
values, as well as the vulnerability of the site to disturbance and destruction, require that it
receive long-term special protection.

2. Aims and objectives

Management at Linnaeus Terrace aims to:
  avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area;
  prevent unnecessary human disturbance to the Area and protect the fragile rock formations
  from breakage;
  permit research on the cryptoendolithic communities while ensuring they are protected from
  over-sampling;
  permit visits for management purposes in support of the objectives of the management plan.

3. Management activities

  Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated helicopter landing
  site whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings at the Area in a given
  season. These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.
  Brightly colored markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant
  threat to the environment, shall be placed to mark the helicopter landing pad.
  Markers or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be
  maintained in good condition.
  Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the
  Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management
  and maintenance measures are adequate.
  National Antarctic Programs operating in the region shall consult together with a view to
  ensuring these steps are carried out.

1
4. Period of designation

Designated under ATCM Recommendation XX-XX for an indefinite period.

5. Maps and photographs

Map A: Linnaeus Terrace, Wright Valley, location image-map. Orthophotograph specifications:
Projection: Lambert conformal conic; Standard parallels: 1st - 79° 18'00" S; 2nd - 76° 42'00" S
Central Meridian: 162° 30'00" E  Latitude of Origin: 78° 01'16.211" S
Spheroid: WGS84; Positional accuracy of original orthophotograph at 1:10,000 is ±2m.
Photography USGS/DoSLI (SN7856) 22 November 1993.

Map B: Linnaeus Terrace, protected area orthophotograph. Orthophotograph specifications are the same as in Map A, except positional accuracy of original orthophotograph at 1:2,500 is ±0.5m.

Map C: Linnaeus Terrace, topographic map. Map specifications are the same as those for Map B. Contours are derived from the digital elevation model used to generate the orthophotograph in Map B.

Figure 1: Perspective view showing Linnaeus terrace above the South Fork of Wright Valley and Don Juan Pond. The perspective is from an elevation of 7000m, 20 km out from the Area at a bearing of 65° E

Figure 2: Linnaeus Terrace, perspective view, showing the boundaries of the Area and the designated helicopter pad (161° 04'29" E, 77° 35'50" S, elevation 1610m). The perspective is from an elevation of 2000 m, 2300 m out from the Area at a bearing of 65° E. Image source: Maps A and B.

Figure 3: Photograph illustrating some of the fragile rock formations and fossils found on Linnaeus Terrace.

6. Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Linnaeus Terrace (161° 05' 00" E, 77° 35' 50" S,) is an elevated bench of weathered Beacon Sandstone approximately 1.5 km in length and 1 km in width. It is located at the east end of the Asgaard Range, 1.5 km north of Oliver Peak (161° 02' 30" E, 77° 36' 40" S) at an elevation of about 1600 m. The Area overlooks the South Fork of the Wright Valley, is about 4 km from Don Juan Pond and 10 km from the terminus of the Wright Upper Glacier (Map A and Figure 1). The boundaries of the Area and prominent features are shown in the accompanying maps and figures.
On the ground, the lower (northern) boundary of the Area is characterized by the presence 
of a predominantly sandstone outcrop of approximately 3 m in height which extends for much of 
the length of the terrace. The lower boundary of the Area is defined as the upper edge of this 
outcrop, and as straight lines adjoining the visible edges where the outcrop is covered by surface 
talus (Figure 2). The upper (southern) boundary of the Area is characterized by a line of 
sandstone outcrop of about 2-5 m in height, occurring between the elevations of 1660 - 1700 m 
about 70 m above the general elevation of the terrace. The upper boundary of the Area is defined 
as the uppermost edge of this outcrop, and shall be considered a straight line between the visible 
edges where the outcrop is covered by surface talus (Map B, Figure 2). The west end of the Area 
is defined as where the terrace narrows and merges with a dolerite talus slope on the flank of the 
NW ridge of Oliver Peak. The boundary at the west dips steeply from where the upper outcrop 
disappears, following the border of the dolerite talus with the terrace sandstone down to the 
westernmost corner. The east boundary is defined as the 1615 m contour, which follows closely 
the edge of an outcrop which extends much of the width of the terrace. At the southernmost 
corner of the Area the terrace merges with the slopes into the valley to the east: from this point 
the boundary extends upward to the 1700 m contour, from where it follows the line of outcrop 
defining the south boundary (Map B, Figure 2).

Winter air temperature at Linnaeus Terrace ranges between -20°C and -45°C, while in 
January the daily mean is -5°C. Cryptoendolithic microorganisms typically colonize porous 
Beacon sandstones with a 0.2 - 0.5 mm grain size, with an apparent preference for rocks stained 
tan or brown by Fe+3-containing oxyhydroxides. A silicified crust of about 1 mm thickness on 
many of the rocks probably facilitates colonization by stabilizing the surface and reducing wind 
erosion. Three of the five described cryptoendolithic microbial communities have been found on 
Linnaeus Terrace: the Lichen Dominated, Red-Gloeocapsa and Chroococcidiopsis Communities. 
Linnaeus Terrace is the type locality of the endemic green algal genus Hemichloris and of the 
endemic Xanthophycean algal species Heterococcus endolithicus. The Area is unusual in that so 
many different living and fossil endolithic communities are present within a small area. The 
main physical and biological features of these communities and their habitat are described in 
Friedmann, E.I. (ed) 1993 Antarctic Microbiology, Wiley-Liss, New York.

A small area (Map C) has been contaminated by release of the C14 radioactive isotope. 
While the contamination poses no significant human or environmental threat, any samples 
gathered within this area are considered unsuitable for scientific work using C14 techniques.

6(ii) Restricted zones within the Area
None.

6(iii). Structures within the Area
A number of rocks within the Area have small instruments installed into them for scientific 
purposes and should not be disturbed.

6(iv) Location of other Specially Protected Areas or Sites of Special Scientific Interests within 
close proximity of the Area
None.
                                                                                
                                  3
7. Permit conditions

Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under Annex V, 
Article 7 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Conditions for 
issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that:
  • it is issued only for scientific study of the cryptoendolithic ecosystem, or for a compelling 
    scientific or management purpose that cannot be served elsewhere;
  • the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural ecological system or scientific values of 
    the Area;
  • any management activities are in support of the objectives of the Management Plan;
  • the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan;
  • the Permit, or an authorized copy, shall be carried within the Area;
  • a Visit Report is supplied to the authority named in the Permit;
  • any Permit issued shall be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Access to the Area is permitted by foot or by helicopter. No special restrictions apply to the 
routes used to move to and from the Area. Helicopters shall land only at the designated site at 
the west end of the terrace (16l° 04'29" E, 77° 35'50" S, elevation 1610 m: Maps B and C), 
except when specifically authorized by Permit otherwise for a compelling scientific or 
management purpose. Use of helicopter smoke bombs within the Area is discouraged. When 
transporting permitted visitors, pilots, air crew, or passengers en route elsewhere on helicopters 
are prohibited from moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the designated landing and 
camping sites unless specifically authorized by a Permit. Land vehicles are prohibited within the 
Area.

Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives 
of any permitted activities. Visitors should avoid breaking fragile rock formations.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
  • Scientific research which will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area;
  • Essential management activities, including monitoring.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures, except boundary markers and signs, are to be erected within the Area except as 
specified in a Permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by Permit 
and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All 
such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. 
Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has expired shall be the responsibility of the 
authority which granted the original Permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping is permitted within the Area only at the designated site in the immediate vicinity of the 
helicopter landing pad (Maps B and C).

4
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area

To avoid compromising the microbial ecosystem for which this site is protected, no living 
animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and 
precautions should be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be 
brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which 
may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be 
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was 
granted. Food, fuel, and other materials are not to be stored in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted. All such 
materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the 
conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction 
into the environment is minimized.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit. Where animal taking or harmful 
interference is involved this should be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the 
Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit. Material 
of human origin, not brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, but which is likely to 
compromise the values of the Area may be removed from any part of the Area.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes, including all human wastes, must be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management 
Plan can continue to be met
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection 
activities, which may involve the collection of small amounts of biological material for analysis 
or audit, or to carry out protective measures.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder of each permit issued submit to the appropriate 
authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such report should include, as 
appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties 
should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their 
jurisdiction, in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. 
Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organizing the scientific use of the Area.

5
Map A - Linnaeus Terrace, Wright Valley, location image-map

                                 161°00'00"E                   161°10'00"E
              77°34'00"S




                                     Don Juan Pond

                      SOUTH
                       FORK

                    WRIGHT VALLEY

              77°36'00"S




                  0         meters         2000
                                 Contour interval: 20m


                  — Protected area boundary
                  H   Designated helicopter pad
                                 Photography: 22 November 1993
                                 Projection: Lambert conformal conic
                                 Spheroid: WGS84
•
•
Map B - Linnaeus Terrace, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 19: site orthophotograph

77°35'40" S                                 161°04'00" E                                 161°06'00" E

                                          ENTRY BY PERMIT

                              161°04'25" E
                                     H
                              77°35'50" S
                               Camping area

                              Former helicopter pad
                              Former camping area

77°36'00" S

0                 meters                 400
Contour interval: 5m

— Protected area boundary
H Designated helicopter pad

                              Photography: 22 November 1993
                              Projection: Lambert conformal conic
                              Spheroid: WGS84

Map C - Linnaeus Terrace, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 19: topographic map

77°35'40"S                                 161°04'00"E                                 161°06'00"E

                                 ENTRY BY PERMIT

              161°04'29"E
              77°35'50"S
Camping area

Former Helicopter pad
Former camping area

77°36'00"S

0                meters                400
Contour interval: 5m

- Protected area boundary
(H) Designated helicopter pad
/// C 14 contaminated area

Map C is digitally derived from the orthophotograph in Map B
Figure 1 - Wright Valley, perspective view

TAYLOR GLACIER
ASGARD RANGE
Olive Peak
Wright Upper Glacier
Litt[?]aeus Terrace
SGSI No. 19
Don[?]an Pond
Dare
SOUTH FORK
NORTH FORK
WRIGHT VALLEY
Lake Vanda
Figure 2 - Linnaeus Terrace, perspective view

Oliver Peak
Helicopter Pad
161°04'29"E
77°35'50"S
Approx. 20cm
Figure 3. Fragile rock formations.
