





Preliminary results of Russian expedition studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok in 2006-2007




Full-scale studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok during the Antarctic season 2006-2007 were carried out under the Program of the 52nd Russian Antarctic Expedition (РАЭ) directly at Vostok station and during the sledge-caterpillar traverses over the lake area. Russia in IP 68 and IP 69 at XXIX ATCM informed the international Antarctic community about the plans of continuing drilling operations in the deep ice borehole 5-G1 during the season 2006-2007 aiming to obtain 75 m of the new ice core at the 3650-3725 m depth range. Penetration to the water layer of the subglacial lake with the purpose of water sampling from its surface layer was planned for the season 2007-2008. On 20 January 2005, RAE was granted a permit No. 25 to continue drilling operations in the deep borehole 5-G1 based on the prepared preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was to be prepared on the basis of new data on the structure of the ice core extracted during the season 2006-2007. It was planned to present it at XXX ATCM. 
In the course of resuming drilling operations in the borehole 5-G1 at Vostok station in December 2005 it was determined that to continue drilling of monocrystalline ice without changing the design of the thermal mechanical drill was of low efficiency. 
During the period between the expeditions (March-October 2006), specialists of the St. Petersburg Mining Institute had developed and produced technical modifications of some units of the drilling assembly applied for borehole drilling at Vostok station, which were delivered to the place of work at the beginning of December 2006. The glacial-drilling group of Vostok station during the 52nd RAE consisted of specialists of the wintering team (2 people) and the seasonal team (6 people). Three glaciologists worked in the latter group (two from the AARI, St. Petersburg and one from the LGGE, Grenoble, France). After completing the preparatory work drilling of the borehole the bottom of which was at a depth of 3650 m, was continued on 26 December 2006. In total from 26 December, 2006 to 13 January 2007, 30 drill runs were made as a result of which 7.8 m of the new ice core were extracted to the surface. 
On 14 January at the time of the next 31st run at the moment of the core separation from the borehole bottom at a depth of 3658.26 m the drill was stuck with the break of the carrying cable armouring in the unit of its fastening to the drill. As a result of this accident the drill remained at the borehole bottom. The drilling operations in the borehole 5G-1 were suspended and preparation for extracting the drill from the borehole and eliminating the accident consequences began.
For this purpose, the Drilling Project Manager Professor of the St. Petersburg Mining Institute Nikolay Vasiliev has developed a technology for the recovery of the damaged drill from the borehole, and drawings of technical devices to determine the cleanness of the carrying cable inlet to the drill and of the device for its recovery. In order to free the drill from the borehole bottom, about 200 liters of antifreeze was delivered using a special device to its lower part, which allowed melting the ice in the area of its contact with the stuck bore bit and release it. Then using a special device, centering and cleanness of the inlet of the unit of cable fastening to the drill relative to the lateral sides of the borehole were checked. Then using a special clutch directed to the inlet of the aforementioned fastening unit, the damaged drill was captured and was successfully recovered to the surface on 7 February 2007. The device for checking the cleanness of the inlet and for capturing the drill was produced under the conditions of Vostok station by specialists of the drilling team. The given engineering operation is unique in the practice of Antarctic studies and illustrates the capabilities of the Russian drilling school.
After extraction of the damaged drill from the borehole, operations for pumping out antifreeze from the lower horizons of the borehole were conducted using a device, which allows delivering or extracting the drilling fluid or some of its components to or from any horizons of the borehole. Control measurements of the drilling fluid density were carried out and the geometric size of the borehole were determined. The conducted operations showed the borehole to be again ready for drilling; However of some concern appears to be the presence of a large void at the borehole bottom formed due to antifreeze action. This fact complicates the start of resuming drilling of the borehole preserving its verticality.
Examination of the damaged drill showed that the cause of its being stuck at the bottom was expansion of free space (“windows”) between the bore bit cutters, specially made for achieving a greater efficiency of drilling monocrystalline ice. Elimination of such deficiencies was foreseen in the modified drill units that had been delivered to Vostok station but were not installed in the drill by unknown reason. The project participants probably tried to obtain the largest possible volume of the new ice core during the period of a short Antarctic season neglecting the reliability of drilling equipment, which was the cause of the accident.
In addition to the aforementioned technology for extracting the stuck drill, an alternative variant of rounding it by means of drilling a slant borehole approximately by 20 m higher than the accident area, was prepared with a subsequent change of the borehole to the vertical position. This technique was tested by Russian drillers in 1992 at rounding the stuck drill at a depth of 2502 m in the same borehole of Vostok station. The deviation was made by a thermal drill at the depth range of 2232-2246 m after which the borehole attained a quasi-real position. The borehole part with the stuck drill was filled with the ice core from the place of the drill break to the beginning of borehole deviation. After this operation the ice borehole 5G at Vostok station was called 5G-1. This method proved to be quite efficient for eliminating accidents in deep ice holes and was considered by RAE as a reserve variant. However the technology applied in 2007 manifested more positive results.
At present the drill modification is completed and its tests are being carried out. Their results will answer the question of the possible continuation of drilling the new ice core during the 2007 Antarctic winter period.
Glaciological studies of the ice core in the lower horizons in the borehole of Vostok station show that ice mono-crystals do not have pronounced directions of the main axes presenting a uniform crystalline structure with some crystals up to 1.5 – 2.0 m in size. In total, about 250 mono-crystals of ice were recorded at a depth interval of 3623-3658 m. This fact indicates that this ice formed from surface water of the subglacial ice, does not experience deformation.
Investigations of spatial characteristics of the subglacial Lake Vostok, bedrock morphometric characteristics in the mountainous valley of lake location and the ice cover above it were continued during the Antarctic summer season 2006-07 using radar profiling and seismic sounding methods. Surface radio-echo sounding was carried out in the southern and northern parts of the subglacial Lake Vostok with the aim of specifying the coastline configuration and obtaining the ice sheet thickness profile along the flow line as a full-scale basis for mathematical modeling of the ice cover dynamics in East Antarctica. During the season of 2005-06, a narrow extensive water channel was detected in the southern part of the lake during radar profiling of the ice sheet thickness, which made it possible for some investigators to suggest a connection of the subglacial Lake Vostok with the other subglacial lakes in this region. The activity during the season of 2006-07 aimed to check this. According to the obtained data of radio-echo sounding it was determined that this non-uniformity of the coastline configuration presents a narrow closed fjord, rather than a water communication channel with other subglacial water bodies. The methodology of surface radar measurements applied by Russian specialists has some advantages compared with standard regular airborne surveys carried out over a rectangular grid of track lines as such non-uniformities have horizontal scales smaller than a step of the regular flight grid.
Glaciologists suppose that in the northern part of the subglacial Lake Vostok, ice of the most ancient origin is located as compared with the other areas of Lake Vostok or other glaciers of East Antarctica. In this connection the ice thickness profile made along the supposed ice flow line across the northern part of the lake creates a good full-scale basis for modeling not only the ice sheet dynamics but also the ice melting and accretion processes. According to the existing hypothesis, lake ice accretion occurs in the southern part of the lake while melting processes take place in the southern lake area. Russian specialists have already made ice thickness measurements along its flow line in the southern part of the lake. So a new ice sheet thickness profile obtained in the season of 2006-07 creates a full picture of initial data for mathematical modeling of ice processes over the Lake Vostok water area.
Using radio-echo sounding methods, a small flat island with an insignificant elevation of its surface over the water level was detected in the central lake area.
Simultaneously with radio-echo sounding, a German land-surveyor was performing high-precision GPS–observations of the vertical tidal motions of the glacial body over the northern shallow water area of the lake. In addition, stakes were set up for a subsequent determination of the surface ice flow rates.
The seismic team made a cross-profile passing across the northern lake area along the same route as the radar profiling of ice thickness along its flow line. The measurements were made using a method of seismic reflected waves in the form of discrete soundings (26 points in the profile and two soundings along the long axis of the lake). At each sounding point, a receiving line of seismic receivers with a total length of 575 m was deployed along the observation profile on the snow surface every 25 m. The source of seismic signal was at a distance of 3-4 km from the receiving line. The sounding points in the profile S52 were located every 3.5-4.0 km and every 10 km along the long axis. 
In addition, methodological studies were carried out in the vicinity of Vostok station to investigate the seismic structure of the Earth’s crust beneath the subglacial lake by means of the method of seismic refraction waves. This method allows obtaining information on the depth of the acoustic basement and the boundaries of basal rocks. Observations were carried out at a distance of 22 km from the source of seismic signal excitation. Two reflected waves were registered, the nature of which will be determined after processing of observations.
Study of the subglacial Lake Vostok during the season of 2006-07 made a significant contribution to the existing information about this unique natural body of Central Antarctica. A relative misfortune in fulfilling the drilling project plan was in our opinion compensated by an operational and a highly efficient engineering decision for extracting the damaged drill from the ice borehole, which allows us to assess with a perspective the possibility of finding a positive way out from many critical situations in the deep ice borehole. Absence of new data on the ice structure in the 3650-3725 m layer did not make it possible to complete the preparation of the Final CEE for the Project of water sampling from the surface lake layer, which was to be presented by Russia at XXX ATCM. This document will be presented at the next session of the XXXI ATCM in Kiev, the Ukraine in 2008.

