





The 50th Anniversary of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition




The 50th Anniversary of the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition
January 29th, 2007 marked the 50th anniversary of the opening of Syowa Station in Antarctica as a scientific base for the annual Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition.  The first Japanese expedition departed Tokyo on November 8th, 1956 on the Antarctic research vessel “Soya”.  In celebration of this anniversary, several memorial events were planned and performed in 2006 and 2007.

1. The Antarctic Exhibition – A Continent of Wonder
The National Science Museum in Tokyo hosted “The Antarctic Exhibition – A Continent of Wonder” from July 15th to September 3rd, 2006 under the joint sponsorship of the National Institute of Polar Research and the Asahi Shimbun Company (Figure 1).  The exhibition featured displays of preserved Adélie penguins and seals, Antarctic continental ice with ancient air bubbles, rock specimens recording the earth’s history, Antarctic meteorites including Lunar and Martian specimens, snow vehicles, field equipment and clothing, and archives of newspaper clippings and films.  Almost every day, the National Science Museum in Tokyo and Syowa Station in Antarctica was connected by satellite communication, and the audience in Tokyo could enjoy chatting with Antarctic expeditioners in real time.  More than 220,000 people visited the exhibition.

2. Open Forum Antarctica
The National Institute of Polar Research in Tokyo celebrated the anniversary by hosting the “Open Forum Antarctica” on January 28th and 29th, 2007.  Three panelists who were supposed to appear in the Forum were invited to Antarctica from January 3rd to 20th, 2007.  They are Mamoru Mohri, an astronaut and Executive Director of the National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation; Michiko Imai, an alpinist and medical doctor; and Wahei Tatematsu, a writer.  The panelists flew from Cape Town, South Africa, to Syowa Station by way of the Norwegian Station Troll and the Russian Station Novolazarevskaya via the newly-established DROMLAN (Dronning Maud Land Air Network) (Figure 2).  The visitors were received at Troll and Novolazarevskaya Stations with the warmest hospitality.  This flight demonstrated that it took only five days to reach Syowa Station from Japan by air.  While staying in Antarctica, conferences connecting Antarctica, the National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation in Tokyo and two other science and technology museums in Australia and Thailand were convened via satellite.  On their return to Japan, the three panelists appeared in the Forum to relate to the audience the sights, experiences and feelings of traveling to Antarctica, and joined in discussion with other panelists on the future of the continent.  
3. Outreach activity for school pupils
The National Institute of Polar Research began new outreach initiatives, including “Bring School Pupils’ Ideas to the Arctic and the Antarctic”, an activity program for school pupils, as part of IPY 2007-08 (Figure 3).  The program advertised for scientifically interesting ideas and experiments from school pupils aged between 12 and 18 to be undertaken in polar regions.  Selected proposals will be undertaken by scientists in Arctic or Antarctic environments, who will visit the schools after their expeditions with the results to present them to pupils.  This program will encourage the next generation continue in polar science.


