





Report of the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group




Report of the Deception Island Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group
1. Introduction

Deception Island was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 4 by Measure 3 (2005). Working Paper XXVIII ATCM/ WP 20 and Information Papers XII SATCM/IP8, XXIV ATCM/IP63,  XXV ATCM/IP28 and XXVI ATCM/IP48 submitted to the CEP summarise the extensive consultation amongst those Parties with major interests in Deception Island, and the process that lead to its adoption as an ASMA.
XXIX ATCM/IP19 reported on the establishment of a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the plan, and on the success of the Deception Island management group in its first year to effectively resolve the previously reported conflicts between science and tourism. 
This paper gives an overview of the activities undertaken on Deception Island during the 2006/07 austral summer. It reports on two cruise ship incidents which occurred within the ASMA, and the planned intersessional work that the Management Group are considering in light of their concerns about these incidents.
2.  Overview of Activities 2006/07
2.1 Science and Logistics

Deception Island is an area of outstanding scientific interest, in particular for studies in geological and biological sciences. Volcanic events offer the rare opportunity to study the effects of environmental change on a recently formed ecosystem, and the dynamics of ecosystems as they recover from natural perturbations. Long term seismological and biological data-sets have been collected at Decepciόn Station (Argentina) and Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain) that need to be maintained and continued in the future.
Gabriel de Castilla Station (Spain) was open from November 20th 2006 to March 10th 2007. A successful programme of science was undertaken, focussing on geodesy, geophysics and tele-detection on Deception Island and its surroundings. This included seismo-volcanic activity records, surface geophysical structures and crust modelling, time evolution modelling of the active layers,  morphological evidences of recent volcanic activity and seismo-tectonic activity. In the field of biology and ecology, research was conducted on parasites and infections in Antarctic seals, studies in extreme ecosystems, lichens, moss and Antarctic lakes, as well as infections and immunity responses on three penguin species.
Geophysical and geodetic instruments to record volcanic activity on Deception Island and its surroundings were maintained. Seismographs, a seismic antenna and a two-frequency geodetic GPS were operated at Gabriel de Castilla Station. Five telemetric vertical seismographs were deployed at selected locations on the island. 
During the campaign, the Spanish Polar Committee hosted scientists from the Korean and Chilean Antarctic Programmes who were undertaking a geophysical programme on the island.
Improvements were introduced at Gabriel de Castilla Station to the communications system, waste treatment, environmental management, safety and medical care. 
At Decepción Station (Argentina), scientific activities focused on volcanological monitoring, including geochemical and isotopic analysis of fumarolic gases and water bodies, seismic activity recording and thermometric recording. Geological studies focused on reviewing the islands stratiography, and geological profiles. 

Significant clean-up work was undertaken at Decepción Station.  Two former waste dumps were removed, and a third partially cleared. Approximately 2000 kgs of waste was cleared up by ten staff dedicated to the task over the summer. The clean-up is planned to be completed during the 2007/08 summer season. 
A feasibility study was undertaken to relocate the existing sewage discharge outlet. Sewage currently drains into the lagoon situated adjacent to the station. It is planned to relocate the discharge pipe to drain into Port Foster. 
2.2 Cultural Heritage
The UK Antarctic Heritage Trust and the British Antarctic Survey undertook a conservation survey of the abandoned British Base B at Whalers Bay on 21st – 22nd January 2007.  A report and recommendations will be submitted to the Deception Island Management Group for consideration. 
 2.3 Tourist Activities
A total of 224 tourist ship visits were planned to Deception Island between 1st November 2006 to 17th March 2007. Many of these visits involved landings at more than one location on the island. This figure excludes yacht visits and non-IAATO vessels. The exact number of IAATO ship visits and passengers landed ashore will be reported by IAATO through the post-visit reporting system. 
 3. Maritime Shipping incidents in Port Foster, Deception Island
Two shipping incidents involving IAATO tourist vessels occurred during the 2006/07 austral summer in Port Foster. 
3. 1. Grounding of M/V Luybov Orlova
The tourist vessel Luybov Orlova ran aground at Whalers Bay, Deception Island at 11.37 hrs on November 15th. At 03.00 hrs on November 16th, the Spanish naval vessel Las Palmas responded to an emergency call on Channel 16 VHF notifying them that the ship was grounded on an unchartered bank and requesting assistance. The Chilean support vessel Viel also picked up the emergency call on Channel 16 and altered course to Deception Island. It is believed that the call was made 15 hours after the vessel grounded, at which time no MAYDAY call was raised. The Orlova was grounded approximately 100 metres from the beach at Whalers Bay, on a port side inclination. There was potential for the situation to have worsened. Weather conditions were, according to Las Palmas vessel report, 50 knot easterly winds with visibility of one mile.
Agreement was provided by the Master of Las Palmas to the Master of Luybov Orlova upon  request that no financial cost would be incurred for the assistance. Depth sounding around the grounded vessel was undertaken by the Spanish crew to determine a safe approach to the vessel. An Officer from Las Palmas accompanied the Officers of the Orlova on the bridge of the grounded vessel. The Orlova was towed off the sandbank, taking 3 hours to complete.  No structural damage was incurred to the Orlova, no passengers or crew of the ship were harmed and no environmental damage was reported.  However, a  failure of the towing chain resulted in structural damage to Las Palmas, including the stern guide.
3.2. Assistance to MS Nordkapp and monitoring
An incident involving the grounding of the tourist vessel Nordkapp occurred on the 30th  January 2007. This incident is described in detail in XXX ATCM/ WP 37 submitted by Norway. The UK ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance provided assistance to Nordkapp. This included boat and helicopter support for the evacuation of 285 passengers from Nordkapp to Nordnorge, transfer of non-essential crew, and technical advice on the damage sustained by the vessel and pollution control. Endurance’s diving team conducted an underwater inspection of the hull of Nordkapp providing photography and video footage to enable an assessment of seaworthiness by Det Norsk Veritas prior to Nordkapp transferring to Ardley Cove, King George Island. The assistance provided by HMS Endurance was done so in accordance with a Memorandum of Understanding agreed between the Master of  Nordkapp and the Captain of HMS Endurance. 
On learning about the grounding of Nordkapp, the Las Palmas also altered course to Deception Island to offer assistance, and left Deception Island after being informed that the situation was under control.
Spain and Argentina established a monitoring programme to determine the environmental impact of the spill. Monitoring started on 30th  January. On January 31st, at 13.00 hrs (approximately 15 hours after the incident occurred) Las Palmas and the Decepción Station staff undertook a visual inspection between Collins Point and Gabriel de Castilla Station, which confirmed the presence of diesel both in the sea and along the shoreline. Oil spill containment booms were also found floating adrift near the shore, and washed up on the coastline at Collins Point, at 17.00 hrs.
Analysis of water samples and beach sediment was carried out from January 31st to February 5th . Four sampling sites were established at Fumarole Bay, Decepción Station, Gabriel de Castilla Station and Collins Point. Samples were collected daily from the beach and from shallow waters (one meter from the shoreline). Forty eight samples were collected in total, of which six samples (collected on January 31st, 17.00 hrs local time) recorded the presence of hydrocarbons. Qualitative chemical analysis  was undertaken by the Environmental Officer at Gabriel de Castilla Station. By February 3rd, there was no further sign of fuel on the beaches, with the exception of some oily residue on the beach around Gabriel de Castilla Station. Monitoring activities also included possible effects on intertidal communities. 
It was concluded that most of the slick evaporated rapidly due to the strong winds in the days following the accident, and by 4th February 2006 no hydrocarbons were detectable in the seawater samples. The monitoring programme ceased on 5th February. No impact on the flora or fauna of Port Foster due to the slick was reported. However, a dive survey of Ravn Rock was undertaken by National Geographic M/V Endeavour which showed damage to this rock pinnacle. Kelp and coralline algae had been scraped off and patches of orange and brown paint were evident. Damage extended up to 8 metres in length. 
4. Planned inter-sessional work (2007-08)
The aim of the Deception Island Management Plan is to conserve and protect the unique and outstanding environment of Deception Island, whilst managing the variety of competing demands placed upon it, including science, tourism, and the conservation of its natural and historic values.  
The Deception Island Management Group will meet to discuss issues related to the management of Deception Island, in particular in light of the lessons learnt from these two shipping incidents on Deception Island. 
Discussions will be held within the context of the objectives of the ASMA Management Plan, which are to: 
    • assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities in the Area, encourage co-operation between Antarctic Treaty Parties and other stakeholders, and manage potential or actual conflicts of interest between different activities, including science, logistics and tourism;
    • avoid unnecessary degradation, by human disturbance, to the unique natural values of the Area;
    • minimise the possibility of non-native species being introduced through human activities;
    • prevent unnecessary disturbance, destruction or removal of historic buildings, structures and artefacts;
    • safeguard those working in or near to, or visiting, the Area from the significant volcanic risk;
    • provide an opportunity for visitors to experience this unique island, and promote an awareness, through education, of its significance. 
Based on these discussions the Group will, over the intersessional period, consider whether there is a need for additional steps to be taken to manage tourist activities on the island and to prevent similar shipping accidents in Port Foster in the future. This may include: 
    • Is there a need for further guidelines for navigation through Neptunes Bellows and within Port Foster, as well as recommended anchorage locations in Port Foster or a ‘safety buffer zone’ at a suitable distance from the shoreline at Whalers Bay ?
    • Should a maximum recommended size of tourist vessel (either by passenger number or tonnage) be included as a new provision within the Management Plan for Deception Island ?
    • Would a maximum recommended number of tourist ship visits per season to Deception Island help to take forward the aims of the ASMA ?
    • Should new incident reporting requirements be set within the framework of the ASMA provisions to allow for rapid emergency response ? 
    • Are further steps required to manage tourist or recreational visits on land at Deception Island (e.g. ASPA designation, further visitor guidelines) ?

The Group will provide a report to CEP XI with recommendations on the above.

Under the Terms of Reference of the Management Group, Chairmanship of the group will rotate every 2 years amongst the 6 member Parties. The UK has completed the first term of 2 years. At  the last meeting of the Group in the margins of CEP IX (Edinburgh, 2006), it was agreed that Argentina would chair the group for the two year period following CEP X.  
5. Conclusions
Two shipping incidents involving tourist vessels occurred in Port Foster, Deception Island during the 2006/07 austral summer. The Management Group is concerned about the potential for future incidents of a similar nature. The Group, which is to be chaired by Argentina for 2 years following ATCM XXX, will consider, on the basis of lessons learnt from these shipping incidents,  whether further actions are required to protect the important natural values of Deception Island, and to support the implementation of the Management Plan
