





Science Supported by Antarctica New Zealand 2006/2007




Science Supported by Antarctica New Zealand 2006/2007
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand

Antarctica New Zealand supported thirty-one science events in the 2006/2007 season. The research undertaken by these events falls under three interdisciplinary research themes that are outlined in the New Zealand Science Strategy for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean (2004-2009) that Antarctica New Zealand published in 2004. Each theme is subdivided into several sub-themes for clarification purposes. Following is a summary of the research undertaken under these themes:
1. Antarctic Physical Environments Research
a. The Lithosphere:
Three projects fall under this sub-theme. These aim to: determine how magma reached the surface to feed massive basaltic lava flows of the Ferrar large igneous province in the Allan Hills; Study the various aspects of the geology of Victoria Land to answer questions about how the area developed when it split from Gondwana, hundreds of millions of years ago; and provide continuous recordings of the earth’s magnetic field at Scott Base from 1957.
b. Ice-Free Regions:
One study investigates the structure and evolution of sand dunes in the McMurdo Dry Valleys to determine how active and how old the dunes are and where they are sourced, so that they can be compared with dunes found on Mars. A second project studies patterned ground and permafrost of the McMurdo Dry Valleys to determine their sensitivity to climate changes.
c. Climate Change:
The largest project under this sub-theme is the multinational ANDRILL project, (Antarctic Drilling Project) which drilled 1200m of marine sediment under the Ross Ice Shelf to tell us of past ice shelf responses to climate change over the last 5 million years. Also included is the NZ portion of the international project ITASE aimed at collecting and analysing ice cores to determine the spatial climate variability across Antarctica over the last 200 years. This project focuses on coastal cores, which have been shown to be very sensitive to climatic variability. Lastly, a project aimed at studying the response of the Antarctic ice sheet to future climate change by combining glacial, geomorphological and climatological approaches.
d. The Cryosphere:
The first of two glaciology projects aims to characterise the composition of ice beneath glaciers to help understand how glaciers move. The second, aims to determine the composition of the meltwater and the pattern of water flow at a cold-based glacier, in order to make the connection between glacier and stream hydrology. In addition, a long-term study on sea ice and Southern Ocean processes is looking at the physical oceanography of McMurdo Sound, the turbulence that exists under sea ice and its influence on ice formation, circulation in Antarctic fjords, and the physical processes involved in the formation of frazil ice beneath land-fast sea ice.
e. The Atmosphere:
Five long-term studies are supported under this sub-theme. These monitor: the general circulation of the atmosphere, in particular the behaviour of wave-driven circulation in the middle atmosphere and how this effects the transport of energy and momentum to higher altitudes; magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling and space weather at high latitudes; the drivers of change in the atmosphere, particularly those involved in the formation of the Antarctic ozone hole; human-induced long-term trends in trace gases to determine changes in oxidative capacity of the atmosphere; and the Scott Base climate record from 1957. A new project under this sub-theme studies the role of Bromine oxide in the regular depletion of tropospheric ozone during the Antarctic springtime to help us understand how these processes might influence the global tropospheric chemistry which is important for the changing concentrations of greenhouse gases.
2. Southern Ocean Research
a. Oceanography of the Ross Sea:
Long-Term monitoring of tides at Cape Roberts and at Scott Base.
b/c. Marine Biodiversity and Ecosystems:
A strong and diverse marine programme is made up of 5 projects. These aim to: test the hypothesis that different fish have different abilities to acclimatise to increases in water temperature, and look at the influence of habitat on that acclimation; increase our knowledge of how lipid transport and metabolism systems work in notothenioid fish and to determine whether this lipid transport system is related to cold adaptation; study the distribution and abundance of meroplankton (larvae of benthic marine invertebrates and fish) in the water column by using morphological and molecular approaches to identify common larval types; study the productivity of algae that live in and under the sea ice and determine what the effects of global climate change will have on this productivity. The final project is a long-term study aimed at characterising the structure and function of benthic marine communities and determine their relationships to key environmental factors as this is important for an improved understanding of Antarctic biodiversity and ecology, and management of the Antarctic coastal zone.
3. Antarctic Ecosystems Research
a. Terrestrial Biodiversity:
Two projects under this sub-theme are aimed at: using modern molecular phylogenetic methods to study the distribution of micro-organisms in Antarctic soil, understanding the key environmental factors that dictate this distribution, and determining the role in the community structure that these micro-organisms play; and studying the biodiversity and performance of lichens, mosses, springtails, mites and nematodes along the Victoria Land coast.
b. Ecosystem Functioning:
Five projects under this sub-theme aim to: establish an inventory of gastrointestinal bacteria in Adèlie and Emperor penguins, south polar skuas and Weddell seals to determine the transfer of micro-organisms between the environment and these species; undertake a long-term study on the population dynamics of the Adèlie penguin population of the Ross Sea as a biological indicator of local, regional and global change; study the polar evolution of springtails by looking at growth rates, responses of the metabolic rate to temperature and the connection between activity, growth and evolutionary rates; study physiological adaptations of nematodes to Antarctic conditions including their tolerance to freezing; study various aspects of Antarctic aquatic ecosystems, geochemistry of ponds, and photosynthetic and nitrogen fixation rates of microbial mats to assess model predictions against actual observations.
c. Management and Conservation:
Research supports environmental protection and management of ice-free areas of the Ross Sea region by increasing the fundamental knowledge and understanding of Antarctic soils including soil distribution and climate, and vulnerability to human impact.
The current science strategy document plus further information on these projects (including web links to the project home pages, recent publications and metadata) can be found on Antarctica New Zealand’s website at:  www.antarcticanz.govt.nz.

