





Report by the CCAMLR Observer at the Thirtieth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting




Report by the CCAMLR Observer at the Thirtieth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting
Introduction

    1. The Twenty-Fifth Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) was held in Hobart from 23 October to 3 November 2006. As in the past a number of routine matters were addressed along with some specific issues. The most notable of the latter included:
    • CCAMLR fisheries in 2005/06;
    • Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing;
    • Ecosystem monitoring and management ;
    • By-catch in longline and trawl fisheries;
    • Marine Protected Areas, and
    • Co-operation with international organizations, particularly the ATCM.
    2. The Meeting was particularly noteworthy as it was the twenty-fifth since the CAMLR Convention entered into force on 7 April 1982. A celebratory statement was issued by the Commission (Attachment 1) to celebrate this notable milestone in CCAMLR’s history.
    3. Information on CCAMLR’s deliberation on the issues identified in paragraph (1), and others, is provided below. Emphasis is given to items that are particularly relevant to the ATCM XXX and CEP X agendas. An overall summary of important discussions and decisions from CCAMLR XXV is provided in Appendix I along with references to the meeting’s report paragraphs. 
CCAMLR Fisheries in 2005/06
    4. Fisheries in the CAMLR Convention Area during 2005/06 (1 December 2005 to 31 November 2006) targeted Patagonian and Antarctic Toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni), mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari) and krill (Euphausia superba). Catch information is available in the CCAMLR Statistical Bulletin (http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sb/vol19.htm).
    5. The reported catch of Dissostichus spp. in 2005/06 (to October 2006) was 13 704 tonnes, taken predominantly by longlining, and this compared to 16 250 tonnes in the previous season.  It is estimated that, in addition to reported catches, some 3080 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. were taken as a result of IUU fishing in the Convention Area during 2005/06, compared with 2076 tonnes in 2004/05. The total global catch for Toothfish in 2005/06 was estimated at 25 967 tonnes, compared with 31 168 tonnes the pervious season. For further discussion on IUU fishing, please refer to paragraphs 11-15. 
    6. The reported krill catch in 2005/06 (to October 2006) was 105 084 tonnes compared with 127 035 tonnes in the previous season. This is a slight decrease in the relatively stable range of krill catches (80 000 to 1000 000 tonnes) since 1992/93. The projected krill catch for the 2006/07 season may be as high as 368 000 tonnes, an effective tripling of the 2005/06 level. 
    7. Once again, CCAMLR noted that the krill fishery’s pattern of operation is changing and this emphasizes the need to obtain sufficient information from the current fishery to meet future management needs. This is vital should the fishery become concentrated in any particular region or subarea.
    8. The Commission adopted conservation measures (CMs) for all fisheries being conducted in the 2006/07 season, as well as general measures for regulating fishing activities and reporting fisheries information from the Convention Area.  A new CM providing general environmental protection during fishing was introduced in 2006/07 (CM 26-01). This CM applies to all fishing activities in the Convention Area. The measures are published in the Schedule of Conservation Measures in Force 2006/07 available from the CCAMLR Secretariat or on website: http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/cm/drt.htm.
    9. In addition to the Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for Dissostichus spp. and conservation measures to manage specific fisheries directly (e.g. the setting of catch limits and other conditions affecting fishing), other CCAMLR measures include:
    • The CCAMLR System of Inspection:
    • Scheme to Promote Compliance by both Contracting and Non-Contracting Party Vessels, including provisions for compiling a list of IUU vessels;
    • Licensing and Inspection Obligations of Contracting Parties with regard to their Flag Vessels Operating in the Convention Area;
    • Procedures for port inspections of vessels carrying Toothfish;
    • Marking of Fishing Vessels and Fishing Gear; 
    • Automated Satellite-Linked Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS); and
    • Various Resolutions – (a) “Banning Driftnet Fishing in the Convention Area”, (b) “Harvesting Species Occurring Both within and Outside the Convention Area”, (c) “Implementation of the CDS by Acceding States and Non-Contracting Parties”, (d) “Use of Ports not Implementing the CDS”, (e) “Application of VMS in the CDS”, (f) “Use of VMS and Other Measures to Verify CDS Catch Data for Areas Outside the Convention Area, Especially FAO Statistical Area 51”; (g) “Harvesting of D. eleginoides in Areas Outside Coastal State Jurisdiction Adjacent to the Convention Area in FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57”, (h) “Vessels Flying Flags of Non-Compliance”, (i) “Ice Strengthening Standards in High Latitude Fisheries” and (j) a “Non-Contracting Party Co-Operation Programme”.
    10. Three new CMs to be noted are those setting in place an interim prohibition on deep-sea gillnetting (CM 22-04), and interim restriction on bottom trawl gear in high-seas areas within the CCAMLR Area in 2006/07 and 2007/08 (CM 22-05), and a scheme (CM 10-08) to promote compliance with CCAMLR CMs by Contracting Party nationals.
Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) Fishing 
    11. IUU fishing for Dissostichus spp. in the Convention Area has been a major issue for the Commission since 1997. CCAMLR gives high priority to eliminating such fishing and implements an integrated suite of administrative, political and enforcement-related measures to address the problem consistent with international best practice. 
    12. CCAMLR’s efforts to combat IUU fishing continue to take place against a background of ongoing and vigorous action by individual CCAMLR Contracting Parties in areas under their national jurisdiction.  
    13.  Nevertheless, CCAMLR has requested its Members to increase surveillance in the Convention Area, particularly in the Indian Ocean Statistical Divisions 58.4.1, 58.4.2 and 58.4.3b. It is also developing a probability matrix to be used to improve the determination of IUU catches.  
    14. To facilitate exchange of relevant information amongst its Members, CCAMLR maintains a database on vessels known to have fished in contravention of CCAMLR Conservation Measures. Such vessels are incorporated annually into an official “CCAMLR IUU Vessel List”. CCAMLR also uses a centralized, satellite-based vessel monitoring system (c-VMS) in the CCAMLR Secretariat to monitor the movements of fishing vessels in the Convention Area. This system has allowed surveillance to be more efficiently deployed.
    15. CCAMLR continues to interact with various other international and regional fisheries organisations, especially those with responsibility for waters adjacent to the Convention Area, in the exchange of information on issues such as IUU fishing, seabird incidental mortality and other matters relevant to CCAMLR.
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management
    16. The CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) collects long-term data on various Antarctic marine ecosystem components as well as the environment. These data are used to provide annual assessments of ecosystem status. 
    17. The CCAMLR scientific community continues to explore ways in which ecosystem advice can be formally incorporated into management decisions. In this respect, the Commission afforded high priority to:
    • On-going development of management procedures to allocate the precautionary krill catch limit in the Southwest Atlantic (Area 48) to Small Scale Management Units (SSMUs);
    • Workshops in 2007 on revising krill precautionary catch limits in Area 48 and in the Indian Ocean (Area 58) as well as on bioregionalisation (see paragraph 26 below) as the first step in developing objective definitions for marine protected areas based on bioregionalisation properties, and 
    • A Workshop in 2008 on providing abundance estimates of land-based predators. 

By-Catch in Longline and Trawl Fisheries
    18. CCAMLR leads the world in implementing measures to reduce seabird mortality during longline fishing. Many CCAMLR measures, particularly the provisions of Conservation Measure 25-03 (first adopted in 1992 ), have been incorporated into the FAO International Plan of Action for Reducing Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries (IPOA-Seabirds) adopted by the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI). A number of CCAMLR Members have developed and implemented national plans of action to address seabird by-catch issues. Such initiatives have thus resulted in the development of close ties between CCAMLR and ACAP (Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels).
    19. Compliance with CCAMLR seabird by-catch mitigation measures has improved to the extent that incidental catch levels in regulated fisheries in the Convention Area are extremely low. However, the levels attributable to IUU fishing remain a cause for concern. In addition, many bird species breeding in the Convention Area (particularly albatrosses and petrels) remain affected by high levels of mortality associated with longline fishing globally.  
    20. CCAMLR Resolution 22/XXIII remains as an important initiative in efforts to reduce incidental mortality of CAMLR Convention Area seabirds in adjacent areas. 
    21. CCAMLR continues to exchange information with other international fisheries and conservation organizations on the prevention of fisheries-induced seabird by-catch and the state of Antarctic seabird populations, as well as its experience with mitigation and associated conservation action. In particular, CCAMLR seeks advice from other regional fisheries bodies (particularly those managing tuna, such as ICCAT, IOTC and CCSBT) in an effort to secure more global information on incidental by-catch of seabird species breeding in the Convention Area. It should be noted that, unlike CCAMLR, many of these organizations do not mandate the collection of seabird by-catch data.
    22. CCAMLR also monitors the by-catch of marine mammals in both trawl and longline fisheries and remains concerned with the need to monitor fish by-catch in directed fisheries, particularly in respect of improving current knowledge and setting ecologically sustainable catch limits for the species being impacted. Various CCAMLR CMs have been agreed to address such concerns (please refer to the Schedule of CCAMLR Conservation Measures 2006/07 at http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/cm/drt.htm. 
Protected Areas (Including Marine Protected [MPAS])
    23. CCAMLR re-affirmed the principle that, in accordance with ATCM Decision 9 (2005) and for the foreseeable future, all ATCM proposals for protected areas with marine components should continue to be reviewed by CCAMLR. 
    24. Following its Workshop on Marine Protected Areas in August 2006, CCAMLR has recognized the need for extensive dialogue with key elements of the Treaty System (CEP and the ATCM) as well as SCAR, SCOR and other inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations. In that regard: 
    • A Bioregionalisation Workshop is planned to held in Belgium in August 2007 as an important step in CCAMLR’s activities to develop a representative network of MPAs;
    • The CEP Chair has been actively cooperating with CCAMLR in the preparations for the CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop;
    • The results of an independent expert consultation held in Australia in September 2006 have been valuable to such preparations and in maintaining momentum in the CCAMLR work on bioregionalisation of the Convention Area;
    • Considerable knowledge is now available concerning possible boundaries between areas in terms of ecological and biogenic processes attached thereto. Such knowledge is likely to prove useful for the Workshop, and
    • Various examples illustrate the development, designation and management of local MPAs within the CCAMLR Area, particularly in respect of MPAs proclaimed by Australia, France and South Africa.
    25. The results of the expert consultation (see paragraph 26 above) has demonstrated the feasibility of a broad-scale bioregionalisation analysis as an early step towards the identification of MPAs.  Therefore, it should be noted that, from a scientific and technical perspective, the CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop results might be expected to yield useful results in the short term.  
    26. In the above regard, CCAMLR has noted that MPAs should be effectively administered and that such a task requires attached policy direction/development.  
Co-Operation with Non-Contracting Parties
    27. In implementing its Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS), CCAMLR has done much to work with various NCPs considered to have an interest in CCAMLR’s work or in the resources that it manages. Such encouragement has included inviting NCPs to attend and participate in CCAMLR meetings. CCAMLR is also actively engaged in improving dialogue with NCPs as a way to address their potential involvement in IUU fishing undermining CCAMLR’s measures.
    28. Participation by NCPs in CCAMLR’s work does not only promote transparency, it has also enabled the Commission’s membership and work to expand. A significant development at CCAMLR-XXV was an updating of CCAMLR’s Policy to Enhance Cooperation between CCAMLR and Non-Contracting Parties aimed at improving the effectiveness of CCAMLR-NCP cooperation, including the submission of information on landing of Toothfish from NCP vessels and a cooperation enhancement program. The latter in particular provides a framework for CCAMLR Members to explore ways to improve, and prioritize, global implementation of the CAMLR Convention, to sponsor participation by relevant States and build capacity for such participation where necessary. 	  
Co-Operation with Other International Organizations
    29. CCAMLR continues to urge its Members to accept and ratify a number of relevant international agreements. It also co-operates closely with various RFMOs (CCSBT, IATTC, ICCAT, IOTC, IWC, NAFO, NEAFC, SEAFO and WCPFC) to further its work and co-ordinate its conservation efforts (particularly in relation to combating both IUU fishing and seabird by-catch during longlining). It also encourages all its Members to cooperate in developing a comprehensive and integrated international approach to such problems.
    30. FAO is one of several international organizations explicitly referred to in CAMLR Convention Article XXIII as an organization with which CCAMLR should cooperate.  Both the Commission and Scientific Committee enjoy a productive cooperative working relationship with FAO in general and with several FAO-sponsored activities such as the work of the Coordinating Working Party on Fisheries Statistics (CWP), the Sub-Committee on Fish Trade, the Regional Fisheries Bodies Secretariat Network and the  Fisheries Resources Monitoring System (FIRMS) in particular. 
    31. The Twenty-Seventh Meeting of COFI (COFI-27) was scheduled for March 2006. It addressed a number of topics of interest to CCAMLR, particularly in terms of growing international interest for a review of Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMOs). At this stage, CCAMLR stands alone as an accepted example of global best practice in addressing marine fisheries conservation issues. 
    32. CCAMLR will submit a report to the Fourteenth Conference of the Parties to the  Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES COP-14) to be held in the Hague, 3-15 June 2007. The report is being submitted under CITES Resolution Conf. 12.4 on "Cooperation between CITES and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources Regarding Trade in Toothfish". In particular, CCAMLR has drawn COP-14’s attention to the activities of Equatorial Guinea and Togo (the Flag States of IUU fishing vessels currently operating in the CCAMLR Convention Area). It has also noted the prevailing situation in respect of full implementation of the CCAMLR CDS by three other CITES parties (China - in respect of Hong Kong SAR, Indonesia and Singapore).
Co-Operation with the ATCM
    33. Once again, CCAMLR expressed satisfaction with the growing co-operation between CCAMLR and the ATCM/CEP	
    34. In particular, it noted a number of points from ATCM-XXIX as being directly relevant to its work. These included:
    • ATCM Resolution 1 (2006) on CCAMLR in the Antarctic Treaty System aimed at improving cooperation between the ATCM and CCAMLR;
    • ATCM Measure 4 (2006) pertaining to delisting of fur seals as specially protected species, and ATCM Resolution 4 (2006) on conservation of southern giant petrels;
    • ATCM Decision 2 (2006) and Resolution 3 (2006) regarding ballast water exchange in the Treaty Area as relating to fishing vessels;
    • The Edinburgh Declaration as an adjunct to CCAMLR-XXV Celebratory Statement (Attachment 1);
    • Possible spread of environmentally dangerous pathogens, such as avian influenza, to the Antarctic and how this could affect CCAMLR’s work;
    • Potential impact of marine technologies, especially acoustic technologies, on key marine species in the Convention Area
    • Need for the CEP and CCAMLR to maintain a dialogue on introduced marine species and the possible role that fishing vessels may play in that regard;
    • ATCM request to SCAR to seek regular CCAMLR advice on seal incidental mortality, particularly in the krill fishery;
    • Prevention of marine pollution and ensuring best practice(s) in terms of dealing with marine debris (see paragraph 35 below);
    • Need to gather more information on the possible effects of acoustic noise from CCAMLR fisheries and research vessels on the Antarctic marine ecosystem, and
    • Presence of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat Executive Secretary at CCAMLR-XXV.
    35. Following the points highlighted in paragraph 34 above, the ATCM’s attention is drawn to the CCAMLR submission on the latter’s monitoring of marine debris in the Convention Area. In addition, it should be noted that the possibility of a joint CEP-CCAMLR Scientific Committee meeting in the near future was also mooted at CCAMLR-XXV. 

Attachment 1
CCAMLR-XXV Celebratory Statement
Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources

On the occasion of its Twenty-fifth Meeting, the Commission,
Recalling that the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (the ‘Convention’) was established as an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty System,
Conscious of the primary responsibilities of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the Antarctic environment and, in particular, their responsibilities under Article IX, paragraph 1(f) of the Antarctic Treaty in respect of the preservation and conservation of living resources in Antarctica,
Acknowledging that all Contracting Parties, whether or not they are Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, are bound by Articles IV and VI of the Antarctic Treaty in their relations with each other,
Further recalling that the objective of the Convention is the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources, which includes rational use,
Noting that that CCAMLR has during its twenty-five years gained a reputation for effective conservation and management, and that its efforts have provided an important example for other organisations,
Emphasising that the Convention is a key instrument in efforts to provide for a comprehensive and systematic protection of the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic environment,
Recognising the need under Convention Articles II and IX to base decisions on the best scientific information available and to apply conservation principles as provided in the Convention to ensure the long-term ecological sustainability of marine living resources stocks in the Convention Area,
Noting the Scientific Committee’s pioneering advances over the past twenty-five years in developing precautionary and ecosystem-based approaches to managing Antarctic marine living resources through extensive scientific observation, innovative research, state-of-the-art assessments and ecosystem models addressing, inter alia, ecosystem monitoring, by-catch mitigation, incidental mortality of seabirds during longlining and development of exploratory fisheries,
Concerned about the devastating global consequences of Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) fishing on fisheries sustainability, conservation of marine living resources, and marine biodiversity,
Noting the Commission’s sustained efforts to combat IUU fishing, particularly through implementation of integrated monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) measures such as the Catch Documentation Scheme, Centralised Vessel Monitoring System, port inspections and cooperation with non-Contracting Parties,
Confirming its participation in efforts to ensure the global conservation of marine living resources and their sustainable management, as well as CCAMLR’s efforts to eliminate IUU fishing through cooperation with other relevant regional and international organisations,
Noting particularly the designation of 2007 to 2008 by the International Council for Science and the World Meteorological Organisation as the International Polar Year (IPY) to run from March 2007 to March 2009,
hereby declares that it will:
	Maintain the Commission’s position as a world leader in the conservation of marine living resources for the benefit of present and future generations through application of the best scientific advice possible and integrated MCS.
    1. Continue to facilitate scientific research into Antarctic marine living resources and the Antarctic marine ecosystem, including observational and experimental approaches, assessments, monitoring and modelling, with the aim of providing the best scientific advice possible.
    2. Continue to develop innovative, proactive and flexible measures consistent with Convention Article II to eliminate threats to sustainable fisheries and the Antarctic marine ecosystem, such as IUU fishing and harmful fishing practices.
    3. Strengthen practical cooperation with the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations, in keeping with Article XXIII of the Convention.

Appendix 1

CCAMLR-XXV Report References for Topics & Decisions

The CCAMLR-XXV report is downloadable from: (http://www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/cr/06/toc.htm).


Topics & Decisions
CCAMLR-XXV Paragraphs
1. General Fishery Matters

	1.1	Fisheries Catches in 2005/06
4.21, 4.45-4.46, 4.58
	1.3	Fishery Regulation Measures 2005/06
12.3, 12.81-12.19, 12.37-12.74
	1.3	New Krill Fishing Technique
4..40-4.44
	1.4	Environment Protection Measures
12.29-12.36, 12.12, 12.19
	1.5	Scheme International Scientific Observation
10.1-10.11
2. IUU fishing in Convention Area

	2.1	Current Levels
9.1-9.2
	2.2	Development IUU Estimation  Methods
9.3-9.10
	2.3	IUU Vessel Lists
9.11-9.9.53, 12.11,12.13-12.14
	3.4	Cooperation Non-Contracting Parties
7.1, 7.3-7.4, 7.1(i), 8.8-8.17, 12.14
3. General Compliance

	3.1	Compliance with Conservation Measures
7.3-7.20
	3.2	Revised Compliance-Related measures
12.9-12.17
	3.3	Development Compliance Evaluation Procedure
7.21-7.30
4. Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management

	4.1	Krill Ecosystem-Based Feedback Management
4.5-4.17, 4.27-4.39
	4.2	Incidental Mortality Seabirds/Marine Mammals
5.5-5.29
	4.3	Marine Debris Impact on biota
5.1-5.4
	4.4	Joint CCAMLR-IWC Workshop
4.77
	4.5	IPY Activities
20.1-20.12
5. Marine Protected Areas

	5.1	Objectives & Definitions
6.1-6.6
	5.2	Preparation 2007 Workshop
6.2, 6.6
6. Cooperation Antarctic Treaty System

	6.1	ATCM
15.1-15.5
	6.1	CEP
6.2.(ii), 15.6, 15.11
	6.3	SCAR
15.16-15.18
7. Cooperation Other International Organisations

	7.1	UN/FAO
16.1-16.6
	7.2	ACAP
16.7
	7.3	General
16.8-26.46




