





Romanian Antarctic Activities in Law-Racovita Australian-Romanian




Romanian Antarctic Activities in Law-Racovita Australian-Romanian 
(690 23’16”S, 760 22’47”E)
2007-2009
Inquiries can be addressed to:
 Romanian Polar Research Institute, 
email: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

Current Activities
I. Romanian polar research correlation with international programs

    • In view of the International Polar Year programs, Romania became a member of the European Polar Consortium, FP6 EUROPOLAR ERA – NET, the future framework of the European polar researches, corelated with the international ones, Antarctic Treaty included.   
    • Antarctic Treaty – SCAR: EBA and TTAAPP Projects
    • International Polar Year 2007-2008  
Project proposals in which Romanian Polar Research Institute was accepted:
    • ID 137- Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic: the Response of Life to Change EBA (coordinators - Italy, Australia)
    • ID 73 - Multidisciplinary Ecological Study of Antarctic Oases (MESAO) – coordinator - Czech Republic
    • ID 341-Taking the Antarctic, Arctic Polar Pulse -Human Biology and Medicine Research, TTAAPPL (coordinator - Australia).
II. Structuring of European and international scientific cooperation networks based on three Romanian Excellence Research Projects – Module III, 2006-2008:
                                                                 
Promotion within an European and international partnership 
of biomedical research under extreme life conditions
(RO-03)
Investigators of 
Institute of Virology of Romanian Academy of Sciences
Medicine University Bucharest
Romanian Polar Research Institute 

Scientific Objectives
This research project includes studies of immunology, physiology, epidemiology,  behavioural sciences and photo/chronobiology, leading to a better, efficient prevention and treatment of any adverse effect of the extreme life and work conditions in man’s health. The activities to be developed within this project will be achieved, for the first time, in the framework of an extensive European and international cooperation, regarding the human health in Antarctica and the study of Antarctic viruses and (micro)organisms - adaptation mechanisms to low temperatures and biomedical applications. Partners in the projects are Sweden, Austria, SUA and Belgium.  Chief Medical Officer of the Australian Antarctic Division would be interested in supporting some joint medical research in Antarctica. 
Negoita T.Gh., Toparceanu F., Xu Chengli, Jin Wei, Eugine Bistrov. Evaluation of the Immunity and Metabolic Changes in the Members of the Romanian Antarctic Expedition, 2006. Paper accepted for oral presentation within the SCAR Symposium, Hobart, July, 2006. (reference number: 0678)
Stroia A., Negoita T.Gh., Toparceanu F., Cotta M., Human Nutrition under Extreme Conditions, Antarctic and Arctic Research, edited by the Romanian Antarctic Foundation, vol.III, 2005. 

Promotion of international cooperation research for the study of
psychrophilic microorganism potential in bioremediation
(RO-04)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Institute of Biology-Bucharest,
 “Lower Danube” University Galati, Romania

Scientific Objectives
The purpose of this project is identifying the possible research projects related to the psychrophilic microorganisms  potential in bioremediation. The project is a continuation of the Romanian scientific activities within the Antarctic Treaty and in Antarctica, specified in the Cooperation Scientific Program between Romania and Australia, presented in 2005 at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting “Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic”, Scientific Plan, SCAR 2004.

Structuring of an integrated international cooperation research on biodiversity in polar ecosystems, their response to environmental changes and applications
(RO-05)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Institute of Biology-Bucharest,
 “Lower Danube” University Galati, Romania

Scientific Objectives
Based on previous research performed with Belgium, Russian Federation, China, Australia, this project aims to perform advanced studies of the Antarctic ecosystems biodiversity and their response to the environment modifications (climatic changes, pollution and risk) to be applied for the sustainable management of Antarctic biological resources and the future elaboration of some environmental protection technologies by using the enzymatic potential of psychrophilic microorganisms.
The last two projects benefit from the collaboration of recognized specialists from seven countries – Belgium, Austria, Bulgaria, Sweden, Israel, SUA and Asutralia. Any other cooperation of the Antarctic Treaty states is wellcome. 

III. Romanian Excellence Research Projects - Module I, 2005-2008

Project: “Polar robotic telescope at Law-Racoviţă Station in Antarctica” 
Investigators of 
Astronomic Institute of Romanian Academy, Bucharest 
Research – Development National Institute for Isotopic and Molecular Techlonogies, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest
Possible future partners: Australian, Russian specialists in Larsemann Hills stations or Davis Station areas.  
Objectives:
    • Romanian contribution within the International Polar Year 2007-2008; 
    • Extension of the Romanian astronomic research in the best astro-climate condition areas, i.e. Antarctic zone;
    • Construction of some remote control systems.

Activity Plan for 2007-2008

    • Preparation of the Romanian Antarctic Expedition in cooperation (working groups: Romanian Polar Research Institute, “Lower Danube”University, Faculty of Chemistry-Bucharest University, “Stefan Nicolau” Institute of Virology, Romanian Academy of Sciences and other institutes of Romania).
    • Improvement of the strategy for activity management of Antarctic reasearch in Larsemann Hills, Law-Racovita Base.
    • Scientific activities in Grove Mountains. 
    • Location of a small building (about 12 – 22 sq.m) near the existing main building in the Base for washroom with:
    .1 a basin for freshwater with a very small water heating station based on gas; 
    .2 a stainless steel basin for the storage and eventual treatment of wastewater and urine and other necessary equipment such as a washing machine, that all should avoid any contamination risk. 

This project and layout will be initially discussed with Australian Antarctic Division and will be implemented if only AAD will consider this arrangement acceptable from the point of view of environmental impact. If this structure will be located near the existing mean builing, it will observe the design and appearance of the latter one.     
	 





