





Annual Report of the Republic of Korea Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual Report of the Republic of Korea Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

This Report has been prepared in compliance with Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty which came into force on January 14, 1998 for the Republic of Korea.
1. Notification of measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Environmental Protocol
The “Act on Antarctic Activities and Environmental Protection” came into force on September 23, 2004 in South Korea and detailed terms and procedures to practice the Act were proclaimed as Presidential Decree on October 25, 2005.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, in cooperation with the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries is currently preparing the Enforcement regulations of the Act for stipulating the details and forms left by the Act and Enforcement Decree.
The Enforcement regulations will contain permission forms for capturing, taking or removing Antarctic Fauna and Flora in accordance with Article 3 of the Annex II to the protocol and for entering ASPA, ASMA and historic sites and monuments designated at ATCM. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade makes efforts to reflect contents and strengthen standards stipulated in the protocol. 
2. Report pursuant to Annex II, Article 6 of the Protocol
Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during the 2005/2006season
During the 2005/2006 season, no permits have been issued under Annex II of the protocol.
3. Report pursuant to Annex III, Article 9 of the Protocol
Waste management regulation for the King Sejong station:
The solid waste materials are divided into 3categories and treated in different ways at the station.
    • Combustible materials are not permitted to store in the station for a long time. They are burned in the incinerator at the station after being recorded. The remains are put in case and will be transported back to Chile.
    • Metal, plastic and other non-combustible materials are collected and piled to be transported back to Chile.
    • Batteries useless are collected into cases and will be transported back to Chile.
The daily domestic liquid waste is treated in the sewage treatment system and then discharged into the sea.
The chemical liquid waste and the fuel waste are collected separately and transported back to South Korea
4. Report pursuant to Annex V, Article 10 of the Protocol
4.1 Number and nature of permits issued under Annex V of the Protocol during the 2005/2006 Season
 None.
4.2 Summary descriptions of activities conducted in any ASMA, ASPA or Historic Site or Monument 
None.


