





Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)




Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
Information Paper Submitted by ASOC to XXX ATCM (ATCM Agenda Item 4)
I. Introduction
ASOC extends its formal thanks to the Government and people of the Republic of India for hosting this ATCM and looks forward to a fruitful meeting, with substantive results across a range of subjects that are important for Antarctica and the earth. We discuss some of these below.
Although the scope of environmental protection under the Protocol and its Annexes is gradually being extended, the Antarctic region faces a range of environmental challenges. This includes the cumulative effects of many recent and new infrastructure projects, some associated with the International Polar Year 2007-08, as well as ongoing and emerging commercial activities both on land and at sea.  In addition, the Antarctic is experiencing the effects of climate change.  These pressing issues require action by Antarctic Treaty states.
II. ASOC Worldwide
ASOC maintains a Secretariat in Washington DC, USA, and a global website (http://www.asoc.org), which contains ASOC papers produced for meetings in recent years and a list of staff, representatives and member groups. There are ASOC member groups located in most Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party (ATCP) states.
ASOC campaigns are coordinated by a team of specialised representatives located in: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, France, Japan, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, South Korea, South Africa, Spain, Russia, Ukraine, and USA.
III. Information Papers for XXX ATCM
In addition to this report, ASOC is tabling nine Information Papers, which reflect key priorities for Antarctic environmental protection:
    • IP 79: The Case Against Tourism Landings From Ships Carrying More Than 500 Passengers
    • IP 80: Taking Action on Marine Noise in the Southern Ocean
    • IP 81: Amendment or Modification of Annex II
    • IP 82 Rev 1: The Antarctic and Climate Change
    • IP 83: A Commentary on Policy Issues Arising from On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula
    • IP 84: Strengthening the CEE Process
    • IP 85: Tourism and the Duty for ATCP Action
    • IP 86: The Human Footprint of the IPY 2007-2008 in Antarctica
    • IP 87: Marine Protected Areas - Steps Forward for the ATCM
    • IP xx: Implementing the Madrid Protocol: A case study of Fildes Peninsula, King George Island
Some of the main recommendations of these Information Papers are discussed below.
IV. Key Issues for XXX ATCM
A. Towards a Greener International Polar Year
The International Polar Year (IPY) 2007-8 is an ambitious international scientific initiative. It provides a unique opportunity to promote international collaboration and sharing of logistics. However, in view of the ensemble of the 350 research activities that have been endorsed, the IPY is likely to lead to an increase in infrastructure and human activity in Antarctica, an increased pressure on Antarctica’s wilderness values, and an increased level of interest in Antarctica. This latter can indirectly generate more activities other than scientific research, adding to the current trend of rapid growth and diversification of Antarctic tourism.
To this end, ASOC has initiated a project to evaluate the cumulative environmental impacts of the IPY and to increase the awareness of those working or visiting Antarctica. IPY activity number 454 "Enhancing the environmental legacy of the IPY in Antarctica" is one of 459 projects that have received endorsement from the IPY Joint Committee. 
As part of this project, IP 86 highlights how research activities are likely to intensify as well as spread out in Antarctica during the IPY. It demonstrates that the IPY is only part of the current trend of the expansion of the human footprint in Antarctica and draws attention to the need for long-term, large-scale, strategic-level planning of all Antarctic activities. 
B. Implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
Since 1999 ASOC has been promoting the legal and practical implementation of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. To this end it has conducted a broad range of activities in most Antarctic Treaty capitals and Antarctica itself.  
Since XXIX ATCM in June 2006 ASOC has been monitoring various aspects of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol and participated actively in intersessional work. 
ASOC attended part of the International Workshop of Antarctic Competent Authorities organised at the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety in Berlin, 27-28 November 2006. In this regard, an informal network of competent authorities may have a role to play to make implementation standards compatible across Antarctic Treaty states. This role would be distinct from that of formal ATS entities dealing with environmental, scientific and operational matters. 
The current status of the implementation of the Madrid Protocol is characterized by widely differing environmental standards in different Antarctic states. Since Parties have been working on the implementation of the Madrid Protocol since 1991, it is about time these differences were narrowed.  
Nevertheless, ASOC is encouraged by the progress made on the five-year plan for the CEP, and by the growing experience among Antarctic Treaty states on the application of the ASMA instrument, both of which encourage broader perspectives in analysing and addressing environmental issues.
Annex I
IP 84 examines the case history of Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) and argues that significant limitations are evident, not least that no CEE has ever resulted in a decision not to proceed with the proposed activity despite this possibility being mandated in the CEE process. It argues that the CEE process requires strengthening, and that this should be done during the Annex I review by ensuring earlier notice of intention to conduct a CEE, earlier engagement of the CEP, broadening the activity classes to which CEE ordinarily attaches, strengthening the CEP’s advisory function, and adding Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) to Annex I obligations.
Annex II
IP 81 examines the various components of Annex II’s revision: the protracted, unsatisfactory and unresolved process of review of the Annex, the decision to remove fur seals from the Appendix A list of Specially Protected Species, and the case for adding southern giant petrels and macaroni penguins to that list. The paper argues that it is sensible to view these elements as part of a package to be resolved at XXX ATCM so that the requisite legal and administrative changes in national jurisdictions may proceed expeditiously and rationally.
Annex IV
ASOC is concerned at the number of incidents of maritime misadventure involving Antarctic shipping, in Antarctic and nearby waters, since the last ATCM. These incidents include: the sinking of the Chilean tourism vessel DAP Mares off Punta Arenas, Chile, in September 2006; the grounding of the Norwegian cruise vessel Nordkapp at Deception Island in February 2007; the fire on board the Japanese whaling factory vessel Nisshin Maru in the northern Ross Sea in February 2007, which tragically resulted in the death of a crew member; and the fire on board the Argentine ice breaker ARA Almirante Irízar 140 nautical miles off Puerto Madryn, Argentina in April 2007.  Aside from concerns about human life and the ongoing operation of National Antarctic Programs, these incidents illuminate the potential environmental risks of operating in the Antarctic.
Annex V
IPxx presents a case study on the implementation of the Madrid Protocol at Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.  The area has been severely impacted by human activities since 1975.  To date, the implementation of the Protocol has resulted in progress on a range of environmental issues on matters that are within the direct control of individual states, such as solid waste management.  However, progress is still needed on matters such as infrastructure expansion, tourism, and overall cumulative impacts.  This suggests that there is a role to play for greater international environmental management of the Fildes Peninsula - for instance, through an ASMA.  This action would be a natural consequence of the Parties’ commitment to the principles and objectives of the Protocol, and growing experience in its implementation at both the national and international levels.   ASOC contends that Antarctic areas with a high concentration of facilities should be internationally managed as a matter of routine, using the area protection and management tools available under the Protocol such as ASPAs and ASMAs.
IP 87 explains the various considerations involved in selecting sites for Marine Protected Areas (MPA) and the values and characteristics to be protected within these sites. Specific attention is given to consideration required in enfolding marine areas into the existing frameworks for ASMAs and ASPAs. ASOC applauds the Antarctic Treaty Parties for its consideration of the Marine Protected Area issue to date and its commitment to elaborating the systematic environmental-geographic framework mandated by Annex V to the Environmental Protocol. IP 87 encourages using the opportunity of IPY to create a positive legacy from this event, to strategically plan for ASMAs and ASPAs to ensure ecological coherence, to fully integrate MPAs into the AMSA and ASPA system, and to continue to strengthen cooperation with CCAMLR on this matter.
Annex VI
XXIX ATCM revealed that only Sweden has completed the domestic legal steps to enable it to implement Annex VI on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies. A year on, ASOC understands that no other Party has yet reached a similar position, that many appear to be years away from completing domestic implementation, and that some Parties still not even having initiated the implementation process. Sadly, the past operating season has seen several incidents of maritime misadventure within the Antarctic Treaty Area, or outside it soon after return. Parties can therefore not be under any illusion about the reality of environmental emergencies of the sort to which this Annex is directed.
It should be a matter of urgency for Consultative Parties to bring Annex VI into force. This requires that the matter is given much higher priority within national jurisdictions than has been evident so far. It would be a significant indictment of the Antarctic Treaty System if, after a decade long negotiation of the Annex, an environmental emergency arose in the Antarctic Treaty area to which no liability attached because Parties had given no urgency to bringing Annex VI into force. This should be the subject of a Resolution of the ATCM stating an objective for bringing the Annex into force by 2009.
C. Addressing Acoustic Impacts
This subject continues to receive strong scientific interest around the world, and more information is coming forward every year. ASOC is pleased that SCAR and COMNAP are actively engaged in work related to acoustic impacts. IP 80 provides an overview of the latest scientific and legal developments around the world, and makes a number of recommendations to the CEP and the ATCM.
In our view, the ATCM should (1) take steps to require assessment of potentially significant marine acoustic impacts in any IEE and CEE relating to marine activities; (2) agree on appropriate seismic guidelines to mitigate harm for all vessels in the Antarctic that are conducting active seismic research; (3) require that reports on utilization of such measures and guidelines are reported to the CEP each year; and (4) establish a small working group of people with relevant expertise on acoustic impacts from various countries and disciplines to share information, advance sound impact research, and develop appropriate tools for mitigating harm from intense sound emissions in the Antarctic.
D. Regulating Commercial Tourism
ASOC began to monitor commercial tourism in Antarctica in the early 1990s, and has been actively promoting the regulation of Antarctic tourism by Antarctic Treaty states since 2000.  To this end ASOC has run an international campaign that cozmbines a broad range of activities, including attendance at international/expert meetings, participation in ASMA processes, targeted intersessional work, and publications in the academic press.  
For XXX ATCM, ASOC has submitted three information papers that cover key generic and specific aspects of Antarctic tourism.  IPs 79 and 83 follow up on discussions at XXIX ATCM and CEP IX regarding the proposal to prevent ships carrying more than 500 passengers from landing in Antarctica, and site-specific guidelines.
IP 79 briefly reviews some of the key arguments for prohibiting landings from ships carrying more than 500 passengers. The trend is now towards larger, general-purpose cruise ships that are not ice-class, and this is in turn changing the type of tourism activities away from its traditional focus on the Antarctic natural and cultural heritage. Barring a prohibition on the use of very large vessels, the Antarctic tourism fleet will continue to increase in average size, further driving the growth of the industry.  Overall, there seems to be a broader argument to limit the overall scale of Antarctic activities to a relatively modest size, on account of safety, logistic and environmental considerations as well as compelling Antarctic purpose.
IP 83 comments on XXIX ATCM/WP02, which outlined policy issues resulting from the adoption of site specific guidelines.  Overall, ASOC contends that Parties should consider how Antarctic tourism as a whole could and should develop, and how it should be most effectively managed before investing too much effort in the development of Site Guidelines. A strategic debate on tourism is necessary, and that debate should be driven by the demands to protect the core values of the Protocol rather than by the de facto turn of events on the ground.  Site Guidelines have a role to play in the local management of Antarctic tourism, but they cannot (and should not, in ASOC´s view) be the main mechanism for tourism management in the Antarctic. 
Beyond specific aspects of tourism management, ASOC has broader concerns about regulation of commercial tourism in Antarctica.  IP 85 argues that ATCPs have a duty to act to ensure appropriate regulation of Antarctic tourism, and identifies three key areas for action: ending the use of very large cruise liners in the AT Area, preventing the establishment of tourism infrastructure ashore, and constraining its absolute scale. It urges the adoption of a Resolution at XXX ATCM stating that Parties do not see unending growth of tourism as desirable or necessary, and the initiation of discussions so that XXXI ATCM may adopt Measures prohibiting very large vessels and establishment of tourism infrastructure ashore.
ASOC is encouraged by the progress in the quality of debate at ATCMs regarding commercial tourism, while noting that there has still not been a strategic discussion of tourism developments, and that no overall tourism policy has yet been put in place by Antarctic Treaty States.  ASOC contends that the modalities in which commercial tourism takes place should be adapted to, rather than drive, strategic decisions on the management of Antarctic tourism. 
E. Monitoring Biological Prospecting
ASOC urges Parties to positively respond to recommendation 2 of Resolution 7 (2005) and annually provide information on the nature and extent of their biological prospecting activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. This will provide the necessary case history to allow informed discussion about whether, and if so what, particular regulatory arrangements are most desirable to regulate this commercial activity. Unless the ATCM engages with biological prospecting, substantive policy debate on this important Antarctic issue will largely occur outside the Antarctic Treaty System.
V. Other Important Antarctic Issues
A. Managing Krill Fisheries
ASOC is collaborating closely with The Pew Charitable Trusts (PCT-USA) in managing the Antarctic Krill Conservation Project (www.krillcount.org), which was initiated in April 2006 and introduced to the 2006 ATCM in ASOC Information Paper 108. The core goal is for CCAMLR to adopt, by 2009: 
a highly precautionary, effective and integrated ecosystem-based package for Antarctic krill management which ensures that functional relationships in the Antarctic ecosystem are maintained and that krill abundance and availability for predators are not compromised, taking full account of climate change and other relevant environmental factors.
While the primary body responsible for managing the Antarctic krill fishery is CCAMLR, there also are opportunities and responsibilities at the broader Antarctic Treaty System in relation to krill fishery management.  In this context, ASOC urges the ATCM and CEP to take note of the combination of forces that are degrading Antarctic marine ecosystems, and to find appropriate ways to articulate its concerns in this respect. As one example, it would be appropriate for the CEP, whose recent ICG on its 5-year plan agreed that "marine protection" is one of the issues on which it will focus, to consider steps it can take both on its own and in concert with CCAMLR to protect the base of the Southern Ocean food chain.
In addition to issue-specific initiatives, ASOC urges this and future ATCMs to consider appropriate actions to address their collective concerns about the emerging threats facing Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and the need to utilize the precautionary principle and a broad range of other tools at their disposal to address concerns regarding krill conservation, inter alia. This would be particularly appropriate as part of the IPY, contributing to improved understanding and actions needed with respect to the global environmental threats posed by climate change, the benefits of krill’s daily transport and sequestration of carbon into the deep sea, and the overall health of the base of the Southern Ocean food chain. 
B. Addressing Climate Change
IP 82 Rev 1 provides an overview of recent research in the Antarctic about various aspects of climate change in order to inform ATCM delegates, the public and decision-makers around the world about the importance of these research findings, and makes a number of recommendations to the ATCM. 
In ASOC’s view, no Antarctic Treaty member state can afford to ignore the realities revealed by the climate-related research being carried on in Antarctica. All Parties should, as a matter of urgency, use this information to take tangible steps both domestically and through international treaties to address the threats posed by the rapidly growing levels of CO2 and other greenhouse gases globally. It is especially appropriate for Antarctic Treaty member states to make use of the unique information resulting from their own scientific programs in the region to take actions at national and global levels that will help avoid dangerous climate change.
ASOC urges this ATCM to take immediate steps to develop a plan for human activity in Antarctica ultimately to be carbon neutral. Such steps could include (1) setting significant targets to reduce use of fossil fuels; (2) more actively exploring solar and wind alternatives; (3) setting up an emissions inventory of all greenhouse gas sources in the region – including vessels and aircraft (both commercial and governmental); (4) establishing a program to offset irreducible emissions from stations, vessels and aircraft of all types and provenance coming to and utilizing the Antarctic; and (5) urging CCAMLR to ensure that exploitation of krill and other living marine resources of the Southern Ocean does not adversely impact the capacity of the region to serve as a carbon sink. In addition, the Parties could issue a call, based upon their duty of care for the Antarctic and their knowledge of Antarctic science and environment, to those working in other international fora to act with urgency in seeking reductions in greenhouse gas emissions to a “safe” level. 
Climate change should be a dedicated Agenda Item at ATCMs, and the ATCM should direct the CEP to focus more attention on the implications for the Antarctic environment and to provide advice to it on appropriate responses. Looking ahead, the Parties should consider capping and reducing fossil-fuel derived energy use in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
VI. Concluding Remarks
The Antarctic is facing extreme pressures from global climate change. Without effort by all ATCPs at both national and global levels, the wilderness, scientific and biodiversity values of the region are likely to deteriorate rapidly. At the same time, the seemingly ever-increasing human footprint from the unplanned and uncoordinated growth of human activities in the Antarctic needs strategic analysis and action at regional and local levels. 
New Delhi presents an opportunity to demonstrate to the world community that the ATCPs and other Treaty participants will take steps to deepen our common efforts to leave the Antarctic as a place of wonder and immense value for future generations of humans and wildlife
