





Future perspectives for Kohnen Station (Dronning Maud Land)




Future perspectives for Kohnen Station (Dronning Maud Land)
Information Paper submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany

1. Introduction
In December 2000, the Alfred-Wegner Institute for Polar and Marine Research started a deep ice-core drilling activity at Kohnen Station (75°S, 0°E. 2889 m asl) in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. This activity was part of the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA), in which Germany as well as Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Great Britain and Northern Ireland were involved.
Prior to its start, this activity was subject to an environmental impact assessment in accordance with Annex I to the Protocol of Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Subsequently, a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was prepared. After it had been discussed by the Committee for Environmental Protection at its 2000 meeting in The Hague (CEP III) in consideration of the rules and regulations of the Protocol of Environmental Protection, and after it had been adopted by the XII Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting (ATCM), Germany’s competent authority, the Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt), issued the permit for the deep ice-coring in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica. The first permit was valid till 30 April 2005.
The project started as planned but for logistical and technical reasons the drilling operations were delayed.  Since the activities of the project described in the CEE did not change and were postponed for two years to the season 2006/2007, the permit was extended until 30 April 2007. Germany submitted an IP to CEP VII in Cape Town describing the drilling status and initial scientific results, the reasons for the extension of the permit, the activities resulting from the extension as well as the assessment of the impacts of these additional activities on the Antarctic’s environmental assets. 
Although the permit is valid till 30 April 2007 only, the Alfred-Wegner Institute for Polar and Marine Research intends to maintain and further operate the Kohnen Station for the next 10 to 15 years. Therefore, Germany wants to inform CEP about the planned activities in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica (see 2.) and about the planned authorisation procedure in Germany (see 3).
2. Further projects at Kohnen Station
In view of the extremely important results of the ice coring program and taking into consideration new scientific programs in connection with the International Polar Year, it is planned to further run Kohnen Station.
The following science projects are envisaged:
    1. Deep ice laboratory
At the end of EPICA drilling operations liquid water was met at the base of the ice sheet. This sub-glacial water had risen in the borehole, was refrozen and therefore had to be re-drilled for investigations on its nature, composition and possible microbial content. The findings will contribute to SCAR and the IPY program SALE and help to understand the role of the wet base for Antarctic ice-sheet dynamics. These additional drillings will have to be augmented with borehole studies to investigate the deformation and strain-field patterns with depth, in order to gather additional information about unusual deformation patterns in certain depth intervals already observed. In order to completely understand the whole system and its relationships it is necessary to map in detail the bedrock topography upstream and downstream of the drill on the basis of a variety of geophysical measurements (e.g. seismic and radar). These investigations will help to understand very basic glaciological questions.

    2. Aerogeophysical investigations of hitherto unexplored regions of East Antarctica
Even today, there are huge areas which are quite unknown. We do not know ice thickness between Kohnen Station and the South Pole apart from a few isolated point measurements. In order to better predict possible sea level changes due to the melting of the Antarctic ice we need information about accumulation, ice thickness etc.
This information can be provided by aerial surveys. Additionally, they will yield information on the geologic setting of the area through aero gravity and aeromagnetic surveys. Using Kohnen Station as base for flight operations will help to save flight hours, fuel and, as the result, will minimize emissions.
    3. During the past years new technologies have been tested at Kohnen Station, i.e. the aerosol load of the atmosphere and seismology have been observed all over the year by means of the installed technical equipment only. These time series need to be continued and the equipment to be serviced regularly.  
    4. Case studies in meteorology and atmospheric physics
The meteorological case studies carried out so far in connection with the deep drilling operations have yielded important new results on how the ice core is to be interpreted in terms of regional meteorology. However, such studies need to be continued to observe the full range of possible weather patterns and their effects and to be augmented with studies of radiation balance and total aerosol distribution.
    5. Snow metamorphosis
Kohnen Station area is an excellent site for studying the snow ice transition under varying conditions. Such studies will be of great value for the interpretation of the gas record obtained from ice cores as the gas records retrieved from an ice core may differ in isotopic composition from the atmosphere due to physical and chemical processes and reactions in the top 100 m of the ice sheet.
Considering the above mentioned science perspectives, which will have to be promoted by field campaigns, we think that Kohnen Station has to run for another term of 10 to 15 years to provide the basic infrastructure necessary for work. The Station can be operated without any major repair work. It is planned that probably every two years 10 to 15 persons will stay there in summer. If Kohnen Station keeps running, the environmental impacts of the planned projects will be minimised because there is no need to set up a new infrastructure every season. Furthermore, additional emissions from transport will be avoided.
3. Planned German approach to further run Kohnen Station
The permit which authorises the deep ice-coring activity in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica is only valid till 30 April 2007. However, the Alfred-Wegner Institute for Polar and Marine Research intends to maintain and further operate Kohnen Station for the next 10 to 15 years also with regard to the activities described under item 2. Herewith, Germany wants to inform CEP about the approach and would like to be supported by CEP with respect to the authorisation process for the further run of Kohnen Station including the planned activities as follows:
    • The German Competent Authority (Umweltbundesamt) will extend the permit for a further use of Kohnen station for the next two years on the basis of an application by the Alfred-Wegner Institute for Polar and Marine Research,
    • The Alfred-Wegner Institute for Polar and Marine Research shall either update the existing Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) or provide, on the basis of the existing CEE, a new document dealing with the changes and focusing on the environmental impacts on the assets to be protected. This updated version has to be submitted to the Federal Environment Agency by summer 2007.
    • On the basis of this updated version the German Competent Authority will carry out an environmental impact assessment in accordance with the provisions of the German Act implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Therefore, the German Competent Authority will examine whether an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is sufficient or whether a CEE is necessary. If it turns out that a CEE is necessary, Germany will circulate it to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in due time for discussion at CEP XI in 2008.


