





Antarctica and climate change – implications for governance




Antarctica and climate change – implications for governance

David G. Vaughan1

Abstract
The Antarctic is a priceless natural laboratory, in which low-levels of direct human impact and near-pristine natural systems mean that it is possible to investigate the complex interactions between climate change with the natural environment without the complications of direct human impacts. Considering the impacts of past and future climate change on the continent can thus provide some valuable illustrations that we should bear in mind as we seek to formulate a sound and effective policy-response to climate change.  In particular, the patchiness of climate change, the existence of thresholds in impacts, and the long-term commitment to change resulting from current emissions, are well demonstrated by reference to recent and projected changes on the Antarctic continent. 
1. Introduction: Antarctic - The natural laboratory
A considerable volume of literature has been published on climate change in Antarctica and several valuable reviews of present understanding are already published [e.g., Anisimov, et al., 2001] and in preparation [Anisimov, et al., In prep].  In this article, I do not intend to reprise these works, but rather, take a slightly more oblique approach.  I will discuss climate change in Antarctica from the point of view, of seeking elements of understanding that might inform our approach to formulating sound governmental responses to climate change.  
Over much of the Earth, the human race is implicitly conducting two overlapping “experiments2” the natural systems that support life.  The first experiment is a test of how the natural environment will cope with the ever-increasing, and very direct, impacts of human occupation and activity.  The impacts result from the continued expansion of the industrial landscapes, the loss of natural ecosystems, increasing levels of contaminants in food chains, and a thousand others that our activities have on the land, sea and sky. 
The second experiment is a test of how the same natural environment will cope if we alter dramatically and rapidly, one of its foundations: climate.   We are achieving this change by altering the level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, which are the fundamental control on mean and local climate on the planet.  The concentration of several such gases has been determined by analysis of ancient ice extracted in cores from Antarctica.  These ice cores show that carbon dioxide is now 30% higher, and methane now 130% higher than at any time in the last 650 thousand years [Siegenthaler, et al., 2005; Spahni, et al., 2005].  Furthermore, rates of change in these concentrations are around 200 times the rate of natural changes over the same period.  There is little doubt that such changes will cause global climate and the natural and human systems it supports to alter rapidly and irrevocably; and there is a growing body of evidence that such changes are already underway [IPCC Working Group II, 2001].  Since every species, habitat and ecosystem on Earth is viable only within specific climatic limits, the changes in climate we are causing today, will, in time, influence almost every plant and animal on the planet.  
These two experiments overlap and complicate one another to such an extent that as impacts accrue over coming decades, we will find it increasingly difficult to connect cause and effect.   Some might argue that to attempt to do so is actually a rather academic effort, but there is actually a very practical motivation that should not be overlooked: if we are to attempt to understand how best to reduce the accumulated impact of human activity on the Earth System we need to know how best to target our efforts.  Without a clear understanding of cause and effect we may never be able to predict the effectiveness of any particular adaptation or mitigation effort.  
For example, we might be concerned about the effects of climate change on a particular species that has become isolated in a particular geographical area.  If climate change makes its current range uninhabitable, then in order to survive, the species may need to migrate, to establish itself in a more equable area.   However, the building of cities and roads, and the conversion of vast tracts to managed forestry and agriculture means that natural the pathways may already be blocked, and so direct human impacts reduce the ability of the species to spread.  Clearly, if the ultimate extinction of our species does occur, both climate change and the direct human impacts might ultimately be shown to have played a role.  Indeed, in this example, the effects have combined as “multiple stresses”, increasing the impact compared to either driver acting alone [Pittock and Jones, 2000].  The multiplicative effect of multiple stresses, may not be particularly surprising, but an understanding of its importance is vital if we are seeking to reduce the impact.  Developing the example above, if we are seeking to manage the survival of this species, we might find that climate change will be so rapid that loss of the species is inevitable, or perhaps simply maintaining open migration pathways, or undertaking a managed re-introduction of the species into new habitats will be sufficient to ensure survival.  In either event, it is a knowledge of separate roles of climate change and the direct impact of human activities, and how they interact, that give us the expertise to formulate a sound adaptation strategy.  
Continental Antarctica is the one place on Earth where we can argue that the level of direct human impacts, is so low, that only one experiment is taking place.  Antarctica is still infrequently visited and protected from the direct impacts of human activities by the Antarctic Treaty.  Its near-pristine nature of the Antarctic environment means that we can view the impact of climate change on this continent without the complicating factors of direct human impacts, and political-social forces.  This is not to say that there Antarctica is without direct human impacts, but these factors are localised compared to those in the developed and developing nations, where almost every square metre, every species, and every natural process is burdened by the weight of human activities.  By this measure, Antarctica is the least complicated continent and can still be said to serve as a natural laboratory in which we can begin to understand the impact of climate change on a natural system.  It is the control experiment, which will allow us to understand better the interactions between climate change and direct human impacts in the rest of the world.  For this reason alone, it is imperative to preserve the near-pristine state of Antarctica, and to exploit it as a natural laboratory that will add clarity to our understanding of the complex multiple stresses that face the rest of our planet.
2. Antarctica and climate change
The scale of the Antarctic continent should not be underestimated.  The distance across the widest diameter of Antarctica is almost the same as the distance from London to New York (5500 km), and a little more than the distance from Wellington to Perth.  Within the Antarctic continent, there are several distinct environments, high mountain chains (e.g. TransAntarctic Mountains and Antarctic Peninsula) and the great ice sheets of East and West Antarctica (Figure 1).
The record of climate change over the last 50 years over all Antarctica is limited to a handful of manned scientific stations, and the story that these records tell is surprisingly complex.  Forgetting for the moment the Antarctica Peninsula, there are 19 long-term (>30 years) Antarctic continental temperature records available, 12 show warming, while seven show cooling; but only two of these (one of each) are significant at the 10% level [Turner, et al., 2005].  Overall, the mean trend suggests that climate warming across Antarctica is probably comparable to mean global warming [Vaughan, et al., 2003], and there is no strong evidence of a continent-wide “polar amplification” of climate change in Antarctica, of the type that has been noted across much of the Arctic [Serreze and Francis, 2006].  
In contrast, there are several long climate records on the Antarctic Peninsula that show large, and statistically significant, warming trends. Over the past 50 years, the west coast of the Peninsula has been one of the most rapidly warming parts of the planet, with annual mean temperatures rising by nearly 3°C - this is approximately 10 times the mean rate of global warming.  The warming has caused a host of changes in the area, from ice-shelf retreat [Vaughan and Doake, 1996], to changes in flora [Convey, 2001] and penguin distributions [e.g., Emslie, et al., 1998].
Considerable recent work has been done to determine if this recent warming on the Antarctic Peninsula is part of a natural cyclic change particular to this area, or whether the warming is a local magnification of human-induced climate change – there are several lines of evidence to suggest it is the latter.   Ice shelves are floating extensions of the glaciers, and the marine sediment record suggests that one ice shelf on the Antarctic Peninsula, Larsen-B, has been in existence for at least 10 000 years [Domack, et al., 2005].  High summer temperatures have recently caused this ice shelf to retreat eventually collapse.  The same pattern of change has been seen on several other, similarly vulnerable, ice shelves along the Antarctic Peninsula [Morris and Vaughan, 2003].  The likelihood of such events occurring by chance is very low and indicates that the present warming is not simply part of a natural cycle.  Furthermore, an observed increase in strength of the dominant westerly atmospheric circulation over the Antarctic Peninsula, a likely result of greenhouse-gas forcing and ozone loss, provides a clear mechanism for bringing warmer air masses into this area, and allows us to connect the apparently regional anomaly of Antarctic Peninsula warming with global warming [Marshall, et al., 2004].
To summarize, the pattern of observed climate change across the Antarctic continent is patchy.  Some areas are warming at the rate of global mean warming, a few are cooling, and one region is warming at an extraordinary rate.  So what are we to make of this, and what does it imply to policy-makers? 
The short answer is, that we should not be surprised where climate change turns out to be highly patchy, and that rates of change will vary both in time and region.  However, this short answer deserves little more discussion.  Although many climate scientists are focused on the use of the large-scale (global) models of climate change, and these are the best tools we have for building projections, the current generation of these models cannot be expected to show how global climate change will affect particular regions as small as the Antarctic Peninsula, or more importantly, particular nations or states [e.g. Mitchell, et al., 1999].  At the moment they have insufficient spatial-resolution and do not capture all the processes that can have a significant effect on local climate.  The Antarctic Peninsula is a prime example of an area where current climate gradients are so steep that even a small geographic movement of the existing patterns can produce a dramatic change at a particular location.  But the Antarctic Peninsula is not the only such example, and there are likely to be other parts of the world where rapid regional climate changes are possible, even if today we are not aware of where these might be.  
In general terms, we understand that that patchiness is inevitable in future climate change, but it is certainly not clear which areas will in future warm more quickly and which more slowly.  The example of the Antarctic Peninsula, with its dramatic rates of warming during the 20th Century, may turn out to be an extreme example, but if similar rates of change are eventually seen in other more-populated areas, there will be damage almost every environmental and human system in those areas.  Without intending to imply a specific prediction, if a similar rate of warming was expressed in New Zealand, it could bring the current climate of Auckland to Wellington in less than 50 years.  The acceptance of patchiness, and the inadequacy of present projections in capturing it, means that policy-makers seeking to frame a realistic national adaptation response are severely hampered.  Climate models are developing at a rapid pace, and in ten years we may well have models of sufficiently high-resolution and sophistication to reproduce the patchiness we see in present rates of change, and to produce reliable regional climate predictions.  But until we do, policy-makers must formulate their adaptation strategies based on the continental scale climate change projections, while accepting that in particular areas rates may dramatically exceed the continental averages. 
3. Antarctica and sea-level rise
There is now little doubt that global sea level today is rising.  The global network of tide gauges shows average rates of seal-level rise during the 20th Century of 10 – 20 cm [Church, et al., 2001], and the past few years, studies using satellite data have provided good evidence for an acceleration in the rate of rise in the late-20th Century.  The over the last decade sea level was rising at rates equivalent to almost 30 cm per Century [Cazenave and Nerem, 2004].  This acceleration coincided with a decade during which occurred the majority of the 10 warmest years ever recorded [Shein, et al., 2006],  confirming, if there were still any doubt, the linkage between sea level rise and climate change.  But global sea-level rise is an accumulation of many contributions (including, thermal expansion of the oceans and melting of mountain glaciers).  There is still great uncertainty in projections of future sea level rise, and the largest single uncertainty is the contribution results from the great ice sheets of Greenland and the Antarctic.  The issues surrounding these contributions present some very specific attributes that complicate it for policy-makers.   
Until a few years ago scientists had very little idea whether or not the Antarctic ice sheet was contributing to global sea level rise3.  The studies that addressed the question were generally, simple efforts at accounting – subtracting the amount of snow falling on the continent from the amount leaving by iceberg production and melting.  This may sound like a relatively straightforward task, but the uncertainties involved in doing this over a continental area are inescapable.  No such assessment ever produced an answer for the continental contribution to sea-level rise that precise enough to be useful.  However, in the last decade, things have changed completely as new technology has provided glaciologists with satellite-borne altimeters that map the surface topography of ice sheets with great precision.  These satellite altimeters are so precise that they can yield maps of the very small changes (around 1 cm per year) in the surface elevation of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets that result from the imbalance between snowfall and glacial flow.  The present generation of these maps show thickening in some parts of the ice sheet and thinning in others [Wingham, et al., 2006; Zwally, et al., 2005].  In less than a decade the emphasis of the science has changed radically; overstepping the conceptually simple question of whether any changes are occurring in the Antarctic ice sheet, to the much harder job of understanding what is causing the observed changes, and providing reliable predictions for the future.
In brief, the maps produced from satellite altimeter data show that the larger part of Antarctica (the East Antarctic ice sheet, EAIS) is thickening.  The rate of thickening is only a couple of centimetres per year, and they may be the result of a higher-than-average snowfall during the decade of measurement, but alternatively they could be associated with a long-term change in snowfall that is the consequence of climate change.  Many climate models have predicted such a change [Lynch, et al., 2006].  If this effect is proved, and if it continues as climate change continues, the thickening of EAIS could serve to slow-down the rate of sea-level rise by some small fraction.  
In a smaller part of Antarctica, the Amundsen Sea embayment in West Antarctic ice sheet WAIS), the rates of change are much more rapid and in the opposite direction.   The ice sheet is thinning across an area of around 400 000 km2 at rates of tens of centimetres per year, and in places at metres per year.  This change cannot be put down simply to anomalous snowfall; rather it is a result of glacier acceleration leading to an imbalance in the ice sheet whereby ice is being removed more quickly than it is being replaced.   The underlying cause of the glacier acceleration is thought by most researchers to lie in the ocean – some change in the ocean causing the lower reaches of the glaciers to thin and flow more rapidly, which is drawing-down the ice sheet inland.  While EAIS contains a rather limited ability to slow sea-level rise down, the changes we are seeing in WAIS have a much greater capacity to cause sea-level rise.  The changes we are seeing at present are in may ways those that we might expect at the onset of substantial retreat of the ice sheet [Vaughan, in press].  If this is the case, and large parts of WAIS are lost, even if that loss takes several centuries, the current present projections of sea-level rise are far too low.
At present, whether or not those presumed changes in the oceans that have caused changes in the Amundsen Sea embayment ice sheet, are related to anthropogenic climate change, or some natural fluctuation, cannot be determined.  There are too few oceanographic observations from the area to show any clear evidence of change.  Many argue that the connection is more likely than not [Payne, et al., 2004], but there are undoubtedly missing elements in our understanding of the connection between climate change and retreating ice sheets, and those missing elements substantially reduce our confidence in predicting how changing greenhouse gas emissions might change the likelihood of collapse of parts of WAIS. 
So how should the policy-maker view this issue?  Firstly, it could be noted that science in this field, is moving at a tremendous pace, and just a decade our understanding has progressed substantially.  We may still be several steps away from providing unequivocal answers to the questions that the policy-makers are asking, but the progress is rapid and in the right direction.  This rapid progress reflects a sea change in the motivation of most environmental scientists, who now accept that science cannot be driven solely by curiosity, and must address the requirements of policy-making.  This new impetus cannot, however, be expected to produce instant success, and there are still outstanding problems.  A clear example of this is the uncertainty of attribution of changes in the Antarctic ice sheet – we can see changes are occurring but cannot be certain if they are anthropogenic in origin or not.  And once again, attribution is the first step towards understanding, which itself is a prerequisite for reliable prediction.  It is an inconvenient truth that it will take time to build the foundations of understanding that will eventually support sound projections of the response of many elements of the Earth system to climate change.   At present, the uncertainties are real and unavoidable, and only time will allow them to be overcome.    	
Secondly, the contribution that the Antarctic ice sheet to sea-level rise, is an excellent example of a long-term climate change commitment4, and an understanding of which, are essential for the development of sound response policies.  For example; it has been predicted that under most projections of climate change climate warming over Greenland will exceed 3 degree C, and once this threshold is crossed, the consequent loss of most of the Greenland ice sheet will become inevitable over the next thousand years, with an accompanying rise in sea-level of several metres [Gregory and Huybrechts, 2006].  A similar threshold and commitment may exist in WAIS, although the most important factor in determining the threshold is likely to be ocean, rather than atmospheric, temperature change.  The commitment to sea level rise resulting arising from WAIS is, however, likely to have a similar magnitude and timescale.  So while we still have real difficulties in specifying the level of the key thresholds we can be confident that thresholds exist and that allowing them to be exceeded will lead to a long-term commitment to change (especially in sea-level rise) that many generations will inherit.
The long timescale of the commitment to sea-level rise, from Antarctic and/or Greenland, cannot, however, be taken as justification that action in coming decades is worthless.  To focus too narrowly on long-term sea-level rise would be ignore the many immediate benefits that reducing the rates of climate change.  In addition, the likelihood of exceeding a threshold that leads to a long-term commitment to change is higher the more rapidly change occurs – the benefits of postponing the crossing any dramatic threshold are clear.
There may be a parallel between the commitment to sea-level rise, and the debate surrounding the production and storage of radioactive waste from nuclear power.  That waste will remain dangerous for around 10 thousand years, a timescale that is not dissimilar to that associated with the commitment to sea-level rise associated with ice sheet.  In the nuclear debate there were many factors that amplified the social importance and fear surrounding the risk [Kasperson and Kasperson, 1996], including the longevity of the risk, its apparent invisibility and its potential to cause widespread mortality; all these aspects are shared with the risk of sea-level rise, and all exert a powerful influence on public perception of the risk.  
4. Conclusions
Even though real and significant uncertainties still exist in our understanding and our ability to predict, a near-total consensus has arisen in science surrounding the basic tenets of anthropogenic climate change, typified by the statement made by the IPCC in 2001 that “there is new and stronger evidence that most of the Earth's warming observed in the last 50 years is attributable to human activities”.   Furthermore, there is growing evidence that the early adoption of workable policies for adaptation and/or mitigation will provide clear benefits in terms of reducing the greatest rates of climate change and postponing the crossing of critical thresholds, and reducing the commitment to ongoing impacts such as sea-level rise.  Our ability to understand and predict, is however, hampered by the complicating effects of the multiple stresses of climate change and direct human impacts.  The Antarctic continent provides a unique natural laboratory for understanding climate change in a near-pristine environment, and a undervalued reference for policy-makers engaged in producing a reasoned, sound and supportable approach to climate-change mitigation and adaptation. 
5. Personal epilogue
There are now very few areas of the world where the body of evidence that climate is changing, has not yet become generally accepted.  However, there are still many nations in which the climate-change debate is now focused on whether we can have confidence that human emissions are the root cause of climate change.  During my participation in the Wellington Conference and subsequent tour of New Zealand, I gained the impression that the debate in New Zealand may well have advanced beyond this position.  A majority of my discussions with general public, and interviews with the media, began with the acceptance that climate is already changing and that human activities have been a significant cause.  Most of the questions I was asked, took the debate to the next level – “what can we do about it?”  It appeared to me that, more than in any other nation I’ve visited, sufficient public concern exists in New Zealand that there may soon be a political will to build reasoned policies for adaptation and, perhaps, mitigation.
It may be true that in terms of population and economic clout, New Zealand is a small nation, but it is also a universally-respected democracy, and could take a leading role in the global debate.  The Wellington conference on Climate Change and Governance is a major initiative in this regard, which I applaud and in which I was honoured to participate.
6. Acknowledgements
I wish to thank the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, New Zealand government, and British Council, for financial and organizational support they provided to enable my participation in the conference. 
7. References
Alley, R. B., et al. (2005), Ice-sheet and sea-level changes, Science, 310, 456-460.
Anisimov, O., et al. (2001), Chapter 16: Polar regions (Arctic and Antarctic), in Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, edited by J. McCarthy, et al., pp. 801-841, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Anisimov, O. A., et al. (In prep), Chapter 15 –  Polar Regions, in Working Group II, IPCC, Fourth Assessment Report, edited, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Cazenave, A., and R. S. Nerem (2004), Present-day sea level change: Observations and causes, Reviews Of Geophysics, 42.
Church, J. A., et al. (2001), Changes in Sea Level, in Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis, edited by J. T. Houghton, et al., pp. 583-638, CUP, Cambridge.
Convey, P. (2001), Terrestrial ecosystem response to climate changes in the Antarctic, in "Fingerprints" of climate change - adapted behaviour and shifting species ranges, edited by G.-R. Walther, et al., pp. 17-42, Kluwer, New York.
Domack, E., et al. (2005), Stability of the Larsen B ice shelf on the Antarctic Peninsula during the Holocene epoch, Nature, 436, 681-685.
Emslie, S., et al. (1998), Abandoned penguin colonies and environmental change in the Palmer Station area, Anvers Island, Antarctic Peninsula, Ant. Sci., 10, 257-268.
Gregory, J. M., and P. Huybrechts (2006), Ice-sheet contributions to future sea-level change, Philosophical Transactions Of The Royal Society A-Mathematical Physical And Engineering Sciences, 364, 1709-1731.
IPCC Working Group II (2001), Summary for Policymakers, in Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, edited by J. J. McCarthy, et al., pp. 1-19, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Kasperson, R. E., and J. X. Kasperson (1996), The social amplification and attenuation of risk, Annals Of The American Academy Of Political And Social Science, 545, 95-105.
Lynch, A., et al. (2006), Changes in synoptic weather patterns in the polar regions in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, part 2: Antarctic, Int. J. Climatol., 26, 1181-1199.
Marshall, G. J., et al. (2004), Causes of exceptional atmospheric circulation changes in the Southern Hemisphere, Geophys. Res. Let., 31, L14205, doi: 10.1029/2004GL019952.
Mitchell, J. F. B., et al. (1999), Towards the construction of climate change scenarios, Clim. Change, 41, 547-581.
Morris, E. M., and D. G. Vaughan (2003), Spatial and temporal variation of surface temperature on the Antarctic Peninsula and the limit of viability of ice shelves, in Antarctic Peninsula Climate Variability: Historical and Paleoenvironmental Perspectives.  Antarctic Research Series, 79, edited by E. Domack, et al., pp. 61-68, AGU, Washington, DC.
Payne, A. J., et al. (2004), Recent dramatic thinning of largest West Antarctic ice stream triggered by oceans, Geophys. Res. Let., 31, doi:10.1029/1204GL021284.
Pittock, A. B., and R. N. Jones (2000), Adaptation to what and why? Environmental Monitoring And Assessment, 61, 9-35.
Serreze, M. C., and J. A. Francis (2006), The arctic amplification debate, Clim. Change, 76, 241-264.
Shein, K. A., et al. (2006), State of the climate in 2005, Bull. Am. Met. Soc., 87, S6-S102.
Siegenthaler, U., et al. (2005), Stable carbon cycle-climate relationship during the late Pleistocene, Science, 310, 1313-1317.
Spahni, R., et al. (2005), Atmospheric methane and nitrous oxide of the late Pleistocene from Antarctic ice cores, Science, 310, 1317-1321.
Turner, J., et al. (2005), Antarctic climate change during the last 50 years, Int. J. Climatol., 25, 279-294.
Vaughan, D. G. (in press), West Antarctic Ice Sheet collapse - the fall and rise of a paradigm, Clim. Change.
Vaughan, D. G., and C. S. M. Doake (1996), Recent atmospheric warming and retreat of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula, Nature, 379, 328-331.
Vaughan, D. G., et al. (2003), Recent rapid regional climate warming on the Antarctic Peninsula, Clim. Change, 60, 243-274.
Wigley, T. M. L. (2005), The climate change commitment, Science, 307, 1766-1769.
Wingham, D. J., et al. (2006), Mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2006.1792.
Zwally, H. J., et al. (2005), Mass changes of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and shelves and contributions to sea-level rise: 1992 - 2002, J. Glaciol., 51, 509-527.

 Figures

Figure 1 Map of Antarctica 

