





COMNAP's 2006 Workshop on Waste Management in Antarctica





COMNAP's 2006 Workshop on Waste Management in Antarctica
Introduction
1. The Antarctic Environment Officers Network (AEON) of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) conducted in 2006 the Workshop: Waste Management in Antarctica. It was held in Kingston, Tasmania, Australia on 10-11 July 2006 in conjunction with the 2006 COMNAP Annual General Meeting.
2. The Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and Veolia Environmental Services (VES), a consultancy that assists in the management of Antarctic waste, kindly sponsored the workshop.  The AAD hosted the Workshop at their offices in Kingston, Tasmania. 
3. The focus of the two day workshop was the sharing of practical information on waste management in Antarctica, and more specifically on:
    • current waste management practices; and
    • clean up of old waste. 
4. This was the first time since the Madrid Protocol was signed in 1991 that the issue of waste management in Antarctica had been specifically tackled at international level. The workshop therefore provided a welcome opportunity to exchange practical experience on a wide range of environmental, operational and cultural issues concerned with waste management in Antarctica. 
Participation
5. The workshop was attended by 21 representatives from 11 National Antarctic Programs. It also included staff of VES that assist several National Programs with waste issues. 13 presentations were given – 11 from representatives of 9 National Programs and 2 by VES. A documentary on the clean-up of abandoned bases by 1 National Program was also screened. 
Workshop format
6. One day was dedicated to each of the two topics selected:
    • current waste management practices; and
    • clean up of old waste. 
7. Each day included a series of relevant presentations focused on conveying and sharing practical experience gained over the years, followed by “wrap-up” sessions. These sessions triggered productive debate on the different issues presented and generated a number of useful conclusions. 
8. The list of presentations is provided at Appendix 1.
Findings
9. The workshop's main findings were:  
(1) Strategy and Planning 
    a) the incorporation of the Environmental Management System (EMS) concept into waste management practices could be a very convenient way to facilitate such activities.
    b) the importance of partnership among National Programs, and of the involvement of the private sector when undertaking clean-up operations.
    c) the need of long-term planning when addressing clean up operations, given the fact that such activities usually involve high costs and human & technical resources. In that respect, participants stressed that clean up operations should be based on reliable site characterizations and that monitoring is a necessary complement to such operations.
    d) the importance of written strategies to help understand clean-up operations as part of a process, which may include planning, designing, implementing, monitoring and
    e) the importance of being flexible when undertaking clean-up programs, as they are usually highly dependant on harsh conditions present in Antarctica. Participants noted the importance of being ready for alternative solutions.
(2) Communication and Reporting 
    a) there is a need to increase the flow of information at a technical level among those responsible for waste management in Antarctica within National Programs. Participants agreed that the COMNAP website was the most adequate tool to achieve such a goal, and that the AEON workspace on the site should be adjusted to allow an easier flow of information.
    b) With respect to incident reporting, there is a need to provide feedback on the information forwarded by operators, as a way to increase confidence on the usefulness of their work and on the reporting system itself.
    c) Participants agreed that, on the issue of waste management, AEON would benefit from closer links with TRAINET and other COMNAP networks.
    d) the value of communicating results from clean-up operations, particularly to the general public, as a powerful tool to obtain resources for further progress on such operations.
(3) Other issues
    a) the recovery of historical objects can be a positive side effect stemming from clean-up activities.
Proceedings
10. The proceedings of the workshop were published by COMNAP in March 2007 in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. Paper copies will be distributed during CEP X. More information about the workshop is available from the COMNAP website at www.comnap.aq.  
Future Workshops
11. Participants fully agreed that the Workshop was a very fruitful initiative and that further sharing information exercises on these issues should be encouraged within AEON. COMNAP endorsed these recommendations in July 2006 at COMNAP XVIII when AEON reported on the workshop and agreed to plan for another AEON workshop on a practical environmental issue as part of COMNAP XX in 2008, on a topic to be defined in 2007 at COMNAP XIX. 
Conclusions
12. AEON and COMNAP recognise the importance of implementing sound waste management procedures and this Workshop on Waste Management in Antarctica constituted a significant step up in the ongoing flow of information on these issues among National Antarctic Programs. 
13. The workshop offered an invaluable opportunity to bring waste management officers together, and will encourage the implementation of alternative, creative and/or likely joint initiatives among National Antarctic Programs on these matters. 
14. The results of this workshop and flow-on actions will gradually favour new standards, conditions, techniques and/or procedures and scenarios for waste management on the continent, and make a significant contribution towards the enhancement of the Antarctic environment for the future.
Appendix 1
Presentations given at the
2006 COMNAP AEON Workshop Waste Management in Antarctica.

Day 1: How Do we Currently Manage Waste in Antarctica? The Practical Aspects.
Day 1 of the workshop focused on the practical aspects of waste management in Antarctica, with a series of presentations by several National Programs about their current waste management practices.  These presentations were followed by group discussions.  
The list of presentations is outlined in the table below:
Table 1
Formal Welcome and Introductions:
Rodolfo Sánchez, AEON Coordinator
Stories about Waste at Dumont d’Urville, on the Traverse and at Concordia station, 
Claire Le Calvez, 
French National Antarctic Program
Learning Outcomes from Industry Management of Waste Generated by East Antarctic Activities
John Brennan and Ron Ward 
Veolia Environmental Services
Current Waste Management Arrangements in the Australian Antarctic Program		
Leslie Frost. 
Australian National Antarctic Program
Wastewater Treatment in Antarctica: Challenges and Process Improvements
Margaret Knuth  
United States National Antarctic Program
Managing Antarctic Wastes
Rod Downie
British National Antarctic Program
Report On Recent SANAP Environmental Waste Management Activities, Incidents And Developments Over The Past Year
Henry Valentine
South African National Antarctic Program (SANAP)
Presentations were interspersed with group discussion.  Items of discussion included:  
    a) optimal incineration techniques;
    b) management of food scraps, in order to enhance efficiency of incinerators;
    c) fuel drums cleaning, reuse and crushing;
    d) waste categories used in stations;
    e) waste management in field parties;
    f) waste management upon return to countries for final disposal;
    g) benefits from reducing wastes prior to departure to Antarctica;
    h) ways to minimise wastes;
    i) auditing waste management practices;
    j) problems faced and solutions found during the operation of high-scale wastewater plants;
    k) involvement of the private sector on the design of technological solutions for specific problems found in Antarctica;
    l) cultural aspects associated to waste management practices;
    m) problems found in reporting of waste management (particularly incidents) from Antarctic stations; 
    n) ways of improving communication connected to waste management, also including other complementary, possibly non-technical, issues. 
Day 2: How are we Approaching Cleaning Up Old Waste in Antarctica?
Day 2 of the workshop focused on current efforts to clean up old waste in Antarctica that was deposited prior to introduction of the environmental protocols.  Again a series of presentations were undertaken by several National Programs about their current approaches and efforts.  
The list of presentations is outlined in the table below:
Table 2
Formal Welcome and Introductions for Day 2
Rodolfo Sánchez, AEON Coordinator
Cleaning Up British Antarctic Survey’s legacy of Abandoned Bases and Worksites in Antarctica
Rod Downie 
British National Antarctic Program
Secrets of Antarctica” – Documentary on the clean-up of abandoned British bases
Rod Downie screened this documentary that was broadcast on BBC World.
Clean Up Program at Syowa Station and the Next Stage Challenges
Kenji Ishizawa 
Japanese National Antarctic Program
Progress Report on the Clean Up of the Thala Valley Tip at Casey Station
Leslie Frost 
Australian National Antarctic Program
Partnerships – Can they Benefit Clean Up Activities in Antarctica?
John Brennan and Ron Ward 
Veolia Environmental Services 
Clean-Up Operations at Marambio Station (Argentina): More than a Decade after their Start
Rodolfo A. Sánchez 
Argentinean National Antarctic Program
Waste Management Approaches in the Brazilian Antarctic Programme
Lucia Siqueiros
Brazilian National Antarctic Program
Clean up of abandoned Cape Hallett Station – New Zealand and United States
Neil Gilbert 
New Zealand National Antarctic Program
As previously discussed a paper prepared by the Uruguayan Antarctic National Program entitled “Cleaning of Past Activities” was also distributed.  

