





Opening of Lago Escondido at Deception Island   





Opening of Lago Escondido at Deception Island 
The geodynamic context of Deception Island and its environs
The Bransfield Basin, located between the South Shetland Islands archipelago and the Antarctic Peninsula, is an active marginal basin.  Here, a 500 km long extensional axis, running NE-SW between 60º and 63º S and occupied by six volcanic edifices in approximate alignment with the principal direction of the basin, has been identified.  Recent volcanic activity on the South Shetland Islands, manifested in the Bridgeman, Penguin and Deception sub-aerial volcanoes, recorded seismic activity, and deformation models obtained for the area indicate that the axis continues throughout the watershed.
Of these three volcanoes, Deception (63º S, 60º W) is the only one that currently shows volcanic activity in the area.  Its last eruptions date back to 1842, 1967, 1969 and 1970, with unconfirmed events in 1912 and 1917. 
During the period from 1967-1970, intense eruptive activity led to the destruction of Chile’s and Great Britain’s scientific bases, located on Pendulum Cove and Whaler’s Bay, respectively.  The activity changed the morphology of the island, generating an islet that was later annexed to the island in the area of Telefon Bay.  Large quantities of ash were emitted and deposited onto neighboring islands, as can be observed at Johnson Glacier on Livingston Island.  Another product of the islet’s annexation was the creation of a lake, “Lago Escondido” in Spanish cartography of the island, which was formed by the union of two existing craters.  This lake was separated from Port Foster by a wall of volcanic material just a few meters thick.
At present, significant superficial manifestations of volcanic activity on Deception Island include the existence of fumarole areas with emissions of 100ºC (Fumarole Bay) and 70ºC (Whaler’s Bay), and the presence of hot soils (Cerro Caliente with 100ºC emissions) and thermal waters (Pendulum and Whaler’s Bay with 40ºC and 65ºC emissions, respectively). As well, there are several areas where significant seismic activity has been detected.  This recorded seismicity has two distinct origins: on the one hand, activity of tectonic origin is due to the expansion of the Bransfield Rift, and on the other hand, there is activity of purely volcanic origin.  Deep (80 km) tectonic earthquakes, no more than 6 per campaign, have been recorded between Livingston and Deception, while volcanic activity generates a mean of 1000 events per campaign.  The majority of these are superficial events of low energetic content with upper magnitudes between 1 and 2. Volcanic-tectonic earthquakes of greater magnitudes, between 3 and 4 on the Richter scale, have also been recorded during situations of seismic-volcanic crisis, as in 1991-92 and 1998-99 when teams of scientists experienced the events during their stay on Deception.  
The presence of active volcanism on Deception Island, and the existence of superficial and deep seismicity, make the tectonic context of this region highly complex.  For this reason, continuous research on Deception Island was renewed in 1986.  Initially, research was oriented towards the surveillance and control of volcanic activity with the use of geodesic and geophysical techniques and methods and the participation of Spanish and Argentine groups.  Since then, two important seismic-volcanic crises have been detected.  During the first, which occurred between 31 December 1991 and 25 January 1992, a notable increase in seismic activity, a total of 900 events and 4 earthquakes, was documented.  This event was interpreted as volcano reactivation caused by a small intrusion of no more than 2 km depth in the area of Fumarole Bay.  The second was detected during the 1998-99 campaign.  After a period of no considerable activity, an episode of significant seismic-volcanic activity, characterized by the occurrence of various types of signatures, was recorded on January 3.  Two earthquakes of 3.3 (January 14) and 4.3 magnitude (January 20) were recorded, indicating an increase in the number of events relative to previous campaigns.  These were located in the area of greatest activity between Fumarole Bay and Telefon Bay. The focal depth of the events was ~1 km. Seismic activity includes volcanic-tectonic earthquakes, events of long duration and volcanic tremors.  The energy liberated is significantly higher than that calculated on previous campaigns.  
The campaign finished without the process having totally concluded.  To evaluate the situation and state of the island at the beginning of the 1999-2000 campaign, the multidisciplinary project DECVOL was developed.  Through the application of geophysical and geodesic techniques, including observation of GPS satellites, recordings of existing seismicity through the deployment of short period and broadband seismic stations, sampling and analysis of fumarole gases, and the acquisition of geomagnetic, gravimetric, and bathymetric data through the systematic scanning of interior waters and waters surrounding the island, it was concluded that volcanic activity had been reactivated on the island.  This was manifested in the increase in seismic activity and deformation, change in the content and composition of gases, and the existence of gravimetric and geomagnetic anomalies.  As well, the values of these parameters have been interpreted as an intrusion of young magma between 500 and 1000 meters depth that has altered the geothermal and geodynamic equilibrium of the island.  The most affected area, where the reactivation was located, is Fumarole Bay at the Argentine Deception Base. 
Currently, volcanic activity on the island continues to be monitored.  In addition, research is being conducted on new techniques and the development of innovative methods for the control of active volcanoes.  Knowledge of the state of activity on Deception is absolutely necessary to ensure the safety of ships that arrive in large numbers to Port Foster, an excellent natural port where ships take shelter during frequent storms and make stopovers for tourism purposes given the site’s attractiveness within the Antarctic environment.  In recent years, this has led to a considerable increase in the number of visitors, with an estimated 18,000 and 20,000 visitors during the last campaigns. 
Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 4 Deception Island (ASMA No. 4)
As stated in the “Deception Island Management Package,” Deception Island is a Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 4). This document describes the different Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), Historic Sites and Monuments (HSMs), and further zones in which activities may be subject to a code of conduct in the future. These places have been established based on their important natural, scientific, historic, educational, aesthetic and wilderness values. 
Interest in Deception Island is first and foremost due to the fact that it is one of only two volcanoes in the Antarctic at which eruptions have been observed.  The Area has an exceptionally important flora, including 18 endemic species, many of which are associated with volcanic activity, as well as the benthic habitat of Port Foster, whose ecological interest is due to the natural perturbations caused by volcanic activity.  Eight species of seabirds maintain habitat on the island, including the world’s largest colony of chinstrap penguins. 
The Area is of outstanding scientific interest, in particular for studies in geoscience and biological science. It offers the rare opportunity to study the effects of environmental change on an ecosystem, and the dynamics of the ecosystem as it recovers from natural disturbance.  Long term seismological and biological data-sets have been collected at Deception Base (Argentina) and Gabriel de Castilla Base (Spain).
With the objective of maintaining current and future scientific research on volcanism, geology, geomorphology, climate, marine and plant and animal ecology, as well as other potential areas of future research, two areas in the ASMA Management Plan for Deception Island are considered and declared as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, ASPA No. 140 and ASPA No. 145. ASPA No. 140 comprises 11 terrestrial sites, and ASPA No. 145 comprises 2 marine sites. The protected areas in ASPA No. 140 are located at Collins Point (A), Crater Lake (B), Cerro Caliente (C), Fumarole Bay  (D), West Stonethrow Ridge (E), Telefon Bay (F), Pendulum Cove (G), Mt. Pond (H), Perchuč Cone’  (J), Ronald Hill to Kroner Lake (K), and South East Point (L).  
The unique topography of the island, especially of Port Foster, the interior bay, has made the area a habitual landing place for ships since its discovery. The first explorations, as well as modern scientific and tourism ships passing by whaling operations, have used and continue to use Port Foster as an obligatory port of refuge and route of passage. In the ASMA, two Historic Sites and Monuments are also added: at Whaler’s Bay (HSM No. 71), the remains of the Hektor Whaling Station and the former British ‘Base B’ that was established at the old whaling station and destroyed during the 1967-1970 eruption as a result of a lahar; and at Pendulum Cove (HSM No. 76), the remains of the Chilean President Pedro Aguirre Cerda Station also destroyed during the same eruption due to ashfall.  

Antarctic Specially Protected Area located at Telefon Bay (ASPA No. 140 Letter F) 
The following description of ASPA No. 140 Letter F is found in the “Deception Island Management Package”:
“The site extends from the north shore of the lagoon at the south-west of Telefon Bay to the south of the "new island" hill, northwards to the north shoreline of the large unnamed lake at the northern end of Telefon Bay, and thence to the shore of the bay following approximately the 10 m contour of a low north-south trending ridge.

This site incorporates several features created during the 1967 eruption in Telefon Bay, and includes the low flat land extending from the prominent hill on the south-eastern side to the steep slopes and lava outcrops ca. 0.5 km inland to the steep slope and lava cliffs below the north-eastern end of Stonethrow Ridge.  The hill was created as a new island in 1967, but is now joined to the main island by the aforementioned ash plain.  About 0.5 km north of the lagoon in the south-west of Telefon Bay there is a small shallow lake, while at the northern end of the plain there is a large deep lake.  

This lake is separated from the sea in Port Foster by a ca. 50 m long isthmus barely 2 m high and 2 m wide.  It has been used as the main pedestrian access along this part of coastline, and is extremely vulnerable to erosion.  If it is breached it will be quickly eroded further by high tides and storms, allowing the lake to become inter-tidal and profoundly altering its geochemistry and microbiota.”

The main feature of botanical interest is that all surfaces within the site were formed in 1967 as a result of intense volcanic activity, thereby allowing accurate monitoring of colonisation by plants and other biota. The site has a generally barren appearance, but close inspection reveals an abundance of inconspicuous mosses and lichens.  In the absence of geothermal activity here, colonisation processes may be related to aspects of the current trend in climate change.  Although species diversity is low, the developing communities are typical of non-heated habitats throughout the island.
Present situation of ASPA No. 140 Letter F
On December 5, 2006, in an effort to find locations for the installation of stations for the measurement of energy balance at the soil-atmosphere interface (VOLTEDEC project), a reconnaissance of the northwestern part of Deception Island was carried out.  During the reconnaissance, the collapse of the wall of separation --approximately 50 m long, 2 m high, and 2 m wide-- between Lago Escondido (denominated as such in “Antarctic Cartography: Deception Island, 1:25.000, second edition 2005”) located some 250 m southwest of the geodesic vertex BOMB, and Port Foster was observed. 
As a result of the collapse, two new landforms were created:  a bay delimited by the perimeter of the old lake and a ~35 m strait that unites said bay and Port Foster.  During later visits, positions were taken at the extremes of the strait with a GPS:  western point of rupture (62º 55’190 S, 60º 39’779 W) and eastern point of rupture (62º 55’ 81 S, 60º 39’743 W).  The total distance of the rupture was 35.2 m. In a sounding, the depth of the strait was estimated to be 1.35 m, and a strong current from the lake to the sea was observed.  
A total connection of the bay united with Port Foster to the intertidal zone was observed, creating a hydrostatic equilibrium between both geographic landforms. In fact, a beach has been formed that may facilitate transit between Telefon Bay, the 1970 craters, and Pendulum Cove. 
Final Considerations
Regarding evacuation plans from the island in the case of a volcanic eruption
Given the existence of beach area around the new bay, a result of Port Foster’s incorporation into the intertidal zone, the evacuation plans designed in the case of a volcanic eruption need not be changed.  The journey from the southwest zone and the northern zone of the island is fully accessible at the foot of the beach.

Regarding the new toponymy    
Due to changes in the topography of the island, that eliminate Lago Escondido, a new toponymy is proposedfor both landforms:  Cala Extremadura for the new bay annexed to Port Foster, and Estrecho Ampurdán for the strait between said bay and Port Foster.  
References
Reports by: 
    • Commander Rafael Ayora Hirsch, Head of the Spanish Antarctic  Base “Gabriel de Castilla”.
    • Dr. Manuel Berrocoso Domínguez, Research Coordinator of the VOLTEDEC project “Actividad volcano-tectónica de la isla Decepción y su entorno (antártica)” and Principal Investigator of subproject 01 VOLTEDEC­GEODESIA.
    • Dr. Mariano Rodríguez-Arias Fernández, Principal Investigator of subproject 03 (VOLTEDEC-PERMAFLUX): “Evolución de la capa activa del permafrost en la isla Decepción (Antártida).” 
    • Dr. Raúl Pérez López, Principal Investigator of the FALLADEC project “Evidencias morfológicas de la actividad de fallas recientes según el tectovulcanismo de isla Decepción (Península Antártica-Islas Shetland del Sur)”.
PHOTOGRAPHIC DOCUMENTATION



Figure 1: The Antarctic Specially Protected Area located at Telefon Bay (ASPA No. 140 Letter F).  Picture of the original situation and current opening of Lago Escondido. 





Figure 2: Panoramic view from the NW during low tide (6-12-2006) 





Figure 3: View of the outflow between the old Lago Escondido and the bay of Port Foster during high tide (6-12-2006) 





Figure 4: The narrow strait between Lago Escondido and Port Foster (2-01-2007)

 


Figure 5: View of the Antarctic Specially Protected Area located at Telefon Bay (ASPA No. 140 Letter F). Lago Escondido and its union with Port Foster can be seen towards the back of the photo.





Figure 6: The western part of the narrow union between the new bay and Port Foster (2-01-2007) 




Figure 7: Northern beach of the newly created bay.

