





On-site Assessment of Metal Contamination During Remediation of a Waste Disposal Site in Antarctica



On-site Assessment of Metal Contamination During Remediation of a Waste Disposal Site in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
A methodology for the on-site chemical assessment of contaminant metals in soil was successfully developed, tested and employed to facilitate the clean-up of the abandoned Thala Valley waste disposal site at Australia’s Casey station in 2003/04. This convenient and robust methodology would be applicable to the remediation of other similar sites in Antarctica.
Background
The remediation of the abandoned Thala Valley waste disposal site near Casey station is part of Australia’s staged approach to cleaning up contaminated sites associated with Australia’s Antarctic program. These sites, which range from abandoned waste disposal sites to fuel spills, are contaminated principally with metals and petroleum hydrocarbons.
Successful remediation of contaminated sites requires accurate, cost-effective and timely chemical analysis of soil and water samples, for three purposes:
    1) site assessment – to guide the excavation or in-situ treatment of waste material and soil;
    2) site validation – to confirm satisfactory remediation; and
    3) classification of excavated material for treatment and disposal.
Owing to the infrequent and typically lengthy transport between Antarctica and Australia, it is desirable to carry out chemical analyses on-site, in either portable or station-based laboratories.
On-site assessment of metal contamination at Thala Valley
During the remediation work at Thala Valley carried out over the 2003-04 summer, waste materials and contaminated soil were excavated for removal to Australia for treatment and disposal. The principal contaminants present were known to be heavy metals – mainly lead, zinc, cadmium, and copper – and chemical analyses were performed at Casey on size-fractionated (<2 mm) soil samples collected from the site. Concentrations of contaminant metals in soil were determined using a portable X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. A United States Environment Protection Agency method for assessing the potential for metals to leach from solid waste material into the environment (the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure, TCLP) was also used to characterise soil.
The analytical methods for total and leachable metals were evaluated for their accuracy and reproducibility throughout the course of the chemical assessment program, and both performed satisfactorily. Chemical data produced by the two methods provided important information for management of the remediation operations, and allowed waste to be classified for treatment and disposal according to Tasmanian State guidelines prior to its transport to Australia.
Further information
A detailed discussion of the chemical assessment program for the Thala Valley clean-up operation is given in Assessment of metal contamination using XRF and the TCLP during remediation of a waste disposal site in Antarctica by Stark, S.C., Snape, I., Graham, N.J., Brennan, J.C. and Gore, D.B. which can be accessed via the internet at:  http://aadc-maps.aad.gov.au/database/cep/CEP_2007_chem_assessment_report.pdf.
This report describes and discusses the chemical assessment of the Thala Valley waste disposal site, including:
    • the rationale for on-site chemical assessment and choice of analytical methods, along with background to the Thala Valley contaminated site and clean-up operation;
    • details of the sampling and analysis program established to ensure compliance with Australian guidelines for the assessment of contaminated sites, and Australian (Tasmanian State) regulations for the disposal of contaminated soil;
    • evaluation of the methods selected for determination of total metals and leachable metals, and their performance during the assessment program;
    • discussion of the outcomes of the chemical assessment program in the clean-up operation; and
    • discussion of some future directions for the development of remote chemical testing methodology.


