





Grounding of Vessels on Deception Island and the M/N “Nordkapp” Incident





Grounding of Vessels on Deception Island and the M/N “Nordkapp” Incident
I. Introduction 
In recent years, an increase in the activity of scientific, transport, logistic support, and tourist vessels, specifically in the area of the Antarctic Peninsula, has raised the risk of accidents, calling for greater attention to these operations by governments from the countries of Antarctic operators and IAATO. 
Singular effort is made by Chile, together with the Republic of Argentina, to share the responsibility of the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol (CANP) in the area with the greatest maritime traffic, and to maintain it in a state of alert and preparation, so that it may provide assistance in the event of an emergency that may affect the security of human lives at sea, or the marine Antarctic environment.  CANP operates regularly between December 1 and March 1.  These dates can be extended if both countries agree, and depending on the anticipated activities.
Chile keeps the Maritime Station “Bahía Fildes” active throughout the year, while the “Bahía Paraíso” and “Rada Covadonga” Stations are operative during the estival period, so that these can coordinate the support required in the case of an incident which threatens human life at sea, or the marine environment.    
The activities of the maritime stations involve serving as a link with CANP, and, during periods when CANP is inactive, coordinating support with the Maritime Authority of Punta Arenas, Chile, for any incident that may occur. 
The maritime stations offer assistance to all vessels in need, including meteorological and/or glaciological information.  They may also provide support in the case of medical emergencies, for example, by looking for facilities to disembark an individual who is ill or by coordinating an individual’s evacuation.  
The maritime stations have rubber boots, the means to combat the initial stages of contamination, and can work in a preventive manner until the arrival of CANP or other units that may lend support.
II. Areas of Convergence in Maritime Traffic 
Within the maritime circuit of passenger vessels, the most visited places are the Paradise Bay and Deception Island areas.  Nearly 160 vessels anchor here or navigate in surrounding areas, and some 20,000 tourists visit during the estival period.      
By contrast, at Bahía Fildes, most maritime traffic is caused by logistic and scientific vessels, with nearly 70 anchorages during the estival period. 
III. Deception Island
Deception Island and Port Foster make up part of an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No.).  This is the result of the shared scientific, historic, and environmental interest of a group of countries in the area, including Argentina, Chile, Spain, United States, Norway, and United Kingdom. These countries developed a management plan for the island, in which a series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas are recognized.  
There are also two scientific bases on the island, Argentina’s Base “Deception” and Spain’s Base “Gabriel de Castilla”.
IV. Incidents on Deception Island 
Following is a description of the incidents that have occurred in recent years:   




A. 2002/2003 season
Passenger vessel “Clipper Adventure” from the Bahamas grounded at Whalers Bay with 44 crew members and 22 passengers.  The vessel was supported and refloated by the Chilean Antarctic icebreaker “Viel”.
B. 2006/2007 season
1. Passenger vessel “Lyubov Orlova” from Malta grounded on 15 November 2006 at Whalers Bay with 54 crew members and 88 passengers, and was freed with support from the Spanish scientific vessel “Las Palmas”.
2. Passenger vessel “Nordkapp” from Norway touched bottom on 30 January 2007 in the area known as Neptune’s Bellows with 58 crew members and 288 passengers aboard.  The vessel was able to free itself from the rocky area but later grounded at Port Foster, where it received assistance from the HMS “Endurance” of the United Kingdom.
Information given by the Captain of “Nordkapp” to the Chilean vessel “Viel” indicates that the vessel sustained damages to the double bottom tanks in the starboard and central areas of the prow. 
The Spanish vessel “Las Palmas” reported that it entered Port Foster on 31 January, at 07:30 hours, verifying that the “Nordkapp” was anchored in the bay with an oil boom for hydrocarbons alongside the starboard. In the course of the morning, the Spanish vessel took samples of the oil that leaked from the damaged vessel.  The vessel left after offering assistance that was not accepted.
Initially, the HMS “Endurance” and the passenger vessel “Nordnorge” /JWPC3 / from Norway anchored at the site.  The first vessel used divers to conduct an inspection of the damages sustained by the “Nordkapp” and made emergency repairs to the hull.  The “Nordnorge” evacuated the passengers to the Port of Ushuaia, Argentina.
At sunrise on February 1, the Chilean icebreaker “Viel” anchored in the emergency area, which has material to combat hydrocarbon contamination, and offered assistance to the damaged vessel which was not accepted. 
Once the damages to the hull were repaired and by instructions of its owner, the “Nordkapp”, with 31 crew members aboard, set sail towards Bahía Fildes, 90 nautical miles from Deception Island, where it anchored on February 1 at 06:45 hours.  Personnel from the Maritime Station Bahía Fildes detected small amounts of diesel oil, 15 by 2 meters, leaking from the “Nordkapp”, causing the vessel to deploy its own oil booms.
Faced with this situation, the Maritime Station Bahía Fildes offered the “Nordkapp” materials available at the station to combat hydrocarbon contamination, which were not accepted.
The Maritime Search and Rescue Service of Chile (MRCC Chile) and CANP, present in the emergency area, were prepared to support the “Nordkapp” with the assessment of damages, as well as repairs to facilitate safe navigation to a shipyard, where the definitive repairs could be carried out.  
The same day and after the HMS “Endurance” set sail, the Captain of the “Nordkapp” met with the Chief of the Maritime Station Bahía Fildes and accepted assistance with repairs.  The vessel of the Chilean Navy “Leucotón”, a participant in CANP, remained tied to the stern of the “Nordkapp” to keep the prow stable while a diving company hired by the owner conducted repairs on 19 holes in the hull.  
The Maritime Station Bahía Fildes, in addition to helping divers refill their air tanks and to deploying the oil booms, was available for any action that would help minimize the potential risk of contamination of the marine Antarctic environment. 
Finally, on 8 February at 19:00 hours, the “Nordkapp” set sail escorted by the Chilean high-seas tugboat “Beagle” with destination to Port Stanly.

V. Coordination in the Event of Maritime Accidents and a Maritime Station on Deception Island
Faced with the occurrence of maritime incidents on Deception Island and adjacent waters, which fortunately have not, to date, involved fatalities or significant impacts on the Antarctic environment, Chile is concerned that in the future accidents could occur in the area with unknown consequences. 
Chile is also concerned about the lack of communication concerning maritime incidents, as in the case of the passenger vessel “Nordkapp”.  Direct information was never received, except via the press, which delivered first news of the incident.  It is also worrying that assistance was not accepted, in compliance with tradition and established Antarctic procedures. This is difficult to comprehend, given that assistance was rejected during moments when the emergency was not sufficiently under control.
Chile will study the possibility of establishing a maritime station on Deception Island to operate during the estival period.  This is necessary considering that it is an Antarctic Specially Managed Area, including several Antarctic Specially Protected Areas that are vulnerable, as is the case with the Port Foster marine site and the Historical Sites of Whalers Bay and Pendulum Cove, where an increasing number of vessels anchor.  
This maritime station, directly dependent on the station in Bahía Fildes, would have similar functions.  In other words, it would adopt measures for the protection of individuals and the environment, coordinate the support required in the case of incidents, serve as a link with CANP, and coordinate the Marine Authority of Punta Arenas, Chile, when needed to obtain support in the case of an incident.  As well, it would provide meteorological and glaciological information and necessary support for medical emergencies. 








23.4.2007
XXX ATCM/Grounding of Vesels on Deception Apr-2007

