





Participation of Romanian Scientists in the International Polar Year 2007-2008




Participation of Romanian Scientists in the International Polar Year 2007-2008
Inquiries can be addressed to:
 Romanian Polar Research Institute, 
email: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

Romanian polar research program and projects in the framework of IPY 2007-2008 and ERA-NET
Romanian Ministry of Education and Research, Romanian Antarctic Foundation and Romanian Polar Research Institute will assume and manage regional and international cooperation activities, such as: joint polar research programes and infrastructure;  LAW-RACOVIŢĂ Station in Antarctica – Romanian national research facility for international cooperation. 
Romanian polar research correlation with international programs:
    • EUROPOLAR ERA-NET Project - European Polar Consortium, in which Romanian Polar Research Institute is a party (under the coordination of Romanian Ministry of Education and Research)
    •  IPY Project proposals in which Romanian Polar Research Institute was accepted:
            1. ID 137- Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic: the Response of Life to Change EBA (coordinators - Italy, Australia)
            2. ID 73 - Multidisciplinary Ecological Study of Antarctic Oases (MESAO) – coordinator - Czech Republic
            3. ID 341-Taking the Antarctic, Arctic Polar Pulse -Human Biology and Medicine Research, TTAAPPL (coordinator - Australia).
	Russian Federation Proposal:
           Study of human and human microflora adaptation ability in the polar regions of the   Earth.
           Leader of project: Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute, Russian Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (Roshydromet), Sanct – Petersburg, Russian Federation.
           	Partners: Romanian Polar Research Institute 
                     	Medicine and Pharmacy University of Bucharest 
		Stefan S. Nicolau”Virology Institute of the Romanian Science Academy
	Other partners invited.

4. ID: 99 (Bipolar) - Ozone layer and UV radiation in a changing climate evaluated during IPY (coordinator Germany)
5. ID: 116 - The Royal Society of Victoria’s Two INTernational Research Expedition Polar Inter-Disciplinary Voyages. Coordinator - The Royal Society of Victoria, Australia 
6. ID: 244 - Antarctic Anthology. A collaborative book incorporating literary, visual and scientific representations of the continent, to commemorate this IPY. Coordinator Scotland, UK.
	7. ID: 451 : Antarctic Touring Exhibition, coordinator Natural History Museum
London, UK

Australian - Romanian Law-Racoviţă Station (690 23’16”S, 760 22’47”E)	
Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica - established on 15.06.2005, based on the Memorandum concluded with the Australian Government, inaugurated on 20.02.2006;											
Scientific research facility for international cooperation observatory in Antarctica.

Romanian scientific activities in Larsemann Hills - multidisciplinary: 
geology, glaciology, lake study, pedology, biology, biodiverstity, microbiology, medicine biotechnology, human impact on the environment, astronomy, climatic changes.



