





A Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1)




A Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1)
Joint Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Brazil, Ecuador and Peru

Introduction
Antarctica is still the most preserved region on Earth and so should be maintained. Protection of the Antarctic environment is a compromise of the nations that conduct activities in the Southern region. The Protocol on Environmental Protection recommends that all human activities in Antarctica are undertaken in a way to minimize the impact of the human presence in that region. One of the protective measures prescribed by the Protocol to assess changes in the environment is monitoring activities.
Environmental monitoring is a useful tool of assessment and prevention. It provides guidance on environmental management to minimize and mitigate potential environmental impacts.
Admiralty Bay was formally adopted as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 1) by ATCM XXIX in 2006 (Measure 2).  The Management Plan for the ASMA was jointly prepared by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and USA. One of the management activities proposed in the management plan was to monitor the Area to investigate possible sources of environment impact including cumulative impacts. 

State of the Environment
Diverse and continuous scientific activities have been undertaken in the Area for 30 years supported by the Polish Henryk Arctowski Station, by the Brazilian Comandante Ferraz Station and by the US Antarctic Program at ASPA Nº 128. Research activities at the Peruvian Machu Picchu Station (at Crepin Point) and at the Ecuadorian refuge (at Hennequin Point) have occurred intermittently during the summer. 
Apart from a few individual and isolated initiatives of cooperation, there was no integration between the scientific investigations or environmental initiatives run by the different nations operating in the Area. Although not done in a systematic and integrated format, all this scientific activity in the Area has resulted in a set of biotic and abiotic data that needed evaluation so that environmental monitoring of the bay could be implemented in an efficient and effective manner. 
Concerning environmental studies, long-term monitoring of birds and pinnipeds has been conducted, in the Area, by Polish and American researchers. The studies on penguins have been undertaken continuously for 30 years, and is the longest ever done in Antarctica. 
Research carried out at Arctowsky Station, since 1977, has revealed significant quantitative changes and has demonstrated specific trends in the system’s variability. The ice-free areas have enlarged threefold during the last 20 years, creating conditions for inhabitation and succession. The number of penguins has decreased in the Area. The population of gentoo penguin decreased 62% since 1977. The numbers of fur seals change in multi-annual cycles. The abundance of elephant seals has kept stable, whereas those of Weddell and crabeater seals declined. With increasing human activity in Antarctica, the impact on terrestrial ecosystems has become increasingly more visible. It is reflected especially by changes in vegetation and in geographical ranges of several species. 
At the Machu Picchu summer station, between 1995 and 1998, Peru set up an Environmental Base Line in the Mackellar Inlet and in the Coastal zone of Crepín Point, which comprised physical and chemical parameters of sea water, such as, temperature, transparency, pH, salinity, dissolved oxygen, nutrients (phosphates, silicates, nitrates, nitrites), suspended solids, morphology of the superficial bottom and traces of metallic elements in bottom sediments (iron, cadmium, copper, zinc, and lead). In the 1996-1997 season, the analytical cover with additional parameters was extended to the biochemical demand of oxygen DBO5, sulfides and chlorophyll "a". Later, during expedition ANTAR XII, monitoring of the considered environmental aspects was retaken, with the development of the project "Environmental Characterization of Crepín Point and its ecosystems associated". At the same time, in 1996, and during five in a row summer seasons, it was developed a Program of Environmental radiological Monitoring with the support of the Instituto Peruano de Energia Nuclear (IPEN). The obtained results showed the presence of Cs-137, an artificial radioactivity indicator, in geological and biological components. It does not mean that a potential danger for the ecosystem of the region is set. In addition, natural radionuclides such as Berilio-7, Ra-226, Bi214 and K-40 were identified. The 1998, a significant evaluation of Cs-137 in sea water of unknown origin was reported; even though, a year later, normal concentrations were registered.
At present time, the Peruvian Antarctic Institute is developing a complete rise of environmental conditions of the Mackellar Cove and the Crepin Point Coastal Zone, in order to support the joint initiative of the ASMA 01 monitoring activity. This last work involves different parameters and indicators, among them: Quality of Air (PM10, Noise, COx, SO2); Sea and continental water quality (Heterotrophic bacteria, Total Coliforms, BOD, COD, DO, TSS, TPH and POP’s, pH, temperature, conductivity, Heavy metals); Sewage (Total and fecal coliforms,  heterotrophic bacteria , BOD, COD, DO, TSS and TPH), and Soils quality (Heavy metals, heterotrophic bacteria, Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) and TPH).
Ecuador has developed some projects from 1989 to 1993. The themes that were at that time explored were: biometrics observation of Antarctic krill (euphasia superba) found that male are larger than female individuals in all classes size, monitoring of Cs-137 in water and soil that found concentrations under the detectable limit in water and higher values in soil profiles depending upon site and topography, and bathymetry and hydrochemical characteristics at the Admiralty Bay.  Currently, the Ecuadorian Antarctic Institute (INAE) is interested into participating actively in the Management and Monitoring activities of the Admiralty Bay to assess and track any environmental change in this important ecosystem.
In the last four years, a comprehensive study of the state of the environment in the Area has been undertaken at Ferraz Station, comprising the analysis of a series of biotic and abiotic parameters. Data from this recent study have been compared with data from over 20 years of scientific investigation conducted by Brazil in Admiralty Bay and with even longer data collected by other Parties operating in the Area. This has allowed a full evaluation of the impact of human activity generated by scientists, tourists and support personnel from the stations, and those from current and past logistic operations. The research network has had the involvement of 15 research groups from 10 Brazilian Institutions. 
The main objectives of the study were:  
    • In the marine environment - to obtain measurements for the following parameters: physical (current, temperature, salinity, tides, wind and atmospheric pressure); chemical (petroleum hydrocarbons, persistent organic compounds, chemical indicators of sewage, heavy metals, nutrients, chlorophyll, pH, alkalinity, dissolved oxygen and partial pressure of CO2 in the seawater); microbiological (microbiological indicators of faecal origin, xenobiotic and pathogen-degrading micro-organisms); biological (benthic communities structure and marine food web); and geological (bathymetry, bottom morphology, and distribution of sediments).
    • In the terrestrial environment - to conduct studies of the plant and animal communities through: their ecological distributions and relationships, aiming at the identification of species and indicators of environmental impact for future monitoring projects; pedological and micro-morphological characterization of soils of the area, including organic matter, biochemical cycles and heavy metals, as well as their spatial distribution (mapping). 
    • To include multiple controls in the detection of anthropogenic effects through asymmetrical analyses (these are univariate statistical analyses appropriate for the examination of data post impact, in which the parameter’s value in the disturbed area is compared to the mean value from control areas, in order to distinguish natural from anthropogenic impacts).
    • To conduct toxicity, bioaccumulation and biotransformation experiments, and evaluate marine organism responses to anthropogenic contaminants in the field and laboratory.
    • To implement a Geographical Information System (GIS) as a tool for spatial integration of data obtained by all projects within this research net, providing support to monitor the environmental impact caused by human activities and decision support for the ASMA management plan. Through the use of routine data analyses, the GIS will make available the necessary information to the planning of logistic, scientific and tourist activities. Also, it provides multi-temporal information for environmental monitoring and impact studies in the area.
    • To elaborate a database of past and future data in adequate format to be made available on the Internet. 
    • To elaborate, together with the logistics segment, a Guidance Plan and the Environmental Management Plan for the Antarctic Brazilian Station “Comandante Ferraz” (EACF), based on environmental data generated by this network.
    • To develop appropriate technologies for constructing a standard Antarctic module, adopting environmentally and adequately correct solutions for the implementation of  the Protocol of Madrid.
    • To elaborate a conduct manual for users of the Brazilian buildings in Antarctica, with specific focus on diminishing the environmental impact caused by the use of installations and equipment. 

In general, results showed that the sites near stations have some relevant differences from the reference areas, considering most analyzed variables. The effects caused by human activities are most evident in the terrestrial areas, especially in the Facilities Zones, with clear disturbance in the diversity and abundance of fauna e flora.  
The main potential sources of chronic contamination in the Bay are: by-products of the burning emission of oil to the marine environment and to the atmosphere; and sewage discharge into the sea from the scientific stations. Notwithstanding, the effects of the contamination sources are chronic, local and very restricted in range (maximum 200m from the shoreline). 
In addition to the results aforementioned on birds, there has been a decline in breeding areas of flying birds in the region, especially concerning giant petrel, whose population has been reduced completely in some areas. Conversely, opportunistic and predator birds, such as skuas and kelp gulls, increased considerably the numbers in population and breeding area.
In the marine environment, local changes in benthic community structure near the station have been identified, but these were not considered significant, indicating that the impact from human activities on the benthic system is still minor. Benthic fauna abundances have shown to change in relation to the water column production and Carbon and Nitrogen stable isotopic analysis have not indicated differences between areas related to organic enrichment in the food web. In general, natural processes, such as anchor ice and ice-scours, rather than anthropogenic processes, are still the main cause of environmental changes in this system. 
The set of multidisciplinary information resulted from the aforementioned study in being included in a geographic information system (GIS), which has been implemented with capability for continuous update and broad accessibility. A cartographic base has been generated with an adequate scale to the ASMA and also thematic maps for the environmental parameters. At present, the GIS holds information on location of facilities, distribution of flora and fauna, geology, retreat of glaciers, altimetry, drainage basins, bathymetry of the Bay, bottom sediments, amongst others. Additional layers on concentration of pollutants (petroleum hydrocarbons, POPs, heavy metals), microbial biodiversity in the sediment and nutrients amongst others are being included.
The integrated knowledge of the environment has allowed the elaboration of an organization and usage plan for the Antarctic Brazilian Station “Comandante Ferraz”. This has been done in accordance to the station support capacity and needs for technological developments, taking into account the fragility of the surrounding environment; and in compliance with the Madrid Protocol. In this way, needs and logistics have been coordinated with environment stewardship.
Zoning has been an important tool to optimize use of facilities, whilst reducing human impact around Ferraz Station. For that, breeding areas, vegetation coverage, melting areas, areas of intensive use and impacted areas with potential for recovery have been considered. Also, a guide with codes of conduct for visitors, including routes and environmental particularities of each route, has been developed as a result of this study. 
This environmental assessment and comparative multidisciplinary investigation have served as base-lines for the identification of preliminary indicators of environmental quality, with the aim to establish a monitoring programme for the Area. It has also provided tools to support decision making processes in order to minimise potential environmental impacts in the region.

Elaboration of a Joint Monitoring Programme
In the XVII Reunion de Administradores de Programas Antárticos Latino-americanos – RAPAL (September, 2006), having the aforementioned study as a starting point, it was established a working group to elaborate an environmental monitoring programme for King George Island. In October, 2006, the working group met in Pirenópolis, Brazil, to discuss the monitoring programme. The meeting had representatives from Peru, Ecuador, Chile and Brazil. 
The terms of reference for the group were to: 
    • compare the base-line information; 
    • identify existing values and to define criteria; 
    • standardize methodology, indicators and parameters; 
    • integrate data into a geographic information system; 
    • make arrangements for a joint initiative for the International Polar Year; 
    • disseminate information on environmental and scientific activities; and to
    • develop a long-term monitoring Programme (ten years).


Figure 1: Relationship between the different groups in order to make the construction of the programme  
The model utilized for the design of the monitoring programme was the pressure/state/response– PSR Model. The choice of this model elapses for this being used as a framework for environmental assessments and to understand the state of the environment. The present framework follows a casual path that goes from driving forces of environmental change, which lead to pressures on the environment, which result in changes in the state of the environment, which in turn results in environmental impacts and elicits institutional responses (UNESCO, 2006). So this model suits in a good manner for present purposes in the Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1).


Figure 2: Pressure, State and response model for the Monitoring Programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1) Modified: POLETTE (2007).

It is important to observe that monitoring is a continuous or periodic process of collecting and analyzing data to measure the performance of a programme, project, or activity. As an integral and continuing part of project/programme management, it provides managers with regular feedback on implementation and progress towards the attainment of environmental objectives. Monitoring enables management to take appropriate corrective action to achieve desired results. Effective monitoring requires baseline data, as well as indicators of performance and related measurements, regular reporting, and a feed-back mechanism for management decision-making. 
In relation of a management process, it involves five different phases, each with individual steps, and the sequence may vary, depending on the characteristics of the management area. For the management process for monitoring programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially managed area (ASMA Nº 1) it has been suggested that the diagnosis, planning, adoption, implementation and evaluation phases be adopted.   

Figure 2:  Management process for monitoring programme for the Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially managed area (ASMA N1).
The activities performed in the first meeting comprised two phases: diagnosis and planning. The first step was to define aims of the monitoring activity to be implemented and existing values to be preserved in the Area. 2. The risk assessment was evaluated, with the definition of the direct and indirect pressures which would put under risk those values (Annex 1). 3. Indicators and associated parameters which can best indicate environmental changes along the time were then defined. 4. Finally, aspects such as sampling periodicity, logistical needs, human resources and actors involved were also appointed. A complex preliminary matrix of environmental indicators was the main result of the meeting. 
In January, 2007, the ASMA Management Group met in Antarctica. The study of the state of the environment and the preliminary matrix of indicators were presented to the representatives from Poland and USA, partners in the ASMA, who had not followed the discussion so far undertaken. The matrix was better improved and the parameters were divided into the two broad categories of environmental monitoring proposed at CEP IX (WP 16 - Environmental Monitoring and Reporting. Report of the Intersessional Contact Group): Operational monitoring and State of the environmental monitoring (Annex 4). The list of indicators and sampling frequencies are presented in Annexs 2 and 3. 
As a final step of this phase, Parties defined which indicators would be able to monitor. Next phase will be to elaborate the systematic of long-term monitoring, with detailed information, resources and timetable of activities, and prepare the implementation of the monitoring programme. Discussions will progress through the forum in the ASMA website and workshops, if they are made necessary. 
References
The Coastal and Shelf Ecosystem of Maritime Antarctica. Admiralty Bay, King George Island. Collected Reprints. Polish Academy of Sciences. Warsaw University Press. Warsaw, 2005. 683pp.
Report on the State of the Environment of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica. Ministry of Environment. Brazil, 2007. In Press.
UNESCO 2006. A handbook for measuring the progress and outcomes of integrated Coastal and Ocean Management. IOC Manuals and guides, 46, ICAM Dossier, 2. Paris UNESCO. 217p.

Annex 1
Values, Direct and Indirect Pressures


Environmental Values
Direct Pressures
Indirect Pressures
Atmospheric Environment
Air Quality
Logistics & Infrastructure
Tourism
Science
Global Changes
Natural Events
    1. Noise
    2. Emission of pollutants (incinerator, burning of oil)
    3. Natural changes
    4. Ozone hole
Terrestrial Environment
Ice-free Areas
Physionomy and diversity of plant communities
Mammals
Birds
Breeding Areas
Moulting Areas
Biodiversity 
Endemic fauna and flora
Geothermal environment
Guano



Logistics & Infrastructure
Tourism	
Science
Global Changes
Natural events
    1. Waste disposal
    2. Buildings
    3. Oil
    4. Movement of people and vehicles
    5. Overflight
    6. Introduction of non-native species
    7. Stepping over
    8. Introduction of pollutants and heavy metals
    9. Habitat destruction
    10. Foot print
    11. Landscape change
    12. Building degradation
    13. Ice retreat
    14. Domestication of fauna
    15. Fluctuation on fauna population
    16. Ozone Hole - UV

Criosphere
Dynamics of ice mass











Environmental Values
Direct Pressures
Indirect Pressures
Aquatic Environment
Fresh water
Water quality
Melting water
Biodiversity
Lakes

Logistics & Infrastructure
Tourism
Science
Global Changes
Natural events
    1. Sewage
    2. Solid waste
    3. Marine pollution
    4. Oil
    5. Ballast water
    6. Fouling
    7. Impact of ice on benthic communities
    8. Waste disposal
    9. Introduction of non-native species
    10. Phytoplancton growth
    11. Cumulative impact from sampling
    12. Change in the community structure
    13. Fluctuation on biota population
    14. Ozone hole - UV

Sea water
Rocky substrata
Shallow water zone (≤ 100m)
Water quality
Biodiversity
Low tolerant fauna and flora
Endemic Fauna and Flora
Algae banks
Breeding areas
Phytal
Geotermal environment


Scientific Values
Scientific knowledge
Natural laboratory
Long-term research

    1. Scientific production(articles, theses, books)
    2. Human resources 
    3. (number of doctors or MSc)

Values
Indicators
Educational Values
Ethic
Outreach
Respect for the environment and to life

    1. Divulgation material
    2. School books
    3. Websites
    4. Training
    5. Documentaries
    6. Interviews
    7. Films
Historic Values
Historic Sites and Monuments
Special Geological formations and fossils 

    1. Presence of Graphite
    2. Conservation state
    3. Number of fossils
Aesthetic Values
Physionomy of the environment
Silence
Perception of beauty and untouchable
    4. Footprint
    5. Level of noise
    6. Glacier retreat
    7. Reduction of vegetation coverage 
Annex 2
List of Environmental Impact Indicators


INDICATORS
PARAMETERS

OPERATIONAL
STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
“Footprint”
Spatial coverage of buildings and associated impact including roads, pipes etc.: number and location of field expeditions

Air quality
Particulates, SO2,  CO, CO2, NOx, CH4, O3, heavy metal, black carbon, atmospheric,  dispersion of pollutants
Source apportionment : natural, antropogenics (Local and regional).
Soil quality
Erosion (e.g. footpaths), metals, hydrocarbons (TPH, PAH)

Fresh water quality
TSS, DO, BOD, COD, pH, conductivity, SS
Changes in species composition of the lakes
Metals (Pb, Al, Cu, Hg, Cd)
Sea water quality
TSS, DO, BOD, COD, pH, conductivity, SS
Salinity, N/P, Silicate, phytoplankton, chlorophyll a, partial pressure, CO2, UV radiation, biomarkers, meroplankton larvae, krill population
Snow and ice quality
Particulates, Metals, hydrocarbons (TPH)

- metals (Pb, Al, Cu, Hg, Cd)
Sediment quality
Clostridium perfringens, hydrocarbons, faecal sterols, POPs, detergents, metals, organic matter, number of sampling taken, trophic web 

Change in the structure of the bacterial community  
Presence of catabolic genes
Change in the fauna and flora diversity (micro, meio, macro e megafauna)
Change in the population of bioindicator species (Polychaeta, Bivalvia e Kelps)

Vegetation quality
Spatial extent, metals
Vegetation diversity
Wildlife health
Population size, distribution, breeding success  

Fuel handling
Amount consumed, number of spills, size and location of spills
Occurrence of leaking 
Aircraft/vehicle operations
Distance travelled, number of landings, fuel consumed

Solid and liquid waste
Waste types/volume/weight

Waste water
TSS, DO, BOD, COD, pH, conductivity, volume, faecal coliforms
Nutrients (N/P), hydrocarbons, faecal sterols, clostridium
Noise
Levels of noise

Station population
Number of Fixed and fluctuant population at the station

Cumulative impact
Number of samples taken, equipment used

Field activities
Number of persons day in field, location of field camp

Introduced organisms
Species distribution, population size

EIA/Permit compliance
Number of breaches recorded



BOD: Biological Oxygen Demand, COD: Chemical Oxygen Demand, DO: Dissolved Oxygen, SS: Suspended Solids, TSS: Total Suspended Solids, TPH: Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons, POPs: Persistent Organic Pollutants

Annex 3
Sampling periodicity of some of the selected environmental impact indicators (preliminary)

INDICATORS
Sampling frequency (periodicity)
Terrestrial environment

Levels of noise 
annual
Quantity of solid waste (by type)
annual
Fix and fluctuant populations
annual
Waste water Volume 
annual
Physical-chemistry parameters of sewage 
annual
Microbiological indicators of sewage pollution in soils
annual
Heavy metals in the surrounding areas of metallic surface
Annual
Hydrocarbons in soil
biannual
Spatial extent of vegetation
quinquenal
Bird population (variation)
annual
presence of birds out of the niche
annual
Bird distribution 
biannual/quinquenal
Aquatic environment

Physical-chemistry parameters of fresh water
Annual
Physical-chemistry parameters of sea water
annual
Particulates in snow and ice
annual
Hydrocarbons in snow and ice
Biannual
Metals in snow and ice
Biannual
INDICATORS
Sampling frequency (periodicity)
Microbial indicators of  faecal pollution in seawater and  sediment
Annual/biannual
Chemical indicators of sewage pollution in sediment
Biannual
Heavy metals in sediment
Biannual
Number of sampling taking
annual
Atmospheric environment

Gases (SO2, NOx, O3)
Annual
Total particulate (TSP, Coarse PM, Fine PM) 
Annual
Black carbon
Annual
Heavy metals
Annual
Atmospheric dispersion of pollutants 
annual

Physical-chemistry parameters: DO, BOD, COD, pH, conductivity, total suspended solids

Annex 4
Broad categories of environmental monitoring proposed  by WP 16 - Environmental Monitoring and Reporting. Report of the Intersessional Contact Group) - at CEP IX

 “Operational monitoring”: a local approach dealing with specific activities and focussed on testing predictions developed through the EIA requirements. The question to be answered by this type of monitoring is: Are the potential impacts identified through the EIA process actually occurring and to what extent? ‘Operational monitoring’ would be relevant to local environmental management including operational managers responsible for the site and environmental managers responsible for EIA and approvals.

“State of the environment monitoring”: a broader approach with the purpose to identify and report on regional or continent-wide environmental changes, irrespective of the cause, as intended by the SAER system. This type of monitoring may lead to investigation of the causes and possibly to responses to those changes. The question to be answered by this type of monitoring is: Are identified environmental values changing? For example, such environmental change may be the result of multiple activities in Antarctica over time (i.e. cumulative impacts), or a combination of external and internal pressures (i.e. climate change plus local activities). This approach would require knowledge of environmental values that occur across the range of specific sites (i.e. regional or continent-wide). ‘State of the environment monitoring’ would be relevant to a more general audience of Antarctic environmental managers, through the CEP and the ATCM.



