





Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS): Report of the VIth Delegates Meeting, 2007




Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS): Report of the VIth Delegates Meeting, 2007
The VIth Delegates Meeting of the Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS: http://www.afops.org/) was held at the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR) in Tokyo on the 15th and 16th of February, 2007. Nearly 30 members from China, India, Japan, Korea and Malaysia were present to exchange information on polar sciences and to discuss collaborations between Asian countries. The AFoPS was established in May 2004, when the three Director-generals of the polar research institutes of China, Japan and Korea gathered in Shanghai. Dr. Kim Yeadong, the Director-general of the Korean Polar Research Institute (KOPRI) chaired the AFoPS until last year, when the position was handed over to Dr. Yoshiyuki Fujii, the Director-general of the NIPR. India and Malaysia joined the AFoPS and delegates from the five countries gathered for the first time at the VIth Delegates Meeting this year. This report of the meeting was submitted by Japan as chair country for the AFoPS.
1. Exchange of Information on Polar Sciences
A report of the AFoPS-Vth Delegates Meeting held in Shanghai in April 2006 was presented by the Korean delegates. Reports were also presented on the first workshop of the Glaciology Working Group, and a meeting of the Engineering & Logistics Working Group of the AFoPS, which were held at KOPRI in Incheon, September 2006 to share expertise in deep ice coring. 

National presentations followed. China introduced the IPY 2007-2008 related programs PANDA (the Prydz Bay, Amery Ice Shelf and Dome A observatories) and ARCTIML (Arctic Change and its Tele-Impact on Mid-Latitude). Korea presented “Korean research activities in polar regions”, introducing activities at the Antarctic King Sejong Station and the Arctic Dasan Station. A meteorite expedition in the Patriot Hills area, plans for building a new Korean icebreaker and outreach activities were also briefly introduced. Malaysia presented “a report on Malaysian Antarctic programs” that introduced the development of Antarctic programs, current scientific activities and future programs relating to IPY 2007-2008. Future possible collaborations between Malaysia and other AFoPS countries in Arctic research were discussed. India presented “Indian Antarctic programme - an overview” that introduced current scientific activities and future programs relating to IPY 2007-2008. A future plan to build a third Antarctic Station near the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, was also presented. Japan introduced organization and highlights of recent Japanese Antarctic Research Expeditions (JARE), as well as Japanese programs in Arctic research. Possibilities for JARE to provide opportunities for AFoPS member scientists to visit Syowa Station, especially after the launch of the new Japanese icebreaker, were discussed.

2. Scientific Exchange and Collaborations within the AFoPS
2.1. Scientific Exchange
Member countries reported on scientific exchange programs during last year’s Antarctic research expeditions, carried out at Dome Fuji and Dome A for deep ice coring and glacial traverses; at King Sejon Station for penguin biology, and at Zhongshan Station for upper atmospheric physics observations (Figure 1). 
An annual workshop on Antarctic medical research and medicine, held at the NIPR in Tokyo on August 26th, 2006 was reported. Four medical doctors who wintered over in 2005-2006 at King Sejon, Syowa and Zhongshan stations participated in the workshop and shared their experiences with participants on medical issues in the Antarctic, including risk management of accidents and disease, mountain sickness and medical evacuation. Other topics included psychological research programs for wintering personnel begun in 2004, environmental comparisons of wintering personnel to space pilots and comparison of medical facilities among Antarctic stations.
2.2. Collaborations within the AFoPS
Special and annual scientific meetings to be held in the near future were announced by member countries, including the 14th Seoul International Symposium on Polar Sciences (focused on Physical Sciences and Geosciences) to be held in Incheon, Korea, on May 15-17, 2007. A collaborative scientific proposal by China, Japan and Korea to funding agencies in each country, was introduced by a Japanese delegate for establishing a cooperative network for research into polar climate change. This proposal stemmed from the AFoPS. 
An announcement for an AFoPS invitation fellowship program, to invite young scientists from AFoPS countries to study at the NIPR, Tokyo was made by Dr. Fujii. Delegates from other countries praised this initiative and one representative expressed an intention to create a similar program to encourage exchanges of young scientists between AFoPS countries.


Appendix. 

Participant list for the VIth Asian Forum for Polar Sciences (AFoPS) Delegates Meeting, held at the National Institute of Polar Research, Tokyo on February 15th and 16th, 2007. National representatives in bold letters.

CHINA
ZANG, Zhanhai (Representative: Director General, PRIC)
LIU, Kefeng (PRIC), SUN, Bo (PRIC), WANG, Yong (CAAA), YANG, Huigen (Deputy Director, PRIC)

INDIA
SAXENA, Ajai (Ministry of Earth Science), KHARE, Neloy (NCAOR)

KOREA
KIM, Yeadong (Representative: Director General, KOPRI)
HONG, Sung Min (KOPRI), JIN, Dong Min (KOPRI)

MALAYSIA
SAMAH, Azizan Abu (Representative: Director General, MARP)
ALIAS, Siti Aishah (MARP), HASSAN, Talha Alhady (MARP)

JAPAN
FUJII, Yoshiyuki (AFoPS Chair/ Representative: Director General, NIPR), 
FUKUCHI, Mitsuo (Deputy Director, NIPR), HOKADA, Keiko (NIPR), ISHIZAWA, Kenji (NIPR), KADOKURA, Akira (NIPR), KANDA, Hiroshi (NIPR), MOTOYOSHI, Yoichi (Deputy Director, NIPR), NOGI, Yoshifumi (NIPR), SATO, Natsuo (Deputy Director, NIPR), SHIRAISHI, Kazuyuki (NIPR), TAKAHASHI, Akinori (NIPR), TOYODA, Motokazu (NIPR), WATANABE, Kentaro (AFoPS Secretary: NIPR), YAMANOUCHI, Takashi (NIPR), 

CAAA: Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration
KOPRI: Korea Polar Research Institute
MARP: Malaysian Antarctic Research Program
NCAOR: National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
NIPR: National Institute of Polar Research
PRIC: Polar Research Institute of China


