





Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Construction and Operation of Halley VI Research Station, and the Demolition and Removal of Halley V Research Station, Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica




Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Construction and Operation of Halley VI Research Station, and the Demolition and Removal of Halley V Research Station, Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom


1) Introduction
The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) is planning to build a new scientific research station to replace its current Halley V Station, on the Brunt Ice Shelf, Caird Coast, Antarctica. A draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the proposed construction and operation of Halley VI was prepared by the BAS, approved and endorsed by the UK Government, and presented to the CEP at ATCM XXVIII in Stockholm, 2005 (see Working Paper ATCM XXVIII /WP 19 and Information Paper ATCM XXVIII/IP66).
The Committee concluded that the draft CEE conformed to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex 1 to the Environmental Protocol, that it was well structured and comprehensive and provided an appropriate assessment of the impacts of the proposed project.
At ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh, 2006), the UK presented a progress report to the CEP about the planned construction of Halley VI (ATCM XXIX IP/018). 
2) Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
The Final CEE was prepared at the end of 2006. It addressed the useful comments received on the Draft CEE from the United States, New Zealand, Japan, Germany and the CEP. Detailed technical specifications of the final design by Faber Maunsell and Hugh Broughton Architects were included in the CEE. The new station will be built at Halley V between 2007/08 to 2008/09 and towed to its proposed location, 12 km inland, during 2009. The CEE also includes an outline of the planned demolition and clean up of Halley V, based on the results of a pre-demolition audit undertaken during the 2006/07 austral summer. 
Due to the novel approach taken with the draft CEE (which included a design competition, the outcome of which was not known when it was released) the UK offered to make the Final CEE available to the members of the CEP for further comment via the BAS website. The draft Final CEE was released on 21st December 2006. Useful comments were received from Germany and Australia, and incorporated into the final CEE. 
The Final CEE is available at www.antarctica.ac.uk/halleyvi/cee.html, and the published version will be distributed at ATCM XXX. It has been endorsed by the UK Government, and agreement has been given to proceed with the construction of the new station to support the world class and globally important science undertaken there.
3) Summary
The UK remains committed to providing a world-class, safe and environmentally friendly scientific research station on the Brunt Ice Shelf. The Final CEE has been endorsed by the UK Government, and agreement has been given to proceed with the construction of the new station to support the globally important science undertaken there. The UK is grateful for the participation of the members of CEP whilst preparing the Final CEE. 

