





Initial Environmental Evaluation. Construction and Operation of Nansen Ice Runway (Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica)




Construction and Operation of Nansen Ice Runway (Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica)
IEE undertaken between April 1 2006 and March 31 2007 by Consortium for the Implementation of the National Programme in Antarctica Research.  (Consorzio PNRA S.c.r.l.)
Nansen Runway site   74° 31.5’S - 163° 28.0’ E and 74° 30.0’ S - 163° 27.0’ E
This initial environmental evaluation (IEE) has been carried out by the PNRA Consortium Scrl for a proposed construction of runway on blue ice.
The activity of preparation and construction of a runway on ice becomes necessary in order to allow the landing of heavy aircraft when the fast ice that normally covers Gerlache Inlet, in front of Mario Zucchelli Station (MZS),  is not present or it does not allow an suitable safety margin because the thickness and ice-temperature. 
The purpose of establishing and operating a runway near Mario Zucchelli Station is consequently to provide better and safer transport service for Italian Antarctic Programme and in case of need as point of reference for other national operators. 
The operational areas of the Nansen Airport will be as here described:
-	the Hercules runway
-	the parking area
-	the shelters,
-	the Twin Otter runway
- 	the movement goods area near the helipad
-	the head of the main runway
Besides are previewed two ways of access at the runway from MZS respectively through Gondwana and Browing Pass and Northern Foothills.

The evaluation of the impacts associated with the establishment of the Nansen Runway and the consequent ways of access have been taken into account.
The process used in assessing the activities has followed the steps defined in the “ Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assssment in Antarctica”. 

On the basis of the results obtained from the present report and in particular from the impact assessment, it can be concluded that the environmental impact of the activities here described for the construction of an runway for Heavy Aircraft (Hercules) and its ways of access, in the area of Nansen Ice Sheet, Terra Nova Bay including Northern Foothills and Gondwana area , will be no more than minor or transitory. 


