





Annual Report Pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual report pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
1. Notification pursuant to Article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
1.1. The legislation
Ukraine produced the documents According to Article 13 (3) of the Protocol:
    a) the Ukraine Law of “On ratification by Ukraine the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” (22.02.2001, № 2284-III);
    b) the decrees of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine on "Maintenance of the Ukraine international obligations in connection with acceding of the Ukraine to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” and “The Procedure of the permission issue on physical and juridical Ukraine personnel activity in Antarctic”;
According to these documents, the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine is responsible state organization for the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty discharging. The Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine issues the permissions on physical and juridical Ukraine personnel activity in the Antarctic in accordance with decision of impact assessment on the Antarctic environment. These documents contain information about obligatory conditions for the issue permission for the planned activity, the consideration terms, and the control for the activity and using sanctions;
The Commission for the permission issue for physical and juridical Ukraine personnel activity in the Antarctic region was created (04.03.2004, № 176). The Commission responsibilities are to review by the requested Antarctic activity and to resume for the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine about character and level of possible environmental impact.
    a) Nowadays the Ukraine according to the Protocol is implementing the Annex VI rules on legislative and practical level in Ukrainian law. 
    b) The project of the Law of the Ukraine “On Antarctic Activity” was passed by the Ukrainian Parliament (Verkhovna Rada) in the Second Reading and assigned to further revision. The Law is defined the general principles of Antarctic activity under Ukrainian jurisdiction to guarantee the scientific, environmental, domestic and normative activity according the Treaty (Article IX).
1.2. Contingency plans in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol
The contingency plans of activity in the emergency situations, which were recommended by Article 15 of the Protocol, are prepared. Activity of personnel in emergency situations at the Ukrainian Antarctic Station Vernadsky is regulated by the documents: Instructions for the station personnel operation under principles of fuel transfer from ships and acting in the case of its leakage, Instructions for the personnel operation in fire emergency. 
2. Annex I of the Protocol
In accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty the activity of Ukraine in Antarctica is subject to rigorous environmental impact assessment procedures.




List of Permits for the proposed science and others activity of the physical or juridical Ukrainian person in Antarctic Treaty Area, issued by Ukraine in 2006 (April 01, 2006 – March 31, 2007)

No
Permit, period
Permit holder
Event title, area activity
Specific permitted activities
1
AP № 019-06;
01.10.2006-
01.03.2007
Mr. Leonid Mikula (Leader of expedition)
The private expedition to the South Pole 

In the Weddell Sea coast area (Brunt Ice Shelf and Luitpold Coast), getting to the plateau up to 80º S and 15º W, route up to the South Pole along the meridian of 15º W.
This proposed activity was not realized because of organizational reasons
2
AP № 020-06; 20.12.2006- 20.01.2007
the State Enterprise “O.K. Antonov Joint Stock Transport Company”
The transportation of the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) by the airplane AN-22

The flight track: Ushuaia (Argentina) – Patriot Hills Ski Landing Airfield (80º18' S, 81º20' W) – Ushuaia.

This proposed activity was not realized because of organizational reasons
3
AP № 021-07; 27.02.2007- 31.03.2008
Mr. Tymofyeyev Vitaliy
to carry out Antarctic biotopes sampling

Argentina Islands Archipelago (Winter Is, Galindez Is, Skua Is); Petermann Island, Yalour Islands, Berthelot Islands, Graham Coast (Antarctic Peninsula)
Samples of soil, samples of lichens, samples of mosses, samples of herbage, samples of phytoplankton, samples of zooplankton etc.
4
AP № 022-07; 27.02.2007- 31.03.2008
Mr. Trokhymets Vladlen



3. Annex III of the Protocol
The waste management at Ukrainian Antarctic Station is provided in compliance with Annex III (9). The detailed waste management plans are developing. In compliance with Annex III (8) the former activity database of the Ukrainian Antarctic Expeditions are preparation.
4. Annex V of the Protocol
Under the terms of the Exchange MoU, Ukraine is responsible for managing Historic Site and Monument No. 62, Base F (Wordie House), located on Winter Is., Argentine Islands (65º15’S, 64º16’W). It is an example of an early British scientific base. Party undertaking management: UK and Ukraine. BAS and NASC should develop jointly a Management Plan, including visitor guidelines, for HSM No. 62, as required by the MoU.

