





Contingency Planning and Emergency Response




Contingency Planning and Emergency Response
Introduction
8. Safety is an integral part of any human activity and a constant focus and priority for operators, in any region of the globe. It always has been and will remain an important focus for National Antarctic Programs and for COMNAP.
9. This has always been endorsed and supported by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) ever since the very first meeting in 1961 which issued Recommendations I-7 (exchange of information on logistics problems) and I-10 (principle of emergency assistance).
10. Emergency Response and Contingency Planning are regular topics on the agenda of the ATCMs and of the meetings of the Antarctic Treaty Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). In 2006 ATCM XXIX and CEP IX included a number of questions and discussions on that topic, in particular around Working Paper ATCM XIX – WP017 on Emergency Response and Contingency Planning. 
11. This Information Paper is submitted to provide an up-to-date overview on Contingency Planning and Emergency Response in the Antarctic. 
Review of Past Events
12. At the very first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM I, Canberra, 1961) Antarctic Treaty Parties did through Recommendation I-7 recommend to their Governments that they should undertake to exchange information on logistics problems. This is happening, in particular through the National Antarctic Programs sharing information about their problems and lessons learned within COMNAP.  
13. Under the current information exchange requirements set out in Resolution 6 (2001) Antarctic Treaty Parties are required to provide
    • as part of their annual report: Notice of Activities Undertaken in Case of Emergencies (section 2.6.2) - including description of emergency, location (latitude and longitude) and action undertaken; and
    • as part of their permanent information: an Inventory of Past Activities (section 3.5) - including crashed aircraft and any other equipment or facilities remaining.
14. This information is available in a variety of formats.
15. The ATCM and COMNAP are currently developing their respective electronic information exchange systems in a coordinated and complementary way and are working on improved, appropriate procedures to gather, exchange and store a range of operational information, including information on past emergencies and activities. This will facilitate further review of past events.
16. The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Madrid Protocol), Article 15 requires Antarctic Treaty Parties to establish procedures for immediate notification of, and co-operative response to, environmental emergencies.  COMNAP has developed an Environmental Incident Reporting System (EIRS) and encourages reporting. There has been good progress, and improvements are being introduced to enhance access.  All operators have reported they have internal organisational systems in place and most have national systems in place. 
17. COMNAP is currently developing a more accessible and comprehensive Accident, Incident and Near Miss Reporting (AINMR) System that will bring together all reports, whether or not they involve an environmental emergency. It will have the capacity to interface with the Antarctic Treaty's electronic information exchange system to assist with fulfilling reporting requirements without duplication of data.  
18. Since its establishment COMNAP has promoted safety as an important issue and each COMNAP group discusses safety issues relevant to its domain of competence. Safety is part of everything National Programs do and has always been a topic for all COMNAP groups, in particular for its Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP), Medical Officers Network (MEDINET), Ship Operations and Air Operations working groups (SHIPOPS and AIROPS) and Training Officers Network (TRAINET). 
19. An ad-hoc COMNAP Emergency Response and Contingency Planning Working Group (EMRAC) was formed in the 1990s to produce guidelines for response to fuel spills, contingency planning and environmental monitoring. EMRAC completed all its tasks successfully and was disbanded. It produced COMNAP's “Framework and Guidelines for Emergency Response and Contingency Planning in Antarctica”, which were endorsed by COMNAP in July 2003 and presented to the ATCM in 2004 in Information Paper XXVII ATCM IP 012. 
20. In July 2006, COMNAP created a new Safety working group to complement the existing successful approach to safety issues and in particular, to reinforce the capacity to address cross-group safety issues. It was established with the following terms of reference:
    • share and review safety, contingency planning and emergency policies and practices used in Antarctica;
    • improve and monitor the COMNAP Accident, Incident and Near Miss Reporting (AINMR) system;
    • work with SHIPOPS, AIROPS, TRAINET and other COMNAP groups on common safety issues; and
    • consider safety initiatives that would benefit National Programs.
Inventory of Accident Sites and Potential Accident Events
21. Each operational activity brings the risk of incident; therefore, potential accident/incident sites are located wherever operations occur.  Through the advance exchange of information by national operators, there is good awareness of planned operational activity. All national operators undertake risk assessments and include contingency planning in their preparations and are encouraged to follow established COMNAP guidelines.  
22. There have been many examples in recent times of the effectiveness of the risk management procedures set in place by National Programs.  These include responses to:
    • cases of severe trauma leading to complex emergency medical treatment and evacuation involving the assistance of several national operators; 
    • illness requiring special consultations, general surgery and/or the delivery of special medication, medical equipment/supplies to the incident site;
    • fires at facilities in Antarctica or onboard ships at sea; 
    • Search and Rescue scenarios including general aircraft and vehicle accidents; and
    • many lesser incidents that are managed daily on site using local resources. 
23. Each of these incidents has been managed well through use of response procedures set in place following risk management practices of the sort discussed at COMNAP meetings and developed within the COMNAP working group framework.  The working relationships and the improved understanding operators share through their COMNAP interactions enhance the ability to plan operations, manage risk and respond to emergencies effectively.
Establishment of a Permanent, Reliable Alert and Alarm Procedure
24. A well established, permanent and reliable alert and alarm procedure already exists worldwide under a range of international agreements, in particular through the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). Under these agreements the Antarctic region is covered by the five Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) of South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Chile and Argentina, each with responsibility over a well defined sector.
25. At the inaugural meeting of the Safety Working Group of COMNAP in July 2006, it was agreed to conduct a survey to provide an update on national approaches to contingency planning and emergency response.  The aim of the survey was to assist with the preparation of this paper on behalf of COMNAP. Information was received from a number of National Programs deemed representative, including from all five nations operating a RCC with responsibility for part of the Antarctic region. 
26. The survey was not intended to be comprehensive, but to provide an indication of the systems or processes already in place in the Antarctic and used by National Antarctic Programs.  From the results of the survey, it is clear that every national operator has contingency and emergency response plans in place and maintains well established cooperative working links with other national operators and their emergency response systems.  The exceptional service of the Argentine and Chilean Navies in providing joint patrols of the Antarctic Peninsula region is unique and highly valued.  
27. Given the limited availability of emergency response assets in the Antarctic, these international links are important.  There are limits to the ability of the standard Search and Rescue (SAR) procedures to respond to Antarctic incidents.  The interactions between national Rescue Coordination Centres and National Antarctic Programs during a recent emergency at sea in a vessel from a third party were simple and easily initiated using well established lines of communication.
28. National operators follow their normal national reporting and alert procedures consistent with the international agreements and channels of communication in place. In addition to this, COMNAP and many National Antarctic Programs have for many years maintained informal links with the five RCCs covering the Antarctic to provide them with a number of additional layers of information and channels of communication. IAATO also maintains similar links.
29. This places the established RCCs in the best possible position to effectively and efficiently fulfil their mission and where appropriate to work with National Programs and their local representatives to coordinate Search and Rescue (SAR) in the Antarctic region.
Define Emergency Plans
30. Under the current information exchange requirements set out in Resolution 6 (2001), Antarctic Treaty Parties are required to provide, as part of their Permanent Information, the details of their contingency plans. This complies with the Madrid Protocol, Article 17, which requires each Party to report annually on its contingency plans established under Article 15. Article 15 requires Parties to establish contingency plans for response to incidents with potential adverse effects on the Antarctic environment or dependent and associated ecosystems.
31. Again, the coordinated development by the ATCM and COMNAP of their respective electronic information exchange systems and associated improvements in the collection, exchange and storage of information will facilitate access to the information on contingency plans.
32. Over the years, COMNAP has also developed a number of guidelines for contingency planning.
33. It is clear from the recent survey that national operators in Antarctica have emergency/contingency plans and well practised procedures in place for emergency response, and search and rescue.  
34. All of these plans are designed to meet the needs of the National Programs.  The National Programs have regularly been called upon to respond to incidents that occur outside their planned operations and risk management processes. On these occasions they do the best possible with available resources.  It should be noted that these are sufficient for their intended purpose and do not provide for wider and more general response to SAR/emergencies that occur outside their framework.   The operators of tourist vessels who are members of the International Association of Antarctic Tourism Operators (IAATO) are in a similar position.
35. A significant exception is the Joint Antarctic Naval Patrol (Patrulla Antártica Naval Combinada) of the Argentine and Chilean Navies.  The Joint Patrol operates every summer since 1998 in the Antarctic Peninsula region, where most of the traffic occurs, and provides dedicated rescue assets over a sea area of some five hundred thousand square kilometers.  
Conclusion
36. In conclusion, the recent survey conducted by the COMNAP Safety Working Group has confirmed that at the international level, there are RCCs, surveillance and ocean patrols operating in the Antarctic region. In addition individual nations have legislation and regulation that brings structure and coordination of national resources. There are well established and proven procedures for responding to incidents and emergencies that occur within the planned operations of National Antarctic Programs; this includes projects and activities conducted jointly with other Programs. However, in most instances there is no dedicated capacity within a National Program to respond to external incidents involving other operators in Antarctica.  
37. Through good planning, sound use of risk management processes, effective contingency planning aligned with the strong relationships and cooperative intent of COMNAP, individual members of the COMNAP community have proven their ability to respond effectively to emergency events and search and rescue incidents.

