





Initial Environmental Evaluation. Replacement of Fuel tanks at the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station 




Initial Environmental Evaluation. Replacement of Fuel tanks at the Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station 

Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Brazil


    1. INTRODUCTION

The historic assessment of accidents in operations involving fuel in the area of the Antarctic Treaty encouraged the Council of Managers of National Antarctic program (COMNAP) to establish procedures regarding its transportation, transfer and operation1 mainly with a view to minimize risks of oil spills and generation of impact on the local environment.
Comandante Ferraz Station is located on the eastern coast of Keller Peninsula, in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetlands Archipelago, North of the Antarctic Peninsula (fig. 1). A region of undeniable environmental, historic, scientific and aesthetic significance, King George Island is the most inhabited and most frequently visited area of Antarctica.  Admiralty Bay was formally adopted as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA Nº 1) (fig. 2) by ATCM XXIX in 2006 (Measure 2). The Management Plan for the ASMA was jointly prepared by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and USA.
There is intense research and logistics activity at Admiralty Bay ASMA which is also often visited by tourists, since access to this region of Antarctica is not difficult. Five countries have scientific facilities in this area: Brazil, Poland, Peru, Ecuador and the United States. The facilities comprise two year-round stations:  Comandante Ferraz Station (Brazil) and Henryk Arctowski Station (Poland); two summer stations: Machu Picchu Station (Peru) and Copacabana Field Station (U.S.A.), and one Ecuadorian shelter, used sporadically. 
Comandante Ferraz station was established in 1984 as a base for scientific research and associated logistic operations conducted by the Brazilian Antarctic Programme. It started year-round operations in 1986. The station consists of 64 containers including biological, chemical, meteorological and geophysical laboratories; dormitories with a capacity of 46 berths; storage facilities; a garage for land vehicles, diesel generators etc. Fuel is stored in 17 large double-walled steel tanks with a total capacity of 339.930 liters of diesel, and in a small tank (3,000 L) for gas. The station is equipped with one helicopter pad.




Figure 1 – Above left, location of King George Island in Antarctica; below left, King George Island, and right, location of EACF on Keller Peninsula. Image sources: www.ufrgs.br/antartica/  and Antarctic Digital Database v. 3 (BAS, 2000) in Arigony (2002) et al.

Figure 2 – Delimitation of ASMA. Image sources: www.ufrgs.br/antartica. Accessed on 03/23/2007.

Since 2003, the optimization of the facilities that make up Ferraz has been a priority for the logistics component of the Brazilian Antarctic Program (PROANTAR), seeking greater efficiency of the installed systems and of the procedures of use and maintenance of buildings and equipment. The Master Plan and the Ferraz Revitalization Plan are the main planning instruments among effective actions aiming at optimization. Their diagnosis and action strategy indicate the need to improve the existing fuel storage system.
This document seeks to explain aspects relating to the Environmental Impact Assessment of the installation of new fuel tanks at Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station, as well as measures taken to reduce anticipated impacts.

    2. HISTORY
Table 1 presents a chronological synthesis of the main interventions made on the fuel storage system at Ferraz.

YEAR
ACTIVITY
1983/1984
Installation and use of rubber lined tanks “SANSUI – six (6) units, with a capacity of 2.250 L  and 200 L. drums (fig. 4).
1984/1985
Installation of three (3) steel tanks with a capacity of 15.500 L each.
1985/1989
Ferraz storage capacity is gradually increased through the addition of new tanks, always installed during the Antarctic summer (fig. 5).
1989/1990
In this period the station receives 11 tanks of 22.300 L e 6 tanks of 15.500 L, as well as a 3000 L gasoline tank.
1992/1993
Start of the process of replacement of the existing tanks by double-walled tanks, of the same overall storage capacity.
2001/2002
Preliminary diagnosis of the need for an in-depth treatment  or  replacement of the existing tanks (fig. 6)
2006/2007
Shipment of new fuel storage tanks (diesel and gasoline), made of stainless steel by AMRJ and replacement of the gasoline tank for procedure tests.
Table 1 – Synthetic table of main events related to the fuel storage system at Ferraz.





Figure 4 – Opening of Ferraz  in 1984, still lacking permanent tanks. Photo: Edson Nascimento Martins.
Figure 5 – Ferraz  in 1987, after the installation of larger capacity tanks .
Figure 6 – Ferraz  in 2002, after superficial treatment of external walls and structure of the tanks.

    3. FEATURES OF THE EXISTING STORAGE SYSTEM
The topography of the region where Ferraz existing tanks are currently installed is flat in its Western part (close to the beach) and rises in gradual slopes toward the east (in the vicinity of Northern Lake).
The fuel storage system of Ferraz is composed of 17 tanks with a total capacity of 339.930 lites of diesel oil. Of those, 10 tanks have a capacity of 21.909 liters;3 tanks of 16.995 liters and 3 tanks of 15.982 liters. They are set in 3 columns, with 4 tanks in the first one, 5 in the second and 8 in the third columns (fig. 7).
The building material used for the tanks, their bases, shoes, pipes and connections is common steel; only the supporting foundations are made of concrete. Generally, the tanks have a single cask within a steel container. 






Fig. 7 – In the foreground, the present configuration of the setting up of Ferraz fuel tanks.

Due to the environmental features of the place, such as meteorological conditions, physico-chemical composition of the atmosphere, among others – the metallic elements in general suffer constant corrosion, which is more intense in areas of snow accumulation, such as the lower parts of the structure of the tanks. In addition to the tanks being covered with snow and ice during a large part of the year, the short distance between the soil and the base of the modules causes great difficulty for the maintenance activities and renders inaccessible some of the elements of the structure. Thus, in the 2005/2006 summer, it was found out that despite the fact that the tanks were in good condition, the structure of their base is going through a serious process of deterioration, with marked corrosion and twists and inflection in specific parts, revealing the urgent need for replacement (fig. 8).
The tanks are replenished annually. The fuel is transported from Brazil to Martel Inlet on the Oceanographic Support Ship Ary Rongel. After casting anchor, the ship transfers the fuel to specialized transporting barges and later, with the help of an electric pump, the fuel is pumped to the tanks through flexible hoses. 


Figure 8 – Left, lower beams in accelerated corrosion process; right, an example of a twisted transversal beam.


    4. FEATURES OF THE NEW TANKS AND INSTALLATION PROCEDURES

While the existing tanks present good conditions for use, the risk of a collapse of the support structure called attention to the need for measures to prevent possible accidents that might cause leaks or personal security hazards. Thus, in 2006 the project for the replacement of the existing tanks was developed (Fig. 9).



Author of the Project: Ad-Tech and Consulpri
Storage capacity: 305.000 l of diesel and and 5.000 l of gasoline
Quantity: 10 tanks of 30.500 l of diesel each
Building materials: Double cask tanks (separation 50 mm), foundations and connections in stainless steel; concrete support structure.
Shape: cylindric
Dimensions:
Diesel tank:
diameter = 2250 mm
width = 6.594 mm
Gasoline tank:
diameter = 1.610 mm
width = 3.424 mm.
Figure 9 – Basic features of the new Ferraz fuel storage tanks.


In order to increase security for the new tanks, the layout for the setting up was done with the tanks arranged in two parallel rows, with 5 tanks each, with a pumping station between them, housed in two containers parallel to the rows of tanks. From the pumping station, the fuel is fed into two service tanks of 5.000 l each, located at the Ferraz engine station.
The tanks are transported from Brazil to Antarctica on Ary Rongel ship or freighter ship from Brazil to Punta Arenas in Chile, and then to Antarctica on Ary Rongel. After casting anchor at Martel Inlet, Ary Rongel transfers the tanks one by one to the barge, which will be pushed by the launch until it runs aground at the beach facing Ferraz. The tanks are designed to allow them to be dragged from the barge to the proximity of the place where they will be installed by means of skids and the use of Ferraz tractors. The tanks will be hoisted by a self-propelling crane, also belonging to the Station, with an estimated 3 hours of activity for each tank.
It should be mentioned that the tanks will be installed on the same place as the existing ones, in a gradual substitution process and that the place of installation was defined in the Environmental Zoning of Use as “Use Zone 1 – already impacted area and of intensive use”. There will be a small shifting of the soil for the leveling needed to the support of the shoes. The project also contemplates the possibility of inspection of the whole structure – including the lower part – and the improvement of consumption control and eventual leakage by means of the controlling instruments installed in the containers.
The basic diagram of installation follows the diagram shown on fig. 10. It is emphasized that every phase is followed by an evaluation process and adjustments (if needed) for the retro-feeding of the process.


Figure 1 – Basic diagram of the installation of the tanks.

The shoes will be partially buried in the ground in places previously defined and marked according to the location plan. Before the installation of the tanks, the skids will be withdrawn. The tanks will be hoisted and positioned on the shoes already in place, by the self-propelled crane. Once in place, the tanks will be cleaned internally with compressed air and then the pipes, complements and gaskets will be installed, followed by the adjustment of the screws. The working test is done through the operation of the system, to locate possible leaks and irregularities. After the period of testing, the fuel from the tanks closest to the pump station will be transferred to the station. All procedures will be executed in the presence of a professional knowledgeable in the aspects related to the safety of work and environment.
At installation, additional care shall be exercised to verify the existence of leaks in joints by means of airtightness tests, either pneumatic or hydrostatic, under visual inspection, and for this reason such activity shall be executed compulsorily in periods free of snow or ice.
At operation, containment trays will be installed under the joints near the tanks, with periodic and constant visual control to detect possible leaks. Maintenance activities will be done after drainage of the fuel, cleaning and de-gassing of the tanks, observing the norms of procedure, especially those relating to safety.
One of the aspects taken into consideration in assessing the feasibility of the operation – in which Brazil has developed specific studies since 2003 – is the evaluation of the impact on the landscape. The assessment methodology proposed by Penteado and Alvarez (2006) analyses the possible effect of an undertaking considering the specific features of the Antarctic landscape.
The simplified questionnaire suggested by Penteado and Alvarez was adopted, thus making possible a prior assessment of the impact of the replacement of the EACF tanks on the landscape (Table 2).
QUESTION
YES
NO
    1. Was there prior assessment of the environmental sensitivity of the site?
O

    2. Will the implementation of the project obstruct any significant visual element from the most relevant angle of vision?  

O
    3. Will the implementation of the project obstruct any significant cultural element?

O
    4. Will the implementation of the project destroy significant natural elements?

O
    5. Does the scale of the project interfere negatively on the landscape?
X

    6. Does the aesthetic quality of the project contribute to the composition of the natural landscape?

O
    7. Do effective use and/or logistic activities entail permanent interference in the landscape? 

O
    8. Do effective use and/or logistic activities entail transitory interference in the landscape?
X

    9. Can planning of actions reduce the anticipated impact?
O

Table 2 – Reference table with preliminary questionnaire on assessment of the impact on the landscape.
Items marked “X” indicate the need for adoption of measures to mitigate the identified impact. Thus, regarding question no. 5 dealing with scale, it should be pointed out that although the height of the tanks will be greater than that of the existing ones – on account of the space for maintenance between the ground and the bottom of the tanks – the fact that they are made of steel permits a more harmonious insertion in the landscape, if compared to the original tanks painted orange. Besides, the proposed aesthetic features of the new tanks and the smaller amount of pipes and cables will be qualifying elements for the final scenery.
With regard to question n°. 8, it is to be noted that the beach facing the tank area presents substrata and topographic homogeneity, broken by the transit caused by the movement of equipment and personnel, mainly related to logistic activities. To set up the new tanks, transit routes will be defined, with a view to reducing the probable depression of the soil, and limits will be established surrounding the area of greater activity.
Acoustic interference is characterized by transitory events of logistic activities in the installation and operation, basically generated by vehicles. A schedule will be established for noisy activities although there is no permanent animal presence in the area. 
There will be no alteration in the elements of vegetal cover, since the new tanks will be installed in sites already occupied by the existing ones. Special attention will be given to the surrounding moss fields, especially during transitory installation activities (fig. 12.)


Figure 12 – Existing structure in the center of the photo and on both sides the new tanks unloaded at Ferraz in February 2007.

    5. FINAL COMMENTS  
The initial environment evaluation points out that no additional significant impact will be resulted from the replacement of the fuel tanks. The area where the new tanks will be placed is already an impacted area and of intensive use, as it is the same place where the old tanks are. There is no vegetation in the area or permanent presence of fauna. All care will be taken with the transference of oil, avoiding leakage or spill. Procedures for monitoring efficiency both of the functionality of the installed system and the response of the building elements will be added to the process of installation of the new tanks. 




(The information on this paper was compiled by Dr Cristina Engel, Architect of the Brazilian Antarctic Programme) 
REFERENCES
ALVAREZ, C. E., B. CASAGRANDE, D. O. CRUZ, G. R. SOAREs. 2004. Estação Antártica Comandante Ferraz: um exemplo brasileiro de adequação ambiental. In Anais do claCS'04 ENTAC'04 I Conferencia Latino Americana de Construção Sustentável e 10a. Encontro Nacional de Tecnologias no Ambiente Construído São Paulo 2004 1-15 São Paulo: ANTAC
ALVAREZ, C. E., G. R. SOARES, B. CASAGRANDE, D. O. CRUZ. 2005. Conceitos e critérios adotados para o Plano Diretor da Estação Antártica Comandante Ferraz. In Documento de Información Reunión Anual de Administradores de Programas Antárticos Latinoamericanos. Lima 2005 1-22 Lima: Inanpe
ALVAREZ, C. E.; CRUZ, D. O. ; CASAGRANDE, B.; SOARES, G. R. 2005. Proposta de Zoneamento Ambiental de uso na área do entorno da Estação Antártica Comandante Ferraz. In: XV RAPAL - Reunion de Administradores de Programas Antárticos Latinoamericanos, 2004, Guayaquil. Anais da XV RAPAL, 2004. p. 1-8.
ARIGONY, J.; SIMÕES, J.  C.; BREMER, U. F.; DANI, N. 2002. Perspectives for environmental management of the Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica. Revista do Departamento de Geografia, n. 15, p. 91-99.
CONSELHO NACIONAL DO MEIO AMBIENTE. 2000 Resolution N°. 273 of 29  November 2000. Resolution . 8 ed. updated rev.  Brasília: 2000. Available at www.mma.gov.br, on  March 25  2007.
PENTEADO, H. M., ALVAREZ, C. E. de. 2006. Proposta simplificada de metodologia de avaliação de impacto paisagístico para novos empreendimentos a serem implementados em ambiente antártico In: XVII Reunión de Administradores de Programas Antárticos Latinoamericanos, 2006, Punta Arenas.   Annals of the XVII RAPAL. Punta Arenas: Chile, 2006. 1CD.
SCAR. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research. 2005.  Contend: BAS, SCAR, Protected Areas, Manual, Bibliography, Quick Start, Download, Feedback, What’s new. Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA). Available at  www.add.scar.org/protected-area/asma/asma.html#1. Acess on August 2 2005.
WEBER, R. R. et al. 2006. Rede 2: Gerenciamento Ambiental na Baia do Almirantado, Ilha Rei George, Antártica. . IOUSP. Technical Report.
PENTEADO, H. M.; ALVAREZ, C. E. de. 2006. Proposta simplificada de metodologia de avaliação de impacto paisagístico para novos empreendimentos a serem implementados em ambiente antártico In: XVII Reunión de Administradores de Programas Antárticos Latinoamericanos, 2006, Punta Arenas.  Annals of the xvii RAPAL. Punta Arenas: Chile, 2006. 1CD.

