





Tourism on Barrientos




Tourism on Barrientos
1. Background   
Barrientos Island (Aitcho Islands), located northeast of the Pedro Vicente Maldonado Station (PVMS), is a growing tourist destination.  While during the summer of 1999-2000 a peak of 3500 tourists was recorded, during the 2005-2006 season some 6351 visitors arrived and landed on the island, moving it from the twelfth to the ninth most visited site on the Antarctic Peninsula.  The island is small, and the majority of the visitors are concentrated in an area no larger than 2 hectares during a visit which lasts approximately 3 hours. The island is just 2 km by sea from PVMS.  The site is vulnerable to potential disturbances stemming from tourist activity, due to the presence of fauna at the landing sites and on the tour. Only ships with less than 50 passengers conduct tours at the western extreme of the island, where there are colonies of elephant seals and giant petrels (Macronectes sp.) at easily accessible sites.  IAATO (International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators) has statistics on landings for all the visitor sites on the Antarctic Peninsula, has elaborated visitor guides for many sites, among them Barrientos, and manages the behavior of passengers.  Nonetheless, we have seen and created a photographic archive of visible impacts which suggests that not all visitors follow the rules due to the lack of a definitive and controlling authority.  The short distance between Barrientos and PVMS, and the potential to conduct partial monitoring of tourist activities on the island with the use of a telescope makes PVMS an ideal location for long-term independent monitoring of impacts and changes on Barrientos Island. 
2. IAATO Site Guidelines 
Barrientos is one of the islands on the Antarctic Peninsula for which specific guidelines regarding tourist visits have been elaborated.  Among other points, the guidelines indicate that ships arriving to the island should not have a capacity of more than 200 passengers, and that there should not be more than 100 passengers ashore at any time.  As well, the primary landing area at the eastern end of the island by the north coast is identified, and areas on the island closed to tourism are established.  For visits to the western end of the island, it is recommended that these only be conducted with the use of a guide and a trail. 
A secondary landing area at the western end of the island is indicated, near the resting areas of several groups of elephant seals. There is specific concern about the colonies of giant petrels that nest on cliff tops on the central part of the island and along the northern cliff.  Another colony of petrels is found at the western extreme of the island. 
3. Observed Impacts of Tourism
Physical Impacts
Most of the eastern area of intense visitation does not have vegetation.  The soil is sandy with mixed grain size, typical of areas affected and created by glaciers.  The material is loose to slightly compact.  In many areas, the permanent trampling of animals is noticeable.  Specifically, superficial quagmires form in areas not covered by snow where colonies of chinstrap penguins are found.  Given that specific trails for tourist visits were not established, erosion problems due to excessive trampling at determined sites were not noted.  This is because visitors walk over a large area, and the effects of trampling are distributed over space and not concentrated in one area. Prints of boots are visible in many areas, but more than negatively affecting the area, they provide evidence of human presence
Biological Impacts 
Vegetation
The vegetation of the island, where it exists (mainly on the central part of the island), consists of mosses that cover important areas of the central part of the island and lichens.  These organisms survive prolonged periods of snow cover.  In the guidelines, these plants have been identified as vulnerable, and it is recommended that trampling be avoided as much as possible. The intensity of trampling required for the vegetation layer to disappear cannot be ascertained. Currently, with visitation a few months each year and an undetermined percentage of visitors arriving to the western part of the island, vegetation disturbance is notable. In addition, vegetation disturbance can also be seen in areas not identified as visitor areas in the IAATO site guidelines.   
In general, the impacts are relatively concentrated in specific areas and can be seen in clearly visible trails.  We do not consider them to be ecologically harmful for the island, but they are clear indicators of the heavy tourist use to which the island is exposed.   
Fauna
Apparently, one of the most stressful events for wildlife observed during our visit was the landing of a giant petrel in the middle of a colony of gentoo penguins on the southern beach of the eastern part of the island.  This caused the precipitous flight of at least one hundred penguins to more elevated lands. Giant petrels are known predators of juvenile penguins. The constant presence of skuas waiting to capture indefensible fledglings was also observed.  During the visiting season, the fledglings of the two penguin species were almost the size of their parents, which probably reduced their vulnerability.  However, exposure to predators, despite these being light disturbances in early stages, could be significant. 
At first glance, human presence has not caused changes in the behavior of the observed animals.  The penguins move with confidence and with little caution in the presence of visitors, keeping minimal distances, particularly in the case of gentoo penguins which are dispersed throughout the visitor area.  Chinstrap penguins, on the other hand, maintain closed, dense colonies, which during the time of our visit were not covered with snow and were muddy.  This acted as protection against the invasion of visitors.  As a result of this, chinstrap penguins demonstrated greater resistance to the approach of humans than did gentoo penguins.   The fledglings of the latter are curious and even approach tourists that remain still, something not done by adults.  This makes them very vulnerable, because if visitors do not respect the instructions of the guides, the birds can easily be touched.  
Giant petrels, on the other hand, become very nervous when approached by people, particularly those in small colonies found on the northern cliffs of the eastern zone where not many people go, while petrels on the western part of the island do not react if the distance of visitors is greater than 30 m. This situation may be due to the birds having become accustomed to the presence of humans nearby.   
Among the mammals, only the fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) demonstrate much nervousness when approached by visitors at a distance of 5 to 10 m.  In general, their behavior is similar to that of fur seals of the same genus on the Galapagos Islands. 
4. Tourism Activities on Barrientos during the Stay 
During the visit of the Antarctic Institute of Ecuador on Barrientos Island, we observed continuous visits by various ships (Table 1).  Before a period of bad meteorological conditions during which the visits announced by IAATO did not take place, there were several days when up to two ships were observed in one day.  In all cases, passenger capacity was not greater than 100.          

Table 1- Log of visits between 5 and 9 February 2007           
Date 
Hour
Name of ship   
Operator
Member of  IAATO
Approximate number of tourists ashore      
Visited areas   
Observation
5 Feb 
15:00
Lyubov  Orlova
Quark Expeditions
Yes
100
East
Eyewitness
7 Feb 
6:30
Akademik Shokalskiy
Quark Expeditions
Yes
30 
East and West
From PVMS  
7 Feb
13:30
Clipper Adventurer
Clipper Cruise Lines
Yes
90
East 
From PVMS
9 Feb 
10:00
Bark Europa
Bark Europa
Yes
48
East and West
From PVMS
5. General Observations of Tourist Behavior 
During our stay, we only witnessed a few visits by ships. We had the opportunity to speak with the guides of one of the ships that arrived, and with several guides of Antarctica that are also guides of the Galapagos Islands and reside in Ecuador.  These conversations were useful and complemented our observations on the development of and on the type of tourism management on Barrientos. 
There were two ships with a capacity of approximately 100 passengers.  In both cases, the visit was limited to the eastern part of the island.  In at least one case, the guides indicated that Barrientos Island was the first site for visitation on the cruise through Antarctica, and that it therefore represented a “training” site for passengers entering into direct contact with wildlife in the area for the first time.  For this reason, they did not the western part of the island.
The eastern part of the visiting area has a useful space not much larger than a hectare.  Visitation here is fundamentally different to that of the Galapagos: visitors are not guided in groups of limited numbers.  Guides position themselves in various places of the visitor area, observe the passengers, and move among the groups who walk freely with previous instructions on conduct.  The visitors moved among the penguin colonies alone, in pairs, or in groups.  Many stayed at just one site, observing for a prolonged period of time.  In addition, visitors sat down, and at no time did they try to touch or interfere with the animals.  This indicates previous orientation on code of conduct.
We did not find trash at the site, which led us to believe that waste collection practices or care taken at Galapagos are also used here.  
On two occasions, with ships carrying at least or ~50 passengers, the visitors moved after about half an hour towards the western part of the island.  We could observe these events from PVMS and infer visitor practices through our knowledge of the island.  In both cases, the passengers were divided into two groups of 20 to 25 people and spaced approximately a half hour apart.  In one case, all the passengers visited the western extreme of the island, and approached a colony of giant petrels to a distance of 30 m found on the extreme end of the island.  In another case, the passengers on the flat western part of the island were never visible from PVMS, indicating that they stayed at the initial part of the western end, near a pinnacle with fur seals and a colony of gentoo penguins.  
The walk towards the West through the central part of the island, where there are closed areas covered with moss, was primarily conducted on the low rocky area, and only after the visitors went up a clearly recognizable path.  According to information provided by the guides with whom we spoke, when larger groups move to the western and more vulnerable part of the island, the guides walk ahead and mark the footpath with flags.   These are collected at the end of the visit.  This suggests that groups are not guided in all cases, as in the cases that we could observe, but that the work of guides is sometimes limited to observing and supervising the behavior of tourists and the marking of footpaths.  
Interpretation is primarily carried out aboard the ships, while on land guides only respond to the questions of passengers or call attention to passengers if they see inappropriate conduct.  
6. Comparison with Galapagos
Only at a few sites on the Galapagos, and generally only at those already disturbed and with little wildlife, is free movement of passengers permitted.  Most of the sites with concentrations of birds or marine mammals have clearly marked routes, whose use is obligatory and supervised by guides that can/should take groups of a maximum of 16 people.  Interpretation, even with such small groups, becomes difficult in many cases when spaces for tourists to convene within the demarcated limits do not exist.  However, permanent control and a continuous process of interpretation exist.  In general, tourists have little freedom to stay at a site and are obliged to move, so as to not interfere with other groups behind them.  
On Barrientos, where it can be considered that a representative model of the type of tourism in Antarctica exists, passenger freedom is relatively greater within and around the colonies of wildlife there. Many passengers want to take photos, and perhaps this experience has shown that obligatory interpretation on site would not be effective.  For this reason, guides are stationed at key sites and control the movement of groups.  
With 600 passengers per year (during Summer), and with a maximum of 1 visitor ship at any one time, this model seems to be acceptable, taking into account that prior orientations are given aboard ships and that supervision exists at the site.  We considered 100 passengers to be the maximum acceptable limit, given the density of visitors that in this case moves in the area.  The area of greatest concentration on the eastern part of the island (high area before the descent to the southern beach) showed a density of individuals that could be reaching the acceptable limit.  Therefore, if the amount of visitors grows, there will be greater concentrations in this and other areas, in which case better organization of the site and of the model of conduct should be considered.
7. General Recommendations 
Site management: Placing clearly recognizable stakes of appropriate size and color, so as to not produce a negative visual effect, to demarcate the limits of the visitor area should be considered.  Specifically, the path towards the western end should be permanently marked to avoid trampling of mossy areas. 
Visitor management: At least on their visit to the western area, all visitors should be led by guides in groups of less than 20 passengers.  There should not be more than one group of 20 persons in the western area at the same time.  These guidelines are not in the visitor site guide which we consider to be too permissive in various aspects.  We have visited the island at the end of the nesting season.  The fledglings were big and in the process of changing to adult feathers.  Their vulnerability to predation by giant petrels or skuas was limited, and therefore visitor walks through the colonies were not very disruptive.  This may be totally different in November or December.  Whether the open model of visitation continues to be acceptable during this season must be evaluated.
Closed area: The western area of the island is vulnerable.  Apart from the small colonies of penguins, there is one important colony of more than 50 giant petrel nests (F. Koester y P. Piedrahita, pers. comm.), nesting of cape petrels, Wilson’s storm-petrels, elephant seals, and fur seals.  According to the site guide, a secondary landing area is found on the peninsula in this area.  This landing site should be abandoned.  The area is useful fro studies of various species and of ice melt ponds.  Declaration of this part of Barrientos Island as a protected area, and restricted visitation to the area between the base of the access slope and the pinnacle rock found at 30 m distance should be seriously considered.  
