





Report Submitted to the XXX ATCM 
by IUCN 
The World Conservation Union





Report Submitted to the XXX ATCM
by IUCN
The World Conservation Union
IUCN extends its formal thanks to the Government of India for hosting this Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
Created in 1948, the World Conservation Union (IUCN) brings together 83 States, 110 government agencies, 800 plus NGOs, and some 10,000 scientists and experts from 181 countries in a unique worldwide partnership.  The Union’s mission is to “influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable”.  The Union is the world's largest environmental knowledge network and has helped over 75 countries to prepare and implement national conservation and biodiversity strategies. The Union is a multicultural, multilingual organization with 1,000 staff located in 62 countries.  Its headquarters are in Gland, Switzerland.
IUCN has a long standing interest in Antarctic Conservation and welcomes the opportunity to assist Parties in their deliberations at the 30th ATCM.  In this submission, IUCN has focussed on a few areas of importance with respect to the conservation of the Antarctic environment.
(1)  Tourism
The number of visits by tourists has grown substantially in recent years, with the number of tourist landings almost tripling since the beginning of the decade.  For this reason, IUCN shares the view that it is timely now to review the impacts of tourism.  Whereas the impacts of small numbers of tourists may have been minor or transitory, it is time to consider whether growing numbers of tourists may have impacts that are more than minor or transitory at certain sites or through certain activities, and if so, how such impacts should be avoided or minimised and monitored.
By its very nature, the construction of any building or permanent infrastructure in Antarctica would by definition likely have an impact that is more than minor or transitory and thus would require a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation.  While such impacts may be justified to advance peace or science -- the core values supported by the Antarctic Treaty – such would not necessarily be the case in support of tourism activities.  Parties may wish to consider measures to ensure that the impacts of tourism on Antarctica remain less than minor or transitory.
It has been noted that as the size of vessels increases, so does the impact, both potential and actual, on scientific programmes in the areas through which the vessels travel, and on the environment.  IUCN believes that it is time now to examine these impacts and to develop regulations to manage them.  Various proposals have been made, from banning large vessels to requiring pairing of vessels by size.  IUCN is of the view that it is time now to review the Code of Arctic Shipping and to draw from it elements that also apply to the Antarctic to further develop a Code of Antarctic Shipping that would be approved through the International Maritime Organization.  Though the existing Code for the Arctic is voluntary, Parties could adopt through a Measure a Code for the Antarctic.  It would be important to give careful consideration to ice classification requirements and the need to require suitably ice-strengthened hulls for passenger vessels travelling in the Antarctic Treaty Area.  As large ships are inter alia less manoeuvrable than smaller ships, consideration should be given to requiring standards based on size and concomitant risk of damage to the hull of the vessel.  However, smaller vessels may pose a greater threat of introduction of non-native species through biofouling due to less stringent hull maintenance regimes.
Each Party should ensure that it notifies “all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, and all expeditions to Antarctica organized in or proceeding from its territory” as required under Article VII(5)(a) of the Antarctic Treaty.  Following on that obligation, Parties should ensure that all vessels so subject to notification are fully able to conform with Protocol obligations.  For example, the discharge into the sea of noxious liquid substances that are harmful to the marine environment is prohibited.  Vessels should have to show that they have the storage capacity, and will use it, to ensure that such substances, which may include by example liquids to develop photographs, are not discharged into Antarctic Treaty Area waters.  With respect to the discharge of sewage, Parties should ensure that vessels certified to carry more than 10 persons are capable of holding all sewage such that no discharges occur within 12 nautical miles of any land or ice shelves and that beyond such distances, sewage is discharged at a moderate rate and only when the ship is en route at a speed of 4 knots or more.  Parties should examine logs and records of each vessel flagged to them to determine that such measures were taken.  Parties should ensure that organizers chartering vessels are able to meet these obligations and include such information in environmental impact assessment documents that they submit to their appropriate home authorities.  If vessels do not have the capacity to comply with these obligations, both tour operators and flag states should ensure that such vessels do not travel to Antarctica.
Any review of the impact of shipping, and especially of large vessels, would necessarily reflect the obligations of Parties under Annex IV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.  Parties should undertake a review of the requirements incorporated in Annex IV in order to ensure themselves that they are sufficient to protect the Antarctica, including its dependent and associated ecosystems.  The review should inter alia examine whether the impacts of discharge of sewage, garbage and other substances is harmful even beyond 12 nautical miles from land or ice shelves and whether vessels travelling to Antarctica should discharge into the sea any food wastes whatsoever within the Antarctic Treaty Area.
As a conservation organization, IUCN has focussed its comments on conservation aspects of tourism.  Nevertheless, IUCN is mindful that expeditions, and in particular those on large vessels that carry many passengers and crew, in the event of an accident may require support for search and rescue operations.  Such operations would likely have an effect, perhaps severe, on national programmes in the affected region, thus hindering programmes from carrying out their activities in support of peace and science, the values that were to be protected by the Antarctic Treaty.  As such, Parties may consider steps to restrict the activities of large vessels in Antarctica in order also to protect human life, to safeguard the unique environment of Antarctica and to promote the values of the Antarctic Treaty System.
(2)  Antarctic and Southern Ocean Marine Protected Areas
IUCN welcomes steps taken at recent meetings under the Antarctic Treaty System with respect to protected areas in general and Marine Protected Areas in particular.  This important work promotes an obligation under Article 3(2)(b) of the Protocol that Parties seek to identify and to include in a series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, representative examples of major terrestrial and marine ecosystems.  For this reason, IUCN welcomes the Bioregionalisation Workshop to be hosted by Belgian authorities and looks forward to consideration of the results of this meeting.  This Workshop will be of a technical nature to gather and share data with respect to bioregions and as the next immediate step towards the establishment of a system of MPAs for the protection of the Antarctic marine environment.  IUCN will welcome work, following the conclusion of this Workshop, on identification and selection of Marine Protected Areas to ensure protection of major examples of marine ecosystems.  This would promote representative areas and areas reserved for scientific study and the latter would also allow for comparison between undisturbed sites and sites subject to human activities.  There would then follow the development of Management Plans for these Areas that would be provided to both the Commission for the Conservation of Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the ATCM for review and adoption.  IUCN urges close and continued cooperation between ATCM-related and CCAMLR-related authorities so that this work may proceed as quickly as possible.
(3)  Bioprospecting
The issue of bioprospecting rightly remains on the agenda of the ATCM.  As with any other activity, bioprospecting is subject to the obligations that Parties have accepted under the Treaty and related instruments, including the Protocol on Environmental Protection.  Thus, advance notification is required, as provided for under Article VII of the Treaty.  Flowing from this, an environmental impact assessment procedure must be undertaken, in accordance with Article 8 of the Protocol and Annex I.  In accordance with Article III of the Treaty scientific observations and results from Antarctica should be exchanged and made freely available to the greatest extent feasible and practicable.  In our view, a desire for commercialization does not overcome this obligation to make the observations and results freely available as it does not affect feasibility or practicability.  Furthermore, as bioprospecting involves the collection of living samples, this should be done consistent with obligations under Annex II of the Protocol to Conserve Antarctic Fauna and Flora, as appropriate.  In keeping with the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty and related instruments, Parties should adopt a Measure to ensure the protection of all native biota, including microbes, such that any collection would not be in such quantities to affect significantly their local distribution or abundance.  Finally, Parties may wish to consider ways to ensure fair rules for a sharing of benefits resulting from the commercialization of products derived from Antarctic biota.
(4)  Introduction of Non-native Species, Parasites and Diseases
The International Polar Year project planned on non-native species will increase knowledge on pathways and potential species introductions into Antarctic terrestrial environments and enhance the opportunity for preventive measures to be put into place.  A crucial question is how to predict which alien species would become problems if they were introduced.  A match of climate and habitat may help with such risk assessment, but many species are known to expand to other habitat types and different temperature ranges once outside their native range.  The factor that has a consistently high correlation with risk for invasiveness is whether or not the species has been invasive anywhere else.  The Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) of the Species Survival Commission of IUCN (the World Conservation Union) is managing and developing several “vehicles” for global exchange of expertise and information on invasiveness which will be able to assist with risk assessment and management in the Antarctic and Sub Antarctic (see more detail in CEP information paper).
As the number of persons travelling to Antarctica has increased, the potential for the introduction of non-native species has grown.  Parties should take immediate steps to address such introductions, including through consideration of stronger measures to avoid operational waste discharge from ships.  The introduction of non-native species in the marine environment is a serious threat that has been overlooked until recently.  With the increase in the number of ships visiting Antarctica, and the predicted impact of climate change which may increase the chance of survival and reproduction of non-native species in the Southern Ocean, it becomes urgent for Parties to take effective measures to reduce such risks by effectively managing the main introduction vectors and pathways:  fouling of vessel hulls, and ballast water, including from fishing activities.
A proposal that the Marine Environment Protection Sub-Committee on Bulk Liquids and Gases of the International Maritime Organization accept as a high priority item of its work programme the development of measures for minimising the translocation of invasive aquatic species through biofouling of ships is being put forward for consideration at the 56th Session of the Marine Environment Protection Committee in July 2007.  The proposed work program would also include the investigation of measures with respect to niche areas on vessels.  It is expected that the Committee, in developing measures, would emphasize practical and cost-effective solutions that would minimise the burden and costs to industry.  Parties may wish to support such work within the IMO Marine Environment Protection Committee because it is a suitable global venue to develop best practices with respect to minimising risk to invasion of aquatic species through the biofouling of ships.  Parties could provide input into this process where appropriate to ensure that issues pertaining to the Antarctic environment are fully taken into account.


