





Borehole Remediation and Closure Activities at Lake Vida in the McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area




Borehole Remediation and Closure Activities at Lake Vida in the McMurdo Dry Valleys Antarctic Specially Managed Area
Information Paper submitted by the United States
1.  Introduction
The Dry Valley Drilling Project (DVDP) was a coordinated scientific endeavor by groups from Japan, New Zealand, and the United States between 1972 and 1975. Scientists hoped to resolve the diverse theories regarding the geologic history of the Dry Valleys by examining subsurface sediments and collecting down-hole geophysical measurements. Fifteen boreholes were drilled from January 1973 to January 1975 (Figure 1).  Due to drilling requirements and hopes of maintaining the integrity of some boreholes for further scientific interests, Diesel Fuel Arctic (DFA) was used as the primary drilling fluid and was commonly left in the borehole.


Figure 1 – Location and status of DVDP boreholes in McMurdo Sound area.

Since the start of DVDP, loss of DFA to the sensitive areas surrounding the borehole locations has been an ongoing environmental concern.  Following discussions between the United States and New Zealand, priority remedial action of DVDP 6, at Lake Vida, was recommended for the 2006-2007 season based on its proximity to a scientifically valuable body of water, historical DFA losses, and the amount of DFA remaining in the borehole. 


2.  Site History: Dry Valley Drilling Project, Borehole 6  
DVDP 6 was drilled to a total depth of approximately 305.8 meters (m) in December 1973 near the edge of Lake Vida, in the McMurdo Dry Valleys. The borehole was drilled through 12m of permafrost with the remaining 293.8m drilled through granite bedrock (a fracture zone was encountered at 88m). Drilling activities involved filling the borehole with 2,210 liters of DFA to maintain site access for future investigations. 
Following establishment of the borehole and upon returning to the site in 1974, DFA impacts to the soils surrounding DVDP 6 were observed when an unexplained resurgence of fuel had breached the borehole casing and spread across the surface soils. As a result of the resurgence, fuel and fuel contaminated soil removal occurred, and continued to occur intermittently from 1974 to 2001-2002 season. During the 2000-2001 a subsurface investigation determined no subsurface contamination was present at DVDP 6 and only minimal surface contamination existed, which was subsequently removed.  In total, between 1974 and 2002, approximately 34,000 kg of fuel-contaminated soils and 750 liters of fuel were removed from the site. Following the clean-up of soils surrounding DVDP 6, remediation efforts began focusing on the removal of the diesel remaining in the borehole. Additionally between 1974 and 2006, the DVDP 6 borehole location was inundated by lake water several times due to high seasonal melt water input from surrounding glaciers and the shallow gradient of the valley floor. The lake water inundations of DVDP 6 led to temporary loss of borehole access while restricting site access and possible remediation activities. 
In 2000, access to the DVDP 6 borehole was re-established after being inaccessible for several years due to flooding events. To maintain borehole integrity, a well casing was installed into bedrock (12m) to secure borehole access. Once the borehole was reestablished, the standpipe stood 1m above surface grade. During fuel recovery efforts and borehole assessment in 2003, a platy ice blockage was observed at 35m below top of casing (btoc), which terminated fuel recovery efforts.  In January and November 2004, the site was again inundated with lake water and another 1m section of standpipe was quickly added to the casing to ensure that expansion of Lake Vida during melt season did not breach the borehole and displace DFA again (Figure 2).  By October 2006, the uppermost 2m of standpipe was bent at a 10 degree angle, as a result of annual freezing and thawing of the lake and surface soils, which limited borehole access (Figure 3). 












Figure 2 –  (January 2004) Addition of 1m casing to ensure borehole is not breached with melt water; 
Figure 3 – (October 2006) Uppermost 2m section of standpipe positioned at 10 degree angle from vertical. 
3.  DVDP 6 Borehole Closure 
3.1  Accessing the borehole
In October 2006, a small temporary field camp was established at the Lake Vida DVDP 6 field site for two Webster Drilling and Exploration personnel and two Raytheon Polar Services Environmental Engineering personnel to complete borehole closure activities. Planned closure activities involved using a large top drive drill rig to: penetrate the blockage at 35m btoc, remove all the DFA or DFA contaminated fluids in the borehole, investigate the borehole to depth (or maximum depth possible), remove and properly abandon the borehole with grout over a freshwater ice plug. Once the drill rig arrived in McMurdo, it was traversed over sea ice to Marble Point where it was staged until the DVDP 6 site was prepared to receive the rig. 
In preparing the site for the drill rig, the portion of the standpipe at a 10 degree bend needed to be corrected and replaced with a straight portion of casing so straight vertical access to the borehole opening could be secured and maintained to depth. Approximately 1m of lake ice and 1m of rock/soil immediately surrounding the standpipe was excavated to remove the bent portion of the standpipe and replace it with a straight standpipe section, which allowed for unrestricted downhole access (Figure 4 and Figure 5). 














Figure 4 – Excavating 2m of lake ice and soil to remove bent portion of standpipe; 
Figure 5 – Replacing the bent portion of standpipe with straight vertical section to reestablish borehole access.
Following standpipe replacement, the excavation was backfilled with the excavated material and the site prepared for the arrival of the drill rig. A total of nine helicopter flights between Marble Point and the DVDP 6 site were used to transport and assemble the drill rig and associated gear at Lake Vida. 
3.2  Blockage and Liquid Removal
After the drill rig was assembled in position over the DVDP 6 borehole, a drill bit and drill rods were lowered into the hole to identify and remove the blockage at 35m btoc (Figure 6). Little resistance was encountered at the blockage, which was determined to be an ice lens easily broken up by the drill rod. 
Once the ice blockage at 35m was cleared, investigations into the status of the remaining borehole depths commenced. Liquid was observed in the borehole just below the blockage at 35m. The drill rod was lowered down the borehole until a sufficient volume of liquid filled the drill rod, at which point a 1m stainless steel bailer was used to remove the liquid from the drill pipe before proceeding further downhole (Figure 7).







      







Figure 6 – Assembled drill rig in position over DVDP 6; Figure 7 – Removal of borehole liquids by bailing with stainless steel bailer through rods lowered into DVDP 6.
The liquid removed from the borehole consisted of a semi-clear fluid that contained both fuel and a brine solution with no obvious separation (i.e. fuel did not float to the surface of the brine as expected). Liquid recovery was repeated at 6m intervals down to a depth of 101m when Webster Drilling reported that the drill bit had entered into a “sticky” material that felt like sand or gravel. At this point all of the liquid remaining in the borehole was removed using the bailer. An additional 19m of drilling rod was lowered into the borehole to a depth of 120m.  Between 101m and 120m no additional liquid had entered the drill rod. Based on the borehole conditions, the 120m of drill rod was pulled in order to identify the material being encountered. Upon retrieval of the drill rod and bit, a slush of diesel and platy ice crystals was observed on the drill bit. 
A different drill bit was then lowered into the borehole to collect a sample of the material at 120m; however the drill bit was not able to proceed below 94m due to a hard ice blockage. It is hypothesized that the hard ice blockage at 94m formed as a result of bailing all borehole fluids past the fractured bedrock zone at 88m.  Removal of borehole fluids created a disequilibrium that encouraged the flow of fracture zone pore liquids into the borehole, which mixed with the diesel-ice slush that froze to create an ice plug.  Attempts to penetrate this ice plug at 94m with the drill rig were unsuccessful and borehole closure activities began since all accessible liquid had been removed from the borehole by bailing activities. 
In total, 568 liters of liquid (fuel and fuel contaminated brine) was removed from the borehole. As the liquid was bailed out of the borehole it was containerized in 208-liter steel drums and labeled to be transported back to McMurdo Station for disposal.  No fuel recovered from the site could be reused due to the presence of brine.
3.3  Borehole Closure
Following removal of the 94m of drill rod, freshwater was flown to the site via helicopter from McMurdo in 208-liter steel drums and pumped into the borehole using a hand pump (in order to prevent freezing while stored onsite) (Figure 8). Approximately 663 liters of freshwater was pumped into the borehole until the water level was 14m btoc. The water was allowed to freeze to create a freshwater ice plug in the borehole. During the freezing of the freshwater, expansion occurred and the top of the freshwater rose to 9m btoc before completely freezing.


Figure 8 – Hand pumping freshwater down borehole to create a freshwater ice plug; 
Figure 9 – Surface section of standpipe removed from DVDP 6, to eliminate all surface remains of former borehole. 
Once the freshwater was frozen, grout was mixed onsite in a steel drum and poured down the borehole. The grout filled the borehole from the top of the freshwater ice plug (9m btoc) to a level equal with the original surface grade (~1m btoc). The section of standpipe above the ground surface was removed using the drill rig, thereby leaving nothing remaining above the ground surface (Figure 9).  
4.  Conclusion
The remediation and closure actions of DVDP 6 were successful in removing the accessible fuel and fuel contaminated brine from the borehole to a depth of 120m, in addition to successfully sealing the borehole from any further interactions between the borehole and the Lake Vida environment. Remediation and closure actions have minimized and/or eliminated any future environmental risks associated with the borehole. No further action at DVDP 6 is recommended.
