





Prevention and Management of Harmful Non-Native Species in the Antarctic and the Sub Antarctic





Prevention and Management of Harmful Non-Native Species in the Antarctic and the Sub Antarctic
1)  Introduction
The lessons learned worldwide show that when non-native species (= alien species) become invasive, they constitute a significant “biological pollution”. Unlike many other types of pollution, they are not diluted in time but, on the contrary, can expand in numbers, density and geographic spread - often exponentially. Prevention of invasive species introduction is hence the first and most cost-effective option, from the point of view of environmental costs as well as direct monetary costs (Wittenberg et al. 2001). Risk analysis, at the species level as well as at the pathway level, plays an important role in the prevention of new IAS introductions by underpinning decision-making. 
The crucial question is how to predict which alien species would become problems if they were introduced and which would remain innocuous. A match of climate and habitat may help in predicting invasiveness, but many species are known to expand to other habitat types once outside their native range, and moreover, non -native species, over time, may exhibit evolutionary adaptation to their new environment. Only one factor has a consistently high correlation with invasiveness: whether or not the species is invasive elsewhere. In addition, given that similar invasive species problems are repeatedly faced in different parts of the world, as illustrated for instance by the species that are problematic on the Sub Antarctic islands, sharing information and expertise internationally on the ecology, impacts and best practice management is critical for maintaining and/or restoring Antarctic and Sub Antarctic values. 
The Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) of IUCN (the World Conservation Union) is involved in developing and maintaining several alien invasive species management tools that empower local management through access to globally sourced authoritative information on invasiveness (including global distributions, impacts, management, references etc) (see below). Other current ISSG activities that may be of relevance include the development of a “footprint” analysis of invasive species impacts on Red listed species, and analysis of invasive species threats to protected areas. 
2)  How may IUCN / Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) of the Species Survival Commission (SSC) be able to assist
ISSG/IUCN is keen to assist the efforts to prevent non-native species impacts in the Antarctic Treaty as well as assist with management of existing invasives in the Sub Antarctic, by maximising synergies between the projects and management-tools it is involved in, and the initiatives and tools in the Antarctic treaty and SCAR context. For instance, the ISSG information sources and database can be developed to provide complimentarity, focussing on management, to the Antarctic databases and information sources such as the invasive species checklist in the context of the Biodiversity SCAR EBA Program, hosted on the Australian Antarctic Data Centre1 (and others.)
The Invasive Species Specialist Group of IUCN (the World Conservation Union) is involved in developing and maintaining several alien invasive species management tools that empower local management through access to globally sourced information;
The Global Invasive Species Database (GISD) (www.issg.org/database) is a free, online public resource of authoritative information about Invasive Alien Species (IAS). The GISD aims to increase public awareness about invasives and to facilitate effective prevention and management activities by disseminating specialist’s knowledge and experience globally. It receives 75,000 hits (1100 unique visitors) per day. At this point in time it contains information on the ecology, impacts, distribution and pathways of more than 430 IAS, along with the contact details of experts that can offer further advice, and most importantly, information on prevention and management options. Location specific records for the Sub Antarctic are already included to some extent, and can be searched (see figure). Many more could be made available with some modest resourcing. 

The Global Register of Invasive Species (GRIS) identifies all organisms that negatively impact biodiversity by accessing and analysing checklists generated by national and regional collection and observation databanks around the world, as well as information not formally published elsewhere. The register will reveal those species that have been identified as invasive and those that impact the most regions. Access to the original source of information, along with metadata describing the definitions used, criteria for inclusion and geographical scope will be provided.

Aliens-L Listserv: A helpful contribution to information exchange on biodiversity impacts of alien species can be achieved through the use of list servers. IUCN administers the globally active Aliens-L list server (see www.issg.org for how to join). List servers offer an important contribution to empowerment and “horizontal” information transfer (practitioners helping each other). Moreover, they have great flexibility and are able to deal quickly with time-critical issues.

The Global Management Project Register (GMPR) will be a free online resource that will be populated with authoritative information about prevention, eradication, control, containment and mitigation activities. The records will be structured to provide information on target and non-target species, factors relevant to the success or failure of projects, methods used, etc. Each record in the GMPR will include links to relevant documentation such as feasibility studies, planning details and technical reports (where available) and a link to the appropriate profile in the GISD

The Global Invasive Species Information Network (GISIN): The development of GISIN will provide a platform through which IAS information from hundreds of databases and web sites can be accessed (http://invasivespecies.nbii.gov/gisin.html). Tools being developed for GISIN include a model invasive species database that will be offered at no cost to users. ISSG’s contributions to development of the GISIN, such the IAS profile schema currently being developed, are based on expertise gained in the development of the Global Invasive Species Database. This ensures future compatibility of all GISD records with GISIN.

The Conservation Commons: The ISSG and IUCN strongly believe that information related to biodiversity conservation must be easily and freely available to empower communities and other stakeholders. The Conservation Commons (http://conservationcommons.org) promotes free and open access to data, information and knowledge for conservation purposes, encourages participants to both use and contribute resources, and expects users to comply, in good faith, with terms of uses specified by contributors. 


For further information, please contact;
Dr Maj De Poorter  (m.depoorter@auckland.ac.nz)
Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) of IUCN’s Species Survival Commission
Centre for Biodiversity and Biosecurity
University of Auckland (Tamaki)
Private Bag 92019 
Auckland, 
New Zealand






Disclaimer: the designation of geographical entities in this paper, the Global Invasive Species Database, or any other ISSG material, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of IUCN nor  ISSG concerning the legal status of any country, territory or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delineation of its frontiers or boundaries.

