





Update on progress towards the CCAMLR Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (Brussels, Belgium, 13-17 August 2007)




Update on progress towards the CCAMLR Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean 
(Brussels, Belgium, 13-17 August 2007)
CEP Information Paper submitted by CCAMLR

1. Introduction
Both the CEP and CCAMLR have recently addressed the topic of marine protected areas (MPAs) and bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (CEP IX Report, paras 85 to 101; CCAMLR-XXV, paras 6.1 to 6.6). 
At CEP IX, CCAMLR presented proposed work to undertake a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, including a workshop to be held in 2007, with the aim of providing a scientific basis for the identification of representative areas for protection (ATCM XXIX WP 7). It noted the importance of developing a strategic approach and harmonised regime to protect the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty System. It also invited the CEP to participate in a Bioregionalisation Workshop Steering Committee established by CCAMLR in April 2006 to work towards the 2007 workshop.
The CEP agreed that it should engage constructively with CCAMLR on the issue of bioregionalisation and MPAs, and welcomed the proposal for a CCAMLR workshop on this topic (CEP IX Report, paras 98 and 99). The Chair of the CEP was nominated to provide representation to the Steering Committee (CEP IX Report, paras 99 and 100), and an additional CEP member (Dr. W. Dinter) was nominated subsequently. 
The terms of reference for the Bioregionalisation Workshop Steering Committee are (ATCM XXIX WP 7):

    1. To facilitate collaboration between the CCAMLR Scientific Committee and CEP in this work
    2. To facilitate the involvement of appropriate experts in this work
    3. To coordinate and facilitate:
            (i) collating existing data on coastal provinces, including benthic and pelagic features and processes;
            (ii) collating existing data on oceanic provinces, including benthic and pelagic features and processes;
            (iii) determining the analyses required to facilitate a bioregionalisation, including the use of empirical, model and expert data;
            (iv) developing a broad-scale bioregionalisation based on existing datasets and other datasets possibly available prior to the workshop;
            (v) delineating fine-scale provinces within regions, where possible; and
            (vi) establishing a procedure for identifying areas for protection to further the conservation objectives of CCAMLR.
    4. To organise a workshop to establish a bioregionalisation for the CCAMLR Convention Area and to consolidate advice on a system of protected areas

Following a formal invitation received from Belgium, CCAMLR agreed that the Bioregionalisation Workshop will be held in Brussels, 13 to 17 August 2007 (CCAMLR-XXV, para 6.1(i)).
This paper provides an update on progress made by the CCAMLR Bioregionalisation Workshop Steering Committee, following its intersessional work and the most recent meetings in 2006 of CCAMLR-XXV and SC-CAMLR-XXV.

2. Focus of the 2007 Bioregionalisation Workshop
Bioregionalisation is a process that aims to partition a broad spatial area into distinct regions, using a range of environmental and biological information. It attempts to identify the natural boundaries between different broad habitats and ecosystems, and provides a simplified interpretation of these spatial differences. The outcomes of this type of analysis can be used to assist in ecological modelling, ecosystem based management, and the identification of representative areas for protection. 
The 2007 workshop is viewed as a next step in the progression of endeavours leading to the establishment of a representative system of marine protected areas (MPAs) harmonised for the protection of the Antarctic marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty system.
The aim of the workshop is to advise on a bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean, including, where possible, advice on fine-scale subdivision of biogeographic provinces. The outcomes of this analysis will be specifically applied to assist in the selection of a representative system of MPAs for the Southern Ocean.
SC-CAMLR-XXV identified two separate components of work to be undertaken towards the development of a system of MPAs for the Convention Area:
    i) technical development of methods for bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean
    ii) consideration of methods for selection and designation of MPAs
The focus of the 2007 Bioregionalisation Workshop will be on component (i), however SC-CAMLR has noted that work on component (ii) should proceed in parallel (SC-CAMLR-XXV, paras 3.33 and 3.34). Similarly, the CEP has noted that in parallel with the work of the Steering Committee, the CEP should continue to consider its requirements and priorities for developing a scientific approach to the protection of the marine environment (CEP IX Report, para 101).
The desired outcomes of the workshop are:
    • An agreed broad-scale bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean 
    • Examples of approaches to fine-scale subdivision of provinces for case study areas 
    • Recommendations for future work on bioregionalisation analysis and the identification of representative areas for protection based on bioregionalisation outcomes. 
To achieve these outcomes, it is expected that the workshop will undertake the following work:
    • Review of outcomes of bioregionalisation analyses or biogeographic classifications previously undertaken for the Southern Ocean, including how these correspond to current knowledge
    • Consideration of which datasets would be most useful for (i) broad-scale bioregionalisation analysis and (ii) fine-scale delineation of provinces
    • Review of statistical tools and other approaches to bioregionalisation 
    • Practical (computer-based) analysis to refine statistical methods and determine the analyses required 
    • Undertaking of (i) broad-scale bioregionalisation analysis and (ii) fine-scale delineation of provinces, using agreed methods and datasets
    • Consideration of further work necessary to develop approaches to the selection of representative areas for protection based on bioregionalisation outcomes.
3. Preparations for the Bioregionalisation Workshop
Preliminary information has been circulated to CEP Members and SC-CAMLR Members on the background and scope of the Bioregionalisation Workshop, including the types of expertise and data that will be required, and a call for papers. 

The results of an independent experts workshop on bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean held during 2006 (Grant et al., 2006) demonstrated the feasibility of a broad-scale physical regionalisation analysis, and have provided useful background and technical information for SC-CAMLR and the CEP in preparation for the 2007 workshop.
In order to make progress at the workshop and achieve the desired outcomes, it is important that some preparatory work is undertaken in advance. This will require the identification of key scientists to take responsibility for preparatory work involving such activities as data processing and preparation for analysis, GIS mapping, modelling etc. In particular, the development of fine-scale regionalisation analyses for case study areas would be of value in providing examples for the workshop. 
The CEP may have more expertise with regard to the coastal provinces, however this need not be the exclusive focus of CEP involvement. A joint approach to the bioregionalisation of the coastal and oceanic areas (at least in the early, broad-scale stages of this work) will help to contribute to a harmonised approach to protection of the marine environment throughout both coastal and oceanic areas. 
It is also important to identify individuals to participate in the workshop who have the expertise to undertake the tasks described in section 2 above. This may include technical / scientific expertise in the following areas:
    • Bioregionalisation analysis and biogeographic classification
    • Oceanography and remote sensing 
    • Ecosystem modelling and ecology
    • Data processing, GIS mapping and data visualisation
CEP Members are encouraged to work with their respective CCAMLR colleagues to ensure that the Workshop is well supported and attended, and to submit papers and data where possible as requested in the recent circular.  
4. Relevance of this work to the CEP
Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean will complement the Environmental Domains classification under development for the terrestrial environment, and will assist in elaborating the “systematic environmental-geographic framework” required by Annex V of the Environmental Protocol. 
This work is of importance to the CEP in terms of developing a harmonised approach to the protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty system. The outcomes of bioregionalisation analysis can be used as one of a range of tools to support decision-making on the selection of marine protected areas, which may include Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs). 
Bioregionalisation outcomes may also have relevance to other issues such as environmental monitoring and reporting, mapping of sensitive or vulnerable areas, identification of knowledge gaps and research requirements, and the improvement of management responses to, for example, the introduction of non-native species. 
Finally, it is hoped that this work will have long-term benefits in strengthening the links and opportunities for collaboration between SC-CAMLR and the CEP on the protection of the marine environment as well as other topics. 
The Steering Committee looks forward to continuing to work with both the CEP and SC-CAMLR towards a successful and productive workshop in August 2007.
References
Grant, S., Constable, A., Raymond, B. & Doust, S. (2006) Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean: Report of Experts Workshop (Hobart, September 2006). WWF-Australia and ACE CRC.

