





Marine Acoustics in Antarctic Waters:Report of an International Whaling Commission Workshop





Marine Acoustics in Antarctic Waters: Report of an International Whaling Commission Workshop.
Introduction
At CEP IX the Committee had a useful discussion on the issue of impacts of acoustic activities on marine species (paras 145 – 150 of the Final Report of CEP IX refer).  At CEP IX it was recognised that the International Whaling Commission’s (IWC) Scientific Committee had also recently held a workshop on “Potential Impacts of Seismic Surveys on Cetaceans”, and that this may yield information to assist the CEP’s consideration of the matter.
The Committee therefore agreed to invite a representative of the IWC Scientific Committee to present a report of their workshop to CEP X (para 202 of the Final Report of CEP IX refers).
In mid-December the CEP Chair wrote to the IWC Secretariat inviting a representative of the IWC’s Scientific Committee to attend CEP X.  The Secretary to the IWC Commission, Dr Nicola Grandy, responded in mid-January, indicating that whilst the IWC would be interested in attending CEPX, the meeting clashed with the 2007 meeting of the IWCs’ Scientific Committee (see copy of IWC communication at Appendix 1).
However, Dr Grandy was able to provide copies of two IWC documents on the issue:
    • The report from the workshop on ‘potential impacts of seismic surveys on cetaceans’ [Extract from Annex K of the Scientific Committee Report, i.e. Report of the Standing Working Group on Environmental Concerns] (Seismic workshop report); 
    • The discussions of the Scientific Committee on the workshop report [Extract from the Report of the Scientific Committee] (SC rep seismic extract).  
These documents are attached to this Information Paper.
IWC Reports
The IWC workshop was held in St Kitts in association with the IWC Annual Meeting, in May/June 2006.
It should be noted that the primary focus of the IWC workshop was on marine industry seismic activity (i.e. oil and gas exploration) rather than academic seismic surveys (such as occur in Antarctic waters).  In that regard it was noted that the recommendations from the IWC workshop might not necessarily apply to academic seismic surveys.
Against that background the IWC workshop report covers:  Features of sound and seismic surveys; effects of seismic surveys on cetaceans (general aspects as well as specific case studies), and mitigation and monitoring measures.
The attention of the CEP is drawn in particular to the section on mitigation and monitoring which includes: a review of existing mitigation measures; considerations relating to planning and conducting seismic surveys; methods to monitor the effects of seismic surveys and the effectiveness of mitigation measures, and research to develop improved mitigation measures.
The workshop report makes a number of recommendations for the consideration of the IWC’s Scientific Committee.  The second document reports on the outcomes to the Scientific Committee’s consideration of the workshop report in which all of the workshop recommendations were either endorsed or strongly endorsed.
Conclusions
The assistance of the IWC Secretariat in providing these documents is acknowledged and appreciated.  It is considered that the CEP will find this material extremely useful in its further consideration of the issue of marine acoustic impacts in Antarctic waters.
It is noted that the IWC Secretariat in turn requested a copy of the final report of the CEP meeting with respect to this matter.  Assuming the CEP is in agreement, the Chair will undertake to provide this.




New Zealand
March 2007.

Appendix 1.


Dr Neil Gilbert
Chair of the Antarctic Treaty’s Committee for Environmental Protection
Environment and Outreach, Antarctica New Zealand
International Antarctic Centre
Administration Building
38 Orchard Road
Private Bag 4745
Christchurch
NEW ZEALAND
 
 
Dear Dr Gilbert,
 
Marine Acoustics in Antarctic Waters
 
Thank you very much for your letter of 18 December inviting IWC to send a representative to the next meeting of the Antarctic Treaty’s Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) taking place in New Delhi, India between 30 April and 4 May 2007.
 
As you are aware, the potential impact of noise on cetaceans is a priority item for IWC’s Scientific Committee.  We would very much have liked to send someone to represent us and to present the outcome of our workshop on the ‘potential impacts of seismic surveys on cetaceans’ held in association with our Annual Meeting in St. Kitts and Nevis in May/June last year.  Unfortunately, the CEP overlaps with the beginning our Scientific Committee meeting in Anchorage this year and it is therefore unlikely that anyone will be available for your meeting.  If I do find an appropriate person, I will let you know.  We would nevertheless still like to be able to contribute to your meeting.  To this end, please find attached the following:
 
    • the report from the workshop on ‘potential impacts of seismic surveys on cetaceans’ [Extract from Annex K of the Scientific Committee Report, i.e. Report of the Standing Working Group on Environmental Concerns] (seismic workshop report.pdf); 
    • the discussions of the Scientific Committee on the workshop report [Extract from the Report of the Scientific Committee] (SC rep seismic.pdf).  
 
Please feel at liberty to distribute these documents to participants at the CEP meeting.  They will be published in due course as part of the spring 2007 volume of our Journal of Cetacean Research and Management (Volume 9 Supplement, April 2007).
 
We would be very interested to receive a copy of the report from your meeting.  Should you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me.
 
With best wishes for the New Year.
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Dr. Nicky Grandy
Secretary to the Commission 
Dr. Nicky Grandy
Secretary
International Whaling Commission
The Red House
135 Station Road
Impington
Cambridge
CB24 9NP
Tel: +44 (0)1223 233971
Fax: +44 (0)1223 232876
e-mail: secretariat@iwcoffice.org

