





Initial Environmental Evaluation. Restructuring works of the pier at the Mario Zucchelli Italian Scientific Station (Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica)




Initial Environmental Evaluation. Restructuring works of the pier at the Mario Zucchelli Italian Scientific Station (Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea, Antarctica)
IEE undertaken between April 1 2006 and March 31 2007 by Consortium for the Implementation of the National Programme in Antarctica Research.  (Consorzio PNRA S.c.r.l.)
A extraordinary maintenance and enlargement of the pier at the MZS has been proposed as     necessary for safety reasons in particular after the sea storm of February 2006 that has left the pier in poor conditions.  
The main use of the pier is at the moment as point of departure of logistic and research activities on the sea ice, and for berthing of small boats particularly for the research boat Malippo and for berthing of the lighter during the transfer of fuel between the ship and the MZS too. Another use has been, in the last years, as landing for small boats carring tourists from a tourist vessel.
In order to sound the bottom sea facing the pier, several immersions have been carried out by divers of Navy. The restructuring of the pier will consist on to fill the left side of the pier limited by the kerb made of cross-sectional reinforced concrete. Besides in order to carry out the enlargement of the pier, will be necessary at least the use of 22 boxing in steel filled up by concrete to rest on the sea bottom inside the proposed border. 
For this activity an IEE has been taken into account. Three alternatives have been considered. Alternative A= No action, Alternative B, Enlargement  of the pier, minimal hypothesis, Alternative C, Enlargement  of the pier, maximal hypothesis.
Among the alternatives considered, the alternative B represents the best compromise between a not excessive widening of the pier and the impact that this activity can produce on the surrounding environment. In this way are preserved the minimum prerogatives for the best approach to the station, the best conditions for the berthing of small boats, and boats equipped for  research at sea (Malippo), and also for the berthing of the pontoon that normally is used for loading and downloading the containers to/from the Italica ship. This alternative, beyond making easier the scientific research and improving the marine operations, allows a greater standard of safety when various means are used by operators during the boarding and landing, preserving at the same time the Antarctic environment.
As a result of the IEE, the environmental impact of the activities described for the enlargement of pier, is predict to be no more than minor or transitory. 
The only one decision taken following the considerations of the environmental impact assessment was to avoid an enlargement not necessary to limit as much possible the impact on the benthic  micro organisms. 


