





 The International Polar Year 2007/08 in Germany. 
Education and Outreach





The International Polar Year 2007/08 in Germany. 
Education and Outreach
Besides scientific research, one of the primary goals of the International Polar Year is a broad transfer of knowledge to the general public and to schools in particular. By involving young people in polar and climate research, we want to stimulate, raise awareness, and inspire a new generation of polar scientists.
The main project dealing with schools is called „Cool Classes“. It will allow schoolteachers to participate directly in international scientific research projects by going to the poles and experiencing the work first hand. The goal is that the teachers will return as eager ambassadors who will encourage fascination and excitement about the research in both their pupils and fellow teachers at home. This initiative will provide direct, project-based involvement of school classes in the Polar Year and will establish long-term partnerships between schools and scientific institutions in Germany and Europe. As one of the long-term benefits of the Polar Year, materials and contents developed during this period will be used to update teaching curricula and textbooks. 
To draw attention to the start of the International Polar Year, a drawing contest was conducted in schools all over Germany. More than 170 pictures were sent in. They showed how students between 6 and 17 years of age imagined the Earth’s polar regions and their future.
The German Youth Steering Committee was founded to represent, promote and foster young researchers’ activities within the International Polar Year. In addition, various summer schools in the Arctic as well as in the Antarctic will give students a unique opportunity to study sea ice, biology and geology at the poles, the most sensitive and unknown but fundamentally important regions for our climate.
Various exhibitions all over Germany dealing with polar science and/or climate change are currently on display. There is a photo exhibition by Lilo Tadday in Stralsund, a picture exhibition in Aalen by Gerhard Rießbeck, who painted various pieces onboard the research icebreaker Polarstern, and an exhibition about Antarctic research in the Zoological Museum of Hamburg. A French-German science caravan will tour around 14 cities in Germany, Belgium and France in order to engage the general public and especially young people in climate issues.
The media will be involved in most of the main expeditions that are taking place during the Polar Year, e.g. filmmakers on board of RV Polarstern or journalists at various research bases. By bringing journalists to fascinating areas and making them aware of up-to-date research, we want to make sure that the general public will be involved in the Polar Year from the start. Polar research is fascinating and increasingly necessary in order to understand and predict our climate – this is the message that we hope to bring to the public.
Events and information for scientists, young people, and the general public can be found at http://www.polarjahr.de.


