





Historic Sites of the Northern Coast of Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (South Shetland Group)



Historic Sites of the Northern Coast of Fildes Peninsula, King George Island (South Shetland Group)



INTRODUCTION


This document presents the inventory of the archeological sites of the northwestern coast of Fildes Peninsula, King George/25 May island, located in the South Shetland archipelago. It is the result of a research undertaken by the scientist Rubén Stehberg and his collaborators, pursued in the framework of the Annual Scientific Program (PROCIEN) of the Chilean Antarctic Institute. The results of this research were presented at the Fildes Peninsula Workshop, that was recently held in Punta Arenas, Chile (29-31 March 2007).

Based on the digital cartographic data emerged from the Project INACH 153, SIG of the South Shetland islands, it has been possible to identify eight spots corresponding to significant archeological sites. This cartographic representation of the findings makes it possible to fully appreciate the sites’ distribution and suggests the convenience for identifying two distinct segments of sites, since the facilities pertaining to the “Teniente Marsh” airfield are located in-between those sites.

Due to the difficulties encountered for the protection of archeological sites, especially in areas whose access is not easily regulated, there is need to proceed rigorously through the geographical delimitation of a protected area of this kind. Furthermore, the adoption of a management plan will require the adaptation as a code of conduct, of the guidelines set up in appendix to Resolution 5 (2001), referred to the handling of pre-1958 remains/sites whose existence or location is not known.

In order to initiate intersessional work on the protection of these sites, it is recommended that an initial consideration on this issue be made in the Committee for Environmental Protection. 


MAP

“THE HISTORICAL SITES









Beach 7a 

3.107.620 N
398.650 E

Located near the Russian Refuge, this semi-circular dry-stone structure locate isolated in the central part of a sandy beach.  The collapsed walls of the structure stand to approximately 700 mm high, and within it is a whale vertebra, fragments of glass and metal, and pieces of wood; the glass dating from the nineteenth century. The site is exposed to wind and snow loads, and the activity of seals, and was partially excavated in 2001. 










Beach  7 

3.107.660  N
398.660 E

Located about 250 m to the north west of the previous site, adjacent to a large rocky outcrop, is a large site 5 x 6 m in extent, bounded by rocks, which may have been occupied. Timber planks are found on the surface, possibly part of a collapsed timber structure.  It is postulated that the site is the remains of a mid-twentieth century camp.















Klotz valley (Beach 9, North Cove)

3.107.900 N
399.080 E

A natural rock shelter and a stone structure are located adjacent to a low cliff face at the narrow northern end of the beach, close to the sea. The rock shelter when excavated contained some cultural material (ceramics, glass and wood) in good condition in the surface levels of the outward sloping ground. The rectangular stone structure was partially excavated, and a timber plank with an iron spike was located on the floor beneath fallen rubble. The cultural remains were consistent with occupation in the nineteenth century.






Fontoura (Beach 12)

3.105.150 N
397.450 E

The site consists of a stone wall enclosing a rectangular area about 7 m long and 2.4 m wide against the side of a rock outcrop. The interior is filled with sand. Another possible site, approximately 3 x 2 m in extent, is located in the extreme south of the bay, against a rock stack on the shore, with a few fragments of material from the nineteenth century.



















Fuschloger Beach

3.104.750 N 
396.785 E

At the northern end of Fuschloger Beach , among the rocks between the cliff face and the shore, are timber planks of a possible refuge of cache of material. A wooden cross on the surface may indicate a burial site. The site remains suggest a mid twentieth century date.











Cuatro Pircas

3.104.125 N
396.450 E

Four structures are located in close proximity at this site on Adelia Cove. The stone structures are situated on a broad beach (known as Rambo Beach after a Barzilian twentieth century refuge the remains of which survive), between the steep hills and the sea which is about 80 m distant. One structure is rectangular without a doorway, and is thought to have served as a store into which seal skins were piled. The other rectangular or semi-circular structures are open on one side, and are interpreted as being habitation or kitchen structures. Partial excavations uncovered metal containers, glass and ceramics, wood, nails, leather from shoes, textiles, and seal skin. The cultural material dates the site to the nineteenth century.








Tómbolo 1

3.100.600 N
395.140 E

Two circular stone fireplaces are located at the eastern end of the tombolo. These are the bases for try-pots used to boil down Elephant seal oil, which would have been killed along the adjacent beaches in the nineteenth century. Near this site is another fireplace that may have been a small domestic fireplace servicing the sealers.


             

























Tómbolo 2

3.100.630 N
394.890 E

A large square stone-walled structure is located against the base of the steep hill slope at the western end of the tombolo. A central entry point survives, and within and surrounding the site is an extensive scatter of glass bottle fragments, ceramics, iron from barrels, whale bones and shoe leather. The site is interpreted as a nineteenth century sealer´s occupation place.

     



















Flat Top Head, Geografo Cove

3.099.550 N
395.290 E

Adjacent to a large rocky outcrop backing the beach, there are many timber planks on the surface, which may have been occupied.  It is postulated that the site is the remains of a mid-twentieth century camp. 




 

















Publicaciones


STEHBERG, R. 1983. Terra Australis Incógnita: una ruta de investigación arqueológica. Serie Científica INACH 30:77-86

STEHBERG, R. Y CAROLINA GATICA.  2001. Reconocimiento arqueológico de la costa norte de la Isla Rey Jorge. Boletín Antártico Chileno 20(1):7-9.

. STEHBERG, R. 2002. Catastro del patrimonio cultural de la costa norte de la isla Rey Jorge, Antártica. VI Encuentro de Historiadores Antártico Iberoamericanos. Ed. J. Berguño. INACH:31-50.

STEHBERG, R. Investigaciones arqueológicas chilenas en las islas Shetland del Sur. ¿Polos opuesto? Estudio Comparado. Ed. J. Berguño.f INACH:172-204.

STEHBERG, R., MARIELA RUIZ Y CAROLINA GATICA. 2002. Reconocimiento arqueológico del patrimonio histórico de la Península Fildes, isla Rey Jorge”, en el Boletín Antártico Chileno Nº 21(1):2-4.

STEHBERG, RUBÉN. 2004. Archaeologists document historical heritage in the South Shetland Islands. Monuments and Sites 8: 69 - 72. 

STEHBERG, R. 2005.  Arqueología histórica antártica. Aborígenes sudamericanos en los mares subantárticos en el siglo XIX. Colección de Antropología, Dirección de Bibliotecas, Archivos y Museos, Santiago VI:11-1202.



