





IPY - Indian Contribution




IPY - Indian Contribution 
Introduction
The International Polar Year (IPY) stems from the idea of propagating greater visibility to the multi disciplinary scientific activity being carried out at the two poles as also the need to put forward a concerted multi national effort to understand various global processes that require more understanding. The international community has worked out detailed scientific plans some for the Antarctic, others for the Arctic and some with bipolar interest. India too is a part of this umbrella. Indian chapter of IPY has been designed to involve the school students with on going polar activities so as to increase their general awareness about Polar Regions. Some postgraduate students have been offered slots in Indian Antarctic Expedition to visit Antarctica. The plans to extend this scheme to school students during the IPY, has been given final shape.
Indian contributions to IPY
India joined IPY by submitting various scientific projects. Following projects have received the endorsement from IPY 
    • ID No: 70: Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and   Antarctica 
    • ID No: 129: Land Based Anthropogenic Impact of Course Particles on Antarctic Shelf  (Aerosol Impact on Antarctica).
The major objectives and the back ground information of these projects is as follows:.
Monitoring of the upper ocean circulation, transport and water masses between Africa and Antarctica (ID No.70). This programme has already been launched in the current expedition (26th Indian Antarctic Expedition) that left Indian shores in early January 2007. Data has been collected as designed from Goa to the India Bay in Antarctica as well as from India bay to the Prydz Bay. The main objectives of the project are: 
    • To access the present scenario and interannual variability of physical properties in the Southern Ocean; 
    • To monitor the circulation, zonal and meridional transport, surface atmospheric heat budget and linkage between Pacific and India Ocean and to devise a framework for understanding the climate variability.
The observational program includes Expandable bathythermographs (XBT)/ Expandable conductivity temperature depth (XCTD) observations in the Indian Sector of the southern ocean with an aim to map the present state of oceanic environment.Year to year variability will be monitored using repeated sampling by using the Indian Antarctic expedition's logistic support on board the ice-class vessels en route India's Antarctic station- Maitri. It is also envisaged to carry out measurement of atmospheric stability parameters along the ship track to understand the zonal / meridional variations of boundary-level heat fluxes. This programme has linkages with science goals of CASO to establish a link between physical oceanography of both continental margin and open ocean environments), biogeochemistry, ecology, sea ice studies, ocean-ice shelf interaction, meteorology, polar-low latitude tele-connections, and palaeoclimate. 
Another important aspect that is being studied initiated as part of IPY in 2007 is Land Based Anthropogenic Impact of Course Particles on Antarctic Shelf  (Aerosol Impact on Antarctica). Various anthropogenic activities on the continent emit aerosol, which are, airborne, remain suspended into troposphere and stratosphere and travel very long distance with the air until they find suitable sink. Large amount of various aerosol particles and their precursor originate from continental sources and significant fraction of this emission travels over oceans to reach Antarctica finally. The primary emitted particles and gases, when transported by the air, come into contact and react via heterogeneous pathways with other aerosols from lays significant role in climate impact which may have the potential to alter the local biologically active system. The study proposes to collect the samples on the ship coarse starting from Goa (India) to the India bay at Antarctica (700 45.94 S and 11044.13’ E) and further en route to the site of India’s third station at Larsemann Hills (69°24'-69°25'S and 76°01' -76°14'E). Elemental composition and particle size distribution and concentration shall be carried out along with the identification of coarse aerosol. Local and cumulative environmental with special reference to accumulation of the particle and its impact on the flora of the area shall be studied. To verify the trajectory of the particles a Meso Scale air quality prediction model shall be utilized.
The data collected will help in understanding the dynamics of continental aerosol over East Antarctica. This programme is in association with the Italian group Project #171 “POLAR-AOD: a network to characterize the means, variability, and trends of the climate-forcing properties of aerosols in Polar Regions” – by Claudio Tomasi, Institute of Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (ISAC-CNR), Bologna, Italy.  
Besides above-mentioned endorsed research proposals the following projects will also contribute to the IPY theme.
Study of the short-term Holocene climate variability’s in Antarctica and the Southern latitudes utilizing sediment cores from the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern ocean, the cores from the periglacial lakes and the shallow ice-cores from Antarctica  (Climate change in the southern latitudes during the Holocene). 
The proposed project seeks to throw light on the forcing functions behind rapid decadal to millennial- scale climate changes at high latitudes, using the polar and Southern Ocean regions as vantage points This study includes work on the shallow ice cores which India has already raised from the shelf and continental ice. during the austral summer (2006-2007) period.
 India is a member of the ITASE Project and its work lays emphasis on the immediate past changes in the chemistry and isotopic variations observed in the ice samples.
Lake sediment cores from Schirmacher Oasis too have offered some proxies for the palaeoclimate studies. For example thecamoebians (Arcella patens Antarctica) and some  palyno-deris from the snow samples as also from the algal mats  have been reported. 
Outreach Programme
Endorsing the view of intensified outreach programme, India has launched an extensive outreach programme for school children during the IPY. The Launching of the Indian Chapter of IPY, simultaneously from New Delhi and Goa, coincided with the international Launch on 1st March 2007. School and college going students apart from general public attended the function. Popular lecture on Green House gasses and Global warming by an eminent scientist was also arranged at Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi. Brochures have been downloaded from the IPY website (www.ipy.org) for translation in official national language and distribution in schools and colleges, all over India. 
World Wildlife Fund-India (WWF) has been named as a partner in the Indian effort for popularising the subject among school children and general public.
NCAOR, has also been actively involved in popularising Antarctic science by inviting students from colleges from different part of India to NCAOR, where they can have a first hand experience of Antarctica and the associated challenges. Many competitions like (Poster and slogan writing, stamp designing etc) for school children and many Invited lectures by eminent scientists, Polar Exhibition “People and the Poles and Photo Exhibition “ Polar Ice”  have also been planned during IPY. Details may also be obtained from NCAOR web site< www.ncaor.org > or WWF-India website  < www.wwfindia.org >




