





Report on an aircraft accident and aircraft removal during Dronning Maud Land Air Network operations in season 2006/2007





Report on an aircraft accident and aircraft removal during Dronning Maud Land Air Network operations 
in season 2006/2007

submitted by

Finland and Germany 
1. Introduction
During Antarctic season 2006/2007 the Finnish Antarctic Programme (FINNARP) and the German Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) as members of Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) have used DROMLAN to transport research groups and cargo to field sites within DML and to their research stations in the region.

DROMLAN is an international project organised by the national Antarctic programs of Belgium, Finland, Germany, India, Japan, The Netherlands, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. DROMLAN coordinates all activities such as intercontinental flights from Cape Town into Dronning Maud Land (DML), intra-continental connecting flights (feeder flights) to stations and field sites in the region, operation of two airfields for landing of heavy wheeled aircraft, provision of flight weather forecast for both the intercontinental flights and feeder flights between the stations Halley (UK) and Syowa (Japan). 
The Antarctic Logistics Centre International (Pty) Ltd (ALCI), Cape Town, is in charge of the practical coordination and performance of intercontinental and intra-continental flights as required by the DROMLAN community. ALCI also provides all pre-flight services in Cape Town. For landing of heavy wheeled aircraft the Novo-Runway (70°51’S, 11°36’E), located close to the Russian station Novolazarevskaya, is operated by the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). The second runway close to the Norwegian station Troll (72°00’S, 02°32’E) is operated by the Norwegian Antarctic Research Expedition (NARE). All members of the community provide meteorological data, support flight following, and ensure fuel provisioning and accommodation at their respective stations.
DROMLAN is an example of international partnership on air-borne science and logistics. The network is open to any member country of COMNAP and SCAR to benefit from this very efficient air-link into DML. 
During Antarctic season 2006/2007 10 intercontinental flights in total (7 flights with aircraft Ilyushin IL-76TD provided by ALCI, 3 flights with aircraft Lockheed Orion P3N-2 provided by NARE) were performed to carry 194 persons and about 28 ton cargo into DML and 185 persons and 9.5 ton cargo back to Cape Town. Feeder flights from Novo-Runway and Troll to the destinations within DML were made with a small ski-equipped aircraft Basler BT-67 (C-GEAI). This aircraft is owned by ALCI and jointly operated with Enterprise Airline Inc. (EAI), Oshawa, Canada. 

2. Basler BT-67 (C-GEAI) accident
On November 10, 2006 one of the intra-continental DROMLAN flights was scheduled with aircraft Basler BT-67 (C-GEAI) on the route Novo-Runway - Mühlig-Hofmannfjella – Neumayer Station – Novo-Runway for FINNARP and AWI. The task was to drop two expedition members of the private non-governmenal Finnish Mountaineer Expedition (FME) in the Mühlig-Hofmannfjella region and further to fly four German experts of AWI for technical inspection to Neumayer Station. 
The BT-67 (C-GEAI) took-off from Novo-Runway at 07-46 UTC. At 08-55 UTC the accident occurred during landing on the unprepared snow surface selected from air at 71° 57.05’ S, 005° 55.90’ E. The aircraft ran into a very hard sastrugi ice at the speed of 60 km/h. The right landing gear collapsed on the impact and the airplane turned around touching the ice surface with its right wing and propeller. 
All six passengers and three crew members were onboard. Nobody was injured during the incident. The following parts of the aircaft were damaged: right wing, right ski, right landing gear and right propeller. Despite the damage of landing gear no oil spills occurred.














Position of accident site and selected airstrip for evacuation (left); the BT-67 just after the accident (right)

3. SAR coordination work and actions
At 09-00 UTC chief pilot of Basler BT-67 (C-GEAI) called the operations manager at Novo-Runway to inform about the accident and requested the evacuation of passengers and crew in the shortest possible time. 

Within the next hour following actions were done at Novo-Runway:
    • Information about the accident and the request to evacuate the people was forwarded to ALCI office in Cape Town, to all DROMLAN stations, and to Enterprise Airline Inc. (Oshawa, Canada). 
    • The team at ALCI office immediately contacted all operators, who had access to the aircraft available in the area i.e. Ken Borek Air, Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions (ALE) operations room (Punta Arenas and Patriot Hills), and Basler Turbo Conversion LLC (Oshkosh, USA).
    • The team at Troll station (Norway) evaluated the option to perform a surface traverse to the accident site and began to prepare the vehicles. Consultations were performed between Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) and AWI in order to assess the risk and identify an appropriate route.
 
From the information received it became clear that the most efficient and quick SAR response could be done using the Twin Otter aircraft chartered by ALE and positioned at Patriot Hills at the time of the incident. Since the weather conditions were good the decision was made with all parties involved to start the rescue preparations with aircraft. The surface traverse was considered as backup in case the weather conditions would deteriorate.

In the meantime the crew inspected the damaged aircraft at the accident site. A communication link was established via Iridium between the Commander and the Communication point at Novo-Runway every 30 minutes. Crew and passengers were informed that possible evacuation could take place within about 24 hours, which meant that passengers and crew had to stay on ice during this time. They prepared survival equipment and provisions on board and worked out a plan of action for the site. An appropriate landing spot for the Twin Otter was found after quite extensive reconnaissance about 2 km off the accident site. 

Within few hours the flight plan for the rescue operation was coordinated and confirmed between ALE, Ken Borek Air, ALCI, Novo-Runway, Troll station, British Antarctic Survey (BAS), and weather forecaster at Neumayer station.  The DROMLAN community was informed on status accordingly. 

On November 10th at 16-50 UTC the Twin Otter took off from Patriot Hills and landed for refuelling at Halley at 21-15 UTC. The flight was continued at 23-50 UTC for Novo-Runway, where backup fuel tanks for long range flights (ferry tanks) were dismantled. The Twin Otter took off from there at 06-16 UTC and landed on the spot 2 km away from the accident site on November 11th at 07-26 UTC. The crew and 4 passengers were evacuated to Novo-Runway. The Finnish mountaineer group remained at site and started the planned expedition. The Twin Otter landed at Novo-Runway at 08-37 UTC and after refuelling immediately flew back to Patriot Hills via Halley. Within about 24 hours from the time of incident the SAR operation had successfully been completed. 















Route of the Twin Otter SAR flights from Patriot Hills to the Basler accident site in the Mühlug-Hofmannfjella on November 10 to 11, 2006

The IL-76TD aircraft waiting at Novo-Runway was ready to fly back with the returned crew and passengers to Cape Town on 11 November 2006. DROMLAN feeder flights could not be continued as planned. The group of the National Institute of Polar Research (Japan) including one member from Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE) and one member from Korean Polar Research Institute (Republic of South Korea) had to stay at Novolazarevskaya station, waiting for the replacement aircraft to complete the flight schedule.

4. Removal of the damaged aircraft
After successful completion of the rescue operation the ALCI office immediately started the preparation works to replace the aircraft in order to continue the regular DROMLAN air operations as soon as possible as well as to repair the damaged aircraft on site for removal.
A new Basler B-67 (reg. N40396) belonging to Basler Turbo Conversion LLC, Oshkosh (US), was contracted and prepared for Antarctic operations. A repair team was assembled with all necessary equipment inclusive the temporary field camp equipment. The crew of the damaged aircraft was flown back to Oshawa (Canada), in order to supervise all the preparations and to fly the replacement aircraft. These works were completed within 15 days from the day of incident. The replacement BT-67 (reg. N40396) arrived with all necessary spares and equipment onboard Novo-Runway 7 days later on December 1, 2006.

On December 2nd the regularly scheduled DROMLAN flight operations were restarted and the repair team was delivered on site. Already on December 9th the damaged aircraft BT-67 (C-GEAI) was ready for return to Novo-Runway. The location did not suffer any environmental damage. No oil spills occurred. The site was cleaned up after completion of repair works, all equipment, temporary field camp and waste has been returned.


The replacement aircraft Basler BT-67 (left) and the repaired aircraft (right) back at Novo-Runway

After further technical check the repaired BT-67 (C-GEAI) left Novo-Runway on December 13, 2006 on the way back to Canada. 

The replacement BT-67 (reg. N40396) was working until the end of the season to complete the planned flight operations within DROMLAN.

4. Lessons learned
1. Coordination between all Antarctic aircraft operators is essential in order to set an efficient SAR system covering due entire Antarctica.
2. Due to the fact that the DROMLAN structure is in place and proper coordination and communication is established between the parties, it was possible to organize this SAR operation in such a short period of time.
3. Combination of groups on board having different destinations is not recommended when outside landings on unprepared airstrips are to be performed.
4. It turned out that small mobile solar panels for recharging the batteries of communication equipment (e.g. Iridium) might become essential. It is recommended to add appropriate solar recharge units to the emergency equipment.
5. The network of possible refuelling spots in Antarctica which can be used for SAR should be further extended in order to cover greater areas, especially considering planned activities during IPY.

