





Annual Report Pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty




Annual Report Pursuant to the Protocol on Environmental protection to the Antarctic Treaty

Inquiries can be addressed to:
Romanian Antarctic Foundation
1, Libertatii Blvd., Bucharest-4, Romania
email: negoita_antarctic@yahoo.com

The report has been elaborated according to article 17 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Romanian Antarctic activities have been carried out at Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, during 07.02.- 31.03.2007 within the collaboration with the 51th Russian Antarctic Expedition, also on board of Akademik Fedorov icebreaker.   
1. NOTIFICATION PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 17 OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
1.1. Notification of the measures taken pursuant to Article 13, paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Protocol
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was ratified by Romania in February 2003, and Romanian Expedition and activities in Larsemann Hills fully observed the Protocol through the procedures of organization and carrying out.
1.2. Contingency plans established in accordance with Article 15 of the Protocol
Romanian Antarctic Foundation has establisched several regulations and contingency plans for our expeditions in Antarctica. Besides these ones, we also permanently observed the specific regulations in the Guide to Law-Racovita Base taken over from Australian Antarctic Division.
2. REPORT PERSUANT TO ANNEX I, ARTICLE 6 (1) OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
2.1. Procedures to consider the environmental impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica/ Annex I, Article 6 (1a)
As the Romanian Law-Racovita Base is located in a protected area, previously to the expedition start, a procedure of Environmental Impact Assessment has been elaborated. This was, besides the Protocol provisions, the basis of developing our activities in compliance with the regulations of implementing the protocol.
2.2. List of initial environmental evaluations developed in accordance with article 2 and decisions taken / Annex I, Article 6 (1b)
In second step of activities in Law-Racovita Base a brief Initial Environmental Assessment was elaborated.
2.3. Significant information obtained, and any action taken in consequence thereof, from procedures put in place in accordance with  Annex I, Article 2 (2) and 5, of the Protocol,  Annex I, Article 6 (1c)

The low number of team members and the adequate initial procedure of activity performance, as well as the people specific education led to an insignificant impact on the local environment. 
3. REPORT PERSUANT TO ANNEX II, ARTICLE 6 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
3.1. Number and nature of permits issued under Annex II of the Protocol during 13 January-24 February 2006 / Annex II, Article 6/2 
None
3.2. Records concerning sampling in the 2007 season 
Limited numbers of samples of sand (20), lichens (4), lake sediment (7), sea water (10), rocks 50 g (10) and soil (3) have been collected during the expedition in Larsemann Hills.
Also I collected samples from:
    • Schirmacher Oasis: rocks (7/50-100g), soils from near the lakes (16/5-10g);
    • Molodezhnaya Station area: lichens (4/0,5g), sand  (7) and rocks (4/20-30g) and
    • between Cape Town – South Atlantic - Greenwich meridian - Lazarev Sea – Davis Sea – Indian Ocean - Cape Town: seawater (120/25-50ml). Part of the samples are taken on board of Akademik Fedorov icebreaker, from various depths in the marine research stations.      
The sampling operation generated an insignificant impact on the environment.
 4. REPORT PERSUANT TO ANNEX III, ARTICLE 9 OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROTOCOL
4.1. Waste Management Plans prepared in accordance with Annex III, Article 8 and 9/1 of the Protocol
We try to be particularly careful to avoid pollution of any sort in Antarctica, and especially any disturbance of fresh water lakes or soil.  We observe the provisions of the Protocol and the Environmental Protection Guide to Law-Racovita Base taken over from Australian Antarctic Division.
4.2. Report on implementation of waste management plan /Annex III, Article 9/1 of the Protocol
All the wastes are separated and transported according to the regulations.
    • Grey water from domestic uses and human urine have been disposed of in special containers.
    • Human solid waste are deposited in double black plastic bags for incineration.
We sort rubbish into three categories:
    • burnables (food scraps, paper) – incinerated;
    • recyclables (glass and plastics containers, aluminium and steel cans) – washed and returned by helycopter to Davis Station;
    • Non - recyclables also returned to Davis Station.
4.3. Inventory of past activities in accordance with Annex III, Article 8/3 and 9/1 of the Protocol 
Inventory of past activities has been as follows:
Title: Romanian National Antarctic Expedition
 Location: Law-Racovita Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica, 69023'16"S and 76022'47"E
 Duration: January 13 –February 24, 2006
 Number of team members: 3
 Type of activities: hydrological, biological and medical researches 
 Sampling: ice, lake water, sand and vegetation (a few grams/sample) 
 Organization Responsible for the preparation of the IEE: Romanian Antarctic Foundation
