





Air Safety on the Antarctic Peninsula 




Air Safety on the Antarctic Peninsula   
1. Introduction
    A. In its articles, the Antarctic Treaty considers various fundamental aspects of the use of air transport:
    1. As a peaceful means recognized and authorized by said instrument.  Historically, the advent of the mechanical and technological era of Antarctic exploration is marked by revolutionary change brought about by the use of planes, aerial cameras, radio communication and motorized transport.   
    2. For aerial observation by observers of the Contracting Parties.  Antarctica is the only region in the world where aerial inspection of all activities can be conducted under the concept of “open skies”, with the purpose of ensuring its status as a protected area “dedicated to peace and science”.
    3.  In the exchange of information on all expeditions to Antarctica that are organized or leave from its territory.  Scientific observations strongly depend on air logistic support, but can also be conducted during flights. For some applications, these observations are more complete than those of satellites.   
    B. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is the body that recommends or regulates the responsibilities and obligations of States regarding the safety of air operations.
    C. In this context, the number of air operations has grown in the last ten years as a result of the increased number of flights by national programs and non-governmental activities.
    D. Each air operator supports the scientific and logistic activities of its national program in accordance with the program’s procedures and experience, and keeping in mind international aeronautical regulations.
    E. The principal objective of this document is to report on air safety in the area of King George Island and environs, so as to avoid incidents and accidents, which may result in the loss of human lives and material damages.  Such incidents would undoubtedly affect national programs and subtract from the common effort of research, environmental protection and Antarctic collaboration. 
    F. The second objective is to make known the permanent capacity of the Pdte. Frei Base in Search and Rescue operations involving persons, planes, and ships, operations that use COSPAS-SARSAT system as an information platform. 
2. Current Regulations 
To achieve full safety of air operations in the area, use and compliance with current regulations is recommended.  
1.  The Antarctic Treaty
The Treaty, its complementary instruments, and the measures adopted in virtue of Article IX make up the “Antarctic Treaty System”, which regulates cooperation among nations and their activities in Antarctica. 
2. Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings 
A.   With regards to cooperation, the VIIth ATCM adopted Recommendation VII-8 on Cooperation in Transport, recommending their Governments to:
    1. Accept the principle of using, where appropriate, common transport facilities by sea and by air for scientific and other personnel proceeding with their equipment to and from Antarctic stations;
    2. Encourage bilateral or multilateral consultations between Contracting Parties in order to establish when arrangements for such common use of transport facilities would be mutually convenient and practicable.
    3. The cost of the use of any common transport facilities should be arranged by agreement between the Contracting Parties concerned, either by direct payment, by reciprocation in kind, or by other mutually agreed means. 

B. 	At the VIIIth and IXth ATCM, interest was expressed in a Cooperative Air Transport System for Antarctica that did not prosper.
        C. Regarding flight safety, at the XIVth ATCM (1987), the Parties discussed growth in air operations and showed concern over delays in the adoption of measures to ensure flight safety, despite their knowledge of low air traffic volume and density in Antarctica compared with other regions in the world. 
The Consultative Meeting adopted Recommendation XVI-9, which led to a meeting of experts to review the situation.  The meeting took place in Paris from 2 to 5 May 1989. 
Based on the recommendations made by the group of experts, the XVth ATCM (1989) elaborated Recommendation XV-20 with 10 proposals, which are available to operators in the AFIM (Appendix N3).
Recommendation XV-20 emphasized that the proposals should be elaborated on the basis of ICAO criteria; defined a calendar for the exchange of information; underlined the importance of the “Manual”; and distinguished between Primary Air and Secondary Air Information Stations for the exchange of information, whose practices were to regulate and specify the procedures for locating a plane in danger in Antarctica.    
 3.  COMNAP and SCALOP
    • Members of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) are the official government representatives responsible for the planning and direction of national activities and programs in Antarctica.  They should expedite important information and directly and collectively contribute to science by providing technical, logistic and other forms of assistance.
    • The Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations (SCALOP) is a coordinating body for Antarctic logistics and operations.  It depends on COMNAP but maintains a special statute of autonomy, having been initially created by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
    • The implementation of Recommendation XV-20 was carried out by COMNAP and assigned to SCALOP, one of whose subgroups has facilitated the execution of the recommendation and the preparation of AFIM.  In addition, TIBA (traffic information broadcasts by aircraft) procedures have been adopted for use in Antarctica.
4.  AFIM (Antarctic Flight Information Manual)
    • This document has been prepared for use as an aeronautical information manual for the region located south of 60ºS, the area to which the Antarctic Treaty applies.  It was prepared using documentation from ICAO, according to Annex 1 S. 
    • The manual is updated by COMNAP’s Working Group on Air Operations.  In addition to information on land-based and associated facilities, it incorporates operational procedures for airplanes that can be modified in virtue of site protection norms and other environmental indications, and air safety. 
    • However, preparation of the manual does not imply acceptance of any risk, obligation, or responsibility on the part of government agencies or COMNAP and its committees.  Inclusion of information into AFIM should not be seen as a service or obligation of the governments of the Antarctic Treaty or of the national programs that provide services or support to other operators, pilots, or expeditions.
    • If the information and details on facilities and procedures in AFIM are elaborated on the basis of ICAO criteria, then Antarctic facilities and services are not available for general or commercial aviation in accordance with ICAO’s normal standards. 
    • The facilities, services and provisions described in AFIM are established and maintained by the national programs and other operators strictly for their own use, and are not designed or provided for use by others, except in the framework of an established cooperation in agreement with Recommendation XVII-8.
    • Pilots and other operators that use the aviation facilities and services in Antarctica do so at their own risk.
    • Airplane operations that involve the facilities of another organization operating in Antarctica should comply with the procedures of prior coordination, prior authorization, and use of a Flight Plan, as is specified in Appendix 6 of AFIM.
5. Chile and the COSPAS-SARSAT System
Chile has been part of the International Satellite System for Search and Rescue COSPAR-SARSAT since 1989, the year in which the Ministry of Foreign Affairs signed on to the program.  It designated the Chilean Air Force as the agency charged with receiving and distributing warning signals detected by the system’s satellites.  This specific function is the role of the Air Search and Rescue Service.
In 1996, after an initial period of close work with the Center for Space Studies of the University of Chile, the Air Force, together with the General Office of Civil Aeronautics, created the Chilean Mission Control Center (CHMCC).  The Center is housed next to a Local use Terminal (LUT) and contains a modern satellite tracking station, homologated in the Cospas–Sarsat system as a “Terrestrial Segment Provider”.  It has the capacity to receive warning information from the system satellites, and process, classify, and distribute it to the Rescue Coordination Centers (RCC) housed in each Air Brigade within national territory.  
Subsequently, this capacity was increased with the creation of two new LUT stations at Punta Arenas (10/JUN/1997) and Easter Island (24/SEP/2001).  The latter is operated by the Armada, which provides more than 90% coverage of the extensive area within the jurisdiction of Chile’s Search and Rescue Service.
Through this system, more than 50 people have been saved in the area under Chile’s supervision through the CHMCC, an area that also comprises the search and rescue regions of Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay.
The search and rescue system in Antarctic works through the Coordinating Subcenter of the Pdte. Frei Antarctic Base with BO-105 helicopters and a Twin Otter plane, and depends on the Rescue Coordination Center of Punta Arenas.
Considering that aeronautical and maritime activity have been growing in recent years, it would be useful for airships heading to Chilean Antarctic territory to consider using 406 beacons, which can be tracked from Chile’s Mission Control Center (CHMCC).  This would allow greater coverage of air safety for said airships.  
6. Capacity of President Frei Base and Lieutenant Marsh Airdrome
    • Operations with DHC-6 and BO-105 Bolkow helicopter.
    • Operations with C-130 airships.
    • Airport services at Lieutenant Marsh airdrome.
    • Flight information.  
    • Support for airships in transit.
    • Crew training.
    • Air Search and Rescue Service and aeromedical evacuations. 
Recommendations
A.  It is known by all Antarctic operators that each year, as of October, air operations increase on the Antarctic continent, specifically in the area of King George Island, a natural outcome of increased activity by Antarctic Program Managers.  In addition, the activity generated by tourist operators, which is increasingly frequent, and whose flight programs are more extensive, further confirms the need to watch over compliance with air safety provisions in Antarctica.
B. In the case of Chile and with experience in this area, it is crucial that information on all flights originating in the area, and on airships proceeding from nearby ships and bases that fly over the areas surrounding the Lieutenant Marsh airdrome, be kept.
C. It is in Chile’s interest to insist on compliance with the aforementioned regulations, whose final objective is to maintain the safety of air operations in Antarctic areas, placing special emphasis on the opportunity to collaborate with our A.T.S. service (Air Transport Service) at the Lieutenant Marsh airdrome.  The objective is to control domestic air transport, and provide aeronautical information and SAR warnings; all of this with the purpose of decreasing and avoiding the risk of incidents and/or accidents in air operations that are carried out in said area, or each time an airship is required to fly over said area. 












23.4.2007
XXX RCTA/Air Safety on the Antarctic Peninsula Apr 2007

