





Construction and Operation of the new Belgian Research Station, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica.
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)





Construction and Operation of the new Belgian Research Station, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica.
Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE)
Introduction
On 10 February 2006 the Belgian Federal Ministries of Environment, Foreign Affairs and Science Policy approved the release of a draft CEE on the Construction and Operation of the new Belgian Research Station, Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica prepared by the Belgian Federal Science Policy (Belspo). The draft CEE was sent to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection via diplomatic channels and the Chair of CEP IX was notified. Working Paper WP-025 was submitted to ATCM XXIX at Edinburgh and the full text of the draft CEE report attached to IP-022. 
Written comments on the draft CEE were received from Australia and Germany, and further comments were made during the review of the CEE at CEP IX during ATCM XXIX. The draft CEE report was well received and Belgium was commended for the quality of the document. The CEP noted that the station design provided a model for sustainable management due to the extensive use of renewable energy sources.
The advice of the CEP to the ATCM on the draft CEE was very positive, indicating that it met the requirements of Article 3 of Annex 1 of the Environmental Protocol and that the CEP agreed with the Conclusion of the report.
Final CEE report
Belspo has prepared a final CEE report that takes account of comments received from Parties intersessionally and during CEP IX. The final CEE report also includes details on refinements to the design, construction and delivery logistics of the station. 
Another site visit was made in the 2006-07 season (BELARE 2006 expedition), during which further baseline survey work was completed, including lichen and snow petrel distribution at Utsteinen Ridge and Nunatak and an investigation of unloading sites in Breid Bay. Access routes onto the ice shelf and to the proposed station location were reviewed. The results of BELARE 2006 have been included in the final CEE report.
The final CEE report can be downloaded as a PDF from the Belspo website (http://www.belspo.be/antar). In addition, Belspo will make available CDs of the final CEE report at ATCM XXX.

