





The Global Invasive Species Database




The Global Invasive Species Database
Introduction
At CEP IX, New Zealand presented the report of a workshop on ‘Non-native Species in the Antarctic’, held in Christchurch in April 2006.  That report made several recommendations for improved management of non-native species matters.
In the discussions that followed it was suggested that a common database for recording non-native species in Antarctica would be useful.  New Zealand noted that there was a global invasive species database co-ordinated in Auckland, New Zealand.  New Zealand offered to make contact with the group to investigate opportunities for using the database to help work related to non-native species in the Antarctic (see paragraphs 130 and 131 from the Final Report of CEP IX).
In the intersessional period New Zealand made contact with the group responsible for managing the global invasive species database.  This short information paper provides a brief overview of the database and suggests some possible next steps.
The Global Invasive Species Database
The Global Invasive Species Database (GISD) can be found on-line at http://www.issg.org/database/welcome/
The GISD aims to increase awareness about invasive alien species and to facilitate effective prevention and management activities.  The GISD is managed by the Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG) of the Species Survival Commission of the IUCN-World Conservation Union.  The GISD was developed as part of the global initiative on invasive species led by the Global Invasive Species Programme (GISP) and is supported through partnerships with the National Biological Information Infrastructure, Manaaki Whenua-Landcare Research (New Zealand), the Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund and the University of Auckland. 
The GISD focuses on invasive alien species that threaten native biodiversity and covers all taxonomic groups from micro-organisms to animals and plants in all ecosystems.  Species information is either supplied by, or reviewed by expert contributors from around the world.
However, the GISD does not include information about all alien species (i.e. those species that may be non-native, but which have not become invasive).  In the sub-Antarctic there are many non-native species that have become invasive and these already feature as such in the GISD.  At present, in Antarctica (south of 60o South), there are no known invasive non-native species.
As such those non-native species that have been identified as occurring in Antarctica do not feature in the GISD.
Possible next steps
It is hoped that preventative measures will significantly minimise the risk of invasive, non-native species occurring in Antarctica.  However, as the New Zealand workshop noted, with increasing visitation to Antarctica and a changing, less hostile climate (in certain parts of Antarctica at least), this can no longer be taken for granted.
As such, and as part of the range of management measures that may be required, it is suggested that some form of database or centralised information system would be helpful.  Possible options include:
    • Seeking ISSG support to expand the GISD so as to also include Antarctic non-native species.  This would certainly require more formal approaches to the ISSG, and potentially also some additional funding to support the work;

    • Development of a separate Antarctic database.  The number of known non-native species is at present small, and gathering the relevant data should not be too onerous.  Once established, the Secretariat may be able to host and maintain the database.
    • Utilising the environmental domains initiative as a further tool for mapping any establishment of non-native species in Antarctica and for identifying “at risk” environments.




New Zealand
March 2007.

