





Scientific Activities at the Argentine Antarctic Bases and 
International Polar Year 




Scientific Activities at the Argentine Antarctic Bases and 
International Polar Year
The Republic of Argentina currently has six permanent scientific bases in Antarctica, as well as seven temporary bases, and several shelters for the support of science, seasonal or opportune scientific activities. These bases operate within the framework of Article I of the Antarctic Treaty and are distributed in locations where the development of scientific projects is permitted, in areas considered to be of special interest for our country and for the international community.  
In the framework of the Argentine Antarctic Program that comprises 30 research projects and more than 15 research-related scientific-technical activities, the permanent Argentine facilities allow data collection year round for international research projects. The information, which meets international quality and reliability standards, is used in the spirit of Article II of the Antarctic Treaty, in collaborative projects with Germany, Finland, France, Italy, Spain, the United States of America, and Canada, and is delivered in real time to different users, including the World Meteorological Organization (e.g., ozone data), the World Organization of Volcano Observatories (Deception Island), the ORFEUS group for seismology, the DORIS beacon, etc.  In the same manner and under the same article, the Republic of Argentina and Germany established the Dallmann Laboratory that operates within Jubany Base.  Upon opening, this was the first laboratory to be jointly managed by two countries in Antarctica and still serves as an example of an effective scientific cooperation in the region. 
In addition and in support of these national and international research projects, the Republic of Argentina maintains and operates the following systems at its permanent Antarctic bases for the measurement and collection of data on:
    • Seismology (in cooperation with Italy) at the Orcadas, Jubany, Esperanza, and San Martín bases.
    • Ozone (in cooperation with Spain, Italy and Finland) at the Belgrano II, San Martín, Jubany, and Marambio bases.
    • Gravimetry, GPS and the DORIS beacon (in cooperation with Germany, United States and France) at the Jubany, Orcadas, and Belgrano II bases.
    • Meteorology at all permanent bases, at the temporary bases that are set up when needed, and on board the Almirante Irízar icebreaker.
In addition to the aforementioned annual activities, during the International Polar Year, the Republic of Argentina will participate, in collaboration with more than 30 countries, in another 33 scientific projects, many of which require more than logistical support, specifically air and naval assistance and support at the Antarctic bases.
Regarding the capacity for support of the scientific activities during the International Polar year, the Republic of Argentina has conveniently provided information about the research projects to be developed and the logistical support available for these at the COMNAP meetings, so that that other countries can use the excess capacities and/or share them in cooperation with the projects of the Argentine Antarctic Program. With this in mind, the laboratories at Belgrano II (in cooperation with Spain) and San Martin (in cooperation with Italy) bases have been expanded, and an agreement has been signed that will permit the installation of a laboratory together with Canada at the Esperanza base. 
With much effort, the Republic of Argentina has maintained a permanent scientific station in Antarctica for 103 years.  The meteorological data collected at the Orcadas base during this period has proven to be extremely relevant for studies of climate warming --which is being recorded in the north of the Antarctic Peninsula-- since it constitutes the most extensive and complete series of documentary data available for the region. In the same manner, the meteorological data collected at the different Argentine Antarctic bases over the last several decades adds to the international network of Antarctic data that makes possible the study of meteorological phenomena and analyses of trends in a region of the planet characterized by a small amount of information.
