





Progress with the Implementation of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP)




Progress with the implementation of the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP): 
Report to ATCM XXX & CEP X 
 
Author: ACAP Interim Secretariat 

Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels
ACAP is a multilateral agreement that aims to achieve and maintain a favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels.  The Agreement entered into force on 1 February 2004.  It has been developed under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS).
The impetus for the development of ACAP was the recognition that albatrosses and petrels are amongst the most threatened birds in the world, with 83% of the world’s albatross species now considered to be endangered, compared with 11% of bird species overall.  The most significant threat too many species of albatrosses and petrels is mortality resulting from interactions with fishing vessels; but the breeding areas of many species are subject to a number of threats including non-native species (which may predate nests and breeding adults, compete for nesting space or destroy nesting habitat), avian diseases and climate change.
At present, eleven Parties have ratified ACAP: Argentina, Australia, Chile, Ecuador, France, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, South Africa, Spain and the United Kingdom.  In addition Brazil has signed but not yet ratified. 
Because of the relatively small number of Parties to the Agreement, the resources available to ACAP are currently modest.  The Interim Secretariat therefore seeks to promote ACAP and encourage more Signatories and Range States to ratify the Agreement and hence further global conservation efforts.

Second Meeting of the Parties

The Second session of the Meeting of the Parties (MoP) to the Agreement was held in Christchurch, New Zealand from 13-17 November 2006. The MoP adopted the Headquarters Agreement (HQA) between the ACAP Secretariat and the Government of Australia. Mr Warren Papworth, in his position of Executive Secretary of the Interim Secretariat, was authorised to sign the HQA on behalf of the Secretariat. The HQA establishes the Secretariat in Hobart, Australia, defines the Secretariat’s legal capacity, and outlines the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the Secretariat and its officers. 

The MoP adopted the Advisory Committee’s 2007-2009 Work Programme and in doing so, identified several issues that they considered to be of highest priority in the Advisory Committee Work Programme. This included, in no particular order, capacity building, working with regional fisheries management organisations to reduce seabird-fisheries interactions, addressing the impacts of non-native species, collecting better information on seabird population status and trends and development of “ACAP Species Assessments”.
Priority actions
The Meeting of the Parties to ACAP has developed a work program and placed responsibility for its implementation with the ACAP Advisory Committee.  The work program reflects the areas of the Action Plan which have been identified as priorities for immediate attention. These are:
    • fisheries bycatch of albatrosses and petrels; and
    • the management and protection of breeding sites, including in particular any adverse effects of introduced species, habitat loss, climate change or avian diseases.
Recognising that much work has been done or is ongoing in these areas, the Advisory Committee has been tasked with recommending the best way to integrate the work of ACAP with existing initiatives.  The aim is to enhance and advance current initiatives, not to duplicate them.  In particular, in addressing seabird bycatch in fisheries, ACAP is seeking to work closely with Regional Fisheries Management Organisations by sharing information derived from tracking studies on the overlap between ACAP listed species and fisheries activities, and by calling on the considerable expertise that some ACAP Parties have in mitigating bycatch through technical solutions and modifying fishing gear and practices. To coordinate the work of the Agreement in addressing this key threat, a Seabird Bycatch Working Group has recently been established.   
Other key areas of work to be taken forward by the Advisory Committee include a review of the status and trends of ACAP listed species.  This review, which is ongoing, has been carried out in consultation with the SCAR Group of Experts on Birds. 

Future meetings
The 3rd Meeting of the ACAP Advisory Committee will take place between 19 and 22 June 2007 in Valdivia, Chile. This meeting will be preceded by meeting of the Status and Trends, and Seabird Bycatch Working Groups.  A workshop to develop an Action Plan for the Waved Albatross is also planned for Lima, Peru on 5 and 6 June, 2007.
ACAP and the Antarctic Treaty
In pursuing its objectives, ACAP seeks to work in an integrated and synergistic manner with other international and national organisations with an interest in the conservation of albatrosses and petrels and the habitats and natural resources on which they depend. 
The significance of the Antarctic Treaty, which applies to an area of importance for a number of ACAP listed species of albatross and petrel, is recognised in the ACAP Agreement. 
In working with the Antarctic Treaty ACAP continues to seek to:
        ◦ encourage the implementation of the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol in such a way as to be mindful of the objectives of ACAP to achieve and maintain a favourable conservation status for albatrosses and petrels, with particular reference to the populations of ACAP species which occur within the Antarctic Treaty Area (see below);
        ◦ encourage Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to avoid significant disturbance of breeding areas of ACAP species through scientific / technical activity or tourism; and to give consideration to ACAP species when preparing environmental impact assessments and conducting environmental impact monitoring;
        ◦ ask the Committee for Environmental Protection to consult with the ACAP Advisory Committee over matters of relevance to ACAP species and their habitats (Article 12.2 of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty refers); and
        ◦ identify opportunities for information exchange – in particular the ongoing reviews of the status and trends of ACAP species and the protection and management status of breeding sites.
ACAP species occurring within the Antarctic Treaty Area
ACAP Annex 1 includes fourteen species which occur regularly within the Antarctic Treaty Area: Black-browed Albatross Thalassarche melanophrys, Campbell Albatross Thalassarche impavida, Chatham Albatross Thalassarche erimita, Grey Petrel Procellaria cinerea, Grey-headed Albatross Thalassarche chrysostoma, Light-mantled Sooty Albatross Phoebetria palpebrata, Northern Giant Petrel Macronectes halli, Northern Royal Albatross Diomedea sanfordi, Salvin’s Albatross Thalassarche salvini, Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus, Sooty Albatross Phoebetria fusca, Southern Royal Albatross Diomedea epomophora, Wandering Albatross Diomedea exulans, White-chinned Petrel Procellaria aequinoctialis.  The majority of these species do not breed in the area, but have foraging ranges which overlap with Antarctic waters.
The Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes giganteus is the single ACAP listed species which breeds within the Antarctic Treaty Area.  This species has been identified by SCAR and BirdLife International as critically endangered at the Antarctic regional scale.  ACAP would welcome any measures taken by the Antarctic Treaty to protect breeding sites for this species, including the designation of the Southern Giant Petrel as an Antarctic Specially Protected Species.
ACAP is grateful for the support provided by SCAR in the provision of data on breeding sites to ACAP’s Breeding Sites Working Group and looks forward to ongoing cooperation with Treaty Parties and organisations in achieving and maintaining a favourable conservation status for ACAP listed species.  
