





Australian Research on the Assessment and Remediation of Contaminated Sites in Antarctica




Australian Research on the Assessment and Remediation of Contaminated Sites in Antarctica
Information Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The Australian Antarctic Division is undertaking research to develop remediation techniques and low cost technologies to allow Australia to clean-up Antarctic and subantarctic contaminated sites in a timely and cost effective manner. The results of this work may also be of benefit for managing other Antarctic contaminated sites. Australia would welcome collaboration from interested Antarctic Treaty nations.
Background
There are a number of contaminated sites associated with Australian activities in the Antarctic and subantarctic region. Such legacy sites include the remains of Wilkes station and the Thala Valley waste disposal site near Casey station, and the partially buried waste site at Davis Station. There are also small abandoned waste disposal sites at Heard and Macquarie Islands. The establishment of these sites pre-dates the current high levels of environmental stewardship and the adoption of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In addition to these legacy sites, further fuel spill sites associated with more recent Australian activities require some form of remediation.
Practical work and scientific research into the clean-up and remediation of contaminated sites in Antarctica has been a focus of Australia’s Antarctic Science Program over the past decade. Australia has reported to the CEP on some of these activities (see On-site assessment of metal contamination during remediation of a waste disposal site in Antarctica submitted to ATCM XXX; ATCM XXIX/IP 45 Fuel spill management in Antarctica: recent advances in first response and remediation; ATCM XXIX/IP77 Monitoring the remediation of the Thala Valley waste disposal site at Casey station; ATCM XXVII/IP54 Thala Valley clean-up; ATCM XXVI/IP36 Clean up of Thala Valley Waste Disposal Site near Casey; ATCM XXV/IP 57 Clean up of a former sub-Antarctic research station at Heard Island).
Current Australian research in environmental risk assessment and remediation 
Assessment and remediation research by the Australian Antarctic Division is currently focusing on five main areas.
    1) Establishing suitable assessment and remediation frameworks
This includes developing “trigger values” or environmental standards specific to the Antarctic environment. Such standards will inform Australia’s remediation activities by assisting to prioritise contaminated sites, and will allow sites to be “signed-off” as posing minimal risk to the environment and ecosystems, based on rigorous scientific data. 
    2) The use of permeable reactive barrier technology for remediation
A fuel spill at Casey station is currently being remediated using permeable reactive barrier technology. A permeable reactive barrier installed in the path of a plume in early 2006 may be the first use of this technology in a cold region environment. Monitoring of the barrier and testing of its effectiveness under freeze/thaw conditions are ongoing.
    3) The use of air sparging for remediation
Air sparging technology was trialed on subantarctic Macquarie Island to remediate a fuel spill that occurred in 2005. It was determined that an easily-installed ‘micro-bioventing’ system, comprising many small air injecting rods, successfully aerated a wide area of soil. When considered with results from experiments to optimise respiration by amending nutrient levels it was concluded that in situ bioremediation for these sites should be capable of achieving a target concentration for soil hydrocarbons of ~200 mg kg-1 in approximately 1-2 years of continual operation at ambient temperatures. This simple methodology could be usefully applied for the summer treatment of other waterlogged and biogenic tundra soils in Antarctica.
    4) Assessing the treatability of hydrocarbon contaminated soils
The aim of this work is to optimise remediation strategies before full-scale implementation occurs, by conducting studies to identify the factors that limit microbial activity (such as temperature, nutrient concentrations and sub-surface oxygen concentrations). The N-Con™ respirometry system was re-designed to measure the rate of respiration by oxygen consumption, total carbon dioxide production and also degradation of a radio-labeled tracer. Oxygen is one of the main limiting factors and the first full-scale treatability assessment has been completed. This work will be published in the near future.
    5) Supporting emerging technological research
Collaborative projects currently underway include: the development and application of multidimensional gas chromatography for quantitative monitoring of fuel spills; the development and application of technologies for the removal of heavy-metal contaminants from run-off associated with abandoned waste disposal sites; and investigating the role of integrons in adaptation to fuel contamination and remediation (ie. horizontal gene transfer in Antarctic bacteria).


Photos: left Monitoring of the permeable reactive barrier at Casey Station to remediate a fuel spill; right Respirometry laboratory at the Australian Antarctic Division investigating constraints on bioremediation.


Photos: left Toxicity test set up to examine the bioavailability and toxicity of contaminated sediments and used to develop “trigger values” for receiving marine environments; right Air sparging trial at Macquarie Island to remediate a fuel spill.
Conclusion
Further research is essential to address gaps in our knowledge of the influence of unique environmental factors in Antarctica on contaminant availability and fluxes, and of the levels at which Antarctic biota and ecosystems respond to contaminants. Collaborative arrangements with Canadian and Alaskan researchers are providing the first quantitative data as the scientific foundation for strategies to remediate sites contaminated with fuel in cold climates.
Further collaboration with researchers working on similar problems in Antarctic ecosystems would be highly beneficial. Australia would warmly welcome such collaboration with representatives from CEP Member nations. Interested persons are invited to contact the Australian Antarctic Division for more information (Dr Ian Snape, Contaminants Geochemist, ian.snape@aad.gov.au).
Australia will report to future CEP meetings on further advances in our clean-up research and remediation activities.

