





Workshop on Coordination of Activities in the Fildes Peninsula  Region





Workshop on Coordination of Activities 
in the Fildes Peninsula  Region


    1. During CEP IX, under other matters related to management plans for protected/managed areas, consistent with paragraph 90 of the final Report of ATCM XXVIII, without prejudice to any other effort to expand the protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, and taking into account the view of WP 22/ATCM XXIX that the Fildes Peninsula region (including Fildes Peninsula, Ardley Island and other adjacent small islands) needs a multiple use management system, it was agreed to establish an international working group involving interested Parties, possibly aiming at drafting a management plan for an ASMA covering the Fildes Peninsula Region, whose initial work is reported in a separate IP.

    2. The Committee also noted that Chile, as a country with large and long-standing installations on King George Island would host a workshop to prepare the input on this issue for discussion at CEP X.

    3. The Programme developed by the Workshop, held at Punta Arenas, Chile, at the siege of the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH) is attached.

    4. Twelve countries were represented at the Workshop. In addition to the convenors of the International Working Group,  Chile and Germany,  the workshop was attended by Argentina,  Brazil,  China,  Ecuador,  France,  Korea, Russia,  Spain,  United Kingdom and Uruguay. ASOC and IAATO attended as observers.

    5. The Workshop, under the heading “Scientific Cooperation, Environmental Protection, Coordination of Activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica”, examined a range of  approaches to a multiple use management system, including the scientific and environmental studies leading towards an ASMA,  the all-inclusive strategy required to integrate all the elements of a multi-use protection system, and the option of applying different codes of conduct to the various uses and values to be protected. 

    6. Tools and methods involved in those approaches and best practices applied in other managed areas were analysed drawing upon previous experiences. These included zoning, such as the one developed in the French Austral and Antarctic Territories, the recourse to geographic information systems and the performance of  environmental risk analysis.

    7.  The state of the existing protected areas within the Fildes Peninsula was systematically explored and proposals emerged for their improvement, including both existing sites (Nºs. 125-150), and new proposals for the protection of archaeological sites. The different nature of the challenges confronting the protection of very diverse values was recognized. Beyond the boundaries of Fildes Peninsula,  environmental management in the adjacent Admiralty Bay ASMA was described as well as the development of patterns of coordination among the stations in that area;  an initial proposal for a new site in the vicinity of King Sejong Station, in Marian Bay, was also presented.
    8. All the existing stations in Fildes Peninsula, one of the most important clusters of scientific and logistic installations in Antarctica, reported on their environmental management policies, including energy efficiency, new technologies to diminish excessive noise and other impacts. The requirement for further codes of conduct and regulatory instruments to be applied within the large space of a “Facilities Zone” in Fildes Peninsula were mentioned.

    9. A presentation was made by IAATO on the role the organization plays in King George Island in order to ensure that the high standards of operation by its members were maintained. The representative of IAATO expressed some concern regarding the possible growth  of very large tourist vessels cruises by operators not affiliated to IAATO. ASOC attended the meeting but did not make a presentation.

    10. The protection of scientific values, compared and related to environmental protection, but concerned with the goal of high quality science as with the ways and means to allow science and good stewardship to progress interactively, was also the subject of a separate presentation.

    11. The Director of the Chilean Antarctic Institute made his concluding remarks on the opportunities for global and climate change research in King George Island, pleading for greater international coordination of science, appealing to comparative experiences and developments, whereas specific scientific or environmental issues offer different profiles within the diversity of Antarctica, and a complete solution cannot be found inside a narrow regional boundary.

    12. The Workshop did not produce findings and recommendations but its materials and methodology shall  remain available to  the International Working Group, and the different presentations, which will be published by INACH, may be posted in the ATS Secretariat web for this purpose. The participants welcomed the announcement of the publication of the results of the German research project. Improvements in the existing ASPAS and development of new ones would be forwarded to the CEP, while Germany and Chile would take advantage of the next ATCM (Delhi, 30 April-11 May, 2007) to gather the International Working Group. 












JBB
23.4.2007
XXX RCTA/IP sobre Taller Fildes abr-2007

Appendix

WORKSHOP  PROGRAMME

Scientific Cooperation, Environmental Protection,
Coordination of Activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region,
King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.


Thursday, 29 March, 2007

Opening Session
09:45 h
Welcome Address by the Director of INACH
Dr. José Retamales.
10 :00
Introduction to the Workshop
Verónica Vallejos, INACH.
10:15
Coffee Break
Session Nº 1
Opportunities and Options
Chair, Cai Minghong China 

10:30
Development of Environmental Environmental Management Options for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island.
Dr.Heike Herata, Germany.
11:00
Codes of Conduct as a primary approach to the coordination of activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
Aldo Felici, Uruguay.
11:30
The Deception Island Model: pioneering trail towards Antarctic  site management.
Rod Downie, United Kingdom.
12:00
Discussion on Strategies and Environmental Management.
12:30
Lunch break

Session Nº 2

Management Tools and Methods
Chair: Dr. José Retamales, Chile.
14:15 
Zoning as a useful Management Tool in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
Yves Frenot, France.
14:45
The requirement for a Geographic Information System in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
Ricardo Jaña, Chile.
15:15
Risk Assessment in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
Rodolfo Sánchez, Argentina.
15:45
Possible Modules in a Fildes Peninsula Region ´ASMA.
Fritz Hertel, Germany
16:15
Discussion on Tools and Methods.
16.45
Coffee Break
Session Nº 3

Conservation of Natural and Cultural Values
Chair:	Dr. Victor Pomelov, Russia.
17:00 h
Management of existing ASPA 150. Current situation. 
Verónica Vallejos, Chile.

17:30
Management and further protection within ASPA 125. 
Marcelo Leppe, Chile.
18:00 
Environmental Assessments and Management Approaches in the Admiralty Bay ASMA
Tania Aparecida da Silva Brito, Brazil.
18:30
Historic Sites and Archaeological remains in Fildes Peninsula.
Rubén Stehberg, Chile 
19:00
The development of a possible ASPA near King Sejong Station.
Jaeyong Choi, Korea
20:00
Icebreaker

Friday, 30 March 2007


Session Nº 4

Challenges and Responses
Chair:	 Jaeyong Choi, Korea 
09:00 hrs
Environmental Management  of the Frei Station Area. 
Santiago Madrid, Chile
Environmental Management for Escudero Station.
Konrad Holscher, Chile, 
Chile.
09:45
Environmental management at Bellingshausen Station.       
Victor Pomelov, Russia.
10:20
Coffee Break
10:35
Environmental Management Approaches in Chinese 
Antarctic Stations. 
Cai Minghong, China.
11:15
Environmental management at Artigas Station
Aldo Felici, Uruguay
11:45
Discussion of the concept of a “Facilities Zone”
12:30
Lunch Break

Session Nº 5

Facilitation of Scientific Research
Chair: Axel Szelinski, Germany
14:30
Tourism on the Fildes Peninsula. The IAATO View.
Denise Landau, IAATO.
15:00
Scientific Research Protection: Restricted, Sensitive, Historic  and Terrestrial and Marine Reserve Zones.
Jorge Berguño, Chile.
15:30
Discussion on the Management of Antarctic Science and other peaceful uses
16:00
Coffee Break
16:30
Concluding Remarks: Opportunities for Climate Change Research and Scientific Cooperation  in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
Dr. José Retamales, Chile
20:00
Workshop Dinner


Saturday, 31 March 2007

Departure of Participants.




