





Cooperation Research Opportunities in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica




Cooperation  Research Opportunities in Larsemann Hills,  East Antarctica 
Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania make efforts to promote such collaborations, willing to become a Consultative Party. In this respect, we mention:
    1. 1. After a series of fruitful negociations between Romania and Australia, on February 20, 2006, Australia marked the establishment of the first scientific Romanian Base in Larsemann Hills, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica. The inauguration of Law-Racovita Base took place in the presence of Chinese, Russian, Australian and Romanian scientists from Zhong Shan, Progress and Davis Stations.
    2. Recent Romanian Antarctic scientific activities were performed based on the cooperation with the 51th Russian Antarctic Expedition and the research conditions provided by Australia following the commissionning of Law-Racovita Base.  

Romanian scientific activities in Larsemann Hills - multidisciplinary: 
Geology, lake study, pedology, biology, biodiverstity, microbiology, medicine, biotechnology, human impact on the environment, astronomy, climatic changes.

Polar Robotic Telescope in Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica

Petre Popescu1, Teodor Gheorghe Negoita2, Daniel Iftimescu2,
Adrian Bot3, Paul-Andrei Iordache2
1 Astronomical Institute, Bucharest, Romania
2Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania
3 National Research and Development Institute for Isotopic 
And Molecular Technologies, Cluj Napoca, Romania

The aim of this project is to achieve a robotic telescope adapted to polar environment activity. After performing the technological study including the main parameters and goals, a study of astroclimate will be performed by both using the previously obtained database and in situ determinations at the Romanian scientific polar station Law-Racoviţă. The module will be built following studies, projects andfinal test in Romania, the module will be installed in situ by our scientific associates, after a preliminary training. Observational results are intended to be stored in databases, analyzed and  eventually home–processed. The astro-geodetical observation programs will be performed via satellite communications.    

The local exceptional observation conditions are: the lowest seeing levels in the visible wavelength range, the lowest sky background level in the infrared domain and the best atmospheric transmission through “windows” in the infrared and sub-millimetre ranges. 

The Romanian equipment will be used to study the atmosphere characteristics in Larsemann Hills, such as: the physical and chemical structure, radiation absorption, atmospheric emissions, atmospheric refraction, diffraction and scattering, turbulence, transparency and the image quality. 
The meteorological conditions to consider in the calculation formulae of the equipment are related to the temperature variations, wind direction, humidity, nebulosity (frequency of clear days) and the other meteorological parameters measured in the existing stations in Larsemann Hills, data collected by us in the last three years. 
Our observations can be performed at short zenith distances and during a long time. The construction of the astronomic module considers all these aspects by using some highly sensitive detectors. The meteorological observations at the soil level in Larsemann Hills will be also correlated with the space ones. 
In the preliminary location studies, there have been considered the direct visibility to the
station, the possible radio link and the selection of a location that should avoid the influence of the parasite light sources at the station during the polar night. 
This module could operate in Larsemann Hills within a cooperation with the neibouring stations and in Davis Station as well.  
References
1. Paraschiv P., Nedelcu A., Popescu P., Negoiţă T.Gh., Bot A., Popescu R., Bădescu O. - Polar Robotic Telescope, Proceedings of the International Symposium „Scientific Programs and Astronomy Education in SEE and Ukraine”, Bucharest, Romania, September 16-17, 2006, Romanian Astronomical Journal, Vol. 16, Suppl., 2006, p. 51, ISSN 1220-5168
2. Popescu P., Paraschiv P., Popescu R., Dumitrescu A., Bocşa G., Bădescu O., Bot A., Cosma V., Negoiţă T.Gh., Cotta M. - Romanian Robotic Telescope Project for Antarctica, IAU GA SPS7 „Astronomy in Antarctica”, Prague, August 14-25, 2006, Abstract Book, p.487
3. Popescu P., Popescu R., Paraschiv P., Nedelcu A., Bădescu O., Dumitrescu A., Bocşa G., Bot A., Negoiţă T.Gh. – Romanian Remote Control Telescope in Law-Racoviţă Antarctic Base,  Proceedings of the International Conference „Fifty Years of Romanian Astrophysics, Bucharest, September 27-30, 2006, to be published in American Institute of Physics Conference Proceedings Series (see: http://aira.astro.ro/~cris/efyra/)

Study of the host-virus relationship in Larsemann Hills lakes, East Antarctica

Florica Topârceanu1, Teodor Gheorghe Negoiţă2
1“Ştefan S. Nicolau” Institute of Virology, Bucharest, Romania
2 Romanian Polar Research Institute, Bucharest, Romania
 
Studies performed until now lead to the conclusion that the lakes of Antarctica are characterized by short food chains with no fish, few metazoans and plankton consisting of viruses and their hosts such as bacteria, cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae. (Kepner et al., 1998; Wilson et al., 2000; Laybourn-Parry et al., 2001; Madan et al., 2005). 
The Romanian Law-Racoviţă Base is situated within the environment protection area of Larsemann Hills in East Antarctica where fresh-water and salt lakes and flowing waters after snow thawing in Antarctic summer are abundant. Our station offers the Romanian and foreign researchers opportunities to study the aquatic ecosystems in this area, in the framework of international coperations. In this respect, we consider the possibility of studying the virus-host cell relationship in the aquatic ecosystems of Larsemann Hills. 
We suggest as potential objectives the intracellular and extracellular detection of virus-like particles (VLPs), the identification of VLPs hosts, VLPs isolation and purification and  the characterization of the viral replication cycle, the investigation of the potential morphological and biochemical changes induced by VLPs in various hosts. 
The achievement of this complex study involves the following stages: 1) the annual organization of Romanian Research Expeditions in East Antarctica at the Law-Racoviţă Station; 2) the fitting out of the Microbiology Laboratory at Law-Racoviţă Station with the research equipment acquired by the Romanian Polar Research Institute; 3) sampling of water and (micro)organisms from the Indian Ocean and Antarctica; 4) processing and partial investigation of the samples in the laboratories operating on the polar research ship Aurora Australis, and in the laboratory of the Law-Racoviţă Station; 5) provision of the adequate sample storage conditions; 6) experimental study proper in laboratories in Romania and those of the foreign partners. 
References
Christin Säwström (2003).Viral dynamics in the microbial loop, Introductory Essay, Department of Ecology, Limnology, Lund University. 


Study of biodiversity in Larsemann Hills ecosystems, their response to environmental changes and applications
(RO-03)

Investigators of 
Romanian Polar Research Institute, Institute of Biology-Bucharest,
 “Lower Danube” University Galati, Romania
	 
Previous researches on the microbiota of certain polar soils led to the identification and selection of strains having biotechnological implications, belonging to the Bacillus genus, that are remarcable due to their potential of elaborating enzymes of industrial interest. The strains Bacillus subtilis MIUG 6.119 and Bacillus subtilis MIUG 6.150, isolated from soils of the East Antarctica, revealed an excellent capacity to addapt to the biotechnological conditions provided at laboratory level, showing a higher enzymatic potential as against the similar strains from indigenous soils.
Based on previous research this project aims to perform advanced studies of the Antarctic ecosystems biodiversity and their response to the environment modifications (climatic changes, pollution and risk) to be applied for the sustainable management of Antarctic biological resources and the future elaboration of some environmental protection technologies by using the enzymatic potential of psychrophilic microorganisms.
Any other cooperation of the Antarctic Treaty parties, besides Australia,  is wellcome. 
References: 
1. Bahrim G., Dan V., Negoiţă T. Studies on the Amylase Biosynthesis Potential of Bacillus sp. strain isolated from East Antarctic Soils. Antarctic and Artic Research, 
Publishing House of the Romanian Academy, vol. I, p. 31-47, 2000, ISBN-973-27-0803-4 
2. Karam, J.; Nicell, J.A. Potential application of enzymes in waste treatment. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 68, 1997, p.47-56
3. Kennedy, M.J.; Reader, S.L.; Swierczynski, L.M. Preservation records of 
micro-organisms evidence of the tenacity of life. Microbiology, 140(10), 1994, p. 2513-2529
4. Ramgren, M. et al. a-Amylase production with B. subtilis in presence of PEG and surfactants. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 1988, 29, p.337-340
5. Vishniac, H.S., Microbiology of Antarctic Soils, Antarctic Microb., 1993, p. 297-341.  
6. Bahrim G., Negoita T.Gh., Cai Minghong.  a-Amylase biosynthesis with Antarctic Bacillus subtilis strains by solid-state fermentation. The First National Polar Research Symposium, with international participation, November, 15-16, 2007, Bucharest, Romania.  







