





Chinese Antarctic Environmental Report (2006-2007)





Chinese Antarctic Environmental Report 
(2006-2007)
1. Introduction
In 2006/07 season, the 23rd Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition, including 52 scientists and logistic men, went to Antarctica. Among them, 27 people went to the Great Wall Station (12 people overwintering), and 25 people went to the Zhongshan Station (18 people overwintering).
Because of the rebuilding of the R/V “Xuelong”, China had no her own Antarctic cruise in this season. Chinese Antarctic expeditioners were transported from Chile or Australia to the Antarctic by Chilean airplane or Australian Antarctic expedition vessel, respectively. 

2. Main activities
2.1 Great Wall Station
Great Wall Station (62º12’59”S, 58º57’52”W) is located on King George Island of the South Shetlands Islands, west Antarctica. The station was established in the summer of 1984/85 season and has being operated continuous since then. The main scientific activities involve the research fields of meteorology, ecology, biology, environmental science, etc. The Station is composed of 10 permanent buildings and can accommodate approximately 40 personnel in summer and 20 personnel in winter.
The main activities in 2006/07 season included:
Logistics:
● Heavy repair of the generators;
● Reinforcing the base of the powerhouse and other old buildings;
● Maintenance of the vehicles and other instruments;
● Mapping of the engineering relief map;
● Investigation of the rebuilding plan of the new oil tanks;
Scientific research programs:
● Meteorological observation and ecological-environmental monitoring;
● 2007 SCAR Epoch GPS Campaign;
● Physiology of plants under extreme environment;
● Eco-geological investigations in the ice-free area of Antarctica;
● History record of pollution in Antarctica by stratigraphic record within the penguin dropping amended soil;
● 3D geospacial data gathering/hydrographic surveying and mapping around the station; 
● Microbiology.

2.2 Zhongshan Station
Zhongshan Station (69º22’24”S, 76º22’40”E) is located on the northeastern tip of eastern Broknes, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. The station was established in the summer of 1988/89 season and has being operated continuously since then. The main scientific activities involve the research fields of meteorology, UAP, geomagnetism, glaciology, geology, biology, etc. The Station is composed of office building, scientific research building, living building and powerhouse etc, which can accommodate about 50 personnel in summer and 25 personnel in winter.
The main activities in the 2006/07 season included:
Logistics:
● Heavy repair of the generators;
● Maintenance of vehicles and buildings;
● Examination of solar utilizing equipments.
●Bulit a path from Russian oilcans to Yuanyang island.
Scientific research programs:
● Observations of meteorology, upper atmosphere physics, geomagnetism, tide gauge, earth tide gravity and sea ice, etc.
● Dalk glacier dynamic monitoring;
● Tectonism of the Prydz belt in assembly of East Antarctica during Pan African age;
● High resolution paleoclimatic records in Antarctic lakes during the late Pleistocene;
● The study of the microbiology.
 
2.3 “Xuelong” 
The “Xuelong” is rebuilding now in China and will carry out her new task of the Antarctic cruise in season of 2007/08.

3. The environmental impact assessment
The Madrid Protocol, in Article 3, establishes a number of environmental principles which can be considered a guide to environmental protection in Antarctica and its dependent and associated ecosystems. Among such principles, those stated under paragraph C express the necessity of collecting sufficient information “to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgments about, their possible impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and on the value of Antarctica for the conduct of scientific research”.
According to the Madrid Protocol, impacts shall be evaluated by taking into account three levels of significance:
-- less than minor or transitory impact;
-- minor or transitory impact; or
-- more than minor or transitory impact.
The EIAs were requested on all the 2006/2007 Chinese Antarctic activities and evaluated by a group of specialists organized by CAA in June 2006. The activities are reasonable and have less than a minor and transitory impact on the environment, so they can be carried out in the Antarctic.

4. Measures of environmental protection
4.1. Education and training
During the organization of the team of the 23rd Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition, all the members, including scientists and logistic men, were trained for the protection of the Antarctic environment. 
The environmental officials at the stations were appointed to be responsible for the environmental management and assisting the chief of the station to deal with environmental accident, including monitoring the state of the equipment used for environmental protection, the sewage treating system, the incinerator, waste material management, etc.
4.2 Oil transportation
There was no oil transportation task in 2006/07 season. 
4.3 Maintenance of the stations
The maintaining work of the generators, vehicles and other instruments were done in doors. Prevention was taken to avoid oil leakage and all the waste oil was stored to bring back to China later.
People at the stations were organized to “clean” the station environment, especially to clean up all waste materials around the buildings. 
4.4 Scientific research
Scientists were asked not to disturb the plants or penguins when they were in the field. All the waste produced during the research should be collected and brought back to the station. 
Approved by the CAA, the scientists took samples from snow-ice, soil, seawater, and freshwater, and no mosses or lichens were sampled in this season. The impacts of these samplings were very small and transitory. By the way, the physiological research of plant was carried out in situ by an equipment of physiological measurement (MiniPAM).
4.5 Waste management and disposal
Under the conduction of the environmental official, the waste materials at the station were divided into different catalog. Combustible material was to be burned in the incinerator. Other waste material, including waste oil, plastic, cans and batteries was gathered into containers to be transported back to China later.
All the medical and chemical wastes were requested to be collected in the vessels to be transported back to China. In 2006/2007 season, no radiate material was used.

5．Monitoring 
The south-western part of King George Island---Fildes Peninsula is a large ice-free area with important natural, scientific, aesthetic and historic values, and is intensively used for scientific, logistic and tourism activities. Based on its intensively human activities and the fact of quick warming in this region, it becomes one of the most fragile environments in the Antarctic. The monitoring of the environment is imperative in order to protect the environment of this region.
In 2006/07 season, the monitoring of water quality was done at Great Wall station in summer (see Fig.1and Fig.2).
5.1 Sewage water
Three monitoring sites (see attachment) were chosen near the coast of the Great Wall Station. One was near sewage point, and other two were chosen for comparison. The results were shown in Fig.3 and Fig.4. 
  The data of the nutrients concentrations showed that, there were little differences of the N [(NO3-+NO2-)-N] and TP (PO43--P) changes between the seawater of the sewage point and those of comparison points. It could be concluded that there was less than minor or transitory impact on the seawater environment of Antarctica.
5.2 Fresh water
Two lakes, West Lake and Yan’ou Lake (see attachment), were chosen near the Station to monitoring the nutrient levels, and classified the waters according to GB 3838-2002. The West Lake is a lake to supply water for the station, and Yan’ou Lake is near the oil tanks. The results were shown in Fig. 5 and Fig.6.
The data of the nutrients concentrations showed that, the classes the freshwater were far less than Class I of the groundwater of the lakes according to GB 3838-2002, means that there was almost no pollution in these areas.
5.3 Sea water
    10 stations were set in the Great Wall and Ardley Bays (see attachment). The parameters such as temperature, salinity, nutrients, chlorophyll a concentrations were measured and plankton samples were taken for further analysis of the community structure.

6. Environmental accident
No environmental accident occurred in this season.

7. Future plan
● According to the project of “The Improvement of the Chinese Antarctic Expedition Abilities”, the Great Wall and Zhongshan Stations will be rebuilt in the coming years. The old sewage treatment systems and incinerators at both stations are going to be replaced. It will effectively decrease the impact of maintaining stations to the environment.
● In order to protect the environment more effectively, China will strengthen the environmental protection measures and long-term environmental monitoring activities at both Stations. A water environmental monitoring system is considered and will be installed at the Great Wall Station in the coming two years so the year-round time-series data can be collected automatically.

