





The Spanish Research Activities 
during IPY





The Spanish Research Activities during IPY
To coordinate all the research activities and international relationships within the International Polar Year (IPY), the Spanish Polar Committee, in December 2005, has designated a Spanish Committee for the IPY. The members of which are well known people related to the different aspects of the Spanish Polar research.
1. Spanish Infrastructure capacities during the IPY
The available infrastructures for the IPY are the followings: 
Antarctic Station Juan Carlos Primero
This station is located in Livingston Island within the South Shetlands Archipelago. The station has a capacity for 20 individuals including scientist and technicians. The Marine Technological Unit (UTM-CSIC) has the responsibility to the integral operation of the station.
Antarctic Station Gabriel de Castilla
The station is situated in Deception Island, also in the South Shetlands Archipelago. The station is operated by the Spanish Army (Ejército de Tierra).
Both stations are open during the austral summer, normally the working season starts mid November ending at the beginning of March. During winter time several physical parameters as recorded automatically. 
Byers Temporal Camp
During the IPY Spain will keep and maintain the temporal Camp at Peninsula Byers, Livingston Island, to support different research activities, mainly in the field of limnology and biology.
Bio Hesperides
Research vessel Hespérides, belongs to the Spanish Navy, and since 1990 is part of the Spanish National Infrastructures performing multidisciplinary marine investigation. The Hespérides spends an average of 2-3 months per year at Antarctic waters.
Technical characteristics
Length: 82.5 m				 Draught: 4.42 m
Width: 14.3 m				 Maximum Speed: 14.7 knots
Displacement: 2,665.6 Tn		 Autonomy: 60 days
Capacity: 33 Scientist/52 Crew
The technical support, management and maintenance are made by UTM-CSIC. During the IPY the vessel is programmed for Polar Research expeditions at Artic (2007) and Antarctic (2008).
Supplier Vessel Bio Las Palmas
The BIO Las Palmas, also belonging to the Navy, is the logistic and supplier vessel to the Spanish Antarctic Stations, and she also supports other activities, funded by the National Research Plan, developed around the South Shetlands Islands.
It must be pointed out that a significant Spanish research activity during the IPY at both poles will be carried out by Spanish scientist using infrastructures of other countries, mainly in areas where no Spanish infrastructure is available.
2- Planned research activity 
The Ministry of Education and Science, through the National Plan of R+D+I, decided in 2005 to include extraordinary resources to specifically finance research activities during the IPY. In spite of the annual call for research programmes, a specific call for IPY proposals was launched.
The resources provided by the Ministry of Education and Science rise up to 8 M€ and are distributed as follows, 3,5 M€ in Research Projects, 1 M€ in scholarships and 3,5 M€ in logistics for Antarctic Stations and Vessels Operations  (Hespérides and Las Palmas).  
The call was very successful and largely accepted by Spanish polar researches with the following numbers. 
A total of 33 projects were submitted, 22 of them with their own logistics and the rest with third countries logistics.
Within this call, 17 Projects were approved concerning, different geographical working areas: 
    • Arctic: 4  Projects 
    • Antarctic: 9 Project
    • Bipolar: 3 Projects
    • Sub-polar:1 Project
The projects approved will be developed with the following infrastructures: 
Spanish infrastructure & logistics: 
    • 4 marine Projects in the BIO Hespérides, 2 of them in the Arctic and 2 in Antarctica 
    • 6 land projects will be achieved in the Spanish Antarctic stations and temporal camps 
International infrastructure & logistics: 
    • 8 with infrastructures and logistics from different countries
In terms of personnel mobilization this call will mobilised about 220 scientists from 65 National and International research centres. 
Thematic fields from the approved proposals for the IPY
    • Ocean-atmosphere interactions 
    • Glaciology- Seismology and backwards motions. 
    • Ozone evolution and other gases associated and their relationship with stratospheric temperature and transport. Improving CTM models.
    • Climate change in Antarctica and Artic (3 projects). Specific topics are related with paleoclime from marine sediments samples.
    • Physical oceanography: Dynamic coastal evolution at the Austral oceans. 
    • Influence of climatic change on lichens, birds, and plankton ecosystems (3 projects) 
    • Permafrost  (2 projects) 
    • Identification and characterisation of process that control the isotopic markers distribution within the ocean, and its sensitivity to climate change (Artic) 
    • Geodynamic of the South Shetlands (2 project) 
There are other initiatives involved in the IPY funded by National calls. 
3- Polar National Data Center
The Antarctic National Data Center (CNDA) is integrated in the Antarctic Data Directory System (ADDS), which together with other national’s data centers is linked to the  AMD (Antarctic Master Directory).
The NDC’s act as a linkage between researches and the AMD contributing to warranty the free interchange and circulation of information generated by the research activities of the countries members of the Antarctic Treaty. Moreover, allow to optimize resources, avoiding duplications efforts and facilitating contacts between national’s teams of different countries.
In the frame of the IPY, Spanish CNDS has implemented a new set of tools: 
    • To assist scientist in the metadata generation.
    • To validate the metadata archives. 
    • To send the validated metadata archives to AMD.
    • To store the brute data recorded in surveys where Spain is involved. 
4- Cultural Events 
During 2007 several events related with the IPY have been programmed:
 Conferences: 
Los martes de l´Oceanogràfic. 3ª edition YPY
November 2006 - June 2007. Ciudad de las Artes y las Ciencias. Valencia
Organized by  Ciudad de las Artes y las Ciencias               
El IGME en la Antártida y el Año Polar Internacional.  19december till de 18 January 2007. Madrid. Organized by Instituto Geológico y Minero de España
Itinerant exposition:
“Atrapados en el Hielo” (Fundación Caixa Catalunya) 2006-2008
Different events and expositions are being organized in Research centres, Museums, and other conferences that will be properly announced on time.
There is already a contact person in the Ministry of Education and Science that deals with all the press release, official Projects presentations, and any other topic concerning the IPY. A group within the International Youth Polar Year has also been formed.
The official ceremony of the IPY in Spain was by1st of March. The Opening ceremony will be chair by the Minister of Education and Science
