





Australia’s Antarctic Air Service 2006/07




Australia’s Antarctic Air Service 2006/07
Objective of the Australian Government Antarctic Air Service
The Australian Antarctic Division is implementing a regular air service between Hobart and Casey station. The Australia‑Antarctica air link will enhance Australia’s ability to support scientific research in Antarctica by reducing reliance on ship‑based transport for passenger movement. 
Key points
Hobart is Australia’s gateway to Antarctica where significant logistical expertise and support infrastructure exists to support collaborative, priority science and Antarctic Treaty activities.
This initiative will modernise support for Australia’s Antarctic programme. The air link from Hobart to Casey will operate during the summer months from 2007/08 onwards. An estimated 10 to 20 flights per season will be conducted once the system is fully operational. The inter‑continental air service will complement the existing use of ski equipped CASA-212 aircraft within Antarctica.
The air service will meet all our domestic legal obligations and Antarctic Treaty requirements.  It will be environmentally safe. The aircraft will operate from a snow‑capped blue‑ice runway near Casey Station. 
Ships will continue to be used for marine science, station bulk cargo resupply and passenger movement.
Background
Why does Australia need an air service to Antarctica?
Australia has had a long association with Antarctica yet since the time of Mawson Australia has had to rely on ice‑strengthened ships to access the continent. 
Australia’s current Antarctic transport system is totally reliant on shipping to transport people and supplies to Antarctica.  This results in inefficiencies and uncertainties that arise due to weather and ice conditions and long ocean voyages. Access to Antarctica by ship is still only possible during the summer months. Because of the length of the voyages (up to several weeks), ships’ visits to the stations are only possible two or three times per summer season. 
The Antarctic air link will provide the single biggest boost to the Australian Antarctic programme since its inception in the late 1940s and will:
    • significantly increase the efficiency, capacity, and flexibility of Australia’s Antarctic science efforts in an area that profoundly impacts on Australia’s (and the world’s) weather, climate, ocean currents and sea-level;
    • allow the internationalisation of the Australian Antarctic programme;
    • allow rapid access to Antarctica to respond to emergencies; and
    • complement our work to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing through aerial surveillance to protect valuable Southern Ocean fisheries.
Activity to date
A five‑year lease for an Airbus A319 aircraft (Figure 1) to provide an inter‑continental air service between Hobart and Antarctica has been signed with aircraft operator Skytraders Pty Ltd.  The aircraft arrived in Australia on 20 February 2007.
Construction of the Wilkins Runway in Antarctica is progressing well (Figure 2).  The majority of the runway foundation has been graded, enabling aircraft to use the runway.  A compressed snow pavement will be applied to the runway surface progressively in ensuing summer seasons.  The compressed snow pavement is not a requirement for a flight to occur, however it is important for the long‑term operation of the runway.

The runway has been graded and surveyed to a length suitable for operations of the A319 (3790m, plus over run).  An overflight of the runway by a Bombardier Global Express in 2006 was used to test a range of operational processes and procedures, and to confirm the suitability of the runway’s navigation aids.
Wheeled takeoffs and landings by a CASA-212 were conducted on the runway in 2005/06.  High-speed taxi trials were also conducted to simulate the landing speed of the A319. 
An Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980 was carried out in November 2005.
Flights are scheduled to commence in the summer 2007/08 with a fully developed schedule commencing in the 2008/9 season.
