





Initial Environmental Evaluation for Placement of Shelter Huts at the proposed site of new Indian Research Base, Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica




Introduction
This Initial Environmental Evaluation Report pertains to the proposed activity for placing two melon huts, as temporary shelters, at the proposed site of new Indian Antarctic base at Larsemann Hills.
Since 1988-89, India is pursuing its scientific activities at Schirmacher Oasis and adjoining regions of Central Dronning Maud Land east Antarctica, keeping Indian permanent research station “Maitri” as its Base. It was felt necessary to extend the area of studies to other parts of Antarctica, to make the observations more regional rather than site specific. A Task Force undertook reconnaissance traverses over several parts of Prydz Bay area in East Antarctica during Austral Summer of 2003-04 and short-listed a suitable location in Larsemann Hills. Based on scientific, environmental and intrinsic values, Grovnes peninsula located in between Broknes and Stornes peninsula was favored over other alternatives. The scientific and logistic reasons for selecting the site have already been enumerated in the Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation Report submitted to the CEP in December 2006. 
Having done identification and evaluation of the probable impacts and taking care of the mitigation measures it is concluded that the adverse impacts on the environment at the site are of low category and Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) is sufficient to address the issue. Need of Activity and Purpose
In order to initiate the process for submission of CEE, it was felt necessary to collect base line data on different environmental parameters. As a precautionary measure, it was decided to install few emergency shelters for the safety of scientists collecting the data.  A melon hut was therefore placed at the site in February 2005.  India is planning to install two additional shelters (melon huts) during March 2007 at the same site for shelter of scientists conducting studies as also for providing the shelter to the research equipments to be installed.
Location
The proposed location for placing of shelter huts at Larsemann Hills in Prydz Bay area is 69°24’ 28”S latitude and 76°11’ 14”E longitude (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Location of Shelter Huts to be placed at Larsemann Hills













Proposed Scientific Studies at the New Site
The members of the XXVI Indian Antarctic Expedition shall visit the Larsemann hills in March 2007. They have been assigned to collect relevant data in the fields of earth science, environmental and biological science, meteorology, remote sensing and geomagnetism.   Though all scientists visiting Larsemann Hills will be using the Expedition Ship “M.V.Emerald Sea” as a platform for living purposes, two melon huts will be placed for any unforeseen eventuality that might force the scientists to take shelter during bad weather for short spell of period. These huts will remain at the site for collection of data during the winter period after the team leaves the Larsemann Hills.
Instruments and Supported Accessories Required for Above Study
It is planned to install a high resolution multi-parameter AWS in the area, to acquire data on various meteorological parameters. Digital Fluxgate Magnetometer, Proton Precession Magnetometer and a Global Positioning System will also be installed to obtain continuous geomagnetic and related data.
Among the various experiments and instruments that will be operated during the short summer period mention may be made of Spectral solar radiometer (for investigation of the optical, micro-physical and radiative properties of aerosols) and Wideband short wave payronometer (for measuring radiative flux in the spectral band from 0.28 to 3.0 micrometer).
Multi Band ground truth radiometers developed at Indian Space Research Organization will be used to collect data in terms of spectral reflectance of terrain surfaces and incoming solar radiations in the spectral range of 400nm to 3000nm. Sun Photometer, Aethalometer, and High Volume Sampler etc. are also planned to be used for various studies.
Two sets of 2V, 730 Ah battery banks (each battery bank consists of 6 batteries of 2V each) two solar panels of 12 V, 90 W each, shall be placed and operated at site.
Facilities at Site
Installation of Melon Huts
The melon huts, made of fiberglass, comprise of base and wall panels that will be assembled at the ship and transported under slung by helicopters to the site of its installation. These huts have pre fabricated interior facilities for accommodating four persons (Figure 2). 













Figure 2: Shelter Hut










Generator
Two numbers 2 kVA and 1 kVA portable generators each will be used for operating the instruments and to charge various battery banks. 
Impact Evaluation
Impact identification and evaluation, carried out for the proposed activity as well as the mitigation measures pertaining to, identified
Table 1: Impact Evaluation and Mitigation Measures

Environ-mental Parameters/
Indicator
Description of Potential Impact from Activities
Evaluation of Impact
Value
Mitigation Measures
Air
Impact from ship helicopter and generators 
Extent:       Low
Duration:   Low
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Medium
Low
As the ship will be berthed far away from the site there will not be any direct or indirect impact on the air quality at the site. 
Helicopters will have a total of about 30 sorties during the entire period of operation. The engines shall be shut while at the site. The impact on the air is, therefore, expected to be minimum.
The portable Generators to be used at the site conform to Central Pollution Control Board, India and USEPA emission standards. The emission levels are expected to be minimum. Moreover the generators shall be operated only for about two weeks period. 
Water
Impact on the lake system 
Extent:       Very Low
Duration:   Very Low
Intensity:   Very Low
Probability: Very Low
Very Low
All the drinking water arrangement shall be made available from the ship. There shall not be any wastewater production, as the ship’s platform will be used for the living purpose.
While selecting the site for installation of the huts due care to the catchment area of the lake will be taken.
Noise
Helicopter, generator operations and scientific experiments.

Extent:       Low
Duration:   Medium
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Medium
Low
Helicopter shall not remain in air for long hours. At the landing site engine shall be switched off. Helicopter will not fly over terrestrial fauna of the area.
A small silent generator does not have potential to emit much noise
Scientific experiments shall not add noise emission except the mast embedment for AWS

Wilderness
Human presence in the area for scientific activity will have mark on wilderness.

Extent:       Low
Duration:   Low
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Low
Low
The human presence will be at site for few days only, however temporary shelters shall remain at site, which shall be removed in future. 
HSM, ASPA, ASMA
Affect of the activity on the ASMA/ASPA /HSM
Extent:       Low
Duration:   Low
Intensity:   Low
Probability: Low
Low
No historical site is present in the area. The area also does not fall under any ASPA
The ASMA (proposed) guidelines will be followed. 

Abbreviations and Acronyms


ASMA		-	Antarctic Specially Managed Area
ASPA		-	Antarctica Specially Protected Area
CEE		-	Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation
DFM		-	Digital Fluxgate Magnetometer
EIA		-	Environmental Impact Assessment
GPS		-	Global Positioning System
HSM		-	Historic Site and Monument
IEE		-	Initial Environmental Evaluation
USEPA		-	United States Environmental Protection Agency


