





Accidents and Medical Evacuations within the German Antarctic Program during Season 2006/2007





Accidents and Medical Evacuations within the German Antarctic Program during Season 2006/2007
1. Introduction
During the summer season 2006/2007 three medical evacuations had to be organized by the German Antarctic program. All three operations were successful and were performed in close co-operation with other national programs.
The Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) would like to inform on the performance of these missions. Two medical evacuations concerned two participants in RV Polarstern cruises and the third one an expedition member at Neumayer Station.
2. Medical evacuations from RV Polarstern
RV Polarstern Cruise ANT XXIII-7
On 11 September 2006 a scientific cruise member was suffering from an acute cardiac infarct. This diagnosis was confirmed through medical telecommunication with the cardiology department of the hospital Reinkenheide in Bremerhaven, Germany. It was recommended to evacuate the patient for medical treatment to a hospital. The ship’s position was 61°06.9’S, 043° 17.98’W.
The temporary hospitalization of the patient could not be organised at the Chilean station Eduardo Frei from where a later evacuation by aircraft from the Chilean Airbase Teniente Marsh to a hospital in Punta Arenas would have been possible. Therefore scientific activities were interrupted on board RV Polarstern for deviation to the next and nearest destination, Ushuaia, Argentina. On 15 September 2006 the helicopter of RV Polarstern landed at Ushuaia Airport. The patient was transported to a hospital and stayed there until end of September. The medical treatment was continued in Germany afterwards until mid-October, 2006.
RV Polarstern Cruise ANT XXIII-8
On 2 December 2006, a scientific cruise member from Italy had to be disembarked due to unendurable seasickness, when RV Polarstern called for Neumayer Station on 6 December 2006. The evacuation to Cape Town was organised with a regular scheduled flight in the framework of Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN). The patient arrived at Cape Town on 8 December 2006 and safely returned to Italy afterwards.
3. Accident at Neumayer Station and medical evacuation to Cape Town
At Neumayer station an expedition member was fully crossed by the track of a Pistenbulli vehicle at 1445 UTC on 22 January, 2007. The accident occurred when a trench was dug out into the snow about 1 km away from the station. After taking immediate medical treatment in the station’s hospital, the physicians reported to AWI and requested for urgent medical evacuation at 1815 UTC.
AWI contacted national programs, aircraft operator and agents of Dronning Maud Land Air Network (DROMLAN) to decide on joint actions. In parallel the stations Neumayer, SANAE IV, Troll and Halley established communication and started on-site preparations. In Cape Town all measures as to chartering an appropriate aircraft, briefing the pilots and finding doctors and paramedics for the intercontinental flight could be done over night within about 12 hours. In the Antarctic one helicopter from SANAE IV station was positioned at Neumayer, and the seriously injured patient was carefully prepared for the flight. The forecaster at Neumayer provided necessary weather information for both the intercontinental flight and the helicopter flights.

The executive jet, Challenger 3000 (Reg. N ZS-ACT), took off from Cape Town airport at 0909 UTC on 23 January. The helicopter departed from Neumayer the same day at 1208 UTC. Two physicians of Neumayer station took care of the patient on board. After stop-over and refuelling at SANAE IV station the helicopter arrived at Troll station at 1500 UTC just a few minutes after the aircraft had landed at the runway. After refuelling and technical service the aircraft departed at 1627 UTC and landed safely in Cape Town at 2140 UTC. 
The medical evacuation was successfully performed within only 27 hours from 22 until 23 January 2007. DROMLAN has proven not only the efficient cooperation on aircraft operations within the region of Dronning Maud Land, but likewise its ability for emergency response. 
The heavily injured patient was admitted to the Milnerton Medi-Clinic at around 2230 UTC the same day. Since then full medical examination and necessary treatment was performed. For days the patient’s condition remained critical. Since 3 February stable condition and slight improvements were reported. The recovery proceeded and the patient was returned to Germany on 5 March 2007. Since then further medical treatment had been ongoing in a hospital close to the city of Hamburg.
AWI highly appreciates the tremendous efforts, which were undertaken by the members of DROMLAN. In particular, AWI would like to thank the teams of 
    • Antarctic Logistics Centre International (ALCI), Cape Town, South Africa
    • South African National Antarctic Program (SANAP), Cape Town, South Africa
    • Agent Meihuizen International, Cape Town, South Africa, Cape Town, South Africa
    • Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI), Tromsø, Norway
    • British Antarctic Survey (BAS), Cambridge, UK 
and last but not least
    • The pilots, physicians and staff at the stations.

