





Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 1) Management Group Report




Admiralty Bay Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 1) Management Group Report
Joint Information Paper submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and the United States


Introduction
Admiralty Bay was formally adopted as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 1) by ATCM XXIX in 2006 (Measure 2).  The Management Plan for the ASMA was jointly prepared by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland and USA. The Management Plan established a Management Group, with representatives from these five countries, to oversee and coordinate activities in the ASMA.  Chairmanship of the Group will rotate amongst the Parties on a five-yearly basis. It is currently convened by Brazil.
The Terms of Reference for the Group are to:
        ◦ review the functioning and implementation of the Management Plan;
        ◦ facilitate communication between those working in or visiting the Area;
        ◦ monitor the Area to investigate possible sources of environment impact including cumulative impacts;
        ◦ promote the dissemination of information on this Management Plan to all parties operating in the Area, and all other visitors to the Area;
        ◦ maintain a record of activities in the Area.

Admiralty Bay Management Activities
The first meeting of the Management Group was held at the ATCM XXIX (Edinburgh, 2006). In this first meeting , some management activities were identified as priorities, which are:  undertake an in loco survey of the Area to investigate if the values for which the Area was designated are still relevant, cumulative impact, trends and  changes in the environment or other information which are not contemplated in the Management Plan;  share of information of the activities conducted in the Area, including scientific, operational, touristic and environmental activities, which should be disseminated through a website developed for the ASMA, where the Management Plan should also be available; develop a joint monitoring programme; develop contingency plans for each station, as well as for the whole Area, for oil spills and any other accident with possible significant impact on the environment, including attendance in an emergency;  and establish a waste management plan for the Area.

“In loco” survey
The second meeting of the Management Group was held in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, Antarctica, in January, 2007. Representatives from Brazil, Peru, Ecuador, Poland and USA got together to visit the different sites and facilities in the Area and to discuss the actions related to the Management Plan and the development of a Monitoring Programme, which was one of the activities identified as priority. 
The survey  was undertaken based on the checklist for inspections recommended in the Resolution 5, 1995 (ATCM XIX, Seoul) and on a draft checklist for inspecting protected areas in Antarctica proposed by New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States of America at the CEP IX (WP 33).   
From the survey, it could be evaluated that the values for which the Area was designated are still relevant, although some changes have been observed in some zones defined in the Management Plan as having scientific and/or ecological interest. Fauna concentrations and breeding areas have varied. Infrastructures in the facilities zones also altered with some small buildings being removed and others being built. The tourist routs were followed to evaluate if they were well placed and efficient in controlling the movements in the Area, and where they should be improved. A guide with code of conduct for the visitors and research participants is available and should be disseminated and strongly encouraged to be applied. 

Environmental Impact by Human Activities
Noise. One of the main impacts observed in the Area was the noise by power generation. This is a common problem in the stations. Efforts to mitigate and control noise at the Power houses and elsewhere due to human activities should be encouraged. Increased use of alternative energy such as solar or wind power was one of the suggestions to help alleviate the noise problem.
Wastewater. The surrounding marine area where the by-product of the sewage treatment is discharged has been monitored for indicators of chemicals from sewage. The results show that the impact is low and restricted to the surroundings of stations. Besides, dispersion is favored by the hydrodynamics of the inlets and Bay. Even though, such impact should be permanently monitored for any ecological change in the surrounding area of the outflow. Secondary treatment, Nutrient control (N/P) and UV system have been implemented by the stations in the Area. 
Solid Waste. All the stations classify the solid waste. Mostly, organic combustible wastes are incinerated and filters are used to reduce harmful emissions. The solid residue of such incineration is removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, together with all the other solid wastes, which are compacted and adequately stored for transportation.  It was considered important to monitor the emissions to the atmosphere of the Bay – from the incinerators as well as from the burning of oil. .The Air quality of the area, should be monitoring to track not only the local seasonal activities but the influence coming from another regions.

Monitoring Programme
In the last four years, a study of the state of the environment has been undertaken in Admiralty Bay, by Brazil. The study allowed an evaluation of the impact caused by human activities in the Area. This environmental assessment, carried out in a comparative multidisciplinary way, was the base for the proposition of preliminary indicators of environmental quality, with the aim to establish a monitoring programme for the Area.
In the XVII Reunião de Administradores de Programas Antárticos Latino-americanos – RAPAL (September, 2006), having the aforementioned study as a starting point, it was established a working group to elaborate an environmental monitoring programme for King George Island. In October, 2006, the working group met in Pirenópolis, Brazil to discuss the monitoring programme. The meeting had representatives from Peru, Ecuador, Chile and Brazil. From the meeting, a preliminary matrix of environmental indicators was elaborated. 
In Antarctica, the results from the study of the state of the environment and the preliminary matrix of indicators were presented to representatives from Poland and USA, partners in the ASMA, who had not followed the discussion so far undertaken. The matrix was better improved and Parties defined which indicators would be able to monitor. A new version of a Matrix is being prepared by Brazil. This will be reviewed by the parties for comments and suggestions. Next step will be to elaborate the systematic of long term monitoring. Discussions will progress through the forum and workshops, if they are made necessary. 
One difficulty identified by the group was the logistics for cooperating in the field. Bad weather, means of transportation and space in the Stations were always making things difficult. Thinking on a way of making viable the management and monitoring activities, Brazil is studying the possibility of building a small hut, within the Facility Zone of Ferraz, on the same place where the former Base G, from UK, was settled in the past. The hut will be used only for environmental management activities, it will use clean energy, it will have labs, meeting and study rooms, and dormitories for those working in environmental management and monitoring in the ASMA.
Exchange of Information 
It was developed a Geographic Information System (GIS) for Admiralty Bay. It holds information on location of facilities, distribution of flora and fauna, geology, retreat of glaciers, altimetry, drainage basins, bathymetry of the Bay, bottom sediments etc. Additional layers on concentration of pollutants, hydrocarbons, POPs, microbial pollution, heavy metals, and nutrients amongst others are being included. 
The Admiralty Bay ASMA website is being elaborated. The website will include information described in the Management Plan, maps, general information about the Area, scientific, operational and environmental activities, permits, and a forum for discussion and exchange of information.
It is suggested by members of the management group that the parties with activities in the Area use a standard format of preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment. It was emphasized the need to circulate Permits for entering in ASPAs, prior to each field station.

Conclusions
It was very important that the Management Group could meet in the Antarctica to visit the different sites and facilities in the Area and to discuss the actions related to the Management Plan in loco. There has been a good support for planning joint actions on monitoring, waste management, emergency plans, cumulative impact, and potential scientific cooperation. The establishment of the ASMA has definitely contributed to improve the level of mutual assistance and co-operation among Parties operating in the Area.

