





Australia in the International Polar Year (2007/08)




Australia in the International Polar Year (2007/08)
Australia is leading ten endorsed projects for IPY 2007/08, covering a wide range of activities from sea-ice observations, to marine biodiversity, to education and outreach.  
Census of Antarctic Marine Life  
The Census of Antarctic Marine Life examines how the distribution and abundance of Antarctica’s marine biodiversity may be affected by climate change; how climate change will alter the nature of ecosystem services that are currently provided free to humankind by the Southern Ocean; and how the effects of future change on the biodiversity of Antarctic ecosystems can be measured.  The Australian Antarctic Division is leading and coordinating the project in association with over 200 researchers from over 20 countries. At least 14 research ships will undertake projects in Antarctic waters, mostly during the 2007/08 season. 
Aliens in Antarctica
The impact of non-native (alien) species on ecosystems is one of the big issues of the 21st Century. Antarctica is not immune to this problem, with some alien species having established on the Antarctic continent and on most sub-Antarctic islands. The travel histories of some 15,000 Antarctic researchers and tourists will be complied, in cooperation with four tourist operators, 15 supply vessels of national Antarctic programmes, and six air operators.  One thousand items of cargo from seven National Antarctic programmes will be inspected for propagules of alien species.  Australia’s international collaborators are the United Kingdom, New Zealand, South Africa, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Japan.
Solar Linkages to Atmospheric Processes (SLAP)
This project investigates solar variability linkages to weather, climate and ozone.  The atmospheric electric circuit links weather and solar variations. In the Earth’s Polar Regions the interaction of the solar wind and the Earth's magnetic field is an additional generator of electricity. Cosmic rays dominantly control atmospheric conductivity and are modulated by the solar wind. Recent results support a linkage between short-term (~few days) solar variability and ground level pressure at high magnetic latitude stations. SLAP seeks to confirm or refute this linkage, and quantify any global weather and climate implications.  Australia’s international collaborators are Russia, the United States, and the United Kingdom and logistic support will be provided by Australia, France, the United Kingdom, United States and Russia.
Taking the Antarctic Arctic Polar Pulse  
A key component of this project will be the development of a snapshot database of human health events occurring in the Antarctic during the IPY 2007/08. Research will focus on the epidemiology of human health and well-being in polar regions and include investigations into the impacts of living in the total darkness of winter (photobiology-ultraviolet), the effects of isolated and confined conditions on the human immune system, metabolism, stress and social behaviour, and the viability of using internet-based telemedicine techniques to diagnose and treat disorders over exceptionally long distances.  The results of this research will provide clear and immediate benefits to participants' health and well-being and provide an important legacy of data to encourage and educate future researchers. 
Astronomy from the Polar Plateau
The polar plateaus provide the best sites on the Earth’s surface to conduct a wide range of astronomical observations, due to the extremely cold, dry and stable air found there. This project aims to quantify these conditions at Summit in Greenland, Ellesmere Island in Canada, and Domes A and C on the Antarctic plateau, and begin the process of turning these sites into front line observatories. An automated observatory, which can gather data over the winter, is scheduled to be delivered to Dome A through a Chinese-led traverse in the summer of 2007/08.
Climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
This project will obtain a synoptic circumpolar snapshot of the physical environment of the Southern Ocean (collaboration with other IPY activities will extend the snapshot to include biogeochemistry, ecology, and biodiversity), through collaborative oceanographic fieldwork.  It will enhance understanding of the role of the Southern Ocean in past, present and future climate, including connections between the longitudinal and latitudinal circulation of the Southern Ocean, water mass transformation, atmospheric variability, the Ocean’s interactions with ice, physical-biogeochemical-ecological linkages, and long-distance connections between polar and temperate latitudes. 
Antarctic Sea Ice
Antarctic Sea Ice in IPY is the coordinated project for the sea ice zone surrounding Antarctica, covering over 20 million km² (the size of South America) at maximum extent. The project aims to determine the circumpolar year-round sea ice thicknesses in this zone. This effort requires extensive ship investigations, coordinated satellite monitoring and use of underwater technologies such as up-looking sonar from moorings and use of unmanned autonomous underwater vehicles. The albedo of the earth's surface, to which sea-ice is a major contributor, represents one of the main determinants of surface temperature.   
Gamburtsev Mountains – Geophysical exploration
The Gamburtsev Mountains lie underneath the ice cap in eastern Antarctica.  This project, involving researchers from many countries but principally the United States, Germany, Australia and China, seeks to characterise the Mountains to understand better their evolutionary origins and history during the break-up of Gondwana 180 M years ago.
International Antarctic Institute (IAI)
The International Antarctic Institute was established in July 2006 to serve as an educational centre for Antarctic programs and facilitate cross accreditation of courses from partner institutes. The IAI currently involves 12 countries with programs in Antarctic education and/or Antarctic research. While its headquarters are at the University of Tasmania during the Institute’s foundation phase, the IAI is a multi-campus, multi-disciplinary institution offering jointly accredited degrees from undergraduate level to Masters.
International Research Expedition
The Royal Society of Victoria intends to lead two 40-day summer voyages of scientific investigation involving 50 final-year school students and 60 scientists. Students will participate in intensive ship-board and shore-based investigative and experimental projects designed to complement other IPY projects, and will prepare an investigative report. If sufficient funds can be raised by June 30 2007, the voyages are expected to depart from Hobart in December 2007 and December 2008, visiting Macquarie Island on the way to the Antarctic coast.
In addition to above, Australian research scientists are involved in 46 IPY-endorsed projects, led by Chief Investigators from other countries.
Further information about Australia’s contribution to IPY may be found at: http://ipy.antarctica.gov.au/
