





International Workshop “Impacts of seismic survey activities on whales and other marine biota”





International Workshop 
“Impacts of seismic survey activities on whales and 
other marine biota”

Federal Environment Agency – Dessau, Germany – 
September 5-7, 2006

Information Paper submitted by Germany


    1. Introduction
Already in August 2005, the Federal Agency for Nature Conservation (Bundesamt für Naturschutz, BfN) organised a workshop to elucidate the environmental impact of scientific sonars on whales. Results from this workshop on scientific sonars were accounted for in the permitting process of ongoing research projects using scientific sonars. 
Encouraged by the success of this national workshop on scientific sonars, the BfN and the Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt, UBA), which is the German Competent Authority for permitting all kind of activities in the area of the Antarctic Treaty, according to the German “Act implementing the Protocol of Environmental Protections to the Antarctic Treaty of 4 October 1991”, decided that another Workshop on the adjoining issue of academic seismic surveys should be held consecutively. This “seismic workshop” was conducted by the UBA in September 2006. As there had been some debating on the provisos and conditions under which the use of airguns could be permitted in Germany for seismic surveys in Antarctic waters, international experts were invited to contribute to the discussion. Four major terms of reference were selected from the realm of seismic surveys with airguns:
    1. Controversial discussion about environmental impacts of seismic activities on the assets to be protected 
    2. Need of scientific knowledge on:
        ◦ physical and technical basic principles of sound aquatic propagation,
        ◦ the contribution of seismic survey activities to the overall ocean noise budget, 
        ◦ the assessment of impacts from seismic survey activities on marine biota
    3. Focus on academic seismic surveys in order to prepare an environmental assessment under the provisions of the Environmental Protocol
    4. Need of information exchange on potential mitigation measures

The workshop was expected to allow vital insights into the subject and to contribute the most recent findings in order to assist the implementation of the Environmental Protocol. 
For detailed agenda and program of the workshop see Annex 1.
For list of speakers see Annex 2.

    2. General outcome of the workshop
Sixty-five experts from 10 countries participated in the workshop. Using their wide expertise they discussed the impact of airguns on marine biota, concentrating on academic seismic surveys and the Antarctic environment. All participants appreciated the intensive exchange of scientific information.
The general introduction of marine seismic surveys and their potential impacts on marine biota was followed by a characterisation of seismic sound generators and their acoustics. The workshop focused on the impact of so-called airguns and airgun arrays, which significantly contribute to anthropogenic noise in the marine environment in some world regions. Considerable gaps in our knowledge on the impact of seismic surveys on marine taxa were identified, but at the same time new and substantial information was provided which helps to assess seismic activities.
Commercial seismic surveys have to be distinguished from academic ones. Acknowledging their particular characteristics (dimension of gear, density of track lines, total time of survey), they have to be considered separately. 
There is evidence that shooting airguns can change behaviour of whales. However, the behavioural responses observed are specific to a respective group or species. Seismic surveys can cause behavioural responses in Baleen Whales and Toothed Whales. Baleen Whales are regarded as low-frequency specialists. They are adapted to long-range communication in a low-frequency ambient noise notch. Grey Whales, for example, avoid seismic sources during migration, and Arctic Bowhead Whales presumably avoid them when feeding. It remains unknown so far, whether this deviant or avoidance behaviour is of biological significance, and whether these observations can be transferred to other species in Antarctic waters.
Seismic surveys can impact other marine species as well. Seals from the northern hemisphere show behavioural response to noise in controlled exposure experiments. Observations suggest that ramp up of airgun arrays may scare away seals and hence reduce the risk of auditory damage in seals. However, the biological significance of this disturbance remains unclear.
Moreover, some species of fin fish are known to be susceptible to seismic noise. When experimentally exposed to an operating airgun, some species of tested teleost fish (bony fish) showed insubstantial behavioural reactions. The behaviour of fish in cage experiments, however, inherently differs from physiological behaviour. In some cases temporary hearing loss was observed.
Atypical beachings of deep-sea giant squid (Architheuthis sp.) have been reported from the years 2001 and 2003 in Asturias/Spain. Both incidents were suspected to be linked spatially and temporally to marine seismic surveys. Stranded animals showed lesions in tissues and organs, however, the effect of seismic noise on cephalopods requires further investigation.
Mitigation measures for shooting airguns, either potential, recommended or already in force at national levels, were discussed. However, their effectiveness was discussed controversially and the need for an internationally valid standard became apparent. To validate the impact of noise and effectiveness of mitigation measures, well-planned long-term observational studies on appropriate control populations are necessary. This will require information on the location of seismic survey plans, the protection of sensitive habitats, analysis of stranding events, as well as funding for long-term cetacean research-programs. 
One session dealt with the ship-borne detection of whales. The detection may serve either scientific studies for whale abundances or mammal detection for mitigation purposes. Each approach requires specific observational standards and methods:
    • Whereas detection for scientific studies requires species identification and observation of a wide radius, detection for mitigation purposes focuses on the mitigation range in the vicinity of the ship, and does not require species identification. 
    • Visual observations by trained and motivated marine mammal observers are well suited for scientific studies, but – due to personal limitations – fail to provide full time coverage needed for mitigation purposes. Automated infrared techniques can provide 24 h coverage up to a range of about 1000 m. 
    • Passive acoustic surveillance is very helpful to complement scientific surveys, but is counteracted in its usefulness for mitigation purposes by ship generated noise, a noisy environment (sea ice) and individual whales that do not vocalise. 
    • Active acoustic observation is feasible and well suited for mitigation purposes. However, it is rather expensive and adds to the emission of noise
In conclusion, further investigations should clarify, how, and to which degree, academic seismic surveys impact the Antarctic environment. Differences in field observations have to be reconciled, biological significance of effects should be assessed, appropriate mitigation procedures should be developed and tested, and a long-term monitoring could be used to control biological effects as well as mitigation measures. All available information should be used for assessing academic seismic surveys according to the provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
    3. Planned common German approach subsequent to the workshop
As a major deficit it became clear from workshop discussions that the exact degree of impact on the Antarctic Environment, that academic seismic surveys are giving cause to suspect, is still to be clarified. The German authorities, i.e. the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU) along with its subordinated Agencies for Nature Conservation (BfN) and Environment (UBA, Germany’s Competent Authority), as well as the Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI, Germany’s lead institute for Antarctic research), agreed on common future activities: 

    1. The corresponding working group of the Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine Research will prepare a risk analysis for the use of airguns in academic seismic surveys. The German Federal Environment Agency and its fellow institution, the German Federal Agency for Nature Conservation will join in this study at appropriate time.
    2. Based on the outcome of this scientific risk analysis the German Competent Authority will assess how to categorise academic seismic surveys in best compliance with the provisions of the German Act implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
    3. Additionally, the involved parties strive for suitable measures that will lead to further elucidation of the issue, e.g. research on the occurrence and distribution of whales in Antarctic waters, on technologies for automated ship borne whale detection, or on the actual impact of airguns. 
    4. Germany will present the risk analysis on the international level, e.g. to the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) or at the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).

    4. Further information
More detailed information about the workshop can be found in the web at www.umweltbundesamt.de. The following items can be downloaded:

    • Program of the workshop and the PowerPoint Presentations (as disposed by the speakers)
    • Proceedings of the workshop



ANNEX 1
Agenda and Workshop Program

Tuesday, September 05, 2006 

Arrival at the Hotel Steigenberger, Welcome to Dessau
18:30
Optional: Guided tour through the new building of the Federal Environment Agency
19:30
Optional: Informal dinner (“get together”) in a local brewery pub

Note: All oral presentations are limited to 20 minutes plus 10 min. for discussion!

Wednesday, September 06, 2006 
08.30 
Registration 
09.00 
Welcome address 
Thomas Holzmann, Vice President of the Federal Environment Agency, Germany

Introduction: 
The Federal Environment Agency in Dessau; Scope of the workshop; Technical notes 
Hans-Heinrich Lindemann, Federal Environment Agency, Germany 
Henning von Nordheim, Federal Agency for Nature Conservation, Germany

1. General introduction to the issue of marine seismic surveys and their potential impacts on marine biota 
Chair: Hans-Heinrich Lindemann, Federal Environment Agency, Germany
09.45 – 10.15 
1.1 Contribution of seismic survey activities to the overall ocean noise budget 
John Hildebrand, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, USA 
10.15 – 10.45 
1.2 Overview on seismic survey activities in the Southern Ocean 
Monika Breitzke, Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Marine and Polar Research, Bremerhaven, Germany 
10.45 – 11.15 
Coffee break 
11.15 – 11.45 
1.3 Report on the IWC-Workshop “Review of the Potential Impacts of Seismic Surveys on Cetaceans”. Pre-Meeting of the IWC Environmental Concerns Sub-Committee, 24-25 May, St. Kitts, West Indies 
Wolfgang Dinter for Howard Rosenbaum, Wildlife Conservation Society, USA 
11.45 – 12.00 
Discussion and Summary by the Chair 
12.00 – 13.30 
Lunch break 

2. Different seismic sound generators and their characteristics on acoustics 
Chair: Axel Friedrich, Federal Environment Agency, Germany
13.30 – 14.00
2.1 Physical basic principles of sound propagation from seismic sources in the marine environment 
John Hildebrand, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, USA
14.00 – 14.30
2.2 Sound generators used in industrial surveys 
Alec Duncan, Centre for Marine Science & Technology, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Australia
14.30 – 15.00
2.3 Sound generators used in scientific seismic surveys – calibration and modelling 
Monika Breitzke, Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Marine and Polar Research, Bremerhaven, Germany
15.00 – 15.15
Discussion and Summary by the Chair
15.15 – 15.45
Coffee break
15.45 
3. Impacts on Whales 
Chair: Wolfgang Dinter, Federal Agency for Nature Conservation, Germany
15.45 – 16.45
3.1 Vocalisations of baleen whales and their reaction to seismic noise 
Peter Tyack for Christopher Clark, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA

16.45 – 17.15
3.2 Vocalisations of toothed whales and their reaction to seismic noise 
Peter Tyack, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, USA
17.15 – 17.45
3.3 Diving behaviour of whales and their reaction to seismic noise 
Peter Tyack, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, USA 
17.45 – 18.00 
Discussion and Summary by the Chair 
18.30 
Evening Bus Tour to Wörlitz Garden, UNESCO’s World Cultural Heritage (approximately 2 hours), afterwards Dinner 

Thursday, September 07, 2006

08.30 
4. Impacts of seismic surveys on other marine biota
Chair: Henning von Nordheim, Federal Agency for Nature Conservation, Germany 
08.30 – 09.00 
4.1 Impacts of seismic surveys on seals 
Jonathan Gordon, Sea Mammal Research Unit (SMRU), University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Scotland 
09.00 – 09.30 
4.2 Impacts of seismic surveys on fin fish 
Arthur N. Popper, Center for Comparative and Evolutionary Biology of Hearing, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
09.30 – 10.00
4.3 Impacts of seismic surveys on giant squid 
Angel Guerra, ECOBIOMAR, stituto de Investigaciones Marinas (CSIC), Vigo, Spain
10.00 – 10.15
Discussion and Summary by the Chair
10.15 – 10.45
Coffee break

5. Risk Analysis for airguns/airgun-arrays used for academic purposes
Chair: Heinrich Miller, Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Marine and Polar Research, Bremerhaven, Germany 
10.45 – 11.15
5.1 Risk analysis – how to structure risk assessments of acoustic sources 
Olaf Boebel, Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Marine and Polar Research (AWI), Bremerhaven, Germany
11.15 – 11.30
Discussion and Summary by the Chair




6. International Measures of Mitigation (under discussion, recommended, or in force) 
Chair: Heinrich Miller, Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Marine and Polar Research, Bremerhaven, Germany
11.30 – 12.00
6.1 Overview on potential mitigation measures 
Karsten Brensing for Sarah Dolman, Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society (WCDS), Chippenham, United Kingdom
12.00 – 12.30
6.2 Short description of national situations 
Michael Jasny, Natural Resources Defense Council, Vancouver, Canada
12.30 – 12.45
Discussion and Summary by the Chair
12.45 – 14.00 
Lunch break 


7. Detection of Whales before and during use of airguns 
Chair: Anita Künitzer, Federal Environment Agency, Germany 
14.00 -14.30
7.1 MAPS: Marine Mammal Perimeter Surveillance - experiences and improvements 
Olaf Boebel, Alfred-Wegener Institute for Marine and Polar Research (AWI), Bremerhaven, Germany 
14.30 – 16.00
7.2 Acoustic detection and surveillance – experiences and improvements 
a) Walter Zimmer, NATO Undersea Research Centre (NURC), La Spezia, Italy 
b) Peter Tyack, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, USA
c) Olaf Boebel, Alfred-Wegener Institute for Marine and Polar Research (AWI), Bremerhaven, Germany
16.00 – 16.30
Discussion and Summary by the Chair
16.30 – 17.00 
Coffee break 
17:00 – 17:45
8. General Discussion and Summary
Chair: Heike Herata, Federal Environment Agency, Germany
Wolfgang Dinter, Federal Agency for Nature Conservation, Germany




ANNEX 2
List of Speakers

Family Name
First 
Name
E-Mail Address
Mailing Address
Boebel
Olaf
oboebel@awi-bremerhaven.de
Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung (AWI) in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Am Handelshafen 12, Postfach 12 0161
2757 Bremerhaven, Deutschland
Breitzke
Monika
mbreitzke@awi-bremerhaven.de
Alfred-Wegener-Institut für Polar- und Meeresforschung (AWI) in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Am Handelshafen 12, Postfach 12 0161
2757 Bremerhaven, Deutschland
Brensing (Presenter on behalf of Sarah Dolman)
Karsten

Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society (WCDS)
Brookfield House, 38 St Paul Street
Chippenham, Wiltshire, UK SN15 1LJ, United Kingdom
Clark (Only abstract, communi­cated by Peter Tyack)
Christo­pher
cwc2@cornell.edu
Cornell University
159 Sapsucker Woods Rd
Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
Duncan
Alec

Centre for Marine Science and Technology
Curtin University of Technology
Perth, Western Australia
Gillespie
Douglas

International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)
London , United Kingdom
Gordon
Jonathan

Sea Mammal Research Unit (SMRU)
University of St Andrews
St Andrews, Fife KY16 8LB, Scotland 
Guerra
Angel
brc1@iim.csic.es
ECOBIOMAR
Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas (CSIC)
Eduardo Cabello 6
36208 Vigo, Spain
Hildebrand
John
jahildebrand@ucsd.edu
jhildebrand@ucsd.edu
Scripps Institution of Oceanography
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, Mail Code: 0205
La Jolla, CA 92093-0205, USA
Jasny
Michael
mjasny@telus.net 
Natural Resources Defense Council
4479 W. 5th Avenue
Vancouver, BC V6R1S4, Canada
Popper
Arthur N.
apopper@umd.edu
Center for Comparative and 
Evolutionary Biology of Hearing
University of Maryland, Department of Biology
College Park, MD 20742, USA
Tyack
Peter
ptyack@whoi.edu
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Biology Department
Marine Research Facility 245, MS#50
Woods Hole Road
Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA
Zimmer
Walter
zimmer@nurc.nato.int
NATO SACLANT Undersea Research Centre (NURC)
Vla San Bartolomeo 400, La Spezia, Italy


