





Consideration of Education and Outreach Issues by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)




Consideration of Education and Outreach 
by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)

Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction

    1. At the XXIX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) in 2006, the Treaty Parties recognised the significant opportunity created by the International Polar Year (IPY) 2007/08 to advance Antarctic education, outreach and communication. At the Meeting, the UK volunteered to explore options with COMNAP, SCAR, National Programmes, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and the IPY International Programme Office as to how Education and Outreach may be best considered by the ATCM. The UK agreed to report back on this topic to ATCM XXX.
 
Education and Outreach projects during the International Polar Year

    2. As part of the IPY, a wide range of exciting Education and Outreach projects have been developed to inform young people about the polar regions and to inspire a new generation of young scientists. The aim is for IPY to leave a truly lasting legacy, raising awareness of the polar regions and translate IPY’s global science into action.

    3. The IPY International Programme Office reports that one quarter of IPY projects (57 out of 228 endorsed projects) have an Education and Outreach focus; offering teachers, students and the public an extraordinary range of opportunities to be part of the largest co-ordinated international scientific effort for 50 years.   Nevertheless, the Programme Office estimates that only approximately one third of these Education and Outreach projects have sufficient funding, and that several truly international projects face substantial financial difficulties.

    4. There are also a wide range of other education and outreach activities being undertaken domestically by Parties.    For example, within the UK:
    • “Ice Station Antarctica” – is an interactive exhibition which challenges young people to survive the extreme conditions faced by scientists researching the frozen continent. The exhibition launches at the end of May 2007 at the Natural History Museum in London, UK and then tours extensively in Europe and beyond from May 2008 to May 2013;
    • www.discoveringantarctica.org.uk – the UK’s interactive website on Antarctica (see also ATCM XXIX/IP041), is being further developed to include new sections about IPY and we are exploring options to translate the site into Spanish.

Consideration of Education and Outreach projects by the ATCM

    5. Education and Outreach is an important issue for the Antarctic Treaty Parties to discuss. However, the annual ATCM always has a very full Agenda and Education and Outreach issues do not always receive as much attention as they deserve because of the pressure on time. 

    6. To further pursue the question of how Education and Outreach may be best considered by the ATCM, the UK suggests that this should be subject of a special international workshop.  The aim of the workshop would be to enable Treaty Parties, Observers, Invited Experts and the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to :
    • learn more about the Education and Outreach projects being undertaken during IPY; 
    • examine whether projects might be linked to maximise resources and the overall impact; and 
    • consider how to support delivery of the IPY legacy.

    7. If such a workshop would be welcomed by the ATCM, the UK would be happy to work with others to consider options for hosting the event and identifying key topics for discussion. 


April 2007

