





The International Polar Year in The Netherlands




The International Polar Year in The Netherlands
IPY-NL Science programme
The Netherlands participates in about 36 international endorsed IPY projects (of a total of 228 IPY projects) which include 31 science projects, one data project and four projects on Education & Outreach. Most of the science projects with active involvement by Dutch researchers focus on the Arctic region or both polar regions. The scientific research in the Netherlands IPY programme focuses on four main themes:

    1. Changes in the cryosphere due to climate change 
    2. Changes in the Southern and Arctic ocean 
    3. Polar terrestrial and coastal ecosystems and global change 
    4. Influence of human activities on polar regions, and influence of climate change on humans.

Within these themes The Netherlands leads six international IPY projects, which are briefly summarized.
IPY Projects coordinated by the Netherlands hereby focussing on both the Arctic and Antarctic region

IPY GEOTRACES: An international study of the biogeochemical cycles of Trace Elements and Isotopes in the Arctic and Southern Oceans	
Trace metals iron, zinc, copper, manganese, nickel and cobalt are essential for every living cell and organism of our planet. Recently it was discovered that algae in the Southern Oceans, the basis of the entire Antarctic food-chain up to pinguins and whales, suffer from a lack of dissolved iron for their growth and CO2 fixation. The role of the other metals in Arctic and Antarctic oceanic waters is virtually unknown. IPY GEOTRACES will quantify distributions, the role and fate of several trace metals. Combination with key natural isotopes allows the unraveling of sources and turnover rates of these Trace Elements and Isotopes in waters and ice of the polar oceans.
The field work is done during 1-2 months long expeditions aboard icebreaker research vessels of several nations. Ships of Canada and the US Coast Guard vessel Healy will work in the Canadian and central Arctic. Polarstern (Germany) and Hesperides (Spain) will work in both the Arctic basin and the Antarctic Ocean. Ships of Australia and Japan will work in the Pacific sector of the Southern Oceans. The BONUS program of France is focusing on the Indian-Atlantic connection south off Africa. Each expedition often has experts onboard of several of the 18 nations involved in IPY-GEOTRACES. 
BIRD HEALTH: health of Arctic and Antarctic bird populations 
What does it mean for a bird to be sick? How does this affect the  survival and reproduction of bird populations? In short, the aim of the Bird Health project is: The role of parasites and pathogens in determining the size and distribution of arctic and antarctic bird populations. 
    • Study geographic variation in infections, parasite loads, viral prevalence, immune system functioning. 
    • Study the effects of infections, parasites, viruses and immune response on fitness parameters and energetics of individually marked birds. 
    • Link the observed trends to pathogen-host (or parasite-host) interaction, dynamics of the pool of pathogens and pollution levels. 
    • Modelling future scenario’s of geographic variation and relating the findings to climate change, nature management and human health.
In this project The Netherlands collaborates with team members from 11 countries (Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Norway, Poland, Russia, Spain, Sweden and USA).
TARANTELLA: Terrestrial ecosystems in ARctic and ANTarctic: Effects of UV Light, Liquefying ice, and Ascending temperatures	
Temperature and moisture availability play an important role in the functioning of terrestrial ecosystems in the polar regions. Because the changes in ecosystem structure and functioning are slow in the natural situation, an experimental approach has been developed, using Open-Top Chambers, which increase the temperature and moisture availability. It is the aim of the TARANTELLA project to determine similarities and differences in the response to climate change between the Arctic and the Antarctic ecosystems. 
Twelve nations are involved in the TARANTELLA project.
LASHIPA: Large Scale Historical Industrial Exploitation of Polar Areas	
The voyages of discovery in the second half of the 16th century and later, during the so called Heroic Century of Polar Exploration (1870-1920), including the first International Polar Year (1882-1883), made it possible for the western colonial powers to penetrate into the polar areas. The voyages of discovery not only led to scientific research but also the exploitation of natural resources. Until now, the history of polar science and exploitation of polar areas were almost exclusively studied from a regional and national approach based on written sources from the archives in the countries in the core region. The aim of the LASHIPA project is to study the various (hunting, whaling, mining and research) settlements/stations in their natural settings from a bipolar, international and comparative perspective.  The project will give an overview of the development of science and natural resource exploitation and its impact on the natural environment and the indigenous peoples.
In this project The Netherlands collaborates with Norway, Russia, Sweden, UK and USA. 
IPY Projects coordinated by the Netherlands focusing on the Arctic region.
GLACIODYN: The dynamic response of Arctic glaciers to global warming	
Global warming will have a large impact on glaciers in the Arctic region. Sea levels will be affected, and substantial changes can be expected in sediment and fresh water supplies to embayments and fjords.
In GLACIODYN the dynamics of Arctic glaciers will be studied by means of field observations, remote sensing from satellites, and computer modelling. This will deliver tools to make more accurate predictions about future changes. A set of target glaciers has been identified for intensive observations (in situ and from space) for the period 2007-2010. This set covers a wide range of climatic/geographical settings and takes maximum advantage of prior long-term studies. Sixteen countries participate in this project. 
NORCLIM: Northern High Latitude Climate variability during the past 2000 years: implications for human settlement
NORCLIM investigates how natural climate change over the past two millenia has affected human presence in the Arctic. Examples are the timing of Viking settlement on the Faroer, Iceland, Greenland and Newfoundland and the shift in whaling activities from Spitsbergen to Davis Strait during the Little Ice Age. To achieve the NORCLIM goals, geologists, climatologists and archeologists from eight counties will carry out marine and terrestrial fieldwork on key locations along a Newfoundland-Spitsbergen transect. 
Partners in NORCLIM are from: Denmark, Greenland, Norway, Iceland, Canada, United Kingdom, USA and The Netherlands.

Apart from these projects, The Netherlands is involved in about 25 IPY projects coordinated by scientists from other countries (Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, UK and USA). 
The IPY-NL programme (duration 2006-2010) aims to strengthen the long-term Netherlands Polar Programme which started in 1989 as a National Antarctic Programme, and includes also an Arctic Programme since 2002. 

IPY-NL Education, Outreach and Communication programme
The aim of the Education, Outreach and Communication (EOC) compenent of the IPY-NL Programme is to bring the polar regions and polar research under the attention of the general public, schoolchildren and policy makers in the Netherlands. EOC follows the same lines as the research scope:
    • cooperation between scientists and professionals in the field of EOC
    • cooperation/cross linking professionals in the field of EOC amongst each other
    • involvement of both natural sciences and humanities
    • cooperation with the local population of the arctic
This will be done in cooperation with various external partners. In the period of 2007-2010 activities ranging from exhibitions, public lectures and documentaries to weblogs will be organised.  The IPY activities in the Netherlands will be imbedded in an international, but mainly European, context as far as relevant and possible. The Netherlands is active in the European Polar Board, working on EOC in IPY on a European level, and in COMNAP INFONET (deals with practical and technical aspects of communicating to the public the activities the National Antarctic Programs). The Netherlands also has a representative in the IPY Youth Steering Committee.  
One of the main projects to present the science to a wide audience is the development of a weblog for all IPY-NL science expeditions. A Dutch public broadcasting corporation – VPRO - will report online and on national radio about the expeditions of the Dutch science teams. Researchers receive professional training in a handling camera. A special VPRO 'Pooljaar' website will serve as a portal for about 18 weblogs featuring polar researchers during their fieldwork, including video and audio contributions. In January 2007 VPRO has started with a weblog from the Australian icebreaker vessel ´Aurora Australis’ while searching for marine viruses, which will be followed throughout 2007 by many reports from the Arctic. 
About 15-18 exhibitions will take place at various locations in The Netherlands during the IPY, together with documentaries on polar research, books and theatre productions. Museum exhibitions will present for example: 
    • A photographic journal “Destination Antarctica” by Dutch wildlife photographer Flip de Nooyer. 
    • Real-time weather data from Antarctica, an automatic weather station and polar ice cores showing the climate archive as part of an interactive exhibition on polar research . 
    • The consequences of climate change on people living in Greenland, Canada, Alaska, Lapland and Siberia and the changes in the material culture in a large exposition under the title: “What if the ice melts... ”. 
    • Land ice and its influence on the formation of the landscape in The Netherlands during the little ice age. 
The interest of primary school children in the earth’s polar regions will be targeted in a project in partnership between IPY-NL and the international Ben & Jerry’s Climate Change College. For secondary school children there will be writing a “thesis” contests that have adopted an IPY focus for the 2007 and 2008 editions. Contributions in field of arctic ecology can win a trip to Lapland, contributions in the field of geosciences can win an expedition to Greenland. The educational effort in IPY-NL also includes a post IPY school curriculum programme. 
A junior polar researchers day will be organised late 2007 including a media training and speed dating to get to know each other to enhance cooperation.  Also, the 2007 edition of the annual Science and Technology Week ('WetenWeek' in Dutch) in the Netherlands is within the framework of the IPY: the theme is ‘Tip of the Iceberg’. 

More information on IPY in the Netherlands, including a calendar of all IPY-NL related activities, can be found at www.ipy.nl 



