





Global Outlook for Ice and Snow





Global Outlook for Ice and Snow
1. Background / Description
In order to inform environmental and developmental policy-making processes, UNEP keeps under review the state of the world environment. UNEP’s environmental assessments, such as its flagship Global Environment Outlook (GEO), are fundamentally communication initiatives that promote the interaction between science and the various stages of the policy and decisionmaking cycle. They reduce complexity but add value by summarizing, synthesizing and building scenarios. They also identify consensus by sorting out what is known and widely accepted from what is not known or not agreed.
Over the last few years, climate change has reached the top of the global environmental agenda. Climate-driven changes are becoming increasingly apparent worldwide and in particular in the Polar regions. Changes to the cryosphere are some of the most critical changes observed to date.
In order to raise awareness of the changes to the cryosphere and to highlight the consequences of these changes for the global community, UNEP is preparing a new assessment report Global Outlook for Ice & Snow. The report will provide an up-to-date, concise review of the state of the environment and the trends in ice and snow-covered regions of the world. Launched at the outset of the International Polar Year 2007-2008 (IPY), the report will also serve as a reference publication on the state and trends of ice and snow in the Polar regions. 
The assessment is being written by a team of experts from many disciplines and many countries. Leading research organizations are involved in preparing and reviewing the report. Global Outlook for Ice & Snow is an official IPY project.
2. Objectives
The objectives of the report are:
    • To provide an up-to-date, concise and well-illustrated review of the state of the environment and the trends in ice-covered regions at the outset of the International Polar Year 2007-2008;
    • To raise the global awareness on the changes and threats to ice-covered regions and challenges deriving from those changes to the world community and to the Arctic communities, in particular.
3. Target audience
Global Outlook for Ice & Snow is aimed at a broad audience which includes decision-makers at many levels. The report will be written in concise and readable language, and will include many case studies, illustrations, maps and graphics in order to serve as an educational and reference publication for a wide range of readers. In addition, a web version of Global Outlook for Ice & Snow will be launched at the same time as the print publication, helping to make this report effective and accessible.
4. Launch
Global Outlook for Ice & Snow will be launched on 5 June 2007 on World Environment Day (WED) in cities around the world. Norway and the City of Tromso will host the main international celebrations. The theme for this year’s World Environment Day is ‘Melting Ice, a Hot Topic?’
5. Coordination
The production of Global Outlook for Ice & Snow is guided by a steering committee led by Pål Prestrud from the Center for International Climate and Environmental Research (CICERO) and is coordinated by UNEP/GRID-Arendal in Norway (Joan Eamer) and UNEP’s Division of Early Warning and Assessment in Nairobi (Christian Lambrechts). The Global Outlook for Ice & Snow is jointly funded by UNEP and the Government of Norway.

-----

