





Australia’s Antarctic Scientific Research Programme 2006/07




Australia’s Antarctic Scientific Research Programme 2006/07
Summary Overview
During the 2006/07 Antarctic season Australia ran 119 projects. A total of 141 scientists travelled south. Of these scientists 109 were from institutions external to the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and included 24  international scientists from Malaysia, United Kingdom, Japan, Netherlands, Belgium, France, United States, Switzerland and New Zealand.
The focus of the season was on climate research, marine research, and human impacts on the Antarctic environment.  Among the climate related projects was a major voyage to the sub‑Antarctic zone of the Southern Ocean to conduct detailed research into the effects of ocean acidification, caused by atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolving in the ocean.  The research targeted processes that govern the ocean's natural uptake of carbon dioxide, the ocean's ability to continue to process carbon dioxide, and the likely impacts of acidification on the organisms that form the base of the food web in the Southern Ocean. The voyage involved extensive collaboration between Australia’s Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre, Australian Antarctic Division and the CSIRO Division of Marine and Atmospheric Research, and included visiting scientists from the Netherlands, United Kingdom, Belgium, France, United States, Switzerland and New Zealand.
Another key climate change science question addressed this season was to determine whether the ice sheet is growing in Enderby Land, between Mawson and Syowa stations. Indications from space-based measurement through the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) suggest this is happening. However, the gravity results could also be interpreted as due to uplift of the continental crust beneath the ice. In January 2007, a field party of scientists flew to Richardson Lake in Enderby Land, East Antarctica, to install a new remote GPS site to measure the vertical movement of the continent. The Antarctic Division’s CASA-212 aircraft landed on the permanently frozen lake, close to suitable outcrops of solid rock on which the GPS antenna was attached. The results of this work will be important in modelling the dynamics of the Antarctic ice sheet.  For further information on this project see: http://rses.anu.edu.au/geodynamics/gps/antarctic/rich.html.
Analysis of meteorological data for the Southern Hemisphere winter stratosphere has led to the development of a scheme to forecast accurately key annual metrics for the Antarctic Ozone Hole up to three months in advance of maximum ozone depletion.
The Southern Ocean Continuous Plankton Recorder (SO-CPR) Survey continued throughout the 2006/07 season with 27 CPR deployments covering the ocean from the zero meridian to 150o east and with many repeat transects between Hobart and Antarctica.  The SO-CPR Survey now includes Australia, Japan, Germany, New Zealand and the United Kingdom and involves nine organisations including SCAR. The multinational nature of the survey significantly increases its ability to document temporal and spatial patterns in Southern Ocean plankton communities and it is now well‑placed to test predictions of ecological community-level changes associated with global CO2 rise.
This summer has also seen an ambitious field program at Casey station with 15 scientists addressing a range of projects within the Impacts of Human Activity in Antarctica programme. Research activities included testing of a permeable reactive barrier designed to contain oil spills and encourage in situ remediation of spilt fuel, and recovery of several experiments deployed over the past ten years to test the resilience of Antarctic marine benthic communities and their ability to adapt to environmental disturbance caused by local activities or global change. 
Australian research in support of CCAMLR continued with another successful field season at the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program site at Bechervaise Island and more broadly in the Mawson region. Evidence from previous seasons of a negative relationship between chick survival and sea-ice extent was strengthened from this year's data, where chick survival was close to the lowest in the 17 years' operation of the program, and sea-ice extent was much greater than usual. Several automatically operating cameras were deployed to collect breeding data cost-effectively from a greater number of sites. New cost-effective methods for region-wide population surveys were also developed and applied. Other CCAMLR –related research continues at the AAD HQ in Kingston where the aquarium system is now fully functioning. Krill are now schooling, growing and reproducing in the experimental aquarium and a range of experiments is underway examining their behaviour, reproduction, development, biochemistry and physiology.  The AAD’s research aquarium is becoming the focus of a number of international collaborations with scientists interested in studying living krill.
