





Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica




Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica
Information Paper Submitted by India

Introduction
This draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been carried out by the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), an R&D wing of Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, which is mandated to coordinate and manage all the activities of India in the Antarctic region. The CEE has been prepared for the establishment of the proposed new Indian research base in the Larsemann Hills of the East Antarctica (69°24’ to 690 25’S latitude and 76°10’ to 76013’E longitude) at an unnamed promontory also referred in some journals as Grovnes.  The document has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (The Madrid Protocol 1991) and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005). This document is approved and endorsed by Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India.
Circulation of Draft CEE
This draft CEE was released on 29 December 2006 and circulated to all Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) members through CEP mailing contact list. CEP chair was also informed about circulation of the document to the members. It is also intimated through notification about the webpage of the draft CEE document. This information paper contents full draft CEE as an attachment. For the discussions during CEP-X, non-technical summary of the document is submitted as Working Paper, which is to be translated into all four-treaty languages. Full text of the documents may also be downloaded from http://www.ncaor.org/draftcee. During CEP-X, document shall also be made available through CD and in printed form. 
Further Information
For further information on this CEE report, please contact:
Director
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research,
Headland Sada, Vasco da Gama, Goa 403 804
India
PH: +91 832- 2525 501, - 2520 876
Fax: +91 832- 2520 877
E-mail: director@ncaor.org
(Attachment: Full text of Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of New Indian Research Base at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica, in PDF format)

