





Report of the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators 2006-2007





Report of the International Association of 
Antarctica Tour Operators 2006-2007 
Under Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty

Introduction
The International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) is pleased to present a report of its activities to ATCM XXX, New Delhi, India, 30 April – 11 May 2007, in relation to Article III (2) of the Antarctic Treaty.
IAATO is a member organization founded by seven companies in 1991 to advocate, promote and practice safe and environmentally responsible private-sector travel to the Antarctic. 
During the current 2006-2007 operating year, IAATO has 83 Members. At least 9 new applications are currently in progress for Full, Provisional and Associate Membership for the 2007-2008 season and will be voted on at the 18th General Meeting in June 2007. An Membership Directory, regularly updated, is on line at www.iaato.org. Despite two vessel incidents (MV Orlova, MV Nordkapp), and the increase in tourists, numbers of vessels and aircraft operations, the Antarctic season operated smoothly. IAATO Members continued to support established practices that have proved to be effective and assures long term protection to the areas visited. 
IAATO successfully manages Antarctic tourism through a diverse collection of self regulatory procedures. IAATO prides itself in the cooperation amongst its Members - all of which are business competitors of one another. As a member organization, IAATO seeks to raise the operational standards of all its Members and the industry as a whole. To do so requires an infrastructure, a forum, in house resources, time and an economic commitment by each company. 
IAATO continues to focus its activities in several key areas. The following is a brief synopsis of organizational activities:

    1. Update of all seasonal instructions to operators to order to provide for a comprehensive resource of materials and guidelines adopted by both IAATO and numerous ATCM’s. These documents are mainly held in the Members Only section of the web site (www.iaato.org). These IAATO-wide operational procedures effectively manage Antarctic tourism;

	Further refinement of the web-based IAATO Ship Scheduler program in order to pre-schedule site visits prior to the season, assure the presence of not more than one ship at one site at one time, take into account the 32 IAATO Site Guidelines and the 12 ATCM adopted Site Guidelines requirements. Further programming enhancement allowed for a much simpler input procedures to allow easier access to Members. The Ship Scheduler is a computerized program which enables all companies to input their preferred day-to-day ship schedules, expedition leader names and departure dates into a single database. A hard copy master schedule is then issued prior to the season. This program was very successful during the 2006-2007 season as a preplanning tool. Small adjustments are currently being made for the 2007-2008 season. Members will input their schedules for the 2007-2008 season in early June, 2008. Scheduler access to the 2006-2007 season was also granted to COMNAP and national programs that interact with IAATO on a regular basis. The final print out of the seasons schedule for all known vessels was circulated to numerous parties at the beginning of the Antarctic season. This enables ease in scheduling, transport of scientists, and coordination of logistics and contingency planning. The Ship Scheduler allowed for effective exchange of information, ship itineraries, compliance with requirements under adopted Site Guidelines and allowed IAATO members -- in their planning -- to avoid the possibility of potential cumulative environmental impacts at the various landing sites. The tool has proven to work extremely well. Some non-members were also included in the master schedule where information was provided in a timely fashion. 

	Members also input the names of their Expedition Leaders. At the onset of the season a comprehensive list of the names and contact information for vessels is issued for improved communication strategies.

    2. IAATO’s Vessel Database is a comprehensive web-based data program that keeps statistics on all Member-operated vessels and companies who operate them. Each IAATO member is responsible for uploading all detailed vessel and company information. The primary reason for creating this on-line program is for effective management of the IAATO Emergency Contingency Plan and to maintain a database on company and vessel specifications;

    3. The computerized IAATO Database for loading Post Visit Reports into a single electronic database works effectively and provides a record of activities coordinated by IAATO since the database began in 2003. Tourism statistics, however, dating back to 1989 can be found on the IAATO website at www.iaato.org.  Data analysis has shown that ship staff occasionally input minor errors on forms, so each form is closely inspected before they are downloaded. Efforts are being made to have the forms reject incorrect data. The occasional, minor duplication that has occurred in past years has been corrected to avoid future discrepancies. The database has the capability to compile all company, visitor, vessel, and activity information as a means of tracking IAATO Member’s activities. IAATO has posted over 48 different data reports on tourism statistics on its website as a matter of interest to the general public. The 2006-2007 data is estimated to be available in July 2007;

    4. Minor improvements were made to the Standard Post Visit Report Form that had been formerly updated for the third time and approved at ATCM XXVIII Resolution 6 (2005) Antarctic Post Visit Report Form to include additional landing sites. Added enhancements were completed for companies using MAC computers in addition to the original used for standard personal computers.  Duplication of a small number of sites required amendments to be made to the forms prior to the start of the 2006-2007 season. Analysis of the forms indicates that mainly only IAATO Members and associated companies use the forms, despite the adoption of ATCM XXVIII Resolution 6 (2005). The updated versions were sent to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat in October 2006 as well as distributed amongst Parties who issue permits or authorization to tour operators that are outside IAATO. IAATO maintains all the latest versions of the Post Visit Site Reports available on open pages at www.iaato.org, under “Operational Procedures.”

    5. Interviews were conducted during the season with nearly all Member companies operating in the Antarctic Peninsula to assess the effectiveness of both the ATCM endorsed Site Guidelines as well as the IAATO Site Guidelines.

    6. IAATO continued to promote its Vessel and Aircraft Coordination by using an all inclusive ship schedule, vessel call data and emergency response list;

    7. Continued use was made of the IAATO Member Emergency Medical Evacuation Response (EMER) action plan. Five IAATO medivacs were required during the 2006-2007 season. 

    8. Updated the operational procedures to continue to support all methods necessary to eliminate the potential spreading of Antarctic diseases and translocation of non-native species;

    9. Provided coordination with all Provisional Members in their start-up operations and offered support to companies who have employees new to the business;

11. Implemented a one-off Yacht Package for sale to non-Members of IAATO;

    12. Furthered work on the proposed IAATO Accreditation Scheme;

    13. Participated in international meetings and liaising with National Antarctic Programs, government agencies of the sub-Antarctic island groups, and scientific and environmental organizations as needed;

1  	IAATO Membership and Activities 
1.1	Founded by seven private tour operators in 1991, the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators had 83 Members from 13 countries during the 2006-2007 season from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Falkland Islands/Islas Malvinas, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom, and the United States.  A Membership Directory can be found on the IAATO web site at www.iaato.org. IAATO’s fiscal year runs from July 1 to June 30 of the next year, which is also consistent with the Antarctic operating season.

1.2 	Member List during the 2006-2007 Operational Year 

35 Full Members: Abercrombie and Kent, Inc./Atholl Shipping Corporation; Adventure Associates; Adventure Network International/Antarctic Logistics & Expeditions; Antarctic Shipping; Antarctica XXI; Antarpply Expeditions; Aurora Expeditions; Cheesemans’ Ecology Safaris; Clipper Cruise Line/New World Ship Management Company LLC; Compagnie Des Iles Du Ponant; Crystal Cruises, Inc., Elegant Cruises; Fathom Expeditions; G.A.P Adventures; Golden Fleece Expeditions Ltd.; Hapag Lloyd Kreuzfahrten; Heritage Expeditions; Holland America Line; Hurtigruten Group ASA; Lindblad Expeditions; Oceanwide Expeditions; Orion Expedition Cruises, Pelagic Expeditions; Peregrine Shipping; plantours and Partner GmbH; Polar Cruises/Expeditions Inc., Polar Star Expeditions; Princess Cruises; Quark Expeditions; Rederij Bark Europa; ResidenSea; Saga Shipping Company Ltd; Thika Travel; Travel Dynamics International; and Zegrahm Expeditions Inc. 

Full Members include one land-based operator, ship operators, companies that charter ships and/or organize groups to Antarctica and companies that reserve space from other ship operators. 

10 Provisional Members: Aerovias DAP-Antarctica; Hansa Kreuzfahrten GmbH; Kotick Charters Ltd.; Latitude Oceané; Le Sourire; Ocean Expeditions; Peter Deilmann Reederei GmbH & Co.; Sea & Ice & Mountain Expeditions; Sterna Corporation; Tooluka Ltd. 

Provisional Members include a land/sea-based operator, ship operators, small vessel/yacht operators, a company that charters vessels from existing Members and a land-based operator.

38 Associate Members: Adventure Life Journeys; Amazing Cruises and Travel, Inc.; Antarctic Horizons; Antarctica Tasmania, Inc.; Antarctica Expeditions; Asteria Expeditions; Beluga Expeditions & Adventures BV; C&O Tours S.A.; Croydon Travel; Cruceros Australis; ExpeditionTrips.com; Falkland Islands Tourism Board; Falkland Conservation; The Falkland Islands Company Ltd Shipping Agency; Galapagos Travel; Grand Nord-Grand Large; Helicopters New Zealand Ltd; Journey Latin America; LAN Airlines; Mountain Travel-Sobek; Navalia s.r.l. Port Agents and Ship Suppliers; Patagonia World; PolarQuest; Regent Seven Seas Cruises; Ship to Shore Inc./shopAntarctica.com; Sintec Tur; Students On Ice; Sulivan Shipping Services Limited; TAMIC S.A.; Tauck World Discovery; TravelWild Expeditions LLC; Tucan Travel Pty Ltd.; Victor Emanuel Nature Tours; United Kingdom Heritage 

Trust; West Point Island; Falkland Islands; WildWings/WildOceans; World Expeditions; and Wouk Logistic and Service S.A.  

Associate Members include travel companies, government offices, conservation groups and ship agencies that reserve space on Full and Provisional Member vessels and/or aircraft or offer support services to the tour operators, or are involved in conservation work. IAATO also had one private yacht as an Associate member. The owners found it useful to use IAATO’s resources when planning their Antarctic trip, filing Advance Notification and their Initial Environmental Evaluation. 

1.3      Membership Categories 

During the 2006-2007 season, IAATO Members were grouped in each of the following Membership categories:

    1. Organizers of expedition ships that carry less than 200 passengers or small sailing vessels that carry less than 12 passengers. The limit of 100 passengers ashore at one site at one time applies.  (29 Members)
    2. Organizers of vessels carrying 200-500 passengers who are making passenger landings. Stringent restrictions on landing activities of time and place apply. The limit of 100 passengers on shore at one site at one time also applies. (5 Members)
    3. Organizers of cruise ships making no landings (cruise only). Cruise ships carrying more than 500 passengers are not permitted to make any landings. (4 Members)
    4. Organizers of land-based operations. (2 Members)
    5. Organizers of air operations with over-flights only. (2 Members)
    6. Organizers of air/cruise operations. (1 Member)
    7. Companies in support of Antarctic tourism. (40 Members)
*Note: Full, Provisional, and Probational status occurs within categories 1-7.

1.4	Bylaws Changes: There were minimal Bylaws Changes during 2006-2007. IAATO Bylaws and Objectives can be found on line at www.iaato.org. The latest update is May 9, 2006.

2	2006-2007 Statistics
   2.1		Overview of Tourist Numbers
IAATO attempts to capture all tourist numbers where the information is readily available and verifiable. From October 2006 to March 2007, a total of 28,448 passengers/tourists landed in the Antarctic on at least 48 commercially organized expedition vessels and land-based operator programs, 174 passengers/tourists participated in a fly cruise program and 908 land-based tourists flew, skied, climbed, camped or simply participated in multi-day or overnight trips to Antarctica. Large cruise-only vessels, 4,152 tourists traveled and landed on 4 non-IAATO large cruise-only vessels, and 1,046 passengers/tourists participated in air over-flights to Antarctica.

For detailed information and overview of the Antarctic tourism industry see the ATCM XXX IP 121 IAATO Overview of Antarctic Tourism 2006-2007 Antarctic Season.
	
3 	Participation in Organized Meetings during 2006-2007 and IAATO 18th General Meeting
3.1 	IAATO will hold its 18th General Meeting in Hobart, Tasmania, June 25-29, 2007. Government and National Program representatives and prospective IAATO Members are encouraged to participate in open sessions of IAATO’s General Meeting where IAATO Bylaws, operating procedures and policies are developed, as well as where obligations set forth by the Antarctic Treaty System are discussed. The meeting will take place in the CCAMLR building. Information can be found on www.iaato.org under Information Papers, 18th General Meeting. Interested parties that would like to attend or participate should contact IAATO at iaato@iaato.org.

IAATO appreciates the participation by respective governments and non-governmental organizations. The following governments sent representatives to IAATO’s 17th General Meeting (Washington, D.C., April, 2006) and we encourage participation by those interested in tourism issues to join us in Hobart. Attending in 2006 were representatives from the Antarctic Institute of Uruguay, Foreign Ministry of France, Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environmental Agency-Germany), Australian Antarctic Division, United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office, British Antarctic Survey, United States Office of Polar Programs (National Science Foundation), and Raytheon Polar Services, United States Environmental Protection Agency, United States Department of State 

The agenda for the 18th General Meeting will be finalized after ATCM XXX. Included in the 2006 agenda were discussions on Site Guidelines (station visits and guidelines, web-based ship scheduler, post visit reports, active management strategies, review of 100 passengers ashore policy, station visits and guidelines, vessel database, work of the Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica, emergency contingency planning (EMER), ballast water, communications safety and navigation, communications software and new technology, boot washing stations, Zodiac operations and safety, IPY, Membership updates and issues, accreditation, field staff reviews and reports, information management, land-based tourism, liability annex, operational updates from various Sub Antarctic Islands, Heritage Trusts and government concerns about tourism. Committees active during the year included Executive, Finance, Marine Committee, Accreditation, Bylaws, Site Guidelines, and Membership,

        3.2 IAATO had four representatives at the COMNAP meeting in Hobart 2006. IAATO appreciates the opportunity to work cooperatively with COMNAP where mutual interests lie in both Air Operations and Ship Operations. IAATO supports further cooperation between operators to ensure there is little or no disruption to science or station activities.

        3.3 IAATO held a 3-day meeting in London, England in July, 2006 for its Executive, Finance, Membership, Bylaws and Accreditation committee members. Excellent progress was made on looking at how to address the needs of a growing industry as well as what mechanisms IAATO needs to further develop its Accreditation process.  

        3.4 IAATO was very pleased to send a participant to the IHO/HCA Meeting in Punta Arenas, Chile in November 2006. IAATO supports and encourages the work of the HCA. Safety and navigation are extremely important concerns to vessel operators and the productive work by this group is invaluable for all ship operators.

        3.5 In early February, IAATO’s committee representatives met in Ushuaia, Argentina for four days. Inspections of various vessels occurred as well as intensive and fruitful discussions carrying on from the London/July meeting.  

For the first time, IAATO worked closely in conjunction with In.Fue.Tur in Argentina to sponsor an IAATO- and Ushuaia-wide meeting to address both the interests of IAATO Members and the needs of the Port and various businesses of Ushuaia and consider the sustainability of Antarctic tourism relative to the needs of the community. It was a very fruitful and interesting meeting and the first of its kind for both IAATO and the community of Ushuaia. 

        3.6 IAATO attended the Fildes Peninsula Workshop, in Punta Arenas, Chile sponsored by INACH in late March. Numerous interesting presentations highlighted the need for consideration of possible management strategies. It was clear that there are complex challenges due to the diversification of interests and activities. IAATO appreciated having the opportunity to exchange ideas and find that this type of workshop is fruitful and productive. 

        3.7 Numerous other meetings took place between IAATO Members, IAATO Committees and their representative governments throughout the year. IAATO values a cooperative working relationship with respective governments on tourism issues and encourages such meetings. We can be available to meet with Parties worldwide should there be interest in further discussions. 

4	Field Coordination
4.1	IAATO compiles seasonal documents including vessel call data, a comprehensive ship schedule, emergency contact information, expedition leader schedules, and important instructional procedures for responsible operations. In addition there are over 100 files hosted on the IAATO website per season providing Members with appropriate guidelines and standard operating procedures. Many of these documents have evolved from decisions made at ATCM’s relevant to tourism but are not found elsewhere.

4.2	IAATO’s comprehensive directory of Vessel Call Data and the Master Ship Schedules are shared with COMNAP and other government offices to encourage improved communication and operational coordination. COMNAP’s MINIATOM is an extremely useful tool for tour operators trying to contact stations or government vessels. As IAATO vessels transport numerous scientists and support personnel to Antarctica each year, in addition to requesting tourist visits to stations, it is helpful when station contact information is up-to-date for communication, planning and emergency purposes. 

4.3	Expedition leaders and ship's officers on Member vessels circulate advance day-to-day itineraries and maintain regular contact throughout the season to coordinate site visits and exchange general information such as ice conditions, weather, landing recommendations, and concern about potential environmental impacts, etc. At 1930 hrs expedition staff monitor agreed-radio frequencies to change itineraries if needed or report on ice conditions, weather or wildlife sensitivities.
	
4.4	Details on IAATO’s Emergency Medical Evacuation Response plan (EMER) have been presented at previous ATCMs. IAATO has always had a plan in place which continues to be effective.

5	Environmental Impact Assessment 
5.1	All IAATO members have submitted either Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA’s) or operational documents that substitute for EIA’s to their national authorities. Not all governments require EIA’s or yearly updates. IAATO is aware of non-IAATO operators this year that have either not submitted Environmental Impact Assessments, filed Advance Notification or Post Visit Reports. 

5.2	A comparison of the various EIA’s and the level of EIA’s that individual operators submit to their respective governments reflect some notable inconsistencies amongst documents and requirements. IAATO, however, has bridged gaps in documentation for ship-based Members in particular to assure there are mitigation measures and procedures in place to avoid environmental impacts. We understand the “Competent Authority” workshop in November, 2006 was restricted to Parties however it could be useful -- in the future -- to engage IAATO in a discussion about the gaps that occur between domestic requirements and what actually takes place in the field.

5.3	As noted in all our previous reports to the ATCM’s, IAATO remains very concerned about non-IAATO operator activities. The Association urges Contracting Parties to ensure that obligations of the Environmental Protocol are being met and that Environmental Impact Assessments are being submitted and that detailed mitigation measures are included. IAATO is concerned that once the paperwork process is completed by non-IAATO Members to their respective governments (if at all), there is no supervision of management or follow-up to ensure that non-Members are following the requirements of activities.

5.4	In some non-IAATO operators Environmental Impact Assessments, IAATO’s documents are frequently referenced. IAATO encourages Parties to contact IAATO for verification. It is not possible for non-IAATO operators to have the breadth or understanding of the numerous operating strategies IAATO has developed over the years. Parties authorizing or permitting non IAATO operators would most likely need to have comprehensive briefing sessions and follow up with each individual operator to assure compliance with Decisions, Measures, and Resolutions agreed at ATCM’s. IAATO provides this service for its Members.

6	Procedures to Prevent the Introduction of Alien Organisms
6.1	For the past nine seasons, IAATO’s Boot and Clothing Decontamination Recommended Guidelines and Translocation of Diseases Protocol have proven to be effective. These guidelines unofficially have been operative for at least the last twelve years by Members. Past ATCM papers have included information on these important guidelines. Both the above-mentioned guidelines have been tabled previously as attachments at SATCM XII, ATCM XXIV, ATCM XXV and XXVII in IAATO’s Annual Reports. A separate paper on the subject was tabled in Stockholm at ATCM XXVIII as IP 97 and is also included as a separate paper for ATCM XXX in IP 116 IAATO Information Outreach to Private One-off Non-Member Expeditions. IAATO is acutely aware of the lack of operational procedures included in non-Member requests for permit or authority to visit Antarctica and have filled the gaps in procedures to at least raise the standards of one-off operators and expeditions. 

7	Reporting of Tourism and Non-governmental Activities and Data Base
7.1	As noted previously in this paper, IAATO requires its Members to submit the ATCM’s approved Post Visit Report Form on conclusion of their activities.

7.2	IAATO continues to support the use of this single form, which reduces the burden of paperwork and facilitates the study of the scope, frequency and intensity of tourist activities. IAATO would like to encourage Parties to send IAATO a copy of any forms received from non-IAATO operators in order for the data to be incorporated into IAATO’s “Overview of Tourism” and the IAATO tourism database. This will provide for greater transparency of all tourist activities and will further the ability to address cumulative impact issues. IAATO’s database will be able to access information from these forms and analyze, if necessary, statistics on site use and visitation. 

8	Implementation of Recommendation XVIII-1 (Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic and Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic) and Other Guidelines
	Recommendation XVIII-1, “Guidance for Those Organising and Conducting Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic”, is provided to all Members in order to inform them of key obligations and procedures to be followed. 
	
	IAATO urges Parties to consider formally adopting Recommendation XVIII-1 for both Visitors and Tour Organizers. 

        8.1 IAATO is very concerned about tourists traveling on non-IAATO Member operated vessels visiting the Antarctic who may not be aware of the Environmental Protocol and its obligations. As tourism increases, especially in the Antarctic Peninsula region, every visitor and operator will need to be responsible for even greater care of the landing sites and the marine environment. 

        8.2 IAATO’s standard operating procedures for implementing Recommendation XVIII-1 include the following: 

    • Mandatory briefings on each tour ship prior to arrival in the Antarctic. This presentation consists of the IAATO slide or PowerPoint presentation. This presentation can be viewed on line at www.iaato.org under “Guidance for Visitors” on the home page. Most expedition leaders will, however, enhance the presentation with additional slides and commentary. 
    • Passengers, ships’ command, crew and expedition staff receives paper copies of Recommendation XVIII-1 “Guidance for Visitors to the Antarctic.” Some companies distribute this document in pre-season materials in advance of departure, some on board the ship. In addition to receiving copies of the Recommendation, all passengers and ship’s personnel are required to attend the briefing. 
    • Guidelines are available on the open pages on the IAATO website in English, Chinese (Mandarin), Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish. 
    • Guidelines are currently being redesigned in a more attractive modern style. See ATCM XXX IP 116 IAATO Information Outreach to Private One-off Non Member Expeditions. Eventually, translations will be updated in all the above-mentioned languages and, where possible, posters and information leaflets will be available in a variety of languages.


        8.3 In addition, IAATO Members continue to use IAATO and/or company adopted guidelines which include: marine wildlife watching, site specific information, assessment checklist for visiting ‘new’ sites, kayak, mountain climbing, camping, scuba, helicopter, Zodiac, Remote Operated Vehicle (ROV), and boot and clothing decontamination and disease protocols. 

        8.4 IAATO has reviewed and updated the Marine Wildlife Watching Guidelines, receiving endorsement of the guidelines from the UK Sea Mammal Research Unit and have redesigned the overall Guideline on one booklet form and also separated it out into two parts for future poster use. All will be included in the IAATO website.

9	Emergency Response Action and Contingency Planning
9.1	At IAATO’s 17th General Meeting (Washington, D.C., 2006) the IAATO Emergency Contingency Plan was reviewed. No changes were made as the plan still proved to be effective for the 2006-2007 season.

9.2	The IAATO EMER plan has been in place for at least the past ten seasons in order to reduce the need to impact scientific stations in the Antarctic Peninsula with tourism-related medical problems. A standard medical information checklist is available for Members and new Members in order to ensure adequate medical supplies are available on board vessels.

9.3 	In the case of the MV Nordkapp and MV Orlova incidents this season, the Contingency Planning process worked according to plan. Like all incidents, lessons have been learned and discussions will take place in Hobart to improve communication. As several papers have been written on these incidents IAATO has chosen not to submit a further paper in order to avoid redundancy. However, as an organization we have suggested improvements to the papers based on factual information received from the vessels.

10	Scientific and Information Support 
	Members continue to provide logistic and scientific support to National Antarctic Programs and to the sub-Antarctic Islands facilities providing a cost-effective resource for the scientific community. During the 2006-2007 season, scientists, support personnel and gear from various National Antarctic and sub-Antarctic Programs were provided transport to and from stations, field sites and gateway ports. A partial list of scientific support is included as Appendix B. Further descriptions are noted below.

	Specific requests for logistic or other support should be made to Members or the IAATO Secretariat. For a complete Membership directory, please refer to the IAATO web site at www.iaato.org.

11	Conservation Research, Academic and Scientific Support
Members and their passengers continued the tradition of direct financial contributions to many organizations active in Antarctica. Appendix A provides a partial list of donations received thus far. The total sum reported to date is USD $180,361.70, €11850 and £7690 GBP, however at the time of this submission we are currently still receiving updates.

IAATO members again provided scientific logistics and support for various Universities, Research Institutions and National Programmes. A partial list is given in Appendix B. 

12	Observers On Board Member Vessels 
IAATO requires Provisional and Probational Members to carry an observer before they are eligible to apply for Full Membership. During the 2006-2007 season IAATO appointed two observers to sail on Provisional Member-operated vessels. There were no Probational Members during the past season. IAATO considers using a qualified National Program observer from the country in which the company is registered. When not available, IAATO will appoint an appropriate person with broad experience in Antarctic and/or related matters. IAATO updated the “Checklist for Observers” form (version October 2006) for use this season.  In addition, ATCM XIX Resolution 5 (1995), Antarctic Treaty Inspection Checklists, is also provided to the appointed observer. IAATO-operated vessels have been carrying observers since 1991. IAATO believes that checklists provide consistency with regard to reporting procedures and that the checklists are also important in that the operator knows what is being inspected. 

13	New Discoveries 
During the 2006-07 season there were no new noticeable changes in islands or landmasses exposed in areas that IAATO Member vessels cruise. 

14	With Thanks -- Cooperation with National Programs
The following provided assistance and operational guidelines to IAATO during the 2006-2007 season for which Members are grateful: 

    • To all Stations in the Antarctic and Sub Antarctic who welcomed tourists and broadened their views on the value of science and provided a friendly, educational and rewarding experiences for tourists. 
    • United Kingdom: United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office, British Antarctic Survey, U.K. Antarctic Heritage Trust, Port Lockroy staff, sub-Antarctic Islands' personnel and others for making visits an extremely educational and enjoyable experience and for providing Members with comprehensive guidelines for visits to BAS stations and their process for arranging visit applications.
    • Chile and Russia: For the use of the runway at Marsh/Frei for medical emergencies in conjunction with Member Aerovias DAP and to Bellingshausen Station for accommomodation, dating last minute requests during medivacs and for receipt of a medical diagnosis for a Russian crew member. There were 5 IAATO medevacs this season.
    • United States: Palmer, McMurdo and South Pole Station personnel for hosting organized visits throughout the season and providing operational guidelines to operators in advance of the season, as well as for assistance with a medevac from McMurdo.
    • New Zealand: For assistance involving a medevac from Enderby Island, sub-Antarctic.
    • United Kingdom and Chile for the assistance of the HMS Endurance for assisting on the Nordkapp incident.
    • Spain for the assistance by the vessel Las Palmas with the M/V Orlova at Whalers Bay. 

Appendices
    A. Partial list of Donations for 2006-07
    B. Partial List of Science Support and Transport by IAATO Vessels in 2006-07

Appendix A:  2006-2007 Partial List of Donations 

The following chart is a partial list of donations that were given by Members or raised by expedition staff and passengers on board vessels during the season. It is known that passengers make individual contributions to various organizations independent of organized campaigns. Various companies have reported funds raised but are in the process of allocating monies or prefer not to be listed here. Due to the early ATCM, we are still receiving updates on funds raised and transport.


IAATO Member
Birdlife International-Albatross
Save the Albatross-Australia
Antarctic Heritage Trust and Donation to Ross Sea Huts
Other
Abercrombie & Kent/Atholl Shipping

$11,056 USD

$4,305 USD Allied Whale at College of the Atlantic

Elegant Cruises

$13,431 USD


Hapag Lloyd Kreuzfahrten

€ 6,500
€2,400 
€600 for Heinz Sielmann Stiftung, €2,350 Antarctic Research Trust
Lindblad Expeditions



$114 USD was raised on board for Oceanites
G.A.P Adventures

$54,478 USD (via G.A.P.s own Planeterra Foundation


Heritage Expeditions



To be advised
Hurtigruten ASA

*see note

A total $50,751.65 USD was raised to be divided between Save the Albatross, South Georgia Heritage Trust, and 
Orca Project. 
Cheesemans’ Ecology Safaris

*see note

*$2439 USD split between Birds Australia and the American Bird Conservancy.

42 of 75 passengers participated in a carbon offset offer where they split the cost of carbon offsets with the Cheesemans’ Ecology Safaris via carbondfund.org for their full carbon footprint. This cost of $25 per person for passengers matched with $25 per person from Cheesemans’ for a total of $2100 USD for donations.
Member
Birdlife International-Albatross
Save the Albatross-Australia
Antarctic Heritage Trust and Donation to Ross Sea Huts
Other
Peregrine Shipping



To be advised.
Quark Expeditions

$23,378.50 USD
$13,360 USD
$1087.50 USD Birdlife South Africa, $1,935 USD Sea Bird Conservancy
Polar Star Expeditions

$2,040 USD


Reederi Bark Europa



Heavily promoted “Save the Albatross, funds sent directly by passengers to instead of gathered on ship.
Saga Shipping Company



£7,696 UK Antarctic Heritage Trust.  

World Cruise Charities - all monies raised from onboard charity events during the world cruise are to be donated to Joyland, Kenya and the World Hope Creche. Total funds to be determined.


    • The amounts do not include all vessels or private donations that tourists have made once at home. Many ships provide their passengers with a list of organizations of whom to donate to. In addition other organizations benefit indirectly from passengers donations. The information included above is based on what was provided to the IAATO Secretariat.

Total Amount Raised as Reported to Date: $180,361.70 USD, 11850€ and £7690 GB.
Appendix B: Partial list of Science Support and Transport by IAATO Operators in 2006-2007
The following is a partial list of support. As always there is in kind support that is unreported but is an important part of cooperation between the tourist industry and the National Programs and Sub Antarctic Islands facilities.

Member
Program or Personnel Assisted
Abercrombie & Kent/Atholl Shipping Corp.
Provided in kind service to 10 persons for U.S. television 60 Minutes/CBS News for transport to and from Antarctica for a news brief on global warming. 

11 Polish research personnel “out” from Arctowski Base, King George Island.

Two persons were transported “out” from the U.S. Field camp, Copacabana, Admiralty Bay, King George Island.

Three persons transport from Ushuaia to Stanley.

Hosted the U.S. Inspection team and transported them from Whalers Bay to Pendulum Cove, Deception Island.

Adventure Network International/Antarctic Logistics and Expeditions
See Below.
G.A.P. Adventures
Transported staff on behalf of  the USA and Canadian coastalwildlife.com project and the U.K. Antarctic Heritage Trust/Austria
Hapag Lloyd Kreuzfahrten
Transported six persons from British Antarctic Survey, University of Jena and U.K. Antarctic Heritage Trust.
Heritage Expeditions
To be advised.
Lindblad Expeditions
Oceanites scientists are funded, assisted, and transported on all departures in the Antarctic. Ten persons in total were moved during the season.

Hosted the U.S. Inspection Team.
Hurtigruten ASA
38 (Polish, U.K, Canadian) scientists and representatives were transported to or from Antarctica.
Peregrine Shipping
Transported three individuals from Canadian-based Coastalwildlife.com project (permitted by Canada and the USA apparently) including fuel, Zodiac, diving compressors to Vernadskiy on behalf of Australian yacht Spirit of Sydney. 

Transported two persons from Stanley to South Georgia.
Polar Star Expeditions
Transported three scientists for Oceanites from Antarctica.
Quark Expeditions
Eight scientists/personnel were transported. 
Transported the team  and supplies to/from Port Lockroy on behalf of the United Kingdom Heritage Trust.

Hosted the US Inspection Team.


Transported various Oceanites staff, U.K. sculptor planning on building a memorial to BAS staff who have lost their lives in Antarctica.

Assisted non-IAATO Australian Operator Spirit of Sydney which ran aground off Gonzales Videla and needed removal assistance. 
Member
Program or Personnel Assisted
Residensea
Two scientists were transported  from South Georgia to Ushuaia


Detail Of Antarctic Logistics And Expeditions Support For Governments And Other Scientific Activity





Organization
Date from 
Date to
No. Aircraft
No. 
Personnel
Notes
BAS
8-Jan-07
9-Jan-07
1
2
Fuel and accommodation
BAS
9-Jan-07
9-Jan-07
1
2
Fuel and food
KORDI



6
Meteorite survey of Pirrit and Martin Hills, and Molton Escarpment

FACH (Chile Airforce)
20-Nov-06
20-Nov-06

2
Visit to Parodi Base 
Ejercito de Chile (Chilean 
Army)
16-Dec-06
18-Dec-06

4
Repair Army vehicles
Russian Federation
3-Jan-07
7-Jan-07
2
9
Russian Mi-8 for IPY Launch
Russian Federation
6-Jan-07
7-Jan-07
1
25
Chiligarov and friends to South Pole
Total


5
50




