





Antarctic Liability: Domestic Implementation of Annex VI to the Environmental Protocol. Key Issues and Areas of Difficulty





Antarctic Liability: Domestic Implementation of Annex VI to the Environmental Protocol
Key Issues and Areas of Difficulty
Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Introduction

In order to facilitate further discussion on the domestic implementation of Annex VI to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the UK considered it would be helpful to summarise the range of issues raised by Parties during discussions at ATCM XXIX in Edinburgh and also during informal inter-sessional e-mail exchanges.

At this stage, the list simply comprises issues and questions.  Parties may find it useful to maintain the list during future discussions, supplementing it with useful information and possible solutions as they emerge.  This may help provide a structure to discussion on the implementation of Annex VI at ATCM XXX and in future inter-sessional exchanges.

It should be recognised that not all the issues listed are a problem for all Parties. The UK has included in the list both concerns shared by a number of experts, and those raised by only one delegation. It may be that other Parties have already addressed the same matter, and their solutions and commentaries may be of assistance. 

It is also not envisaged that all Parties will necessarily adopt the same solutions in their domestic implementation; clearly these may vary according to different legal systems and circumstances. Rather, the UK hopes that the list will assist Annex VI experts to work together to share experiences and locate the information and examples they need to complete their work on the implementation of Annex VI.  Consequently it is hoped that such an approach will promote the early entry into force of the Annex.


List of issues raised in relation to the implementation of the Liability Annex
1. 	General issues: Conceptual/jurisprudential/translation/definitions

1.1	The concept of "liability" in Annex VI: is it a civil law or a public law concept? 
How to translate this concept of liability into other languages?

1.2	The role and interplay of civil, criminal and administrative branches of domestic legal systems. Should the processes and penalties for non-compliance be civil, administrative or criminal? 

1.3	How to enact and enforce the Annex obligations against all citizens, even when they don't approach the authorities for a permit? 

1.4	The requirement of Article 6(3) that "liability shall be strict". What does it mean? (see also Article 9(3) in this context and Article 2 (f) on the definition of response action as requiring only "reasonable" measures). 
Problems arising from the application of strict liability in criminal law.

1.5	How to enforce criminal sanctions against operators which are legal persons?
2. 	Agencies/Competences/ Extra-territoriality

2.1	Which agency should be responsible for enforcing Annex VI, in particular Article 6(2)(b)? Should it be the same as the agency which has responsibility for issuing permits and/or enforcing the environmental impact assessments under the Protocol?

2.2	Problems arising where competence in the subject-matter of Annex VI is shared between federal and regional authorities.

2.3	Extra-territoriality: problems regarding the applicability of domestic laws, especially criminal law, to acts and consequences outside territorial jurisdiction;
Problems regarding lack of competence of the relevant agency outside national territory.
3. 	Level playing field/forum shopping

3.1	Consequences of variations among Parties in the timing of entry into force of domestic legislation implementing Annex VI. Concerns that this could disadvantage the operators in the countries which are first to implement the Annex. 

3.2	Timing of entry into force of provisions concerning payments into the Fund to be established under Article 12. How to implement this before the Annex becomes effective (as the Fund will not exist)? 

Possible solutions: 
    • Parties delay entry into force of those provisions of domestic law concerning the obligations under Article 6(2) until the Annex becomes effective; or
    • Parties implement Article 6(2) and require the operator to make payment to the national Agency, which would hold the money pending establishment of the Fund; or
    • The ATCM mandates the Secretariat to establish a provisional Fund to hold any money paid into it by Governments or operators of Parties which have implemented Article 6(2) of the Annex.

3.3	Different interpretations of the Annex and differential levels of enforcement; risk of "forum-shopping" by operators to find the least onerous liability regime.

3.4	Resolution 3 (2004): is this sufficient to address the problem of "forum-shopping" in the context of Annex VI liability obligations or do we need to develop more extensive modes of co-operation and exchanges of information? Is the "Discussion Forum of Competent Authorities" established by the CEP potentially useful in this context?
4. 	Article 6(2): Liability where no response action was taken
(See Article 6(2) (a) and (b), especially (b) combined with Article 7(3)).

4.1	Conceptual basis for imposing liability where no response action was taken and no costs incurred. Rationale for explaining this to the public.

4.2	Which agency should be responsible for bringing Article 6(2) cases against non-State operators?
Should it be the same agency which acts as permitting authority or a different one?

4.3	How to calculate the costs of the response action which the operator should have undertaken but did not take.  Should outside experts be consulted? If so, what kind of experts and where are they available?

4.4	How to prove the calculation of such costs to a non-State operator under Article 6(2)(b). What kind of proof would the courts require?

4.5	If the operator refuses to comply with an administrative request to pay the calculated sum, and enforcement action is carried out through the criminal law system, how will any money obtained through criminal fines reach the Fund established under Article 12?

4.6	How should the agency channel the payment due under Article 6(2) to the Fund? Should it pay the amount first then seek reimbursement from the operator? 

4.7	Possible steps to address Parties' concerns and difficulties relating to this issue?
5. 	Article 11: Insurance

5.1	Article 11(1): "Each Party shall require its operators to maintain adequate insurance...... to cover liability under Article 6(1)..."
What is "adequate" insurance?

5.2	What practical checks should the permitting authority carry out to ensure its operators have "adequate" insurance? For example, should the insurance policy be inspected? Should any check be made as to the reputability or solvency of the insurance company?

5.3	Is adequate insurance cover available on the market to cover Article 6(1) liability? Article 6(2) liability? Which companies are willing to offer it?

5.4	Article 11(2): "Each Party may require its operators to maintain adequate insurance .........to cover liability under Article 6(2)
Which Governments intend to make insurance cover for Article 6(2) liability mandatory for their operators?

5.5	Possible incompatibility of insurance for Article 6(2) liability with the principle in some domestic legal systems that one may not insure against one's own wrongdoing?

5.5	Consultations with the insurance industry
What consultations have Governments carried out with the industry, and what feedback or information has resulted?

5.5	Small operators
Are there any particular difficulties arising for small operators from the requirements of Article 11, in light of the limits on liability in Article 9?  

5.6	Figures from actual past cases
Data on costs incurred by response action taken in actual past cases of environmental emergencies in Antarctica or elsewhere in comparable circumstances?

5.7	Possible steps to address Parties' concerns and difficulties over this issue?
6. 	Article 7(1) and (2): Jurisdiction of courts

6.1	Opening courts to foreign states to sue non-State operators
Is this novel? 

6.2	Are new jurisdictional rules required? For example, on forum non conveniens or lis pendens? (e.g. when a case should not be accepted because it would be more appropriately heard by the courts of another country, or should be suspended pending the outcome of related proceedings in the courts of another country)


Polar Regions Unit
March 2007

