





Russian scientific studies of the Antarctic in 2006




Russian scientific studies of the Antarctic in 2006

Main directions of Russian studies and activities in the Antarctic were formulated in the subprogram “Study and research of the Antarctic” of the Federal Program “World Ocean”. The second phase of this subprogram is being implemented during the period 2003-2007. The aims and goals of scientific studies of this phase were generalized in 14 projects that are carried out on the basis of full-scale experiments specially undertaken for the last few years in the Antarctic by the Russian Antarctic Expedition or using the archived materials of national and foreign studies carried out in this region in the past. Specialists of 26 research institutes, scientific-production organizations and universities of Russia participate in the work under the indicated projects representing  the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring, Ministry of Natural Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Transport, Ministry for Defense, Ministry of Education and Science, Ministry of Foreign Affaires and the Russian Academy of Science.
In 2006, the aforementioned studies were made under the following projects:
    1) Develop the normative-legal documents regulating presence of Russian citizens in the Antarctic and social protection of participants in the Russian Antarctic expeditions. In the framework of this project a Concept of the Federal Law “On regulation of activities of Russian citizens and Legal Entities in the Antarctic” was prepared. This document underwent the necessary approval at the interested ministries and agencies and the expert legal examination and was included by the Government of the Russian Federation to the plan of lawmaking activity of the Government for 2007.
    2) Investigate the processes of formation of present climate and its future changes taking into account a variety of factors and relations in the Antarctic system “atmosphere-ice-ocean – continent” and their influence on the global climatic processes. Formation of one uniform data set of surface meteorological measurements at the Russian Antarctic stations for the entire period of instrumental observations beginning from 1956 was completed. Multiyear tendencies of the changes of Antarctic climate parameters, characteristics of the thermodynamic regime in the surface layer and the free atmosphere and cyclonic mesoscale activity were estimated. Estimates of changes in the 30-km atmospheric layer were obtained on the basis of upper-air sounding data. Estimates of the air temperature trends in the free atmosphere over the Bellingshausen station for the period 1969-1999 showed the most significant warming in the troposphere in the Southern Ocean, determined by the dominance of meridional forms of atmospheric circulation. Correlated fluctuations of large-scale atmospheric circulation in the Northern and Southern Polar areas were determined. The biologically active UV-radiation values at Bellingshausen station were assessed being characterized by pronounced positive trend. The parameters of Antarctic climate response to changes in the concentration of green-house gases in the atmosphere were determined on the basis of climate models and full-scale data. At the glacier exit in the Novolazarevskaya station area, values of the turbulent heat flux and of melting and evaporation from its surface were determined by the method of direct measurements. This made it possible to assess the vertical structure of the active glacier layer and the thermal and radiation fluxes above it. At Mirny and Bellingshausen stations, the experimental measurements of the turbulent exchange values were carried out at the action of catabatic wind at different distances from the glacial surface. The process of increased atmospheric turbulence at the wind flow transfer from the glacial dome to open seawater was revealed. Based on data of coastal observations at Mirny, Progress, Bellingshausen and Molodezhnaya field base, a schematic zonation of landfast ice was performed by the prevailing type of its structure. It allows us to identify the peculiarities of ice formation and formation of landfast ice structure, determine the ice areas with different physical properties and forecast the dates of different ice formation phases during the autumn-winter period and ice decay in spring-summer.
    3) Determine the climate-forming role of the Southern Ocean. An assessment of the spatial and temporal variability of the Antarctic slope front in the Commonwealth Sea area and of parameters of bottom water formation was obtained on the basis of oceanographic surveys in Antarctic waters. It was determined that bottom water of Prydz Bay spreads to the bottom and supplements the layer of bottom Antarctic water manifesting its influence in the near-bottom layer with an average thickness of 50 m. The quantitative estimates of the water exchange of the Southern Ocean with the adjacent oceanic basins were obtained by means of the general ocean circulation model and full-scale data.
    4) Conduct complex studies of the subglacial Lake Vostok and assess climate changes in the past using data of ice cores and marine and lacustrine sediment cores. Based on the obtained 27 m of the new ice core at the depth range of 3623-3650 m in the deep borehole 5G-1 at Vostok station during the season 2005-06, the following glaciological and microbiological studies were carried out. New data on isotopic, gaseous and biological composition of lake ice were obtained, necessary for modeling the hydrological regime of the lake. The microbiological and molecular-biological studies of the ice core samples showed an exceptionally low content of bacterial cells in ice of Lake Vostok; however microorganisms – psychrophylls and mesophylls were revealed in the 3633 and 3643 m horizons. Isotopic-geochemical studies of sedimentary rock fragments extracted from the ice core specimens from depths of 3582 and 3607 m were carried out. The mineral and chemical composition of inclusions was investigated and identification of uraniferous minerals (zircons and monocytes) was performed. A geological model of generation and evolution of Lake Vostok was developed. Materials on microbiological diversity of the drilling fluid (kerosene and Freon mixture) from the deep borehole 5G-1 at Vostok station were prepared and published.
    5) Assess the structure, regime and evolution of glaciers in the marginal zone of Antarctica and Sub-Antarctica. Calculation of the current discharge and accumulation of land ice of the ice catchment basin of outlet glaciers on the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula was performed.
    6) Investigate the influence of energy charged particles and dynamic variations of solar wind on the stratosphere and troposphere of the Earth’s polar regions. Study the mechanisms of the impact of gravity field variations on the rhythmics of the biological processes under the Antarctic conditions. The relationship between the changes of magnetic activity in the Earth’s polar regions (РС-index) and perturbations in the auroral zone (АЕ-index) was investigated. It is shown that the РС-index increase in the summer polar cap precedes a sudden start of isolated magnetic perturbations (sub-storms). It was determined that the magnetic activity in polar caps is a reliable indicator of “solar wind” energy, transferred to the magnetosphere and realized in the form of magnetosphere sub-storms and world magnetic storms. A numerical photochemical model of the changes in chemical composition of the atmosphere as a result of impact of strong proton outbursts was developed .An estimate of the influence of dynamics of the ionic layer of the stratosphere (20 – 25 km) on the change of parameters of the middle atmosphere was given.
    7) Investigate the structure of geophysical processes of a different scale and dynamics of ionosphere irregularities in polar caps. Using riometer observation data at Novolazarevskaya station, based on continuous registration of incoming radio-emission pulse signals from the ionosphere in continuous spectrum and in the UV spectrum in the free atmosphere zenith, it was detected that occurrence of pulse signals is confined to five fixed frequencies. The value of pulse signals corresponds to the energy jump. It is shown that the pulse signals registered by different instruments have an extraterrestrial origin and are connected with space-physical emission.
    8) Investigate trace gases of the atmosphere of Antarctica. Based on the materials of total ozone (TO) observations at Mirny, Novolazarevskaya and Vostok stations, a record decrease in ozone concentration over Antarctica was recorded in 2006. It was rapidly decreasing from early September to early October. In spite of the fact that in October the area of “ozone hole” slowly decreased, it remained record large by the series of multiyear data. A quantitative assessment of relationship of parameters of the stratospheric circumpolar vortex with TO concentrations over the continent was performed. The numerical experiments with a global three-dimensional transport-photochemical model showed the TO distribution pattern in the middle and polar latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere to be determined by the atmospheric circulation processes while the air temperature change influences the depth of the occurring ozone anomaly. Based on data of shipborne observations of carbon dioxide and methane concentrations in the air, a sub-meridional section of their concentrations from St. Petersburg to Antarctica was constructed. It was determined that in the Southern Hemisphere, the multiyear increase (2003-2006) of these concentrations remains approximately constant and corresponds to the global average.
    9) Investigate the conditions of formation of aerosol-optical properties of the atmosphere and the radiation balance components over Antarctica. The mean daily and mean monthly radiation balance components over Antarctica were calculated using satellite data. A regularly supplemented electronic archive of solar radiation observations at the Russian Antarctic stations was generated. Regular measurements of the brightness of clear and cloudy sky in the UV and IR wavelength ranges in Obninsk (Russia) and in Antarctica were continued. As a result of processing the experimental data obtained in 2005-2006, models of spatial distributions of sky emission radiance and dispersions of their fluctuations were constructed. 
    10) Generate components of the geo-information system the “Antarctic”, electronic reference manuals and sets of databases and banks, generalizing data of observations in the Antarctic. Based on the electronic versions of the geographical, hydrographic and topographical charts and databases on different Antarctic environmental components, a version of the information system “Natural Environment of the Antarctic” was created. The software package of database management tools was developed, which allows obtaining reference information on its content and state, organizing its operational supplement, reserve copying and reconstruction in case of possible failures.
    11) Carry out a complex study of Antarctic biota. According to data of monitoring of the Antarctic ecosystems organized in RAE, a regional assessment of biodiversity of terrestrial and marine ecosystems of the Antarctic was performed. Studies of lichen flora were carried out in six regions of the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. Lichens on Barton Peninsula and in the vicinity of King Sejong station of the Republic of Korea were studied for the first time. It is shown that a noticeable climate warming leads to the increased biomass of lichens in stable plant communities. This fact is confirmed by a wide spreading of the vascular plant Deschampsia аntarctica on the Fildes Peninsula.
    12) Assess the ecology of the sea ice zone of the Antarctic. The electronic base of biological characteristics (concentration of chlorophyll and organic carbon) of the sea ice zone of the Antarctic was formed.
    13) Investigate the main features of structure, basic regularities of the evolution and peculiarities of mineragenia of the Antarctic lithosphere. As a result of processing and interpretation of full-scale geophysical data obtained in the central part of the continental margin of the Wilkes Land, a set of maps and sections of the Earth’s crust was compiled. They reflect its structure and the history of tectonic development (scheme of isochrones of the basement surface; scheme of isochrones of the sedimentary mantle thickness; schematic charts of the diagrams of anomalous gravity field and anomalous magnetic field; model of seabed spreading; standard geological-geophysical section of the continental margin, structural-tectonic scheme). Characteristics of the geological sedimentary basin structure of the continental margin of the Wilkes Land are given.
    14) Carry out geological-geophysical studies of the nodal Antarctic areas in the framework of the international geo-traverses (ANTALITH, GEOMAUD) and programs (ANTOSTRAT). Create geophysical databases and sets of special charts of the geological-geophysical content of medium scale for the Antarctic areas perspective for mineral resources. The geodynamic reconstruction of the history of development of the Queen Maud Land was made. Maps of the Sor-Rondane Mountains and the Shaw massif were prepared.
The results of the work under these projects will be used for diagnosing the state of the Antarctic climate and its influence on the global climatic system necessary for preparation of the “Climatic Doctrine of the Russian Federation”. In addition they will be used in practice of hydrometeorological forecasting of man activity and transport operations under the conditions of extreme synoptic situations. Solar-geophysical and ozone measurement studies in the South Polar Area present a theoretical basis for developing practical recommendations for human health protection and design of engineering structures in case of extreme natural phenomena in the solar system.
The biological studies will allow us to scientifically substantiate the impact of variability of climatic factors both on the terrestrial and marine ecosystems of the Antarctic.

