





Antarctic Research in Finland 1998–2005. International Evaluation





Antarctic Research in Finland 1998–2005
International Evaluation

Information Paper
Submitted by Finland*
1. Introduction
An international expert panel has evaluated Finnish Antarctic research. The panel members were Dr John Dudeney, who is recently retired as Deputy Director of the British Antarctic Survey; Professor Richard Peltier from the University of Toronto, Canada; and Professor Francisco Navarro from the Technical University of Madrid, Spain. The key issues in the evaluation were the quality, innovativeness and effectiveness of the research as measured by international standards. Finland’s Antarctic research policy and the functioning of the administration were also addressed. Recommendations for future development were provided.
Science in Antarctica has moved from exploration of Antarctica, through exploration in Antarctica to exploration from Antarctica. Undeniably, international politics is a major driver for national involvement, but the Antarctic Treaty also provides a unique and effective symbiosis of politics and science. Science from Antarctica has fundamental importance for humankind and is worth investment, independent of the political dimension. Working in Antarctica is intrinsically expensive and focusing on vital research that can only be carried out there or needs a bi-polar perspective has to be a preference. 
This was the second evaluation of the Finnish Antarctic research, which started in 1989 when Finland became a consultative party of the Antarctic Treaty. The evaluation was carried out by the Academy of Finland commissioned by the Ministry of Education. The evaluation has been published in Publications of the Academy of Finland 13/06 (http://www.aka.fi/publications).
2. Background
Cold region research is a strong, diverse and well-established field in Finland for obvious reason; the country lies between latitudes 60°N and 70°N, is covered by snow every winter and its coastline can become completely ice-covered in winter. Almost all cold region research in Finland is quite rightly focused on the Arctic. Antarctic research has its roots in the political decision to become a Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty. The Antarctic research programme was based on pre-existing Arctic research expertise and there have been few purely Antarctic topics. Rather, the research has supplemented or brought a bi-polar dimension to similar work done in the Northern hemisphere.
The Finnish research station Aboa (73°03’S, 13°25’W) was established in 1988, and the first research expedition was undertaken during the austral summer of 1989/1990, after which the expeditions have been organised in cooperation with Sweden and Norway. During the years 1988–1997, six expeditions were arranged, and the Ministry of Trade and Industry was mainly responsible for the research funding.  In 1998 the responsibility of Antarctic research was transferred to the Ministry of Education. At the same time the Coordination Committee for Antarctic Research (CCAR) was established. The Finnish Antarctic Research Programme (FINNARP) is the logistic secretariat responsible for logistics and the Aboa station. It is attached to the Finnish Marine Research Institute, which  is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Transport and Communications. During the evaluation period 1998–2005, eight expeditions were undertaken. 

The main source of research funding is the Academy of Finland. The decisions are based on ratings made by international expert panels. During the evaluation in question there have been three calls, in 1998, 2001 and 2004, which have respectively allocated funding totalling 1.3, 1.4 and 2 million euros.
The international expert panel evaluated the following institutions to the extent that it related to Antarctic research: CCAR, FINNARP, Institute of Marine Research, Finnish Meteorological Institute, Geological Survey of Finland, University of Helsinki, University of Lapland and University of Oulu.
3. Conclusions and recommendations
The outcome of the evaluation was quite critical. In Finland, the Antarctic involvement arises from political considerations and the research strategy established in 2002 reinforces the primacy of this motivation. There is a need to clarify the scientific and strategic visions. The research programme is scientifically incoherent and the earmarked funding is modest. The research groups are rather small and isolated causing a lack of critical mass. International collaboration is relatively weak. Finnish Antarctic research under-performs against both national and international scientific norms.
However, the evaluation panel also found undisputed success stories in Finnish Antarctic research. The ozone and ultra-violet radiation programme run by the Arctic Research Centre of the Finnish Meteorological Institute has provided, and continues to provide, essential datasets for posterity on the historical behaviour of the Antarctic ozone hole and on its behaviour. The measurements are conducted at the Argentinean Marambio station and are an excellent example of very cost-effective, long-term international collaboration. 
The experimental work on air quality carried out by the Finnish Meteorological Institute in collaboration with the University of Helsinki is delivering a comprehensive, and now year-round, database of atmospheric aerosols from Dronning Maud Land. This Antarctic work is part of a much larger programme of aerosol research studying Arctic pollution for which it provides a baseline from an unpolluted air mass. 
The University of Helsinki’s atmospheric physics programme studies the dynamics of the Antarctic boundary layer. It has clearly-focused goals and well-designed experimental work closely coupled with modelling. 
The work on Gondwana break-up located in the Department of Geology of the University of Helsinki takes full advantage of the geophysical setting of Aboa and is focused on an important problem concerning the processes that are responsible for super-continent break-up.
The panel rates FINNARP as a highly effective and efficient organisation that delivers a surprising amount given its funding level. The Nordic agreement on logistics is a very effective way of leveraging the FINNARP capability. However, FINNARP cannot be expected to continue to maintain the current volume of activity with its present budget.
The panel recommended considering whether to target funding into fewer but larger awards to tackle the problem of critical mass. The purpose, composition and terms of reference of CCAR need to be reviewed. CCAR should take more active role in championing Antarctic research and establish a formal link with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) to aid tactical and strategic decision-making. Finland needs to continue to give priority to maintaining the collection of key environmental datasets. Strong efforts should be made to encourage collaboration within the Finnish Antarctic community. 
The evaluation panel pointed out several clear cases of missed opportunities in the ongoing Finnish Antarctic research. The Finnish Geodetic Institute has carried out geodetic monitoring to detect the rate of ice-mass loss from Antarctic peripheral sites. This research would give a great contribution to the studies of the global sea level rise. Surface snow cover work done by the Division of Geophysics from the University of Helsinki would have a potential for refining general circulation models (GCMs) and impact of double CO2 scenarios. Also the atmospheric aerosol programme run by the Finnish Meteorological Institute and the University of Helsinki should be linked to improvements of GCM parameterisation. The apparent failures have been not to maintain continuity in the air-sea/ice interaction buoy programme and the decision not to participate in the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA).

