





Re-issue of WP 44 (ATCM XXIX) 
Review of Annex II of the Environmental Protocol




Re-issue of WP 44 (ATCM XXIX) Review of Annex II of the Environmental Protocol
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

The text relating to the review of Annex II of the Environmental Protocol was attached as Appendix 9 to the Report of CEP VII and discussed by ATCM XXVII (2004).

That same text was re-circulated at ATCM XXIX by the Secretariat as a non-Paper.

The Final Report of ATCM XXVII (para 83) identified that some key policy matters of a substantive nature relating to Annex II remained to be addressed.  In particular these were, whether:

    • the title of the Annex should be amended and if, in doing so, whether its scope would be extended;

    • the definitions (in Article 1) should be modified;

    • to extend the designation of Special Protected Species to include marine species.

Following discussion of the non-paper by the Legal and Institutional Group of ATCM XXIX it was proposed that:

    • the draft revised text of Annex II be amended further on the basis that the title of the Annex should not be amended; and 

    • the amended text be re-submitted by a Party (or Parties) as a Working Paper.

The attached draft of Annex II, prepared by the United Kingdom, is devised from Appendix 9 to the Report of CEP VII.  The only amendments that have been made are deletion of the proposed reference to “Antarctic Living Organisms” in the title of that draft Annex and deletion of any commensurate references that flow from such an action.  In essence these references are (see Appendix 9 of the Report of CEP VII):

		Article 1 (Definitions) – new para.

		Article 1 (a) (Alt 1)

		Article 1 (b). (Alt 1)

	New para. (Alt 1) on “marine species”

	Article 1 (g) (Alt 1)

Article 1 (h)(i) (Alt 1)

Article 1 (h)(ii) (Alt 1)

Article 1 (h)(iii) (Alt 1)

Article 1 (h)(iv) (Alt 1)

Article 1 (h)(vi) (Alt)

Article 2 (2) (Alt 1)

Article 3.  Title of the Article (Alt)

Article 3 (3) (a) (Alt 1)

Article 3 (3) (b) (Alt 1)

Article 3. New para between paras. 4 and 5 (Alt 1)

Article 3 (6) (Alt 1)

Article 4 (3).  New para. (Alt 1)

Article 4 (4) (Alt 1).

	Article 4 (4).  New para. (Alt 1) 

	Article 4 (6).  New para. (Alt 1)

Article 6 (1)(a) (Alt 1)

Article 6 (1)(b) (Alt 1)

Article 8 (Alt)

This revision of Annex II has not however addressed other matters.  In essence what this means is that a number of issues identified by the CEP during their review of Annex II would remain to be addressed by the ATCM.

Largely, such issues are matters of choice between one form of drafting or another.  For example, whether Parties would want to retain the definition of “harmful interference” in Article 1 (h)(i) or instead employ one or other of the two alternatives provided by the CEP. 

The more substantive matter relates to the issue of “marine species” and whether such species can then be afforded “Specially Protected Species” status.  (See Article 1 (Definitions) new paragraph following sub-para (d) and Article 3(4).

This exercise has been conducted in order to assist Parties in their intersessional analysis of the review of Annex II prior to ATCM XXX. 

	

