





Statement by the Head of Japanese Delegation on the occasion of the 50th Anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty





Statement by the Head of Japanese Delegation
on the occasion of
the 50th Anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty
Buenos Aires, June 23rd, 2011


1.  Introduction

It is my great pleasure to be able to celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty here in Buenos Aires, where the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty is located.  I would like to extend my sincere appreciation for the untiring effort made by the Government of Argentina and the Secretariat.  Let me also take this opportunity to express my heartfelt gratitude, on behalf of the people of Japan, for warm support and encouraging messages from all around the world, after the Great East Japan Earthquake hit my country in March.  

2.  Antarctic Observation and the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes

Antarctica, as an unknown continent, has attracted many explorers including Japan’s Lieutenant Nobu Shirase, for nearly two centuries.  Antarctica also has been the centre of variety of observation activities, just like a natural laboratory without much human influence. 

Japan started the observation of atmospheric total ozone in 1961.  After continued regular observations, the stratospheric ozone depletion (or later called ozone hole) was discovered by the member of the 23rd JARE (Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition) in 1982.  We still continue our observation of the ozone, and these observation results have made a great contribution to the international effort under the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. 

At the Dome Fuji Station, scientists acquire data on the changes in temperature and greenhouse gases that have taken place over the past 720,000 years.  These data will undoubtedly help to clarify the history of the global environment, and it is expected they will be utilized as we address issues like climate change.  

Japan’s achievements were made possible by the establishment of fundamental principles of the Antarctic Treaty, namely, “peaceful use” and “freedom of scientific investigation and international cooperation”.  Japan, as one of the countries signed the Treaty in 1959, has acted with responsibility as a consultative party.  Japan is determined to continue to work to maintain the basic principles of the Treaty, and to actively engage with discussions on Antarctica.



3.  Inspection

Japan, in order to fulfill its responsibility as a consultative party, conducted its first-ever inspection under the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Treaty.  The inspection took place in January 2010 for about two weeks and covered six stations.  It took us almost two years to prepare for this inspection, with relevant ministries and experts repeatedly discussing its content and possible outcome.  

Concluding inspections, we found that all inspected stations comply with the principle of the use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes, and endeavour to promote scientific investigation and international cooperation under physical and financial constraints, while trying to reduce extra burden on the Antarctic environment.  The inspections also provided Japan with excellent opportunities to learn about operations of other stations, including those utilizing renewable energy with sophisticated technologies.
 
The system of inspection will increase its importance as human activities in Antarctica become more active in future.  Japan hopes that this system will further enhance compliance to the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol, as well as international cooperation in Antarctica. 

4.  Antarctic Tourism

In considering how to reduce extra burden of human activities on the Antarctic environment, we must think about how Antarctic tourism should be conducted.  More than 30,000 people now visit Antarctica every year, frequently with large tourist vessels.  Although Antarctic tourism itself can be a useful activity which provides opportunity of awareness raising and environmental learning, tourism activities must be conducted in a responsible manner not to interfere with the value of Antarctica as the place for scientific research or to adversely affect the Antarctic environment.

Japan has promoted environmental conservation in Antarctica by enacting the “Law Relating to Protection of the Environment in Antarctica”, to ensure our full compliance with the provisions of the Protocol.  Japan will continue to take part in the discussion on necessary actions on Antarctic tourism in good faith.  

5.  Conclusion

Antarctica is the place far from where we live.  This uniqueness of Antarctica enables us to conduct pure observation of the impact of human activities on the environment, with little external influence.  Antarctica is just like a mirror, reflecting how healthy our planet is.

All of us here have special responsibility to protect this special place.  On this occasion of the 50th anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty, Japan would like to renew its determination, to further promote research and observation and protect Antarctic environment, based on the principles of this historic Treaty. 

Thank you very much.

