





Update on enhancement activities for HSM 38 “Snow Hill”




Update on enhancement activities for HSM 38 “Snow Hill”
Summary
This paper summarises the work done by Argentina during the 2010/11 season to contribute to the enhancement of the Historic Site and Monument 38 “Hut on Snow Hill Island”. This paper is intended as a complement and follow-up to the reports made to CEP VI (Madrid, 2003) in IP 57 (Argentina),  and to CEP XIII (Punta del Este, 2010) in IP 21 (Argentina), and the adoption of the Site Guidelines for Visitors for Snow Hill (Resolution 1, 2007), originally proposed by Argentina and Sweden.
Management and conservation of historic heritage
The activities carried out at HSM 38 during the last season were focused on the management and conservation of the historic heritage at the site.  
Conservation activities carried out at HSM 38 during the last season included:  
    • updating the inventory of the objects on display in the Snow Hill hut, 
    • determining their state of conservation, and 
    • taking preventive measures for their conservation.  

The preventive conservation measures1 taken at HSM 38 during the 2010/2011 Antarctic summer seasons followed the parameters established by various leading international institutions in the field, such as the International Council of Museums (ICOM) and the Museum Documentation Association (MDA), among others. Likewise, the guidelines established in current international legislation on the management of cultural heritage were also respected. 
Based on the parameters established during the latest two field seasons, various tasks comprising the preventive conservation plan for the material collection were carried out in the following stages:

    a. Recording and documentation
Continuing with the process of creating and updating a standardised record of the material collection that covered all the most relevant aspects, new historic pieces and information related with its conservation were uploaded on the digital inventory. This included an updated photographic record of each item, as well as of the different treatments applied to each of them.
    b. Intervention and Stabilisation
On this occasion, after an initial “inspection and cleaning” phase, specific physical methods were applied to metals and glassware. Chemical methods were also applied as part of the ongoing inspection and cleaning work on metals. During the 2010/11 summer season additional temporary (and in some cases definitive) supports were constructed for each intervened item, so as to stabilise them. Such supports were subsequently used to store these treated items in dedicated areas of the hut.  

Conclusions
The tasks described in this report have contributed to make progress on the recovery of objects for the material collection of HSM 38, continuing to maintain an up-to-date inventory of this collection and assessing and defining the necessary conditions for its preventive conservation. 
The work done by Argentina at HSM 38 will be continued in the years to come, with a view to implementing additional measures for the site’s management as part of a comprehensive plan for the appropriate administration of activities on the site and for the protection and dissemination of the site’s values. 


