





Antarctic Peninsula Compendium, 3rd Edition




Antarctic Peninsula Compendium, 3rd edition
Summary
The 3rd edition of the Antarctic Peninsula Compendium by Antarctic Site Inventory Co-principal Investigators Ron Naveen of Oceanites, Inc., and Dr. Heather Lynch of the University of Maryland, is now available and may be downloaded from the: Oceanites website: www.oceanites.org
This revision updates the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2nd edition to cover the 142 sites that have been visited and censused by Antarctic Site Inventory (ASI) researchers in 17 field seasons from November 1994 through February 2011 — an increase in coverage by 60 sites. These 142 locations include sites that are regularly visited by tourists or other visitors, sites with historic census data, national research stations, sites within Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), and a few Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) that are off-limits to tourists that ASI researchers have visited pursuant to appropriate permits under the U.S. Antarctic Conservation Act. 
This new edition revises Antarctic Peninsula regional maps (which are copied below), updates site-specific species presence/absence information, and summarizes recent ASI census data for each site (with brief comments, as appropriate, whether populations are increasing or decreasing). Previous site descriptions have been updated and, as well, this 3rd edition incorporates all site-specific visitation guidelines in the Antarctic Peninsula adopted by Antarctic Treaty countries through the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. Appropriate notice appears in descriptions of “off limits” sites to help ensure that ASPA and ASMA boundaries are not encroached, and that advance notice needs to be provided to stations before visiting.
The Antarctic Site Inventory divides the Antarctic Peninsula into seven regions: South Orkney Islands Region, including Laurie, Coronation, and Signy Islands; the Elephant Island Region; the Northeastern Antarctic Peninsula Region from Saxum Nunatak (-63.17, -56.03) south to Snow Hill Island (-64.47, -57.20); the Central Western Antarctic Peninsula Region from Mikklesen Harbor    (-63.90, -60.78) south to the Berthelot Islands (-65.33, -64.15); the South Shetland Islands Region; Northwestern Antarctic Peninsula Region from Gourdin Island (-63.20, -57.30) south to Lindblad Cove (-63.85, -59.45; the Southwestern Antarctic Peninsula Region from Martin Islands South (-65.69, -65.33) south to Red Rock Ridge (-68.30,      -67.13). The western coast of the Antarctic Peninsula has been redivided into three regions (from two) to reflect the natural grouping of sites.
Critically, data from all of these sites assist the analyses presently underway to assess the drivers of change in the vastly warming Antarctic Peninsula ecosystem, where it is warming faster — or as fast — as any other location on Earth. 
Because of the comprehensive spatial and temporal nature of our analyses, as well as recognizing that the Compendium assists everyone who's connected with or interested in the Antarctic Treaty system — from scientists and diplomats to tourism operators, their expedition staff, and environmentalists, we have renamed this 3rd edition the Antarctic Site Compendium. 



