





Report on the Evacuation of an Altitude Sickness-suffered Expeditioner at the Kunlun Station in Dome A




Report on the Evacuation of an Altitude Sickness-suffered Expeditioner at the Kunlun Station in Dome A


The symptoms of altitude stress began to appear after the inland team of the 27th CHINARE arrived at the Kunlun Station in Dome A on December 29, 2010. Most of the expeditioners grew better as the days passed by. Only one of the expeditioners, the doctor himself, aggravated his condition from mild to severe within one week.
At the midnight of January 5, 2011, with all the necessary and possible medical treatments including taking oxygen, there was no sign of improvement. Under such kind of circumstances, it seemed that the only way out was to move the suffered expeditioner to a place where the altitude was lower. So we contacted the nearby station, the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station of the United Stated, to seek help to transport the suffered expeditioner out of Dome A. The Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station replied us quickly and kept close contact with us since then with the promise of calling us when the flight was determined.
Great news came at the noon of January 6, 2011. After coordinating with the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Mr. Robb Clifton, the Operations Support and Coordination Manager of the Australian Antarctic Division, called the 27th CHINARE and suggested to take the suffered expeditioner to the Australian Davis Station for further medical treatment.  
At 22:45 on January 6, a Twin Otter flied from the Australian Davis Station, stopped at the Grove Mountains for refuelling on their way, with the emergency rescue team onboard, and lasting 13 hours, to Dome A to get the suffered expeditioner back to the hospital at Davis Station. Dr. Clive, the station doctor, together with his two assistants, Mr. Shane and Mrs. Jennifer, and the Chinese doctor, started the pressing medical treatment immediately. After the examination, the doctors agreed that the expeditioner was only suffered from the altitude sickness, his health was gradually improving after being back to the lower area, and no pharmacological intervention was needed. Dr. Clive also sent the case presentation and the inspection result through internet to the Kingston medical service terminal in Hobart for expert diagnosis. It was agreed that taking the suffered expeditioner to the place of lower altitude was crucial to the symptoms alleviation, and this was the only way to save his life.
On January 8, the suffered expeditioner returned to R/V Xuelong, and came back to China safe and sound. 
We would like to take this opportunity to thank Australian Antarctic Division and NSF for their efforts and arrangements to evacuate our suffered expeditioner. The brilliant work done by Mr. Robb Clifton, Dr. Clive and Alison A Dean, the station leader of the Australian Davis Station were most valued. We believe that the rapid response to emergency follow the Antarctic Spirit of cooperation and embody the friendship among us.
