





Present zoological study at Mirny station area and at  ASPA No 127 “Haswell Island”




Present zoological study at Mirny station area and at  ASPA No 127 “Haswell Island”

It is fifty five years ago that Russia started regular permanent study in Antarctica. Mirny, the first Soviet station inaugurated on 13 February 1956 is situated at Davis sea coast, in the vicinity of Haswell Island. A big colony of Emperor penguins, Adeli penguin colonies, Snow Petrel, Southern fulmar, Antarctic Petrel, Cape petrel, Wilson’s storm petrel, South Polar skua colonies, as well as Weddell seal whelping site– nearly all biodiversity of East Antarctica is represented around here.
Biologic observations took place from the very first wintering, zoologists were always part of the Soviet Antarctic Expeditions (SAE) up to early 1970-ties. During these years sets of samples were collected, year round studies of bird colonies were performed. A number of scientists, primarily, V.M. Kamenev, then E.S. Korotkevich, V.M. Makushok and M.E. Pryor, zoologist from the USA compiled an excellent description of biology of species nesting at Haswell Island (Neelov et al, 2007).  Today these records are of special value since they may be used as a starting point for the monitoring of further changes in the populations and ecosystem as a whole.
At VIII ATCM (Oslo, 1975) at the suggestion of the Soviet Union Haswell Island with its littoral zone and fast ice, if any, with regard to the area uniqueness and with an aim to preserve the biodiversity of East Antarctica   was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest No 7 (SSSI No 7). Starting from 2002 in accordance with Decision 1 (2002) it is reffered to as Antarctic Specially Protected Area No 127 “Haswell Island” (ASPA No 127).
It is well known that the vertebrates and specifically their higher trophic level species  serve as an illustrative indicator of environment changes, that is why monitoring and study focused on their population state were always considered to be the important component of ecosystem study and remain top topic now, under rapidly changing climatic conditions.
Regretfully, with the Emperor penguin colony in the immediate vicinity from the year-round Mirny station, zoological and in general biological studies were quite fragmentary. Systematic monitoring was not conducted nearly 30 years. Other nesting species also did not receive proper attention, the impact of Mirny station activity on the population state was not studied, fish fauna and  invertebrate community were studied fragmentarily. 
In late 1990-ties ornithological observations, though to the minimal extent, with curtailed nestling season, have been resumed. The first resumed counts at sea bird colonies at Haswell Island showed the significant decline of the majority species population. The most dramatic changes were revealed for Emperor penguins: as compared to the period from 1950-ties to early 70-ties the population declined nearly by three times. With no monitoring data available, the question when specifically and why took place the significant decline of the population  was unanswerable. At the same time, the studies on penguins, though started later than at Mirny station but since then have been conducted permanently and systematically at Dumont d’Urville station, situated in the same ecological region of East Antarctic. Once published in “Nature” journal the study results revealing the relationships between the penguin population dynamics and large-scale environmental factor became paradigmatic.
Starting from 1999 zoologists started to participate in Russian Antarctic expeditions, they started to collect data with the observance of systematic succession which allowed to obtain representative data. The project “Health of sea polar birds” in the framework of IPY 2007/08 National program allowed to conduct zoological studies at Mirny station and to obtain a series of monitoring observations over the last decade. Zoological observations to a greater or lesser degree were performed in 1999, 2003, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010.
The studies on colonies location and bird population counts were resumed, the major phonological occurrences time was registered. It was started a program of mass South-polar skua banding. Emperor penguin, Adelie penguin and South-polar skua  as a key sea bird species were chosen as a major monitoring subjects.
Regular long-term observations at Mirny station enabled to update a list of birds at Haswell Island with new species: now it counts 14 species including 8 nesting and 6 vagrant ones.

As a whole the regional avifauna core remains the same during the last 55 years and may be  characterized by species composition typical for the coastal regions of East Antarctica. The update of the bird species list testifies so far rather of ornithological study intensification. All of new species registered within the last decade fall in vagrant category. Among these are Macaroni and Chinstrap penguins, Southern giant petrel, Lonnberg skua and even Pomarine skua, a long-run migrant from the opposite polar region, nestling in the Arctic and got to Mirny area during his wintering period.
The most interesting results were obtained after the resuming of  Emperor penguin regular counts at the colony “Haswell Island” (ASPA No 127). During the last decade this colony remains in a rather stable state, even a population increase trend could be noted. According to 2009/2010 population counts performed in the period of adult birds maximum concentration during the egg-laying, the colony population reached 12 000. The average year chick mortality is estimated as approximately 10%, which is a normal rate of chicken mortality and phenological dates (dates of bird arrival to the colony, of egg-laying, hatching out, moulting and colony break up) agree closely with those obtained by the Soviet scientists 50 years ago.
This raises a question as to what happened between early 1970s and  late 1990s, i.e. within a period when the observations were interrupted and the penguin population dramatically declined? Vigorous station activities could be a cause. Long-term logistic operations in the vicinity of specially protected island and the possibility of unauthorized visits of nestling colonies nearby the station could adversely affect the bird population. General abrupt decline of population noted as well for Adelie penguins and some petrel species suggests on the common reason of negative population dynamics.
It is hardly probable that human disturbance was the only reason for decrease of population of several species with different ecology. The data of French colleagues and our joint studies on the dynamics of Emperor penguin population size in the colonies of Haswell island (ASPA No 127, Mirny station) and Pointe Geologie (ASPA No 120, Dumont D’Urville station) enabled to find an answer to the question. It has been found that population dynamics at Haswell and Geologie colonies have been subjected to similar changes during the last 50 years. Up to the early 1970s the both populations were practically stable, though it is possible that the Haswell population was decreasing a little. Then, French scientists clearly noted an abrupt decline of population within a period between early 1970s and early 1990s.
Generally, population dynamics trend and decline magnitude were similar for the both colonies observations and the number of breeding pairs was in agreement with them. This suggests that the reason has to do with a common large-scale ecosystem change due to regime shift registered all over the Southern Ocean. It is clear that both colonies were affected by the same strong negative factor. Sea ice which the Emperor penguin ecology is closely connected with was the  mostly probable factor. It was noted a long-term decrease in sea ice extent in the region adjacent to the studied colonies , and the period of the penguin population decline got in line with the certainly known periods of fast ice earlier breakup. According to extensive studies at Point Geologie colony, a decrease in sea ice limited access to open waters where penguins feed, respectively, reducing the adult penguin survival rate and the whole colony population size.
These results once again underline the importance of systematic monitoring for better understanding of environmental processes. Sea mammals and birds prove to be sensitive indicators of environmental changes and primarily changes in the ocean ecosystem. To understand processes occurring in the populations, to estimate the health of individuals in them – is a vital today’s issue. The importance of zoological and ecological studies is beyond question


