





Bioremediation of Antarctic soils contaminated with hydrocarbons. Rational design of bioremediation strategies





Bioremediation of Antarctic soils contaminated with hydrocarbons. Rational design of bioremediation strategies
The object of this report is to present the experience and conclusions of the bioremediation experiments carried out by the Microbiology Group of the Argentine Antarctic Institute with soils which had suffered contamination with hydrocarbons during loading, discharge and transport operations of petroleum-derived fuels in the Jubany base (25 May Island, South Shetland, 64°14´S, 58°40´W) and the Marambio base (Marambio Island, 64°14´S, 56°38´W)
Introduction
In Antarctica, the use of petroleum-derived fuels as a primary energy source for producing electricity, heat and vehicle movement implies the transport, storage and distribution of these fuels. A consequence of this has been the occasional events of contamination in different areas of the Antarctic continent. These contamination events are of small or medium magnitude but their recurrence transforms them into a serious problem for the conservation of the Antarctic environment as established in the Antarctic Treaty and its annexes1.
 Bioremediation consists of a package of strategies which enable the environmental quality of water and soil to be recovered, exploiting the metabolic capacity of microorganisms which are able to degrade the contaminating compounds. Because they depend on biological systems, these processes are conditioned by a variety of factors. The most critical of these are the temperature and the availability of nutrients. 
A bioremediation process may be founded on two strategies: making use of the degrader microorganisms present naturally in the soil by optimising the physical-chemical conditions (biostimulation), or adding degrader microorganisms to the soil in large numbers in “in vitro” conditions (bioaugmentation).
In Antarctica low temperatures are a permanent condition, and the use of microorganisms suited to these conditions (psychrotolerant organisms) is therefore indispensable. Furthermore the legal restrictions on the introduction of alochthonous organisms established by Annexe II of the Madrid Protocol prevents the use of microorganisms obtained from other regions of the world. These two points mean that autocthonous microorganisms are the only viable alternative for the biological removal of hydrocarbons from Antarctic soils. 
Each contaminated soil presents its own characteristics (type of contaminant, time elapsed since it was contaminated, microflora present, etc). This means that although general guidelines can be established, the choice of one strategy or another must be based on prior experimentation, considering each case as particular. 
Origin of the contaminants
According to observations made in the last 15 years in the Jubany and Marambio bases, the majority of the fuel which reaches the soil is spilt accidentally during handling and transfer, or results from small recurrent leaks from tanks or distribution pipes.  This means that two types of soil can be defined, according to the time elapsed since their first exposure to the contaminants:
Recently contaminated soils
When a massive quantity of petroleum-derived fuel is spilt onto soil which has never been contact with hydrocarbons, the result is known as acutely contaminated soil. The volatile fraction of the contaminant is enriched and hardly adsorbed by the matrix. In these cases, in general, the number of microorganisms capable of degrading hydrocarbons is low or zero, due to the lack of time for adaptation to the presence of the contaminant.
Soils with chronic contamination 
This type of soil occurs on the one hand as a product of the ageing of acutely contaminated soils; and on the other from the recurrent spillage of small quantities of fuel on the same spot over months or years. In these two cases, the soils present various common characteristics. Because these soils are “aged”, a fraction of the hydrocarbons is strongly adsorbed into the matrix. In addition, the fuel spilt on the soil is poorer in its most volatile fraction. These soils also generally present a considerable number of microorganisms which are metabolically capable of degrading the contaminants and adapted to the presence of these.
Some results
Various researchers have described bioaugmentation as an effective strategy for diminishing the concentration of hydrocarbons in soils.  This strategy requires the development of an inoculum of the microorganisms to be used, in dimensions proportional to the quantity of soil to be treated. If the volume of soil to be treated is very large (thousands of m3) the size of the inoculum to be developed means that this tool presents a significant cost. For this reason an evaluation of the real need for its use is crucial.  
Field trials carried out during the Antarctic summer showed that biostimulation of the autocthonous flora present in a soil of the Marambio base containing 11,972 ppm of hydrocarbons due to a history of prolonged exposure to diesel enabled up to 80% of the contaminants to be removed in a period of 45 days2. The trial was done in microcosms consisting of trays (40 cm x 32 cm x 5 cm) containing 2.5 kg of contaminated soil. In this case, the addition of a microbial inoculum did not result in improved process efficiency.
Another field trial, carried out in Jubany Base and using plots (1 m x 1 m x 10 cm) containing 50 kg of a soil which also had a history of long-term exposure to contaminants (5,950 ppm total hydrocarbons), confirmed the effectiveness of biostimulation. The system containing the biostimulated autochthonous microflora reduced the hydrocarbon concentration to 2,050 ppm in 48 days. This represented the removal of around 66% of the hydrocarbons present at the start of the treatment. This removal was significantly greater than that presented by the untreated control soil. At the same time, the same trial showed that an inoculum of similar magnitude to the cultivable bacterial population present (106 UFC g-1) did not result in improved removal compared to the same soil subjected to biostimulation alone3. In this study, the presence of the inoculum added could not be detected by the use of molecular biology techniques (T-RFLP, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism), suggesting that it meets major physical-chemical and biological challenges on being introduced into the treatment soil. 
These observations imposed the need to investigate the strategy of bioaugmentation in greater depth. To do this studies were carried out tending to evaluate whether the size of the inoculum and the presence of autochthonous microflora are factors which may condition the efficiency of hydrocarbon removal.  The results showed that an inoculum 3 orders of magnitude greater (109 UFC g-1) than the microflora present in the soil (106 UFC g-1) did not improve the removal efficiency shown by the biostimulated autochthonous flora, even in the absence of biological competition 4.


Figure 1. Level of hydrocarbons removed (ppm) in experimental systems inoculated with a low level (106 UFC g-1) and a high level (109 UFC g-1) of microorganisms. Systems containing sterile and non sterile soil were analysed and compared with one control which was unmodified, and another with biostimulation of the autochthonous flora. 

Based on all these results, we consider it important to establish the following general guidelines:
    • For Antarctic soils with extensive prior exposure to diesel and other petroleum-derived fuels, the strategy offering the best cost-benefit ratio is biostimulation. This strategy allows up to 80% of the contaminants to be removed.
    • Bioaugmentation in these soils proves inefficient, and in some cases may even inhibit the degrading activity of the autochthonous flora. This does not mean that the latter strategy is definitively excluded as a method which may be effective in certain particular cases, which should be analysed individually.
Despite the proven effectiveness of biostimulation, the removal of a recalcitrant fraction of the contaminants which remains in the soil after application of this strategy must still be addressed. This is a generally encountered phenomenon which is not exclusive to Antarctic soils. To deal with this problem a sequential bioremediation strategy is being investigated with biostimulation of the autochthonous microflora in order to remove one fraction of the contaminants (approximately 80%) in the first stage and the application of bioaugmentation in the second stage. The latter process would use degrader microorganisms selected not only for their the autochthonous character and their degrading capacity but principally their ecology and the chemical characteristics of the remaining hydrocarbons. These microorganisms will be used specifically to remove this remaining fraction.
This focus requires a deeper understanding of strategies to increase the survival of the inoculum. To this end the possibility is being investigated of immobilising it in different types of inert matrices which will retain and protect it during introduction into the soil under treatment. 
We consider that this combination of strategies (sequential bioremediation) will enable treatment times to be reduced and adapted to the Antarctic summer, as well as increasing the efficiency of contaminant removal in order to recover better soil quality.


