





Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM)





Report of the CEP Observer to SC-CAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM)

Introduction

    1. The sixteenth meeting of SC-CAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) was held in Cape Town, South Africa, from 25 July to 3 August 2010.

    2. The Working Group was attended by 49 participants representing 15 CCAMLR Members. The Report of the meeting (Annex 6 of SC-CAMLR-XXIX) is available on the CCAMLR website.

    3. WG-EMM focused its deliberations on aspects of the “ecosystem effects of fishing for krill” and “spatial management to facilitate the conservation of marine biodiversity.”

Ecosystem effects of fishing for krill

    4. With respect to the krill-centric ecosystem, WG-EMM considered a wide range of topics including,
        i. reporting and notification requirements for krill fishing vessels,
        ii. information on krill biology and ecology,
        iii. new monitoring efforts focused on krill in the Scotia Sea (one effort, proposed by Norway, to be conducted from krill fishing vessels and another effort, proposed for evaluation by Argentina, focused on krill larvae),
        iv. the quantities of krill that pass through commercial fishing gear and die as result of the process (so called “escape mortality”),
        v. the design of a scheme to provide systematic, scientific observations of the krill fishery, and
        vi. the decision rules that are applied to estimate precautionary yield of krill and how these rules may be sensitive to variability in recruitment of new individuals to the krill population.

    5. WG-EMM endorsed a corrected estimate of krill biomass resulting from the CCAMLR-2000 Survey (60.3 million tonnes with a CV of 12.8%), and used this estimate to advise SC-CAMLR (and the Commission) on a new precautionary catch limit (5.61 million tonnes) for krill in the South Atlantic Sector (FAO Statistical Subareas 48.1–48.4) of the Southern Ocean.

Spatial management to facilitate the conservation of marine biodiversity

    6. With respect to spatial management, WG-EMM considered topics related to the conservation of “vulnerable marine ecosystems” (VMEs, e.g., habitat-forming communities of benthic invertebrates such as sponges) and marine protected areas (MPAs).  Discussions on VMEs included consideration of criteria by which VMEs could be registered (and, thus, possibly protected) on the basis of information gathered during research activities (including activities that may be conducted by Parties to the CEP and not usually considered by SC-CAMLR).  Discussions on MPAs included consideration of work at the circumpolar scale, for Eastern Antarctica, the Ross Sea, and the Cape Shirreff ASPA, as well as more general issues related to terminology, bioregionalisation, the appropriate use of decision-support tools, systematic conservation planning in relation to climate change, “rational use”, and the CCAMLR MPA Workshop planned for 2011.

    7. While discussing MPAs, WG-EMM emphasised that the underlying rationale for spatial management be transparent and reiterated previous advice to SC-CAMLR and the Commission that it is important to be clear about objectives for spatial management design, with reference to conservation goals and effects on rational use, and to clearly identify how achievement of the objectives will be assessed, taking account of uncertainty.

    8. As Parties to the CEP may recall, SC-CAMLR has agreed a set of milestones to progress the development of a representative system of MPAs (SC-CAMLR-XXVIII, paragraph 3.28) in the CAMLR Convention Area.  To achieve the second of milestone, the Scientific Committee intends to convene an MPA Workshop in August/September 2011.

    9. WG-EMM developed specific terms of reference for this workshop, and, copied from the report of the working group, these are provided below.

        i. To review progress on the development of a representative system of marine protected areas in the Convention Area, including consideration of:

            (a) recently designated MPAs and other spatial protection/management measures; and

            (b) proposals for new MPAs and other spatial protection/management measures.

        ii. To share experience on different approaches to the selection of candidate marine sites for protection, including consideration of:

            (a) types of scientific information that could be used for the identification of areas of conservation importance;

            (b) use of bioregionalisation and other data compilations, e.g. characterisations of priority regions in terms of biodiversity patterns and ecosystem processes, physical environmental features and human activities; and representation of particular biological distributions and ecosystem processes as separate overlays;

            (c) identification of conservation objectives appropriate to different regions; with reference to particular data layers and metrics against which achievement of objectives might be assessed;

            (d) identification of the value of particular areas for rational use;

            (e) methods for identifying and prioritising candidate sites for protection, including the means by which conservation and rational use objectives might be addressed;

            (f) use of decision-support tools or approaches.

        iii. To review draft proposals for MPAs or a representative system of MPAs [RSMPA] in the CAMLR Convention Area, submitted for this purpose, such that Members developing proposals can incorporate feedback from the workshop and revise their proposals accordingly in advance of SC-CAMLR in 2011.

        iv. To develop a work program for further developing an RSMPA in each statistical area, including consideration of:

            (a) regions in which further work to identify MPAs is now required, based on current progress and considering the 11 priority regions and other regions as appropriate;

            (b) collaboration with the Committee on Environmental Protection towards a harmonised approach to the development of MPA representative systems south of 60°S.

    10. WG-EMM also recommended the following list of workshop outputs 

        i. Summary of progress on developing an RSMPA, which could include:

            (a) the current status of existing and proposed MPAs in the Convention Area;

            (b) updated consideration of priority regions in which further work to identify MPAs could be focused;

            (c) recommendations on draft MPA proposals.

        ii. Work program for finalising recommendations on an RSMPA for the Commission meeting in 2012.

    11. The CCAMLR MPA Workshop will be held from 29 August to 2 September in Brest, France, and the CEP has been invited to send an expert.  Additional information on the workshop can be obtained from Dr Polly Penhale, the CEP’s Observer to SC-CAMLR and Co-convener of the Workshop.

The next meeting of WG-EMM

    12. The 2011 meeting of WG-EMM will convene in Busan, Korea, from 11 to 22 July.  The agenda for this meeting is primarily focused on issues that relate directly to the krill-centric ecosystem and management of the krill fishery and will include a special symposium on the development of a new management strategy for the fishery.  The new strategy (termed a “feedback management strategy”) may ultimately utilise information collected through the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program, CEMP, to determine management quantities such as catch limits and the spatial distribution of the catch.

