





Microbiological monitoring of coastal Antarctic stations and bases as a factor of study of anthropogenic impact on the Antarctic environment and the human organism




Microbiological monitoring of coastal Antarctic stations and bases as a factor of study of anthropogenic impact on the Antarctic environment and the human organism
Antarctica is a natural laboratory, which allows us to understand how organisms adapt to extreme conditions, how the ecosystems and communities are structured and how they respond to changes of external conditions. At the first stages of study of the sixth continent, there was a widespread opinion among specialists about the extremely poor microbiological diversity of this region. However a development of sciences about life disproved this conclusion and highlighted the problems of man influence on fragile Antarctic ecosystems. Issues of bioprospecting to which the Antarctic community first paid attention at XXVI ATCM in 2003 in Madrid have become new arguments of current development of microbiological studies of the Antarctic environment.  In this regard, a comparative study of the communities of microorganisms in natural and anthropogenic habitats is of great interest both in terms of classical microbiological science and the Antarctic environment and medical support of the expedition personnel. The point is that recent studies carried out in different regions of the Antarctic at the facilities that had a specific anthropogenic impact have revealed the pathogenic forms of microorganisms, which under some specific conditions can produce a harmful influence on human health. On the other hand, exactly these microbial communities inhabiting under the extreme conditions, can become a necessary biological material for creating a new generation of medicines. Russia has already pointed to these problems in its IP-72 “Monitoring of pathogenic microbiota in the Antarctic” at XXIX ATCM. During the years after this period the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) annually carried out a program of microbiological monitoring of the community of microorganisms inhabiting residential and working zones of polar stations and transport vehicles and natural biogeocenoses in order to assess the anthropogenic impact on the ecosystems in the Antarctic. From 2005 to 2011, six next Russian Antarctic Expeditions were carried out, in two of them the Russian expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” circumnavigated the entire Antarctic continent eastward with visiting the Russian Antarctic stations and field bases located along its perimeter. This fact significantly expands the geography of the studies and makes it possible to compare the data from different regions of Antarctica. This document presents the results of these studiesе. 
Studies of microbiota of the Antarctic for the last two decades have significantly expanded our knowledge about the diversity of microorganisms under the extreme conditions of their existence. This also fully concerns the microscopic fungi (micromicetes). The structure of fungi communities is quite a sensitive integral indicator of the state of the ecosystems. The microscopic fungi are able to colonize different substrates – both natural and those introduced by man to the Antarctic ecosystems. The composition and numbers of micromicetes directly influence the life conditions of people at polar stations. In recent years, the RAE specialists have detected micromicetes in the Antarctic samples of soil, mountain rock, moss, algae and lichen and also in the air medium. The largest species composition and high numbers of fungi were noted in soil near the colonies of birds (ornithophilic communities). Besides, the micromicetes were registered on different materials introduced by man to the Antarctic ecosystems. In spite of a seeming diversity of micromicetes in the Antarctic, one can speak about their highly discreet distribution in the terrestrial ecosystems. So in desert inland regions there are few fungi. The diversity of micromicetes significantly increases in the coastal territories with warmer climate, near the colonies of animals and also in the zones of anthropogenic influence. Adaptation of organisms to life in the Antarctic means not only adaptation to life at low temperatures, but also the ability to survive at constant freeze up and melting cycles. The extreme climatic factors of this Earth’s region produce influence not only on living organisms but also on inorganic substrates, on which the microbial communities settle. Destruction of bedrocks due to the temperature regime change and impact of winds results in the formation of eluvium, which peculiar by their composition lithobiont communities inhabit. A similar situation is observed at the destruction of concrete structures in the area of Antarctic stations. The microorganisms, which have well adapted to the existence on a rocky substrate under the changing environmental conditions, play a large role in these processes. 
The main result of the studies under the program of microbiological monitoring in the Antarctic carried out in RAE was the determination of a phenomenon of anthropogenic modification of the communities of microorganisms in natural ecosystems and in the isolated human habitats. Appearance of aggressive (conventionally pathogenic and pathogenic) strains and of decomposers of construction materials and structures in the areas of anthropogenic influence in the Antarctic was detected. The studies of diversity of Antarctic fungi were supplemented by studies of the diversity of bacterial communities, which has significantly expanded the existing knowledge of microbiological communities at the sixth continent. 
In the course of the expedition studies, sampling of natural and anthropogenic substrates that are of interest in mycological and microbiological respect was made. They include soil from a different depth, primary soil under the moss and lichen cover, cyanobacterial mats, rocky substrates with biofouling indications, snow, ice, water, feathers and bones of birds, guano, bones of marine mammals, timber, construction and finishing materials, tissues, paper, dust from open surfaces and air medium of open space and closed quarters.
Special attention in the course of ecological studies was given to an analysis of microbial communities at the permanent points of bio-monitoring or abandoned structures, which are periodically visited by people. Quite rich (by species composition and numbers) microbial communities form in the latter, in which micromicetes play a leading role. Here, the conventionally pathogenic forms of fungi prevail. Different materials left by man in these structures serve as a source of nutrition for them.
With account of data collected in the previous years of RAE work, the total list of micromicetes in the areas of polar stations in West Antarctica numbers more than 100 species. Most of species were registered on different anthropogenic materials. The results obtained indicate that microscopic fungi occupy a noticeable place in terrestrial communities in the study territory and are characterized by a significant diversity. For comparison it is noted that the number of revealed fungi species in the area of Bellingshausen station (King George Island) is comparable with the species diversity of fungi in the regions of all the rest (put together) Russian Antarctic stations. 
In general, the microbiota of the areas of location of Russian Antarctic stations and seasonal field bases is formed due to cosmopolitan species. They penetrate to the polar stations together with man (with equipment, food products and different materials). Besides the fungi spores can be spread by wind and by animals, for example, by birds. Most of fungi revealed can be characterized as small spore micromicetes. Their spores are known to spread over large distances with air flows. The colonies of birds and marine mammals are concentrated in direct proximity of the polar stations and are an important factor of the formation of microbiota. However there is a group of micromicete species that can be considered “local”. They are well adapted to the existence in the Antarctic ecosystems and are confined to specific habitats (rocky substrate, lichen and moss). 
Under the natural habitat conditions, the largest diversity of fungi was revealed in ornithophilic communities (samples of soil and soil cover with traces of life activity of birds in the places that are most frequently visited by birds). 
It was experimentally shown that most micromicetes revealed are characterized by a wide spectrum of enzymic activity, which can be considered as an important adaptation factor to the extreme conditions in the Antarctic. The enzymic activity can change significantly under different temperatures. The non-uniformity of the populations of micromicetes is shown by the spectra of enzymic activity. An assessment of the numbers and composition of bacteria of the surface layer of ecologically clean localities was performed. A molecular-genetic analysis of snow concentrates of ecologically clean habitats in the vicinity of Antarctic stations and seasonal field bases was carried out. The bacterial diversity of snow communities at the study stations differs significantly. These differences can be determined by peculiarities of habitats and by the sources and ways of spreading of microorganisms.
The data obtained have significantly expanded the existing knowledge of the microbiological diversity of the Antarctic continent, adaptation conditions to the extreme environment, influence of microorganisms on the health of the expedition participants and on reliability of construction structures. At present it is quite difficult to differentiate the sources of introduction of some species of microorganisms to the Antarctic, which include the anthropogenic impact, on the one hand, and life activity of sea birds and mammals and air transports on the other hand. In general, the microbiological monitoring in the Antarctic is an extremely perspective direction of scientific studies in terms of both the theoretical and practical activity. 


