





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Fourteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection 

(Submitted by the CCAMLR Secretariat in the four official languages)





Report by the SC-CAMLR Observer to the Fourteenth Meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection
Introduction
1.	As in previous years this report focuses on the following five issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR 
a.	Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
b.	Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
c.	Antarctic species requiring special protection
d.	Spatial marine management and protected areas 
e.	Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
General 
2.	The Twenty-ninth Meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CAMLR) was held in Hobart from 
25–29 October 2010.  The full report of the meeting is available from the CCAMLR website www.ccamlr.org. A list of the SC-CAMLR Representatives from each Member and Observer to SC-CAMLR-XXIX is provided in Appendix 1. 
SC-CAMLR Capacity Building 
3.	The Scientific Committee endorsed the terms of the CCAMLR Scientific Scholarship Scheme noting that the objective of the scheme is to contribute to capacity building within the CCAMLR scientific community and to contribute to consistent and high attendance and participation by scientists from all Members and consistent and high-quality scientific advice being provided by the Scientific Committee.
4.	The remainder of this report highlights the deliberations of SC-CAMLR of the five issues of common interest in paragraph 1. 
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment 
5.	The Scientific Committee recognised that SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) report was an authoritative report that has clear implications for the work of the Scientific Committee and its working groups, as well as for wider global climate negotiations, e.g. for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  The Scientific Committee noted that the findings of the report were far-reaching, with some of particular relevance to CCAMLR, including:
•	The ozone hole has delayed the impact of greenhouse gas increases on the climate of the continent.  An important exception is the Antarctic Peninsula, which has seen rapid summer warming.  This warming is caused by stronger westerly winds bringing warm wet air into the region from the ocean.
•	The Antarctic Circumpolar Current has warmed faster than the global ocean as a whole.
•	Regional sea-ice has decreased west of the Antarctic Peninsula due to changes in local atmospheric circulation.  This is thought to have caused changes in food webs on the northern Antarctic Peninsula that have cascaded to upper trophic level predators, e.g. to Adélie penguins.
•	Over this century the ozone hole is expected to heal, allowing the full effects of greenhouse gas increases to be felt across the Antarctic.
•	Climate variability in the polar regions is larger than in other parts of the world, yet these remote regions are sparsely monitored.  These areas need to be monitored in much greater detail in order to detect change, to improve understanding of the processes at work, and to distinguish between natural climate variability and variability caused by human influences.
6.	The CCAMLR Science Officer reported on the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on the impacts of climate change for management and governance of the Antarctic region (ATME).  The meeting reached agreement on 30 recommendations of which the following are of particular relevance to the Scientific Committee:
•	Recommendation 19, ‘that the CEP consider developing a climate change response work program’;
•	Recommendation 26, that the CEP ‘coordinate with SC-CAMLR, that the CEP consider, and advise the ATCM accordingly, as to means by which automatic interim protection might be afforded to newly exposed areas, such as marine areas exposed through ice-shelf collapse’;
•	Recommendation 27, that the ‘CEP and SC-CAMLR be encouraged to ensure that sufficiently frequent biodiversity surveys and adequate monitoring programs are established to provide an understanding of climate-change induced responses in species distribution and abundance’;
•	Recommendation 28, that ‘CEP and SC-CAMLR continue to develop means for collecting and sharing data and information on the status and trends of species of interest to both bodies (seals, penguins and seabirds), including the need to cooperate with other expert bodies such as SCAR and ACAP’.
7.	The paper considered the implications of climate change for the Antarctic Protected Areas System.
8.	The Scientific Committee noted the recommendations in SC-CAMLR-XXIX/12 (The Implications of Climate Change for the Antarctic Protected Areas System (Delegation of the United Kingdom) previously submitted to ATME and to CEP XIII/ATCM XXXIII) that had previously been endorsed by the CEP, in particular:
•	Recommendation 1, the need ‘to ensure a more strategic approach to ASPA selection and designation’;
•	Recommendation 2, the need to develop ‘a methodology for classifying existing ASPAs continent-wide according to their potential vulnerability to regional climate change’.
•	Recommendation 4, the need to give ‘newly-exposed marine habitats protection following the collapse of ice shelves to allow scientific research to establish baseline information and monitor further change’;
•	Recommendation 5, that ‘spatial protection for species that are particularly vulnerable to climate change (e.g. Adélie and emperor penguins) is appropriate to minimise other impacts that might limit their survival in marginal locations’;
•	Recommendation 6, the necessity of reviewing ‘the need for further or continued site-protection of species whose abundance or range has increased substantially under climate warming’.
9.	The Scientific Committee noted that the recommendations detailed in SC-CAMLR-XXIX/12 have implications for the development and implementation of an RSMPA within the Convention Area and that the consequences of climate change may increase the vulnerability of different ecosystem components necessitating a more precautionary approach in the establishment of an RSMPA.
10.	The Scientific Committee agreed that the consequences of climate change have the potential to impact on the work of the Commission and, therefore, there may be utility in developing ‘A State of the Environment Report’.  The Scientific Committee recognised that this would require coordination and necessitate considerable effort.  The Scientific Committee agreed that WG-EMM should consider how such a report might be framed.
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment 
11.	There was no discussion of the issue of non-native species by SC-CAMLR other than to note that the CEP would be the lead-body on this issue and would liaise with SC-CAMLR as appropriate.
Antarctic species requiring special protection 
12.	No marine mammal mortalities were recorded in CCAMLR fisheries in 2010.
13.	Total seabird mortality in CCAMLR fisheries was 350 birds of which 332 were in in longline fisheries in the French EEZs in the Indian Ocean.  Incidental mortality in longline fisheries at Crozet and Kerguelen Islands has reduced by 84% from 2006/07 to 2009/10. 
Spatial marine management and protected areas 
Marine protected areas (MPAs)
14.	The Scientific Committee recalled its advice in 2005 (SC‑CAMLR-XXIV, paragraph 3.54) that: (i) the whole Convention Area is equivalent to an IUCN Category IV MPA, but there are areas within the Convention Area that require further special consideration in a representative system; and (ii) the ideas, concepts and terminology used by CCAMLR were to fulfil the objectives specified in Article II of the Convention and may not be related to terminology used elsewhere.
15.	The Scientific Committee reviewed approaches to bioregionalisation and agreed that Members planning to undertake bioregionalisation and systematic conservation planning in the Convention Area should:
(i)	where biological data are lacking, use bathymetric, oceanographic or climatological data indicative of biogeographic boundaries to define large-scale biogeographic provinces within which spatial planning will occur separately;
(ii)	where biological and other spatial data are available, use appropriate datasets to locate areas containing ecosystem processes that may constitute conservation objectives in their own right and represent these areas as separate spatial overlays;
(iii)	generate separate pelagic and benthic bioregionalisations; 
(iv)	for pelagic bioregionalisations, consider the selection of the following large-scale environmental drivers: (a) depth, (b) water mass characteristics, and (c) dynamic ice behaviour.
Marine Protected Area Workshop
16.	The Scientific Committee endorsed the following terms of reference, based on advice provided by the MPA Special Fund Correspondence Group: 
(i)	To review progress on the development of a Representative System of Marine Protected Areas (RSMPAs) in the Convention Area, including consideration of:
(a)	recently designated MPAs and other spatial protection/management measures; 
(b)	proposals for new MPAs and other spatial protection/management measures.
(ii)	To share experience on different approaches to the selection of candidate marine sites for protection, including consideration of:
(a)	types of scientific information that could be used for the identification of areas of conservation importance;
(b)	use of bioregionalisation and other data compilations, e.g. characterisations of priority regions in terms of biodiversity patterns and ecosystem processes, physical environmental features and human activities, and representation of particular biological distributions and ecosystem processes as separate overlays;
(c)	identification of conservation objectives appropriate to different regions; with reference to particular data layers and metrics against which achievement of objectives might be assessed;
(d)	identification of the value of particular areas for rational use;
(e)	methods for identifying and prioritising candidate sites for protection, including the means by which conservation and rational use objectives might be addressed;
(f)	use of decision-support tools or approaches.
(iii)	To review draft proposals for MPAs or an RSMPA in the CAMLR Convention Area, submitted for this purpose, such that Members developing proposals can incorporate feedback from the workshop and revise their proposals accordingly in advance of SC-CAMLR in 2011.
(iv)	To develop a work program for further developing an RSMPA in each statistical area, including consideration of:
(a)	regions in which further work to identify MPAs is now required, based on current progress and considering the 11 priority regions and other regions as appropriate;
(b)	collaboration with the Committee on Environmental Protection towards a harmonised approach to the development of RSMPAs south of 60°S.
17.	The Scientific Committee also recommended a list of workshop outputs:
(i)	Summary of progress on developing an RSMPA, which could include:
(a)	the current status of existing and proposed MPAs in the Convention Area;
(b)	updated consideration of priority regions in which further work to identify MPAs could be focused;
(c)	recommendations on draft MPA proposals.
(ii)	Work program for finalising recommendations on an RSMPA for the Commission meeting in 2012.
18.	The Scientific Committee noted that practical aspects of the 2011 workshop included planning to ensure that technical experts (e.g. representatives from SCAR, CEP and IUCN) were invited, subject to the Scientific Committee’s Rules of Procedure. 
ASMAs, ASPAs and CEMP sites
19.	The Scientific Committee endorsed the revised management plan for ASPA No. 149, Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Islands (WG-EMM-10/21), and forwarded the plan to the Commission for consideration.  Members were reminded that, in an effort to harmonise protection of the site within the ATS and avoid duplication of effort, CCAMLR’s protection of Cape Shirreff was rescinded with the lapse of CM 91-02.
20.	Dr Penhale (CEP Observer to CCAMLR) noted that there are two ASMAs (1 and 7) and two ASPAs (152 and 153) that contain marine components with the potential for harvesting.  While these ASPA and ASMA designations have previously been reviewed by CCAMLR, there is no mention of them in CCAMLR conservation measures. 
21.	The Scientific Committee agreed that in the spirit of continued cooperation with the CEP and to encourage advance discussion and coordination of activities, including harvesting, in those ASPAs and ASMAs, the details of these sites and other relevant instruments should be made available to CCAMLR Members on the CCAMLR website.  Furthermore, the Scientific Committee agreed to place the details of sites where CEMP data have been collected, highlighting those sites where CEMP research is currently undertaken, on the CCAMLR website. 
Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs)
22.	Fifteen Risk Areas, all in the Ross Sea, have been closed to fishing following notifications by fishing vessels of the detection of a VME.  A Risk Area is a 1 nautical mile radius around the mid-point of a longline segment (1.2 km or 1000 hooks) that contained at least 10 VME units. 
23.	Thirty-two encounters with VMEs during the course of research have been notified. These are in the Antarctic Peninsula, South Orkney Islands and East Antarctica.  VMEs were observed using in situ photography and benthic sampling.  These VMEs are in areas which are currently closed to most bottom fishing activities.  Directed fishing for finfish is prohibited in the Antarctic Peninsula and South Orkney Islands and the location of the notified VMEs in the South Orkney Islands are closed to the exploratory fishery for crab (CM 52-02).  In East Antarctica the notified VMEs are located in SSRU H that is closed to the exploratory fishery for Dissostichus spp. (CM 41-11).
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring 
24.	CCAMLR Members continue to collect data as part of CEMP, the consideration of this data will be a major focus for discussion in 2011. 
Surveys for krill 
25.	The Scientific Committee welcomed a Norwegian proposal for a krill fishing vessel to commit five days each year for the next five years to conduct research surveys in Subarea 48.2.  This is a major development that signals an active role for fishing vessels in providing scientific information which can be used for the management of the krill fishery. 
Future Meetings 
26.	The next meeting of SC-CAMLR is scheduled at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart, Australia, from 25 to 29 October 2010.
27.	The Scientific Committee  agreed to the following meetings in the 2010/11 intersessional period: 
•	WG-SAM (Busan, Republic of Korea, 11 to 15 July 2011) (Co-conveners Drs Constable and Jones);
•	WG-EMM (Busan, Republic of Korea, 11 to 22 July 2011) (Convener, Dr Watters);
•	Workshop on Marine Protected Areas (Brest, France, 29 August to 2 September 2011) (Co-conveners, Dr Penhale and Prof. Koubbi);
•	WG-IMAF at CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, from 10 to 14 October 2011 (Convener, Ms K. Rivera (USA));
•	WG-FSA at CCAMLR Headquarters, Hobart, Australia, from 10 to 21 October 2011 (Convener, Dr Jones).
Future work of the Scientific Committee 
28.	The Scientific Committee identified the three priority areas for its work over the next two to three years as feedback management of the krill fishery, assessment of toothfish fisheries (especially in exploratory fisheries) and MPAs.  A schedule to address issues related to these priority items (including those identified in the PRP report), and the allocation of tasks to particular working groups, were agreed (Table 1). 


Table 1:	Indicative program of work for the Scientific Committee for the next three years.  Where items of work will contribute towards completion of the Performance Review (PRP Report) recommendations, this is indicated.  The year in which issues will be addressed is indicated by an ‘x’ and the group which will be responsible for undertaking the work is indicated in the final column.
 
PRP report 
2011
2012
2013
Work by
Krill 
 
 
 
 

Feedback management
3.1.2.2, 3.1, 3.2.6
x
x
x
EMM/SAM
Recruitment variation, B0
 
x
x
x
EMM
Fishing vessel survey methods
 
x
x
x
EMM
Catch monitoring, escape mortality, green weight
3.3.4.2, 3.3.4.3
x
x
x
EMM
Spatial distribution
 
x


EMM
CEMP review and STAPP
3.1.2.2, 3.1.2.3, 3.1.3.2.6, 3.1.3.2.7, 3.2.1.4
x
x

EMM
Fish
 




Biennial assessments
 
x

x
FSA/SAM
Other assessments 48.4, 58.5.1
 
x
x
x
FSA
By-catch
3.1.3.2.1, 3.1.3.2.2

x
x
FSA
Data-poor fisheries
3.1.1.2, 3.1.1.3
x
x
x
FSA/SAM
Depleted/recovering stocks
3.1.1.1

x
x
FSA
Biology and ecology
 

x

FSA
Ecosystem interactions
 

x
x
FSA/EMM
MPA
2.4.3.1, 2.4.3.2




MPA workshop
 
x


MPA
MPA proposals
 

x

EMM 
Recommendations
 

x

EMM
Incidental mortality
 
x

x

Observers
 




Accreditation
3.3.4.1
x
x
x
Review panel correspondence (paragraph 7.12)
General advice on sampling
3.3.4.2




VME
 




Outstanding future work 
 

x

FSA
Modelling
 


x
SAM
CM 22-06
 
x
x
x
EMM
Review and update of impact assessments
 
x
x
x
FSA
Method assessment for all bottom methods
 

x

FSA
Climate change
3.5.2.2


x
EMM

Appendix 1
Representatives of Members and Observers to SC-CAMLR-XXIX


Chair,
Scientific Committee
Dr David Agnew
Marine Resources Assessment Group Ltd
London, United Kingdom
d.agnew@mrag.co.uk


Argentina
Dr. Enrique Marschoff
Instituto Antártico Argentino
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores,
Comercio Internacional y Culto
Buenos Aires
marschoff@dna.gov.ar

Australia
Dr Andrew Constable
Australian Antarctic Division
Department of Sustainability, Environment, 
	Water, Population and Communities
Tasmania
andrew.constable@aad.gov.au

Belgium
Mr Daan Delbare
Institute for Agriculture and Fisheries Research
Oostende 
daan.delbare@ilvo.vlaanderen.be

Brazil
Mr Andre Makarenko
Ministry of External Relations
Brasilia
andre.makarenko@itamaraty.gov.br

Chile
Prof. Patricio Arana
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso Consejo de Rectores 
Valparaíso
parana@ucv.cl

People’s Republic Of China
Dr Xianyong Zhao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences
Qingdao
zhaoxy@ysfri.ac.cn

France
Prof. Guy Duhamel
Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle
Paris
duhamel@mnhn.fr

Germany
Mr Walter Dübner
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection
Bonn
walter.duebner@bmelv.bund

India
Dr V.N. Sanjeevan
Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Kochi
vnsanjeevan@gmail.com

Italy
Prof. Marino Vacchi
Museo Nazionale Antartide
Università degli Studi di Genova
Genoa
m.vacchi@unige.it

Japan
Mr Masashi Kiyota
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries
Yokohama
kiyo@affrc.go.jp

Republic Of Korea
Dr Kyujin Seok
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute
Busan
pisces@nfrdi.go.kr

Namibia
Mr Titus Iilende
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
Windhoek
tiilende@mfmr.gov.na

New Zealand
Dr Ben Sharp
Ministry of Fisheries
Wellington
ben.sharp@fish.govt.nz

Norway
Mr Svein Iversen
Institute of Marine Research
Bergen
sveini@imr.no

Poland
Mr Leszek Dybiec
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Warsaw
leszek.dybiec@minrol.gov.pl

Russian Federation
Dr Viacheslav A. Bizikov
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries
and Oceanography 
Moscow
bizikov@vniro.ru

South Africa





Spain 
Dr Robin Leslie
Marine and Coastal Management
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Cape Town
rwleslie@deat.gov.za

Mr Luis López Abellán
Instituto Español de Oceanografía
Madrid
luis.lopez@ca.ieo.es


Sweden
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

Ukraine
Dr Leonid Pshenichnov
YugNIRO
Kerch
lkpbikentnet@rambler.ru

United Kingdom
Dr Graeme Parkes
Marine Resources Assessment Group Ltd
St. Petersburg, Florida, USA
graeme.parkes@mragamericas.com

United States Of America



Dr George Watters
Southwest Fisheries Science Centre
National Marine Fisheries Service
La Jolla, California
george.watters@noaa.gov

Uruguay
Prof. Oscar Pin
Dirección Nacional de Recursos Acuáticos
Montevideo
opin@dinara.gub.uy



OBSERVERS –
NON-CONTRACTING PARTIES

Nigeria
Mr John Babatunde Olusegun
Fisheries Department
Federal Ministry of Agriculture
Abuja
babatundejhn@yahoo.com

OBSERVERS – 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

CEP





IUCN 
Dr Polly Penhale
National Science Foundation
Office of Polar Programs
Arlington, Virginia, USA
ppenhale@nsf.gov

Ms Dorothee Herr
International Union for Conservation of Nature
Washington, DC, USA
dorothee.herr@iucn.org


IWC
Prof. Bo Fernholm
Swedish Museum of Natural History
Stockholm, Sweden
bo.fernholm@nrm.se

SCAR
Prof. Mark Hindell
University of Tasmania
Hobart, Australia
mark.hindell@utas.edu.au


OBSERVERS – 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS

ASOC

Mr Guillermo Cañete
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina
Buenos Aires, Argentina
guillermo.canete@vidasilvestre.org.ar


Ms Claire Christian
ASOC
Washington, DC, USA
claire.christian@asoc.org


Ms Verónica Cirelli
Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
veronica.cirelli@vidasilvestre.org.ar


Ms Lyn Goldsworthy AM
ASOC
Canberra, Australia
lyn.goldsworthy@ozemail.com.au


Mr Frank Meere
Pew Environment Group
Canberra, Australia
fmeere@aapt.net.au


Ms Ayako Sekine
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Tokyo, Japan
ayakos04@yahoo.co.jp


Dr Rodolfo Werner
Antarctic Krill Conservation Project
Bariloche, Río Negro
Argentina
rodolfo.antarctica@gmail.com


Mr Rob Nicoll
WWF-Australia
Ultimo, Australia
rnicoll@wwf.org.au

COLTO
Mr Rhys Arangio
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
rarangio@australfisheries.com.au
	

Mr Warwick Beauchamp
Beauline International Ltd
Nelson, New Zealand
info@beauline.co.nz


Ms Louise Cowan
Sanford Limited
Timaru, New Zealand
lcowan@sanford.co.nz.


Mr Martin Exel
Austral Fisheries Pty Ltd
Western Australia
mexel@australfisheries.com.au




