





Report of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group





Report of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) Management Group 
Information Paper submitted by Australia, China, India, Romania and Russian Federation

Abstract
Following the adoption of Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 Larsemann Hills at ATCM XXX, the Parties active in the Larsemann Hills established a Management Group to oversee the implementation of the ASMA Management Plan. This paper gives a brief report on the Management Group’s activities during 2010-11.
Background
At CEP X Australia, China, India, Romania and the Russian Federation submitted ATCM XXX/WP 8 Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica. Antarctic Specially Managed Area Management Plan. The CEP and ATCM endorsed the joint proposal to designate a new ASMA in the Larsemann Hills, which was adopted as ASMA 6 by Measure 2 (2007). The Management Plan aims to protect the Larsemann Hills environment by promoting coordination and cooperation by Parties in the planning and conduct of human activities. Consistent with the approach taken for several other ASMAs, the Parties active in the Area have established a Management Group to oversee the management plan’s implementation and to provide report to CEP on the implementation and maintenance of management plan. In this regard joint Information Papers were submitted to CEP-XI (IP-17), CEP-XII (IP-54) and CEP-XIII (IP-40).
Management Group Activities
Members of Larsemann Hills ASMA Management Group met on the sidelines of the COMNAP meeting held at Buenos Aires during August 2010.  Report of previous year (2009-10) and activities to be undertaken during 2010-11 were discussed amongst the members. By correspondence, Romania updated the Group about initiation of European and International project in the Larsemann Hills area, in cooperation with India and Russian federation. India updated the Group on the construction activity of its new research base at Larsemann Hills and presented on account of the progress achieved in the site preparation and transfer of construction machineries to the site. It also briefed the Group about the construction activity of the first phase that will be undertaken during 2010-11.
Members deliberated on the issue of proposal about designating the Stornes Peninsula as ASPA. It was decided that relevant scientific data be collated.  Russia informed the usage of part of the Stornes shore side as a site for their logistic platform to be used for resupply of material to Progress station. Members agreed that an adjustment to the boundaries of the Stornes restricted zone (and proposed ASPA) could likely be made in a way that would satisfy Russia’s requirements, while still protecting the geological values of the region. 
To maintain the near-pristine nature of Stornes, Members agreed on interim protection measures, namely to avoid usages of surface vehicles, building permanent shelters, extended camping, blasting, drilling etc. However, it was also agreed that within ASPA boundary, limited helicopter landing, and short duration camping for scientific data/sample collection, if needed, may be permitted.
All the members expressed their keen interest to continue activities following the guidelines of Management Plan and measure to protect the Larsemann Hills from the introduction of non-native species. It was recorded that the Group has made contributions to COMNAP/SCAR deliberations on NNS by participating in workshop held in Buenos Aires in 2010, and presentation on Larsemann Hills quarantine management initiatives. 
An English-language compilation of bibliography of research papers published on the region was circulated by Australia. 
During the summer period air operations increase over Larsemann Hills region, hence members agreed to be kept informed at least a day in advance regarding any flight operation. Russia and China informed the current status of the road connecting Progress and Zhongshan stations. Russia agreed to prepare EIA for levelling of road project between these stations. 
Members of the Group are active in the field of information exchange on station operations and scientific activities as well as cooperation on medical evacuation. 
It was agreed that India will chair the Management Group for next two years (2011 and 2012). The next meeting of management group will be held during the COMNAP meeting at Sweden in 2011.



