





Report on all-terrain vehicles impact on deglaciated area of James Ross Island, Antarctica






Report on all-terrain vehicles impact on deglaciated area of James Ross Island, Antarctica

Field works - Introduction

The northern part of James Ross Island represents one of the largest deglaciated area in Antarctica with great potential of research projects conducted in terrestrial ecosystems. Since 2005, long-term research activites of the Czech Republic are performed there using the facilities of J.G.Mendel station (Czech Republic) located on the northern coast of the island. Over the last decade, several expeditions were carried out on James Ross Island by other nations, e.g. Argentina, UK, Brasil. These expeditions exploited the approach of short-term field camps (established mainly close to the Monolith lake) and field work in their neighbourhood. 

. 



























Transportation

As geology, glaciology, climatology, biology and ecology represent main scientific disciplines performed at James Ross Island by the Czech expeditions there is a necessity of effective transport of expedition team members to distant (from J.G. Mendel station or field camp sites) and less frequently visited parts of James Ross Island. Since the beginning of the Czech scientific activities, the Czech expedition members have never used any vehicle to move over the land of James Ross Island. They either a walk to the target places distant less than 8 km from the J.G. Mendel station or use boat trips along the cost to reach typical field camp sites: Sharp Valley, Brandy Bay, Solorina Valley, St. Martha Cove and Torrent Valley. 

In contrast, expeditions of other nations use all-terrain vehicles to move on the deglaciated part of the James Ross Island. Typical paths caused by all-terrain  vehicle rides are indicated in Fig. 1, The depth of track caused by a single ride is dependent on actual soil hydration and soil skeleton share. If there are more vehicles or repeated rides along a single path, then the tracks are more apparent.
























Persistence of the tracks caused by all-terrain  vehicles

The tracks represent an important factor in the environment of deglaciated area since it affects the upper soil layer. The tracks cause changes in natural layering of the upper soil profiles by mechanical disturbance as well as displacement of biological soil crusts (if there are any). They cause also stacking of soil immediately below the tracks which changes soil physical properties. Moreover, the track causes depressions that change hydration regime of the particular site since preferential snow accumulation and consequent melting water availability happens in the tracks. 

Persistence of the tracks is dependent on number of vehicles/rides. If a single ride of a single vehicle occurs the persistence of track ranges from 3 to 5 years. If the path is used repeatedly, or more vehicles follow a single path then persistence of tracks increases. Recently, some track paths, e.g. the Monolith Lake (inland of the James Ross Island) – Crame Col (200 m a.s.l.) – J.G. Mendel station (coast) traverse may be classified as permanent – see Fig. 4.



























Future directions

Vehicle impact on deglaciated area of James Ross Island, Antarctica will be monitored by Czech expedition members in more details in future. The monitoring will comprise (1) photographic documentation of existing tracks persistence in different parts of the island, (2) documentation of newly-created ones, (3) measurements of track depth in most critical parts, i.e. permanently or temporarily wet places. Collected data will be analyzed and regulations concerning directions the paths used by all-terrain vehicles will be suggested.






