





The Annual Report for 2010 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 



The Annual Report for 2010 of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) 
COMNAP is the organisation of National Antarctic Programs which brings together, in particular, the Managers of those Programs, that is, the national officials responsible for planning, conducting and managing support to science in Antarctica on behalf of their respective governments, all Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty. 
COMNAP has grown into an international association whose Members are the National Antarctic Programs from 28 Antarctic Treaty Parties from Africa (1), the Americas (7), Asia (4), Australasia (2) and Europe (14). 
COMNAP's Constitution asserts its purpose: to develop and promote best practice in managing the support of scientific research in the Antarctic. As an organisation, COMNAP acts to add value to National Antarctic Program’s efforts by serving as a forum to develop practices that improve effectiveness of activities in an environmentally responsible manner, by facilitating and promoting international partnerships, and by providing opportunities and systems for information exchange.
COMNAP also strives to provide the Antarctic Treaty System with objective, practical, technical and non-political advice drawn from the National Antarctic Programs' extensive pool of expertise and their first-hand knowledge of the Antarctic.
Increasingly complex science questions are being poised which can only be answered by multi-disciplinary and often multi-national science teams.  This complexity, along with more demanding environmental measures and, in some cases, reduced funding, contribute to added pressure on National Antarctic Programs and to an even greater need for international collaboration. COMNAP works in support of greater collaboration between National Antarctic Programs and recognises the need for robust partnerships with organisations with similar goals. COMNAP has also progressively assumed responsibility for the production of a number of practical tools related to safety and information exchange.  
For more information on COMNAP, generally, please refer to ATCM XXXII IP078 COMNAP's 20 years: a New Constitution and a New Way of Working to Continue Supporting Science and the Antarctic Treaty System.
Highlights and Achievements for 2010
COMNAP/SCAR Action Group
This Action Group (AG) was formed at the joint Executive Committee meeting in August 2009, Punta Arenas.  The AG met formally in March 2010 and developed a list of areas to collaborate together. These areas include education, outreach and communications, sustainability, non-native species, and the King George Island Project, to name only a few.    
Inaugural COMNAP Research Fellowship
Noting that education and capacity-building was an area of mutual interest to both SCAR and COMNAP, and in recognition of the depth and breadth of talent within National Antarctic Programs, COMNAP has established, in conjunction with SCAR, the first COMNAP Research Fellowship.  The COMNAP Research Fellowship was jointly launched with the Annual SCAR Science Fellowships, is being promoted jointly and applications will be reviewed by a joint selection panel. This inaugural fellowship was made possible by a grant from Antarctica New Zealand to COMNAP. The deadline for applications was 15 May 2011. It is hoped COMNAP can offer a Research Fellowship on an annual basis.
COMNAP Symposium
The “Responding to Change through New Approaches” Symposium took place on 11 August, in Buenos Aires.  Over 120 people attended, with 12 presentations and 15 posters that were selected by a Symposium Review Committee. Symposium Proceedings were published and distributed to all COMNAP Members in November 2010 (ISBN 978-0-473-17888-8). Additional copies have been brought to this ATCM for distribution to those who wish a copy.
Non-native Species Workshop and the Non-Native Species Checklists for Supply Chain Managers
The COMNAP/SCAR Non-native Species Workshop was convened by Dr. Yves Frenot on the margins of the COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) 2010 (8 August 2010, Buenos Aires, Argentina) in order to continue to raise awareness of the risks of non-native species introductions by human vectors.  The preliminary results of the IPY “Aliens in Antarctica” project were discussed. COMNAP took very seriously the discussions held during the workshop and noted, especially, the need to develop simple and inexpensive awareness tools which could be used by National Antarctic Program supply chain managers (see COMNAP ATCM XXXIV Working Paper Raising awareness of non-native species introductions: Workshop results and checklists for supple chain managers). The checklists were made available to all National Antarctic Programs in November, are available in many formats for ease of use, in both English and Spanish, and copies of the checklists can be found at www.comnap.aq/nnsenvironment.  Paper copies are also available at this meeting should anyone wish a copy. At the COMNAP AGM, August 2010 in Buenos Aires, it was noted by the Environmental Expert Group leader that cooperation with the CEP on the issue of the introduction of non-native species into the Antarctic was, the most significant, current environmental issue and also said that engaging in the CEP's work program on non-native species was considered a high priority task. COMNAP through its Environmental Expert Group continues to focus attention on education regarding non-native species and on sharing best practice as regards prevention of non-native species introduction in the Antarctic region.  
Energy Management Workshop
Considering the discussion that took place at ATCM XXXIII and the discussions and recommendations of the ATME, it was agreed that a COMNAP Energy Management Workshop would be held on 8 August 2010, in Buenos Aires. The workshop, convened by Energy and Technology Expert Group Leader, David Blake with oversight from COMNAP EXCOM Vice Chair, Kazuyuki Shiraishi included presentations and also allowed time for discussion in order to share best practice related to energy management in Antarctica (see COMNAP ATCM XXXIV IP008 COMNAP Energy Management Workshop).
IPY Outreach Workshop 
COMNAP Outreach Expert Group members met in Tromso and Oslo in June 2010 on the margins of the IPY Science Conference. The group held workshop meetings, provided ‘masterclass’ sessions for the Association of Early Polar Career Scientists (APECS) colleagues, and worked together in the IPY Press Centre to promote the science and operations from members’ organisations. These combined activities afforded the Expert Group sufficient time together to share best professional practice and discuss past examples of successful joint communication and outreach projects and examine in-depth how this network would continue to work successfully post-IPY. 
Medical Expert Group – Workshop and Restructure
The Medical Expert Group met on the margins of the AGM on 8 August in Buenos Aires to discuss pandemic management in Antarctica. The Expert Group on Human Biology and Medicine, Life Sciences Standing Scientific Group of SCAR and the Medical Expert Group of COMNAP proposed to combine the two groups in order to be more effective and reduce duplication of efforts.  The proposal was first discussed by the joint Executive Committees, and in November 2010, the COMNAP EXCOM agreed to the proposal. The combined group will be known as the Joint Advisory Group on Antarctic Human Science and Medicine. It will remain responsive to the needs of both SCAR and COMNAP, but will have a reporting line via COMNAP alone.


COMNAP Products and Tools
COMNAP Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS)
The SPRS (www.comnap.aq/sprs) is an optional, voluntary system for exchange of information about National Antarctic Program ship operations. Its primary purpose is to facilitate collaboration between National Antarctic Programs, however, it can also make a very useful contribution to safety with all SPRS information made available to the Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) which cover the Antarctic region, as an additional source of information complementing all other national and international systems in place. 
The Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) 
AFIM is a handbook of aeronautical information published by COMNAP as a tool towards safe air operations in Antarctica as recommended by the ATCM Recommendation XV-20 Air safety in Antarctica.  An in-depth review of the AFIM is in progress. The AFIM continues to be updated via information from National Antarctic Programs and revisions are prepared and distributed on an annual basis to all National Antarctic Programs and to other subscribers.  
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
ATOM is an evolution of the handbook of telecommunications practices to which ATCM Recommendation X-3 Improvement of Telecommunications in Antarctica and the Collection and Distribution of Antarctic Meteorological Data refers. COMNAP members and Search and Rescue authorities have access to the latest version (March 2011) at www.comnap.aq/membersonly/atom  (login required). 
Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting (AINMR)
Information on problems encountered in Antarctica has always been exchanged. The very first ATCM recommended in Recommendation I-VII Exchange of Information on Logistics Problems that this should be so (effective 30 April 1962). COMNAP Annual General Meetings offer an opportunity for Members to exchange such information and also a new, comprehensive AINMR System is under development as one of COMNAP's projects.  The AINMR's primary objective is: To capture outline information about events that had, or could have had, serious consequences; and/or reveal lessons to be learned; and/or are novel, very unusual events. So that National Antarctic Programs can learn from each other to reduce the risk of serious consequences occurring in the course of their activities.
________
For more information, please visit COMNAP's web site at www.comnap.aq or email us at info@comnap.aq.
Appendix 1.	COMNAP officers, projects and expert groups
Executive Committee (EXCOM) 
The COMNAP Chair and Vice-Chairs are elected officers of COMNAP. The elected officers plus the Executive Secretary, compose the COMNAP Executive Committee as follows:
Position
Officer
Term expires
Chair
José Retamales (INACH) jretamales@inach.cl 
Aug-2011
Vice-Chair
Kazuyuki Shiraishi (NPRI) kshiraishi@nipr.ac.jp 
Aug-2011

Maaike Vancauwenberghe (BELSPO)  maaike.vancauwenberghe@belspo.be 
AGM 2012

Yuansheng Li (PRIC) lysh@pric.gov.cn 
AGM 2013

Mariano Memolli (DNA) drmemolli@gmail.com 
AGM 2013
Executive Secretary
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore michelle.finnemore@comnap.aq 
30 Sept 2015
Table 1 – COMNAP Executive Committee.
Projects
Project
Project Manager
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Antarctic glossary
Valerie Lukin
Mariano Memolli
AFIM – Consideration of the results of the review
Brian Stone & Giuseppe De Rossi
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
AINMR Reporting System & implementation
Robert Culshaw
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
King George Island project (APASI)
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Jose Retamales
Energy standard terminology development

David Blake
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
Review of equipment available at Antarctic stations for oil spill response
To be determined
Mariano Memolli
Table 2 – COMNAP Projects currently in progress.
Expert Groups
Expert Group (topic)
Expert Group leader
EXCOM officer (oversight)
Science
Heinz Miller
Jose Retamales
Outreach
Linda Capper
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Air
Giuseppe De Rossi
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Environment
Sandra Potter
Maaike Vancauwenberghe
Training
Veronica Vlasich
Mariano Memolli
Medical
Iain Grant
Mariano Memolli
Shipping
Juan Jose Danobeitia
Jose Retamales
Safety
Robert Culshaw
Kazuyuki Shiraishi
Energy & Technology
David Blake
Yuansheng Li
Data Management
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Jose Retamales
External Relationships
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
EXCOM All
Strategic Framework
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
Jose Retamales
Table 3 – COMNAP Expert Groups. 

Appendix 2. Meetings 
Previous 12 months
9  - 12 August, 2010, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXII) & IX Symposium, Buenos Aires, Argentina hosted by the COMNAP member for Argentina, Direccion Nacional del Antartico (DNA). 
17 – 19 November, 2010, COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) Meeting, Shanghai, China hosted by COMNAP Vice Chair, Yuansheng Li of the Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC).

Upcoming 12 months
1 – 3 August, 2011, COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXIII), Stockholm, Sweden, hosted by the Swedish Polar Research Secretariat. In conjunction with COMNAP XXIV, two workshops will be held on the margins of the AGM. These are “The Management Implications of a Changing Antarctica” and “Inland Traversing”. 
2012 COMNAP Annual General Meeting (COMNAP XXIV), Portland, Oregon, USA (dates to be confirmed) in conjunction with the SCAR Open Science Conference and associated meetings.


