





Law-Racovita Base
An example of cooperation in Antarctica





Law-Racovita Base 
An example of cooperation in Antarctica

Romania adhered to the Antarctic Treaty by the Decree no. 255/1971signed in Washington on December    the 1st 1959. The Protocol on Environmental Protection and its annexes I-V that have been adopted in Madrid on October 4th, 1991 was signed by Romania that very day. The instrument of ratification was received by USA on February 3, 2003, for deposit with the Government of the USA. The Protocol, in accordance with the provisions of Article 23, paragraph 2, thereof, entered into force for Romania on March 5, 2003. 
Within the spirit of the Antarctic Treaty, Article 3, for promoting scientific cooperation of Parties in the Antarctic and of the Article 6 of the Protocol, Romania make efforts to promote such collaborations, willing to become a Consultative Party. 
The Antarctic Treaty , "provides an example to the world of how nations can successfully work together to preserve a major part of this planet, for the benefit of all mankind".  By the Protocol of Madrid, the parties engage themselves "to maintain and strengthen the Treaty and to protect Antarctica's environmental and scientific values".
In Larsemann Hills, Romania will continue the researches in the fields of biology, geology, limnology and climatic changes.  

x

The Australian National Antarctic program is based now on the substantial contribution of Phillip Law. Australian areas of operations in Antarctica and ways of working there follow the clear lead set by Phillip Law.
In January 1949 Phillip Law was appointed Director of the Antarctic Division and leader of ANARE - a position which he was to hold for the next 17 years. 
On 13 February 1954 Phillip Law opened Australia's first permanent station in Antarctica, naming it in honour of Sir Douglas Mawson. Law consolidated Australia's reputation in Antarctica.
Over nineteen years as an Antarctic explorer Law made 28 voyages to Antarctic and subantarctic regions - most of them as leader of the Expedition. His coastal exploration achieved 28 landings at previously unvisited sites, and under his direction over 5000 kilometres of coastline was accurately charted for the first time. 
In 1987 Law Base, named in honour of Phillip Law, was established in the Larsemann Hills near the site where Law first landed in February 1958. Phillip Law and his team were the first to explore this area in February 1958.

x

On June the 15th 2005, 13 hours, in the presence of the Australian and Romanian Ambassadors in Sweden, the representatives of the Australian Government, AAD - Tony Press, respectively and Romanian Antarctic Foundation, Teodor Gh. Negoita, signed a Memorandum of  Understanding specifying the establishment of the Law-Racovita Base (Australian-Romanian Base).
From the scientific point of view Romania benefit from a significant traditional research in Antarctica. The Romanian scientist Emil Racoviţă, president of Romanian Science Academy, the founder of the biospeology and of the first Speology Institute in the world,  participated in the Belgica Expedition, 1897-1899 and was the very first biologist  who studied the life in Antarctica. 

Belgica Expedition was the first international one in human history. On the bord of the small ship with three masts Belgica, 19 young men faced the harsch conditions of Antarctic winter. Many species received the name of the Romanian biologist, as well as, a few islands in Graham Land.
We wish to continue the activity of Emil Racovita and Philip Law in Antarctica. On February 20, 2006 a new era of scientific collaboration and international friendship between Australian Antarctic Division and Romanian Antarctic Foundation was opened, as a unique moment in Antarctica. This event took place in the presence of Chinese, Russian, Australian and Romanian scientists from Zhong Shan, Progress and Davis Stations and marked the establishment of the first scientific Romanian Base in Antarctica. 
If Belgica benefitted of one of the most remarkable team in the Antarctic exploration history, where Emil Racovita has been Chief Scientist, this is a reason for continuing this cooperation for a long term.


