





Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2011




Antarctic Site Inventory: 1994-2011
Summary
This paper provides an update on results of the Antarctic Site Inventory project through February 2011. The Antarctic Site Inventory (ASI), led by Ron Naveen of Oceanites, Inc. and Drs. Heather Lynch and William Fagan of the University of Maryland, has collected biological data and site-descriptive information in the Antarctic Peninsula since 1994.1 The project's methodology and results from previous field seasons were described and discussed in ATCM XXXII IP1 and ATCM XXXII IP32 and at previous ATCMs.2
 Introduction
The ASI began fieldwork in November 1994, examining whether opportunistic visits can be used:
    1) to effectively and economically detect possible visitor-caused changes in the physical features, flora, and fauna of sites in the Antarctic Peninsula being visited repeatedly by ship-based tourists; 
    2) to collect baseline information necessary to detect possible changes in the physical and biological variables being monitored; and 
    3) to determine how best  to minimize or avoid possible environmental impacts of tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Peninsula area,
The ASI has demonstrated an ability to reach Antarctic Peninsula visitor sites frequently and cost-effectively, relying opportunistically on commercial cruise vessels and various national research vessels.  Well-timed visits by trained researchers have proved an effective means of characterizing sites and for collecting relevant biological data.3
Data collected by the Inventory are intended to assist the implementation of Annex I of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, particularly in relation to establishing a priori environmental impact assessments for tourism,4 and for monitoring to assess and verify predicted environmental impacts. The Inventory’s primary objective is to identify and detect changes at the sites being monitored, and to determine whether any changes are naturally occurring or are caused by tourism or other human activities. Potential impacts may be short-term or long-term, immediate or cumulative.5
In 2006, Oceanites, Inc. began a collaboration with the Fagan Lab at the University of Maryland to begin utilizing hierarchical Bayesian modelling and other statistical and geographic information system (GIS) techniques to analyze the ASI database in the context of other extant, long-term Peninsula datasets.6 
Results
In 17 seasons from November 1994 through February 2011, the ASI has made 1,156 site visits and collected data at 142 Antarctic Peninsula locations. During the recently concluded 2010-11 field season, the ASI made 121 visits and collected data at 71 sites; 20 of these sites were visited multiple times, 51 were visited only once.
In the 2010-11 season, as well as over the 17-year history of the ASI, there have been repetitive visits to all of the visitor sites that are most heavily visited by expedition tourists, to all sites which exhibit the most species diversity and are most prone to potential environmental disturbance from human visitors,7 and to the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at recent ATCMs.8
 Species Trends; Recent Papers
As noted, the ASI is primarily conducted by researchers placed on tour ships and censusing sites during zodiac landings or, occasionally, during zodiac tours. The advantages of this approach include wide spatial coverage of the western and northeastern Antarctic Peninsula, and a negligible “footprint” on the landscape. The Inventory’s censuses add tremendous spatial and temporal coverage to existing census records and can be used in various analyses to describe regional penguin population changes.9
Because the ASI’s timing of censuses is opportunistic, censuses are not always timed with the peak of egg laying or chick crèching as required by the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program.10 Census correction involves knowing how the census is timed relative to the peak of egg laying, and how nest numbers change through the breeding cycle. In one of the Inventory’s recent papers,11 we presented an analysis relating to both these challenges. Using clutch initiation data for four penguin breeding sites, we find that mean October temperatures constitute the most consistently significant factor related to the timing of clutch initiation for the three penguin species examined (Adélie: Pygoscelis adeliae, gentoo: Pygoscelis papua, and chinstrap: Pygoscelis antarcticus). These data also were used to develop a statistical model for determining the peak of clutch initiation, which, combined with a simple estimation of species-specific nest attrition rates, can be used to correct off-peak census counts.
In another recent publication,12 we reported census data collected by the ASI through February 2007, updating earlier efforts reported in Naveen et al. (2000), as well as reporting new breeding populations of gentoo penguins13 and documenting the rapid change in the relative populations of gentoo and Adélie penguins where they breed sympatrically in the southwestern region of the Antarctic Peninsula. The rapid increase of gentoo penguins at Petermann Island is more fully described in a recent paper describing the ASI’s five-year austral field camp and reproductive study on the island, where the breeding productivity of Adélie and gentoo penguins were monitored to identify drivers of this rapid community change.14 
In the Inventory’s four most recent field seasons, we have continued to explore and census new penguin breeding sites on the Peninsula and, during the recently concluded 2010-11 season, completed the most extensive penguin censuses ever at the South Sandwich Islands, at the far eastern end of the Scotia Arc. The ASI continues to document rapid change in the relative populations of gentoo, chinstrap, and Adélie penguins in the western Antarctic Peninsula. Gentoo penguin populations are increasing rapidly and expanding their range southward, while the other two species are declining significantly. 
Analyses
In examining long-term changes in Antarctic Peninsula penguin and seabird populations, Oceanites’ collaboration with The Fagan Lab at the University of Maryland intends to:
    1) characterize decadal scale changes in these populations throughout the Peninsula;
    2) discern how Antarctic species are changing in abundance, relative abundance, and spatial distribution;
    3) identify the factors specifically driving these long-term changes; 
    4) understand how Peninsula biological and physical processes, as well as direct/cumulative impacts from human activities, may connect;
    5) identify the likely drivers of population shifts (both numerical and spatial); and 
    6) forecast Peninsula-wide changes in the relative balance between the three pygoscelid penguin species. 

Describing more precisely how the warming Peninsula effects change — e.g. whether or not detected penguin population changes are or may be related to food (krill and fish distribution and abundance), should assist both management of the Antarctic Peninsula and provide information critical to the estimation and management of krill in the adjacent areas of the Southern Ocean. 
The ASI is the only project monitoring penguin and seabird populations throughout the Peninsula, and the only project regularly censusing the species-diverse, environmentally sensitive tourism sites now subject to site visitation guidelines adopted at the last three ATCMs. Because the number of visiting tour ships, the sizes of such ships, and the number of visitors ashore continues to rise, this new approach uniquely assists Parties in determining whether any observed changes are Peninsula-wide trends, site-specific aberrations, and whether and how changes in penguin and seabird populations may relate to broader, global changes in this region. 
With regard to the tourism aspects, described more fully in  ATCM XXXIII IP2, a recent paper by the ASI, University of Maryland, and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) quantifies spatial and temporal patterns of tour ship traffic using 19 years of passenger landing statistics and five years of reconstructed itineraries, from the 2003-04 season to the 2007-08 season.15 The paper finds passenger landings and marine traffic to be highly concentrated and growing disproportionally rapidly at a few specific locations. It is hoped that this analysis and future, similar analyses may aid efforts to monitor and manage Antarctic shipborne tourism. 
Logistics
As noted above, the ASI places research teams aboard expedition vessels operating in the Peninsula during the austral spring and summer. Expedition ships are selected carefully, particularly those with the longest Peninsula itineraries, whose Initial Environmental Evaluations have been reviewed by national authorities, and whose operations and expedition personnel enable ASI researchers to reach as many sites and make as many site census visits as possible during each field season.

Geographic Coverage, Methodology
The ASI now divides the Antarctic Peninsula into seven regions16 and collects three categories of data and information.17 The Inventory’s methodology as initially constituted is fully described in the Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites, 2d edition: A Report To The United States Environmental Protection Agency.18 As noted above, because the timing of ASI censuses is opportunistic, and because the intention is to analyze decadal scale changes in penguin and seabird populations, data are collected on all Inventory site visits and off-peak bias corrections have been developed to ensure the appropriate analysis of all collected data.19 
The ASI is creating fully digitized and annotated GPS maps for all of the locations in the ASI. These maps include both biologically relevant information such as the location and boundaries of breeding bird colonies, as well as information on zodiac landing sites, commonly used visitor trails, locations of historical sites and markers such as cairns and stakes. Where appropriate, map locations are associated with regular and repeated photodocumentation of sensitive features such as moss beds.
With respect to penguins and flying birds, the focus is collecting data on the key biological variables of breeding population size (nest counts) and breeding productivity (number of chicks per active nest), which are the appropriate biological parameters for detecting direct and cumulative impacts on these populations. 
Dissemination of Data and Information, Publications
Biological data and site descriptions collected by the ASI have been published and routinely are made available in peer-reviewed papers, government reports, and popular publications. 
The most recent government report is the Antarctic Peninsula Compendium, 3rd edition,20 which covers the 142 sites that have been visited and censused by ASI researchers in 17 field seasons from November 1994 through February 2011 — an increase in coverage by 60 sites from the 2nd edition. These 142 locations include sites that are regularly visited by tourists or other visitors, sites with historic census data,  Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), national research stations, and a few Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) (see ATCM XXXIV IP __ ). 
Data and information about the ASI are also available on the recently launched Oceanites website — www.oceanites.org, and the Oceanites news/content site — http://oceanitesfeed.wordpress.com/, and the newly available Oceanites iPhone App that is freely available via Apple’s iTunes Store.

References
Abbott, S. and W.S. Benninghoff. 1990. Orientation of Environmental Change Studies to the Conservation of Antarctic Ecosystems, in Antarctic Ecosystems. Ecological Change and Conservation (ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel), Berlin, Germany.
Benninghoff, W.S. and W.N. Bonner. 1985. Man’s Impact on the Antarctic Environment: A procedure for evaluating impacts and logistic activities. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, Cambridge, England.
Chesalin, M., R. Naveen, H. Lynch, I. Bullock, M. Rider, A. Miller, S. Forrest, R. Dagit, I. Dykyy, and V. Timofeyev. 2009. Long-term changes in populations of seabirds on Petermann Island and surrounding islands in Graham Land, Antarctic Peninsula. Marine Ecological Journal (In English and Russian) VIII(3): 5-13.
Emslie, S. 1997. Natural and human-induced impacts to seabird productivity and conservation in Antarctica: a review and perspectives. In Cumulative Impacts in Antarctica: Minimisation and Management, The World Conservation Union (IUCN), Washington.
Hofman, R.J. and J. Jatko (eds). 2002. Assessment of the Possible Cumulative Environmental Impacts of Commercial Ship-Based Tourism in the Antarctic Peninsula Area: Proceedings of a Workshop Held in La Jolla California, 7-9 June 2000, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2008. Censuses of Penguin, Blue-Eyed Shag Phalacrocorax Atriceps and Southern Giant Petrel Macronectes Giganteus Populations in the Antarctic Peninsula, 2001-2007. Marine Ornithology 36: 83–97.
Lynch, H.J., R. Naveen, and W.F. Fagan. 2009a. Population trends and reproductive success at a frequently visited penguin colony on the western Antarctic Peninsula. Polar Biology, In press and available online. DOI: 10.1007/s00300-009-0726-y. 
Lynch, H.J., K. Crosbie, W.F. Fagan and R. Naveen. 2009b. Spatial patterns of tour ship traffic in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Antarctic Science, In press and available online. DOI: 10.1017/S0954102009990654.
Lynch, H.J., W.F. Fagan, R. Naveen, S.G. Trivelpiece, and W.Z. Trivelpiece. 2009c. Timing of clutch initiation in Pygoscelis penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula: Towards an improved understanding of off-peak census correction factors. CCAMLR Science 16:149-165.
Naveen, R. 1996. Human Activity and Disturbance: Building An Antarctic Site Inventory, In R. Ross, E. Hofman, and L. Quetin (eds.) Foundations for Ecosystem Research in the Western Antarctic Peninsula Region. American Geophysical Union. Washington. pp. 389-400.
Naveen, R. 1997. Compendium of Antarctic Peninsula Visitor Sites: A Report to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom, US Department of State and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Naveen, R., S.C. Forrest, R.G. Dagit, L.K. Blight, W.Z. Trivelpiece, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 2000. Censuses of penguin, blue-eyed shag, and southern giant petrel populations in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1994-2000, Polar Record 36 (199): 323-334.
Naveen, R., S.C. Forrest, R.G. Dagit, L.K. Blight, W.Z. Trivelpiece, and S.G. Trivelpiece. 2001. Zodiac landings by tourist ships in the Antarctic Peninsula region, 1989-99, Polar Record 37 (201): 121-132.
Naveen, R. and H. Lynch. 2011. Antarctic Peninsula Compendium.
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Subcommittee on Bird Biology (Ed. by E. Woehler and J. Croxall). 1996. The Status and Trends of Antarctic and Subantarctic Seabirds.
Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SCCAMLR). 2004 (revised). CEMP Standard Methods for Monitoring Studies. Hobart, Australia.



