





60th Anniversary of the 
Argentine Antarctic Institute 





60th Anniversary of the 
Argentine Antarctic Institute 
The Argentine Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Argentino - IAA) was created by Decree of the National Executive Power Nº 7338 of 17 April 1951. Its founder and first director was the then Colonel Hernán Pujato, after whom it is named. Among the bases for its creation, the need was established for the existence of a specialised organisation to permanently orientate, control, direct and execute technical-scientific research and studies relating to the Antarctic region, in co-ordination with the then National Antarctic Commission, which depended on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The stations installed in Laurie Island (Southern Orkneys), Margarita Bay, Esperanza Bay and the Filchner Ice Shelf, together with the summer scientific campaigns, have sustained the objectives for which  it was created, addressing a wide spectrum of earth, air and marine sciences.
To fully understand this achievement, the context of that period must be remembered when, in the middle of the "Cold War", many Antarctic expeditions included military operations. At that moment Argentina, just as she had in 1904, generated a visionary initiative towards a peaceful, proactive path: to promote a higher priority for Antarctic science among the activities carried out in the region by the various countries.
On 26 January 1956, the Organic Regulation of the Argentine Antarctic Institute was promulgated, establishing the scientific and technical nature of the organisation. Since that date, the Argentine Antarctic Institute has participated consistently in international scientific events, as the permanent representative of the Argentine Republic on the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) since its foundation in 1958, in International Geophysical Year (1957-1958) and in International Quiet Sun Year (1964-1965).
Between 1958 and 1963 it administered the Ellsworth station, in the Weddell Sea, ceded by USA on completion of International Geophysical Year. In 1964 Brown base, in Paradise Bay, was incorporated as a scientific station. 
In 1970 the National Antarctic Directorate (Dirección Nacional del Antártico) was created with administrative and logistical functions with respect to Antarctica; the Argentine Antarctic Institute was incorporated as its scientific organisation, with three departments: Scientific, Technical and Scientific Exchange.
In the 1980s the Potter Cove hut on 25th May Island was incorporated, today transformed into the Jubany Scientific Station, where the Dallmann Laboratory has been in operation since 1994, carrying out research tasks in the fields of biology and earth sciences. This laboratory is unique in Antarctica, and the scientific projects carried out there are co-ordinated jointly by three countries: Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands and the Argentine Republic.
On 22 April 2003, IAA was admitted to the Interinstitutional Council of Science and Technology (Consejo Interinstitucional de Ciencia y Tecnología - CICyT) of the Argentine Republic and finally, on 5 May 2009, the newly created Ministry of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation granted it formal recognition as an organisation directly linked to scientific and technological activities which orientates, controls, directs and executes technical-scientific research and studies relating to Antarctica.
True to the principles underlying its creation, today the scientific and technical staff of the Argentine Antarctic institute takes part in a broad spectrum of national and international programmes for greater knowledge of Antarctica, giving priority to the following fields of research:
    • Study of the phenomena of Climate Change - Global Warming, causes and consequences on Antarctic systems and impact on national systems of production
    • Knowledge and conservation of the natural resources of Antarctica and associated and dependent areas
    • Development of alternative energy 
    • Geographical-geological knowledge of Antarctica and its connection with the extreme south of South America
    • History of Argentinean activities in Antarctica 

To carry out this mission in harmony with the principles of the Antarctic Treaty, and in accordance with the scientific priorities identified at a world level, the Argentine Antarctic Institute has recently increased its scientific staff by 35%, and signed an agreement for the use of the oceanographic vessel Puerto Deseado, belonging to the National Scientific and Technical Research Council (Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas - CONICET), during the Antarctic summer campaigns. Today, a Strategic Scientific Plan is being drawn up for the next 10 years which will enable IAA to continue occupying a leading place among the institutions dedicated to scientific research in Antarctica.

