


Temporal and spatial patterns of anthropogenic disturbance at McMurdo Station, Antarctica





Temporal and spatial patterns of anthropogenic disturbance at McMurdo Station, Antarctica 
Introduction
The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) aims to conduct science and operations in a way that has as minimal an impact on the Antarctic environment as practicable.  Consistent with the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the USAP also seeks to undertake “regular and effective monitoring . . . to allow assessment of the impacts of ongoing activities, including the verification of predicted impacts” and “facilitate early detection of the possible unforeseen effects of activities.”  To meet both of these goals, the National Science Foundation has funded a long-term monitoring program that examines the impacts of science and logistics at McMurdo Station, Antarctica’s largest scientific base.  The United States feels that the attached paper, which reports on these monitoring efforts, would be of interest to ATCMXXXIV and CEPXII.  This paper by Texas A&M University, published in Environmental Research Letters in 2010, is a synthesis of the monitoring efforts at McMurdo Station to date, but focuses on describing the chemical contamination around the station.

Analyses of soil samples have shown that the most common contaminants are hydrocarbons from fuel, occurring at levels so low that acute or chronic biological responses are not expected.  Similarly, contaminant metals generally occur at or near background levels and are not expected to elicit acute or chronic biological effects.  Due to remediation efforts, there was not a strong correlation between known spill locations and soil contaminant levels.  However, hydrocarbon levels were highest in areas where fuel is either stored or transferred to vehicles and in vehicular traffic and parking areas.

Marine sediments were contaminated by past (pre-1980) disposal practices.  Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), petroleum hydrocarbons, and metals were detectable in the sediments close to the Station at concentrations expected to elicit biological responses.  PCB concentrations are highest near the sewage outfall.

Hydrocarbons in both terrestrial and marine samples were biodegraded, indicating that the area around McMurdo Station has an indigenous population of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria.  PCBs, however, were unaltered indicating that in situ microbes have limited capacities to degrade synthetic chemicals.

From a management perspective, these data are useful for 
    • Identifying monitoring indicators and protocols that work well in the Antarctic environment;
    • Assessing program design elements; and 
    • Informing monitoring efforts elsewhere in Antarctica.
  
   

