





Report on the recent bioprospecting activities carried out by Argentina during the period 2010-2011





Report on the recent bioprospecting activities carried out by Argentina during the period 2010-2011

Introduction
At present there is undeniable scientific interest in study of the microbial biodiversity of Antarctica. Given that the knowledge acquired about the genetic and metabolic capacities of organisms not only represents an enormous and interesting field of basic scientific research, but that it may also represent a source of new knowledge with direct practical application in such diverse fields as biotechnology, industrial microbiology, the pharmaceutical industry, the food industry etc., these studies have been a focus of attention with respect to their real objectives and the degree of discussion on this subject in the forum of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings.
A large part of the scientific activities which, in the broadest sense of the term, fall into the category of bioprospecting work, is focused on organisms which live in extreme environments, known as “extremophiles”. These organisms, as part of their adaptation to extreme environmental conditions (of temperature, ph, pressure, nutrient concentration, etc.) must present exceptional metabolic and physiological characteristics, which are in turn dictated by their genetic information.
Antarctica is one of the extreme sites of the planet, and for this reason bioprospecting activities are of growing importance. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings have therefore required the Parties to report and update all their activities related to this subject. In fact, at the XXXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) it was decided to form an intersessional contact group (ICG) for the purpose of examining the subject of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty area. The conclusions reached by this ICG were presented in Working Paper 13 of the XXXIII ATCM, held in Punta del Este, Uruguay, from 3 to 14 May 2010.
Under these guidelines, the present Informative Paper will sketch briefly the scientific activities carried out by the Microbiology Group of the Argentine Antarctic Institute (Instituto Antártico Argentino - IAA) which might be included under bioprospecting activities.
White Genome Project
A scientific cooperation project named White Genome has been developed between the National Antarctic Directorate (Dirección Nacional del Antártico) and the biotechnology company BIOSIDUS. As reported at the time, the development of this project led to the identification of a new species of bacteria1 and the complete sequencing of its genome. As part of the project, 300 strains of bacteria were isolated, constituting part of the objective of the project's future work. During 2010, DNA isolation was used to complete gene amplification and sequencing of ARNr 16S, as well as identification at species or genus level of more than 250 of these strains.
As a part of recent studies, results based on 277 Antarctic marine isolations taken from Potter Cove, 25 May Island (King George Island) have shown that the cultivable bacterial community of that zone is generally dominated by Gram negative microorganisms, 84.5% of which belonged to the Class γ-Proteobacteria, the genera with the greatest representation being Psychrobacter and Pseudoalteromonas. Members of the Flavobacteriaceae family represented 7% of the isolations, while Gram positive bacteria of the families Actinobacteriaceae (Phylum Actinobacteria) and Bacillaceae (Phylum Firmicutes) represented 8%.
In addition to characterising the biodiversity of a part of the cultivable marine bacterial community of Potter Cove, a search was done for various enzyme activities, exopolysaccharide production and anti-microbial activities, as a means of evaluating the capacity of the microorganisms studied for the production of bioactive compounds at low temperatures, and their biotechnological potential2.
A preliminary analysis has been done of the genome sequence of Bizionia argentinensis, on the basis of which the principal metabolic paths present are being identified. This will enable the genetic information from B. argentinensis to be related to its ecological role in Potter Cove and will provide interesting data for future bioprospecting studies.
The next objective of this project is the discovery of proteins with enzyme activity at low temperatures with possible industrial applications. To this end the structures of some of the proteins of B. argentinensis will be analysed, first in silico and then using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques. An attempt will also be made to correlate the enzyme activities displayed by the different components of the microbiome of the region with their taxonomic position. This objective, to be achieved by an analysis of the bacterial isolations obtained during previous stages of the research which culminated in the description of B. argentinensis, will allow a description to be made of the relation microorganism-enzyme activities-habitat-ecological niche. This information will contribute important data from the point of view of the microbial ecology of the region, and will also provide valuable information for more rational planning of future bioprospecting programmes.
 
Project on bioremediation technologies for soils exposed to contamination with hydrocarbons in Antarctica
As part of this project, studies have been done during the reporting period of the efficiency of some strains and consortia of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria which were isolated in previous work. Using the bacterial consortia M10 (obtained in the Marambio Base)3 and J13 (obtained in the Jubany Base), their efficiency was analysed as bioaugmentation tools in in situ bioremediation systems, in Jubany Base, using the following experimental systems: microcosms in flasks, biopiles and small plots defined directly on the ground.4 The results together suggest that biostimulation is the best tool for favouring biodegradation in situ of the hydrocarbons contaminating Antarctic soil,5 while bioaugmentation does not appear to be effective, since the environmental stress which the inoculum must undergo on being added to the soil results in drastic diminution and thus a loss of degrading efficiency.6 In any case, and given that some of the results mentioned in greater detail in another informative paper (IP) presented in the meeting suggest that bioaugmentation might be beneficial under certain particular conditions, in future phases deeper study will be made of the selected microorganisms in order to research what are the environmental factors which determine their inability to become established in the soil. It is also planned to continue with the process of selecting psychrophile degrading bacteria, but stressing not only their capacity to metabolise hydrocarbons, but their basic ecology, trying to obtain new strains with the capacity to resist and combat these limiting environmental factors. It is hoped that this will also allow a greater removal efficiency to be achieved, attacking the recalcitrant fraction of close to 20% of the initial contaminants which have repeatedly been observed to remain after any bioremediation process is carried out.7

Marambio Environmental Monitoring Project 
IAA is currently carrying out an environmental monitoring project of the Marambio Base (project GAT 03) in order to determine to what degree the presence of the base has had an impact on the surrounding environment. Although the central objective of this project, which will also make it possible in future to take measurements to optimize care of the environment close to the base, does not concern bioprospecting-related activities, one of its results has been to obtain new strains of autochthonous bacteria with a capacity to degrade different types of hydrocarbons. At present a more in-depth study is being done of their metabolic capacities and their taxonomy is being described. It may be possible in the future, if their characteristics are suitable, to use these microorganisms in bioremediation processes to improve those sites of the Marambio Base which are affected by the presence of fuels.

Jubany Mycology Project
Another project currently being run by the IAA microbiology group, in collaboration with the Universitat Rovira i Virgili (Reus, Spain), is related to the study of the mycota present in the Antarctic Peninsula. Although the object of this project is to fill a significant gap in the knowledge of Antarctic biology through the description of the fungi present in the study area, new species have been described for the zone which may well be the object of genetic and/or biochemical studies which in turn will provide useful information for future bioprospecting programmes of psychrophile organisms. This project has also generated recent scientific publications.8
    The aim of this brief report is to inform the Parties of the scientific activities which may, directly or indirectly, generate or lead to biological prospecting activities, according to the general guidelines established by the ICG which studied this subject between ATCM XXXII and ATCM XXXIII. We would be pleased to see Parties generating information on this subject, as a consensual means of exchanging information about the type of research which they are carrying on in Antarctica and which may in future result in obtaining benefits from the genetic body of the Antarctic biome. 
 
