





Frontiers in Understanding Climate Change and Polar Ecosystems Workshop Report




Frontiers in Understanding Climate Change and Polar Ecosystems Workshop Report
Introduction
Climate change is already causing observable impacts on many polar ecosystems, but the complexity of the systems and the fact that they are subject to multiple stressors makes the prediction of future environmental changes a challenge.  In August 2010, the National Research Council of the National Academies convened a workshop entitled “Frontiers in Climate Change and Polar Ecosystems.”  The purpose of the workshop was to explore what is known about the impacts of climate change on polar ecosystems and to identify gaps in knowledge or unknowns that will be “frontiers” for future science.  The workshop was designed to bring together polar and non-polar scientists to explore whether there are new capabilities available to study ecosystems in different ways that might shed light on questions related to species movement, changes in seasonality, feedbacks and how changes in these patterns might be related to climate change. Workshop participants sought to identify, but not prioritize, areas of research and technology advances needed to better understand the changes occurring in polar ecosystems.  
Frontier Questions
Workshop participants identified five questions that will lead to new frontiers of knowledge about climate change and polar ecosystem response:
Will a rapidly shrinking cryosphere (the frozen portion of the Earth’s surface) tip polar ecosystems into new states?
Workshop participants emphasized the need to understand what happens as the amount of frozen ground, snow pack, glacial ice and sea ice and both poles begins to shrink in response to warming. For example, as ice glaciers and permanent frost melts, populations of some polar species may decline, thus reducing biodiversity and leading to the potential extinction of important keystone species.
Workshop participants also stressed the importance of studying links between climate change and impacts on the Earth’s processes in order to identify “tipping points”- critical thresholds where a small perturbation in climate could push the ecosystem from one state to another.  If potential tipping points are known or can be anticipated, scientists may be able to develop strategies to minimize the impacts of climate change on ecosystem properties.
What are the key polar ecosystem processes that will be the “first responders” to climate forcing?
Workshop participants discussed the importance of recognizing and quantifying the interactions between living organisms and their environments at all scales, rather than simply studying isolated ecosystem components, in order to accurately predict how ecosystems will change as polar regions warm (or in some case cool).  For example, the melting of the sea ice will significantly affect large mammals that utilize polar marine ecosystems as habitats.
What are the bi-directional gateways and feedbacks between the poles and the global climate system?
Polar ecosystems have the potential to influence climate and ecosystems at lower latitudes. For example, the melting polar snow and ice will decrease the amount of sunlight and heat reflected back into the atmosphere, which in turn will alter global circulation of the atmosphere and the ocean.
How is climate change altering biodiversity?
Because polar species have evolved in cold temperatures, the rapid warming of the Arctic and Antarctic has the potential to affect biodiversity.  Warming could cause shifts in habitats and the availability of food, and if species are unable to cope with these conditions, their populations would decline and biodiversity could decrease.  It is possible that both terrestrial and marine species from more temperate regions could migrate towards the poles as they warm, causing major ecosystem reorganization.
How will increases in human activities intensify ecosystem impacts in the polar regions?
Access to polar regions has grown in recent years resulting in significant increases in human activity.  For example, as the number of ice-free days in the Arctic climbs, shipping across the northern routes is on the rise, industrial activity is increasing, and ecotourism cruises to both the Arctic and Antarctic are growing in popularity.  The potential impacts of such human activities include disturbances to wildlife, increased potential for oil spills, discharge of water and sewage from ships, as well as the potential for introducing non-native species and diseases into remote polar regions.
Conclusions
The rapid pace of change in high latitude systems makes polar ecosystems a fundamental concern for science and society.  Workshop participants discussed the need for a systems science approach to understanding the complexities of ecosystem responses to climate change.  In addition, participants brainstormed ways to advance understanding of polar ecosystems and promote the next generation of polar research topics. These include developing new and emerging technologies, sustaining long term observations, upgrading data synthesis and management, and fostering collaboration through data dissemination and outreach.

A paper copy of the full workshop report can be purchased, or the report can be read online or downloaded for free at: http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13132 


