





Scientific workshop on Antarctic krill in the Netherlands




Scientific workshop on Antarctic krill in the Netherlands
From 11 to 15 April 2011 an international scientific workshop entitled “Antarctic Krill in a Changing Ocean”  took place on the island of Texel in the Netherlands.
The workshop was organised by the Institute for Marine Resources and Ecosystem Studies (IMARES) on Texel and was funded by the European Commission, IMARES and the Netherlands’ Polar Research Programme. Thirty-one scientists participated, coming from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, France, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Ukraine, the UK and the US. NGOs were also represented with participants from Argentina, the Netherlands, Norway and the U.S.
The workshop aimed to compile the state of knowledge about the impact of environmental change and increasing human exploitation of Antarctic krill in the light of an updated analysis of existing knowledge, and to discuss potential implications for CCAMLR's ecosystem based management approach. Its specific objectives were:
    1. A critical review of the implications of environmental change for Antarctic krill stock management considering various aspects, such as population dynamics, recruitment, genetic diversity, physiology, predator-prey interactions, and fisheries management;
    2. An evaluation of the ecosystem effects of changing krill populations caused by environmental change.
Key nursery habitats and feeding grounds of Antarctic krill have experienced significant change during recent decades. On-going environmental change, e.g. sea ice decline, temperature rise and ocean acidification, is likely to affect Antarctic krill stocks. Recently, strong concern was expressed in the scientific community about the future sustainability of Antarctic krill fisheries under increasing environmental pressure on krill populations. Both environmental change and fisheries lead to growing concern about the long-term stability and sustainability of Antarctic marine ecosystems as a whole. 
Additionally, if Antarctic krill populations are changing as a consequence of environmental change, then it is a critical issue for the managers of  the Southern Ocean marine ecosystem and is likely to have important consequences for CCAMLR. This is especially relevant, as the Generalized Yield Model applied by CCAMLR to estimate stock development over time, and ultimately catch limits, does not account for environmental change, because it assumes a stable krill stock and stable environmental conditions. Therefore, there is an urgent need to evaluate how Antarctic krill stocks will respond to environmental change.
Against this context, the workshop aimed to evaluate the effects of environmental change on the size and distribution of Antarctic krill stocks and of the various krill-dependent ecosystems, using the most recent scientific data. The meeting also aimed to look into the possible consequences of this evaluation for the policies of CCAMLR and for possible adjustments needed to CCAMLR’s ecosystem-based fisheries management.
 Based on more than 20 presentations and the ensuing discussions at the Workshop, a joint scientific position paper was drafted by the participants and will be submitted to a reputable scientific journal around June 2011, at the time of the XXXIV ATCM.  In this paper the main threats to Antarctic krill and krill-dependent ecosystems will be identified and presented in a matrix model. As there remain substantial gaps in the biological and ecological knowledge on krill, the paper will also make recommendations for further in-depth studies in a number of research fields. 
The position-paper will be presented to the European Commission, specifically addressing the role of the EU in supporting urgently needed research for CCAMLR, and in management issues.
Furthermore, the position-paper will be presented to the CCAMLR Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management, accompanied by a number of recommendations about, e.g., the need for the continuation of precautionary management measures for krill fisheries.
-------------------------




Participants of the Workshop “Antarctic krill in a changing Ocean”.
Texel, Netherlands, 11-15 April 2011. Photo: A. v.d. Putte

