





Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)




Report of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
    1. Introduction
ASOC is pleased to be in the Argentine Republic for the annual Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting. This report briefly describes ASOC’s work over the past year, and outlines some key issues for this ATCM. ASOC Worldwide
ASOC maintains its Secretariat office in Washington DC, USA. Our website (http://www.asoc.org) provides details about the organisation and its activities.  
ASOC has 27 full member groups in eleven countries. ASOC campaigns are coordinated by teams of experts located in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, France, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Russia, Ukraine, UK and USA.
    2. ASOC Intersessional Activities Since XXXIII ATCM 
Since XXXIII ATCM ASOC participated in intersessional discussions in the ATCM and CEP fora, contributing actively to the discussions on tourism; non-native species; revision of CEEs; subsidiary group on management plans; the development of the IMO mandatory Polar Code; Historic Sites and Monuments; and preparations for the upcoming ASMA workshop. 
ASOC representatives attended:
    • CCAMLR’s 29th Meeting in October-November 2010, introducing papers on Antarctic krill management, Marine Protected Areas, the Ross Sea, fishing vessels, IUU fishing, and impacts of climate change.
    • International Maritime Organization (IMO) meetings, including the 61st Marine Environment Protection Committee session, and the 54th and 55th sessions of the Ship Design and Equipment sub-committee regarding development of a mandatory Polar Code for ships operating in polar waters.
    • Antarctic Krill in a Changing Ocean – Scientific workshop on effects of environmental change on Antarctic krill and implications for ecosystem-based management, April 2011 in Texel, The Netherlands.
    • SCAR workshop on Antarctic Conservation in the 21st Century, held in June 2011 in Kruger National Park, South Africa.
    3. Information Papers for XXXIV ATCM
ASOC has introduced twelve Information Papers, which address a range of topics that ASOC regard as particularly important for environmental management and conservation. The Information Papers contain recommendations for the ATCM and CEP that will help to achieve a more effective protection of Antarctica.
An Antarctic Climate Change Communication Plan (IP 83) – The ATME on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance recommended that the ATCM consider developing an Antarctic climate change communication plan to bring the findings of the SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and Environment report to the attention of other decision makers, the general public and the media [Recommendation 2].  In this paper, ASOC provides a draft communication plan to help implement this recommendation.
Ocean Acidification and the Southern Ocean (IP 88) – This paper provides an overview of the growing problem of ocean acidification, which poses severe potential threats to marine environments. The unique characteristics of the Southern Ocean suggest that ocean acidification will have its greatest initial impacts in the waters surrounding Antarctica if greenhouse gas emissions continue at present rates.  More research is needed to fill current knowledge gaps on Southern Ocean acidification and its impacts.
The Ross Sea: A Valuable Reference Area to Assess the Effects of Climate Change (IP 92) – This paper discusses how International Panel on Climate Change models predict that the Ross Sea will be the last portion of the Southern Ocean with sea ice year round. The Ross Sea constitutes an important reference area to gauge the ecosystem effects of climate change and distinguish those effects from the effects of human activities elsewhere. This, in conjunction with a range of other scientific and biological reasons underpins why the Ross Sea should be included as a key component of a network of Southern Ocean marine protected areas.
The Southern Ocean MPA Agenda – Matching words and spirit with action (IP 90) – CCAMLR Members and ATCPs need to increase their resources directed towards a representative system of marine protected areas by 2012. ASOC urges ATCPs to make effective use of the upcoming MPA workshop this August in Brest, France.  This will ensure that the words and the spirit of the agreements and conventions that make up the ATS and of recent discussions on MPAs are matched with action.  ASOC looks forward to all participants coming to the workshop with well-justified MPA proposals.
Antarctic Tourism – What Next? Key Issues to Address with Binding Rules (IP 84) – This paper addresses issues that require particular attention from regulatory entities. Current trends suggest that tourism will continue to expand and diversify, adopting new modalities and penetrating further into the Antarctic mainland and along its coasts.   It is important that ATCPs take proactive steps to constrain tourism within ecologically sustainable limits.. Making better use of existing regulatory mechanisms would be a good first step.
Land-Based Tourism in Antarctica (IP 87) – This paper examines the interface between commercial land-based tourism and the use of national program infrastructures, as well as recent developments in land-based tourism.  The improvement of land-based facilities such as runways and camps, and the broad array of land activities now available to tourists, indicate that land-based tourism is growing.  If no actions are taken soon, land-based tourism may well become consolidated as a major activity.
An Antarctic Vessel Traffic Monitoring and Information System (IP 82) – This paper provides information on the value of vessel traffic monitoring and information systems for improving safety and environmental protection. It uses as an example the development of a European VTMIS as a direct response to disasters in European waters. It summarises the existing tools and initiatives for tracking and monitoring of vessels, which could provide increased safety and environmental protection in Antarctica. ASOC calls on the ATCM to adopt a Resolution or Decision on development of an Antarctic Vessel Traffic Monitoring and Information System.
Developing a Mandatory Polar Code – Progress and Gaps (IP 85) – This paper provides information on the development of a Mandatory Polar Code and identifies issues needing further consideration, including a requirement for only polar class vessels to operate in waters where ice presents a hazard; and an Environmental Protection Chapter.  ASOC calls on the ATCM to adopt a Resolution on taking collaborative actions to ensure that the Mandatory Polar Code provides appropriate safety and environmental protection standards for all vessel operations in Antarctica.
Vessel Protection and Routeing – Options Available to Reduce Risk and Provide Enhanced Environmental Protection (IP 91) –Ships’ routeing and environmental protection measures developed to reduce risk and prevent marine pollution have not been used extensively in Antarctica. This paper provides information on the range of IMO measures available. A review of opportunities for reducing the risks of collision and groundings and protecting the most vulnerable areas through the use of IMO measures should be considered.  ASOC calls on the ATCM to adopt a Resolution on a review of measures to address these issues. 
The Antarctic Environmental Protocol, 1991-2011 (IP 89) – This paper reflects on Antarctic environmental protection since the signature of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. There have been some significant accomplishments, some issues remain outstanding, and some events seem incompatible with the original commitments. While overall the Antarctic region is protected, it is also under growing environmental pressures. The challenge for ATCPs is to respond effectively to emerging pressures, and not let national interests prevail over international obligations and the global benefits of protecting the Antarctic.
Review of the Implementation of the Madrid Protocol: Annual reports by Parties (Article 17) (IP 113) – This paper, addresses the annual reporting duty set out in Article 17 of the Protocol.. The level of compliance by Parties since the entry into force of the Protocol, while showing an increasing trend, is still relatively low.  Information papers submitted to the CEP and the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) are the most effective ways available to Parties for complying with annual information exchange requirements. 
Evolution of Footprint: Spatial and Temporal Dimensions of Human Activities (IP 86) – This paper discusses why the concept of footprint is essential in quantifying the impacts of human activities on Antarctica.  This concept has been largely discussed since the first meeting of the CEP and needs to be applied more rigorously to address the complex aspects of a growing human presence in Antarctica.  ASOC has also prepared a poster that illustrates the human footprint in Antarctica. 
    4. Other Important Issues for XXXIV ATCM
    • Bringing Annex VI on Liability Arising from Environmental Emergencies into force as rapidly as possible should be a high priority for all ATCPs.  ASOC urges all Parties to redouble their efforts over the next year to solve the remaining implementation problems, so that Annex VI can be ratified and come into force in 2012. 
    • Biological prospecting is not yet adequately regulated. ASOC supports a framework for managing it, including much more transparent sharing of data and information by Parties. Following Resolution 9 (2009), ASOC urges all Parties to re-start the discussions of bioprospecting.
    5. Concluding Remarks
Antarctica is facing many pressures from global climate change and a wide range of activities.. ASOC looks forward to the ATCPs taking concrete actions in Buenos Aires that will help protect Antarctica over the longer term. 

