





Report of the CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas Montevideo, Uruguay, 16-17 June 2011





Report of the CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Montevideo, Uruguay, 16-17 June 2011
Information Paper submitted by Australia and Uruguay
Summary

    1. Background
At its 13th meeting in 2010 the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) endorsed a proposal by its Subsidiary Group on Management Plans (SGMP) to convene a workshop to exchange best practice and work towards producing guidelines for preparing marine and terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA)  management plans. The Committee supported the objectives and themes proposed by SGMP, which were reflected in the terms of reference for the workshop.
The CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctic Specially Managed Areas was hosted by the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute at Club Naval in Montevideo, from 16-17 June 2011. It was co-convened by Juan Abdala (Uruguay) and Ewan McIvor (Australia), and involved seventeen participants representing eight CEP Members and seven CEP Observers (see Appendix 1)1.
    2. Workshop aim and terms of reference
The aim of the workshop was to review how the ASMA designation is currently working, with a view to exchanging best practice and developing guidelines for the preparation of marine and terrestrial ASMA management plans.
The terms of reference for the workshop were:
    1) Share good practice by examining common issues arising and lessons learnt from different approaches to site management in Antarctica, and drawing upon relevant approaches to the management of multiple use areas elsewhere.
    2) Develop guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans.
    3) Identify the characteristics of potential new ASMAs.
    4) Prepare a report for CEP XIV.
The workshop addressed these terms of reference through a series of presentations, break out groups, and open discussion sessions (see workshop schedule at Appendix 2).
    3. The ASMA mechanism
Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) provides that ‘[a]ny area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between Parties or minimize environmental impacts’.
Seven ASMAs have been adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) since Annex V entered into force in May 2002 (see Appendix 3). A Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas was adopted in 1998 (Resolution 2 (1998)), and is currently under review (see ATCM XXXIV/WP13). There are no such guidelines to assist with the preparation of ASMA management plans.
    4. Presentations
Dr Colin Harris presented a keynote presentation titled The purpose and potential of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas within the Antarctic Protected Areas system which reviewed the evolution and application of ASMA mechanism to date, in the context of the development of the protected area system as a whole, and considered examples of its implication against emerging issues, and its potential application in the future. 
The workshop also considered the following other presentations:
    • Dr Ricardo Roura (ASOC) introduced a presentation titled ‘Antarctic Specially Managed Areas: Considerations of best practice and identification of new areas in the terrestrial and coastal environment’, which provided some examples of best practice, based on current ASMAs, with a focus on the terrestrial and adjacent coastal areas that are used in land-based operations.
    • Dr Polly Penhale (United States) introduced a presentation on ‘The Development of ASMA Management Plans: Stakeholder Input’, which discussed recommendations to improve stakeholder involvement in the planning process, drawing on the United States’ experience in the development and management of several ASMAs.
    • Dr Yves Frenot (France) introduced a presentation prepared by Dr Kevin Hughes (United Kingdom) on ‘ASMAs: managing the risks associated with non-native species introductions’, noting that ASMA management plans could provide an effectively framework for implementing coordinated biosecurity measures within areas where levels of human activity, and therefore risks of non-native species introductions, are high.
    • Adrian Dahood (United States) introduced a presentation prepared by Jana Newman (New Zealand) titled ‘Websites as a tool for outreach and management: McMurdo Dry Valleys Website’, which reviewed experiences associated with the development and use of the website for the McMurdo Dry Valleys, and highlighted future challenges.
    • Adrian Dahood also introduced a presentation on ‘Guidelines for the Application of Management Zones’, recalling an earlier United States Working Paper that reviewed zoning practice in all existing ASMA management plans and proposed a ‘core’ set of seven zones, and discussing how each of these zones was applied during the recent revision of the management plan for ASMA 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys.
    • Dr Polly Penhale also introduced a presentation prepared by Dr Keith Reid (CCAMLR) titled ‘Monitoring and Management in CCAMLR with relevance to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas’, which summarised aspects of CCAMLR’s approach to environmental monitoring and spatial protection and management in the marine environment, highlighting synergies between the work of CCAMLR and the application of the ASMA mechanism. 
    • Using an online audio/video link from Australia, Rob Nicoll (ASOC) gave a presentation titled ‘Antarctic Specially Managed Areas: Considerations of best practice and identification of new areas in the marine environment’, which provided examples of good practice with regard to spatial management and protection measures in the marine environment relevant to the ASMA mechanism. 
These presentations raised many points, and questions, and usefully served to stimulate discussion under terms of reference #1 - #3, as outlined below. A more detailed summary of each presentation is provided at Appendix A, and the presentations slides are available from the workshop page on the CEP Workspace at: http://www.ats.aq/e/cep_workspace/cep_workspace.htm
    5. Term of reference #1 – share good practice
Under this term of reference the workshop discussed common issues arising and lessons learnt from different approaches to area management in Antarctica, with a view to identifying good practice.
Key points raised in discussion
Future use of the AMSA mechanism
    1) There is a need and opportunity to promote further and more effective collaboration and cooperation between those undertaking activities in Antarctica. The ASMA mechanism represents a flexible framework for achieving such objectives. Designating an ASMA can provide clarity and visibility regarding the management arrangements for an area, and can be a good means of promoting engagement by stakeholders (see further comments below on stakeholder engagement). 
    2) However, it is important to apply the most appropriate management tool(s) to achieve the desired objective. Depending on the circumstances, other tools available under the Environmental Protocol, or more generally, may be more appropriate and effective.
    3) Experience with the development of existing ASMAs has shown that the process to establish an ASMA can be long and involved. In particular, the complexity of an ASMA process may increase with the scale of the area, and with the number of Parties or other actors involved. To streamline the process it would be useful to develop information for proponents, drawing on lessons arising from the existing ASMAs (see also below comments under ToR #2). The availability of such guidance should not discourage new or innovative approaches.
    4) ASMA management arrangements (e.g. policies, provisions) will need to be developed to address the circumstances of the area in question, but there is value in sharing information about effective approaches in one ASMA that may be applicable in other existing ASMAs, or in proposed new ASMAs.
Legal status of ASMA management plans
    5) ASMA management plans are adopted via a Measure of the ATCM, which implies a legally binding status, but there is some uncertainty regarding the status of the provisions of ASMA management plans (e.g. codes of conduct, zones) given that, unlike ASPAs, no permit is required for entry. 
    6) Provisions may be implemented differently by different Parties, in accordance with the provisions of relevant national legislation. Nevertheless, it is clear that there is an obligation on Parties to promote compliance with ASMA management plans, and with visitors to comply with the provisions. Practical means of promoting compliance can include the use of induction videos, information pamphlets and websites.
Stakeholder engagement, communication and information exchange 
    7) There is a need for early and effective stakeholder engagement in the development and review of ASMA proposals and management plans. Holding stakeholder meetings, including workshop held on-site, can be effective, as can well managed web-based discussion forums and other remote means of communication. It can also be beneficial to draw on the input of relevant experts who are not directly involved in the area in question.
    8) A website can be a useful way to make information about an ASMA readily available to stakeholders and the general public. Some existing ASMAs have websites, and others are under development. Providing links to these ASMA websites from the ATS website would help increase their visibility. Establishing and maintaining a website can be resource intensive, so there are benefits to keeping it simple and robust. One example is to include links to the websites of research programs conducted in the area, rather than duplicating content.
Non-native species
    9) Together with a range of other measures, ASMAs have an important role to play in addressing the introduction of non-native species (NNS), which is a high priority issue for the CEP.
    10) ASMA management plans should include NNS provisions relevant to the circumstances of the area in question, and could also provide direction to generally applicable NNS measures (such as the proposed Non-Native Species Manual). Preventing the introduction of NNS remains the most practical and cost-effective approach, and measures to bring NNS issues and requirements to the attention of visitors can be easily incorporated to the provisions of ASMA management plans.
    11) In multiple-operator ASMAs a principle-based approach to addressing non-native species issues can be effective, allowing each operator to implement the principles in a manner appropriate to their operational circumstances. For similar reasons, this type of approach could be more broadly applied to other issues.
Special zones
    12) Zoning is one of the key tools in the ASMA management toolbox. An important function of zoning is to raise awareness regarding the special characteristics of an area (e.g. historic zone) or the appropriate use of an area (e.g. scientific zone, facilities zone). 
    13) To be effective, it is important to make the reason for a zone quite clear. It would be useful to establish guidance to promote consistent application of zones across ASMAs, where appropriate, with particular benefits for those Areas located in close proximity that might be accessed by the same users.
    14) Other available tools for spatial management and protection of sensitive areas (e.g. ASPAs, HSMs) should also be considered, and applied in an integrated manner.
Marine ASMAs
    15) ASMAs can be, and have been, designated in the marine environment and application of the ASMA mechanism should be considered in the CEP’s ongoing efforts to engage in and support work led by SC-CAMLR to develop a network of Antarctic marine protected areas.
‘Regional’ ASMAs 
    16) Further consideration would be required to assess whether the idea of establishing ‘regional’ ASMAs, or ASMAs with a focus on managing one particular activity (e.g. shipping, tourism) would have merit and value. Aspects requiring consideration would include the relationship between regional ASMAs and other ASMAs, and the practical aspects of managing such ASMAs.
A systematic approach to identifying ASMAs
    17) There was a discussion regarding the concept of applying ASMAs in a ‘systematic’ manner. A view was expressed that such an approach would be consistent with the purpose of ‘minimising environmental impacts’, including in areas where activities may ‘in the future be conducted’. An alternative view was expressed that Annex V provides for a systematic approach to designation of ASPAs, and that such an approach can be based on ‘environmental-geographic’ characteristics, but that ASMAs relate to areas where human activities are or are likely to be conducted, which cannot be identified in a similar way.
ASMA management groups
    18) Management groups have proved effective in facilitating the management of ASMAs, particularly those subject to activities by multiple national programs and/or multiple types of activities.
    19) There can be practical challenges with convening ASMA Management Groups, including the language barrier, but useful approaches have included meetings in the margins of the ATCM and COMNAP, and focussed discussion on particular topics using online discussion forums / web-based seminars; the latter approaches are less expensive than face-to-face meetings, but do require the acquisition and management of suitable software and may be less suitable for consideration of complex or ‘sticky’ issues.
    20) It could be useful to consider ASMA management within the context of regional discussions regularly scheduled as part of the annual COMNAP meeting. This would also assist with drawing in COMNAP’s experience with facilitating cooperation and coordination between national Antarctic programs. Drawing on the experience of IAATO, SCAR and SC-CAMLR could also be useful.
Monitoring and assessing the effectiveness of management
    21) It is important to monitor and assess the status of values and activities in an ASMA to determine the effectiveness of management measures. The results should be fed back into regular reviews. 
Codes of conduct
    22) In addition to the general code of conduct required for ASMA management plans, the use of codes of conduct specific to management zones or types of activities has proved effective in achieving understanding and acceptance of the relevant provisions.
    23) Utilising the accepted format and approach of visitor site guidelines is a suitable alternative to a code of conduct for sites within ASMAs that are used by visitors (e.g. as at Deception Island, and as proposed for the McMurdo Dry Valleys).
    6. Term of reference #2 – develop guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans
The workshop noted that there was currently no ASMA equivalent of the Guide to the Preparation of Antarctic Specially Protected Area Management Plans and, with reference to the points raised under term of reference 1, held discussions in small groups about what aspects of ASMA management could be elaborated in such a Guide, and how such guidance might be prepared and presented.
Key points raised in discussion
    1) It would be useful to develop guidance (which could consist of a voluntary checklist, guidelines or a combination of similar products) to assist with the different steps from initiation to adoption of an ASMA, including: the process to consider the designation of an ASMA; the preparation of ASMA management plans; and the assessment and revision of management arrangements. The process would be different (e.g. more or less detailed) for different ASMAs according to local circumstances.
    2) One approach to considering the potential for designating an area as an ASMA would be to use a checklist approach, drawing on the provisions of Article 4 of Annex V, to examine whether there is a need or opportunity to address one or more of the following objectives:
    • assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities;
    • avoid possible conflicts;
    • improve co-operation between Parties; and/or
    • minimize environmental impacts
    3) A valuable first step in developing such guidance would be to review the provisions of existing ASMA management plans, to identify common approaches and issues, as well as any gaps.
    4) A practical way to take this work forward would be to invite a small group of interested parties to undertake such a review and to develop materials for consideration by the CEP, with a view to facilitating further work by the SGMP to develop guidance.
    5) This proposed work could give further consideration to other points raised in discussion, regarding the development of guidance on:
    • the differences between an ASMA and an ASPA;
    • how to determine the spatial scope of an ASMA, involving consideration of factors such as values, activities and practicalities (more players and wider scope could result in greater complexity, however a larger area does not necessarily mean a larger number of players);
    • whether an ASMA would be a possible outcome of discussions and development of area management arrangements, or a framework within which to take forward such discussions and further develop such management arrangements; 
    • identifying potential barriers to the development of an ASMA (e.g. practical, economic, political, human resources) as a means of identifying solutions;
    • the need to take into account the varying level of activities by parties operating or otherwise engaged in an area;
    • the provisions of Article IV of the Antarctic Treaty;
    • how to effectively communicate with potential stakeholders would be useful, with particular relevance to areas with many different actors;
    • the benefits and operation of ASMA Management groups;  
    • other relevant management instruments (e.g. ASPAs, HSMs);
    • the benefits of translating ASMA management plans into the languages of all interested parties;
    • the benefits of improved cooperation and coordination in helping Parties to be more efficient in the field, and in reducing duplication of effort and the costs of operations; and
    • the continuing review of management plans, including assessments of effectiveness in achieving objectives.
    7. Term of reference #3 – identify the characteristics of potential new ASMAs
Workshop participants convened in small groups to discuss the characteristics of marine and terrestrial areas in Antarctica that might warrant consideration for ASMA designation. 
Key points raised in discussion
    1) Overall, the workshop agreed that Article 4 of Annex V provides useful guidance regarding:
    • the types of areas that can be designated as an ASMA (any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted; areas where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts; sites or monuments of historic values); and
    • the purposes for which an ASMA can be designated (to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities: to avoid possible conflicts; to improve cooperation between Parties; or to minimise environmental impacts).
    2) Other points raised in discussions included:
    • In some cases, areas subject to a high concentration of activities, or to activities by multiple actors might warrant consideration for designation as ASMAs. However these situations would need to be considered in the context of Article 4 and, as noted earlier, with due regard to the full range of available management tools.
    • While Article 4 provides for an ASMA to be designated in anticipation of future activities, the practicalities of such an approach should be considered (e.g. the time and resources involved in designating and managing an ASMA; challenges with anticipating required management activities).
    • ASMAs can contain ASPAs and HSMs, and in some instances might be applied to establish a buffer zone to complement other such forms of protection.
    8. Concluding remarks and recommendations
Participants agreed that the ASMA mechanism plays an important and useful role in the framework established under the Protocol to achieve comprehensive environmental protection in Antarctica. The workshop was a useful first step in considering a range of matters relating to the use of ASMAs as a management tool, and to good practice in the management of ASMAs.
Discussions touched on a range of matters of interest to the CEP including, but not limited to: non-native species; cumulative impacts; human footprint; environmental monitoring; cooperation between Parties and cooperation with other organisations; management of historic sites; visitor management; marine spatial management; and education and outreach. 
The following recommendations were developed for consideration by the CEP, with a view to assisting to enhancing the management of existing ASMAs and the further application of the ASMA mechanism, as appropriate:
    1) To help disseminate information about existing ASMAs, the CEP should request the Secretariat to establish links from the ATS website to ASMA websites, where available.
    2) The CEP should promote further exchange of information on good practice in ASMA management. In particular, ASMA Management Groups could be encouraged to share information regarding initiatives that may be of broader interest for application in other ASMAs.
    3) The CEP should seek to identify opportunities to draw on COMNAP’s broader experience and responsibilities to help facilitate cooperation and coordination in the development, implementation and management of ASMAs. In addition, the CEP could seek to draw on SCAR with respect to scientific activities, IAATO with respect to tourism activities, and SC-CAMLR with respect to good practice in the identification, management and monitoring of marine areas.
    4) The CEP should encourage interested Members to review the provisions of existing ASMA management plans, with a view to preparing a suggested work plan and supporting materials to support work by the SGMP to develop guidance for establishing ASMAs and for preparing and reviewing ASMA management plans.
Appendix 1. List of participants
Participant
CEP Member / Observer
Email address
Rodolfo Sanchez
Argentina
rsanchez@dna.gov.ar 
Ewan McIvor (Co-convener)
Australia
ewan.mcivor@aad.gov.au 
Rob Nicoll*
ASOC
RNicoll@wwf.org.au 
Ricardo Roura
ASOC
ricardo.roura@worldonline.nl 
Veronica Cirelli
ASOC
veronica.cirelli@vidasilvestre.org.ar 
Keith Reid*
CCAMLR
keith@ccamlr.org 
Veronica Vallejos
Chile
vvallejos@inach.cl 
Jose Retamales
Chile
jretamales@inach.cl
Michelle Rogan-Finnemore
COMNAP
michelle.finnemore@canterbury.ac.nz 
Yves Frenot
France
yves.frenot@ipev.fr 
Heike Herata*
Germany
heike.herata@uba.de 
Kim Crosbie*
IAATO
kimcrosbie@iaato.org 
Jana Newman*
New Zealand
jnewman@antarcticanz.govt.nz
Birgit Njaastad
Norway
njaastad@npolar.no 
Victor Pomelov
Russian Federation
pom@aari.ru 
Kevin Hughes*
United Kingdom
kehu@bas.ac.uk
Polly Penhale
United States
ppenhale@nsf.gov 
Adrian Dahood
United States
adahood@nsf.gov
Colin Harris
Expert supported by United States
colin.harris@era.gs 
Juan Abdala (Co-convener)
Uruguay
jabdala@iau.gub.uy 
Waldemar Fontes
Uruguay 
wfontes@iau.gub.uy
Nicole Caula
Uruguay
ncaula@iau.gub.uy
Oscar Pin
Uruguay
opin@dinara.gub.uy
*Unable to attend due to flight cancellations
Appendix 2. Work program
Day 1 – Thursday 16 June 2011
Time
Topic
Presenter / facilitator
1130
Refreshments
1200
Welcome
Manuel Burgos (Uruguay)

Workshop background; Introduction to Day 1
Ewan McIvor (Australia)
1230
Lunch
1400
Keynote presentation: The purpose and potential of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas within the Antarctic Protected Areas system
Colin Harris (invited expert supported by United States)
1430
Comments and discussion 
Facilitator – Ewan McIvor
Workshop Term of Reference #1 – sharing good practice in area management
1500
Presentations on good practice in area management:


    • Antarctic Specially Managed Areas: Considerations of best practice and identification of new areas in the terrestrial and coastal environment 
Ricardo Roura (ASOC)

    • The Development of ASMA Management Plans: Stakeholder Input
Polly Penhale (United States)

    • ASMAs: managing the risks associated with non-native species introductions
Yves Frenot for Kevin Hughes (United Kingdom)
1600
Break for refreshments
1630
Presentations on good practice in area management (continued):


    • Guidelines for the Application of Management Zones
Adrian Dahood (United States)

    • Sharing Good Practice: Websites as tools for outreach and management: McMurdo Dry Valleys Website
Adrian Dahood for Jana Newman (New Zealand)

    • Monitoring and Management in CCAMLR with relevance to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Polly Penhale for Keith Reid (CCAMLR)

    • Antarctic Specially Managed Areas: Considerations of best practice and identification of new areas in the marine environment
Rob Nicoll (ASOC) (by online a/v link)
1730
Open discussion on good practice in area management
Facilitator – Ewan McIvor
1830
Close of Day 1
2000 
Welcome cocktail by host country


Day 2 – Friday 17 June 2011
Time
Topic
Presenter / convener
0900
Review of Day 1, introduction to Day 2
Ewan McIvor
Workshop Term of Reference #2 – guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans
0910
Introduction to workshop Term of Reference #2 and suggested questions for discussion by each break out group:
    • Recalling discussions under TOR #1, what guidance might usefully be presented in guidelines for the preparation of ASMA management plans?
    • How might such guidelines be prepared and presented?
Ewan McIvor
0930
Break out group discussion

1030
Break for refreshments
1100
Reports from break out groups and discussion
Facilitator – Ewan McIvor
Workshop Term of Reference #3 – characteristics of potential new ASMAs
1200
Introduction to Term of Reference #3 and suggested question for discussion by each break out group:
    • What are the characteristics of marine and/or terrestrial areas that might warrant consideration for ASMA designation?
Ewan McIvor (Australia)
1230
Lunch
1400
Break out group discussion

1500
Reports from break out groups and discussion
Facilitator – Ewan McIvor
1530
Break for refreshments
1600
Review of outcomes and recommendations arising, next steps
Facilitator – Ewan McIvor
1730
Workshop close
Appendix 3. Existing ASMAs
ASMA
Location
Proposing Party/ies
Measure
1
Admiralty Bay, King George Island
Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Poland & United States
2 (2006)
2
McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
New Zealand & United States
1 (2004)

3
Cape Denison, Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, East Antarctica
Australia
1 (2004)
4
Deception Island, South Shetland Islands
Argentina, Chile, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom & United States
3 (2005)
5
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole
United States
2 (2007)
6
Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica
Australia, China, India, Romania & Russia
2 (2007)
7
Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin
United States
2 (2009)
(see also ATCM XXXIV/IP69 Summary of key features of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas)
Appendix 4. Summaries of workshop presentations
1. Keynote presentation: The purpose and potential of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas within the Antarctic Protected Areas system
Colin M Harris, Director, Environmental Research & Assessment Ltd., Cambridge, UK
The Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) is a key instrument created by the Madrid Protocol in 1991. It is intended to be applied in “Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted … to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve cooperation between Parties or minimise environmental impacts.” [Madrid Protocol, Annex V, Article 4 (1)] 
The ASMA has origins in advice provided by SCAR to the Antarctic Treaty Parties in the 1980s that in certain contexts there are needs to plan and coordinate activities more explicitly to ensure that mutual interference is avoided and impacts, particularly those of a cumulative nature, are minimized.
As it is now twenty years since the instrument was adopted, this meeting – the first of its kind to consider ASMAs – is a timely opportunity to take stock of both the ASMA purpose and its application. Despite the time that has elapsed since the ASMA was introduced by the Protocol, relatively few ASMAs have been designated. By comparison, 20 years after the introduction of the Specially Protected Area (SPA) category in 1966, 20 SPAs and 10 Sites of Special Scientific Interest had been designated, bringing a total of 30 protected sites in Antarctica by 1985. Now, in 2011, the seven ASMAs designated compares with around ten times that number of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs), of which 71 sites are adopted.
Why is there such a stark contrast in the apparent enthusiasm with which the ASMA tool has been taken up in comparison to the SPA, SSSI or ASPA? Is it because there is relatively little need for the ASMA? Is it because of political sensitivities, or perhaps the complexities of implementation? Is there a lack of enthusiasm for putting in place a framework of rules that could potentially constrain activities in areas which, typically, are a focus of science and support? Or is there a lack of understanding of what the tool is designed to provide or achieve? Is there a need for, and would there be benefits to, more widespread application of the ASMA throughout the Antarctic Treaty Area? What steps, if any, should be taken to help strengthen and improve application of the ASMA tool?
The aim of this paper is to take stock of the Antarctic Specially Managed Area in the context of the development of the Antarctic protected area system as a whole, and to consider examples of its implementation against emerging issues, and its potential application in the future.

2. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas: Considerations of best practice and identification of new areas in the terrestrial and coastal environment
Dr. Ricardo Roura (ASOC), Senior ASOC Adviser
Annex V Art 4 of the Protocol establishes that “Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between Parties or minimize environmental impacts.”  This presentation will provide some examples of best practice in ASMA based on current ASMA practice, with a focus on the terrestrial environment and adjacent coastal areas that are used in land-based operations.  In ASOC’s view, best practice for ASMAs includes:
    • Anticipating and preventing cumulative impacts and the degradation or loss of quality of the environment (and hence its scientific quality) from the effects of past, present, and future activities; 
    • Preventing conflicts of use between different activities e.g. science and commercial tourism; different aspects of science (pure/applied scientific research; science/logistic support); and different forms of visitation (commercial/non commercial; affiliated/non affiliated etc.). 
    • Using different management tools such as ASPAs, HSMs, and zoning to protect sensitive locations within the ASMA (defined by their natural or cultural attributes) as well as to manage the range of activities conducted in the ASMA, such as science, logistic support, and commercial tourism; and  
Best ASMA practice would generally require active management, including the periodic assessment and ongoing monitoring of impacts; an active ASMA management group; and periodic reviews of the management plan.  Plainly these actions are generally accepted as part of ASMA practice but are not necessarily applied in all cases, which risks turning some ASMAs into “paper parks”. 
During the presentation consideration will also be given to identifying the characteristics of potential new ASMAs.  Selecting new ASMAs would involve strategic consideration of foreseeable future activities; identification of areas where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts; and identification of sensitive locations adjacent to areas of present or future activity.  It is recommended that Parties establish, with respect to ASMAs, guidelines equivalent to those of Resolution 1 (2000) for the establishment of ASPAs.  ASMAs, however, are not an alternative to ASPAs.  
At present, designated ASMAs vary substantially in terms of, inter alia, surface area, environmental setting, values protected, and the type and level of activities conducted within.  This diversity highlights the flexibility of ASMA as an instrument for area protection, and the potential to expand its use beyond current applications. New applications may include, inter alia, ASMAs covering larger areas than those used so far, including for the management of tourism at a sub-regional level; existing clusters of bases; and coastal or terrestrial transport corridors.  These applications are consistent with the mandate of Annex V Art. 4 and with current ASMA practice.

3. The Development of ASMA Management Plans: Stakeholder Input
Polly A Penhale (United States), Acting Head, Polar Environment, Health & Safety, Office of Polar Programs, National Science Foundation
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty provides for the designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) “to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve cooperation between Parties or minimize environmental impacts”. The concept of an ASMA often begins when those working in an area of multiple use recognize that various activities are causing conflict or have the potential to cause conflict amongst various stakeholders. Those involved in the development of an ASMA management plan are best served by clearly describing the values to be protected within an area and identifying the activities which have the potential to adversely impact those values. Once the scope of the activities is understood, the input of the stakeholders is an important step to help resolve conflict and minimize negative impact to the environment.
The United States has been involved in the development and management of several ASMAs. Two of these ASMAs include activities at US stations and in the surrounding areas (ASMA No. 5, Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole and ASMA No. 7, Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin). The development of the management plans for these ASMAs provides examples of the ways in which those with interests in the areas were included in the process. Both of these ASMAs include scientific research, operational activities, and tourism. A particular challenge in the development of ASMA No. 7 was the inclusion of a marine environment, where not only research but harvesting under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) had occurred. Under Decision 9 (2005), draft management plans that contain marine areas and meet specific criteria require prior approval of CCAMLR. Thus, an additional set of stakeholders were engaged in the process. It is noted that the inclusion of all stakeholders in the development of ASMA management plans remains a challenge.  Lessons learned will include a discussion of recommendations to improve the stakeholder involvement in the planning process.

4. ASMAs: managing the risks associated with non-native species introductions
Kevin A. Hughes (United Kingdom), Environmental Research and Monitoring Manager, British Antarctic Survey
Non-native species pose a major threat to Antarctica’s unique biodiversity.  The introduction of non-native species can have severe consequences for indigenous biota with changes in both ecosystem structure and function.  The Antarctic Treaty area has few confirmed non-native species currently, but numbers are increasing.  On-going and possible future increases in human presence in the region, either through tourism, governmental operators or other activities, increase the risk of further non-native species introductions, while climate change may enhance the likelihood of establishment and range expansion.  Ensuring effective biosecurity measures are implemented throughout the Antarctic region in a timely manner is an urgent challenge for the Antarctic Treaty nations and the Antarctic community as a whole.  
Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) are designated to (i) assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, (ii) avoid possible conflicts, (iii) improve co-operation between Parties or (iv) minimize environmental impacts within a designated area.  As such ASMA management plans could provide an effective framework for implementing co-ordinated biosecurity measures within an area where levels of human activity, and therefore risks of non-native species introductions, are high.  However, in ASMA management plans drafted to date, the issue of non-native species is either omitted or mentioned only briefly, although some work has been undertaking relating to ASMA 6 Larsemann Hills (ATCM XXXI/IP17). During future revisions of ASMA management plans, proponent Parties are encouraged to consider the issues relating to introductions and implement appropriate and effective biosecurity practices.

5. Guidelines for the Application of Management Zones 
Adrian Dahood (United States), Environmental Policy Specialist, National Science Foundation
Annex V provides the framework for the designation of Antarctic Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs) and Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and allows for the creation of special zones within these areas. Since 2002, when Annex V entered into force, seven ASMAs and 71 ASPAs were approved by the Antarctic Treaty Parties.  While Annex V provides some guidance related to zoning, there are no clear guidelines for the definition and implementation of zones. There are numerous overlapping and some potentially unnecessary management zones in use. As a result, visitors to Antarctica may encounter a variety of zones at different sites with different names, but similar purpose.  This is potentially a confusing situation, and may make it more difficult for visitors to understand and follow the regulations and guidelines at each site. 
In an effort to gain greater clarity on current zoning practice, the US reviewed all existing management plans in WP-010 (ATCM XXXIII, 2010).  The analysis of existing management plans and management zones suggested that a standard set of zones could meet the majority of current zoning needs.  An increasing use of zoning as a management tool is anticipated as more information about sites becomes available and as maps and plans are improved over time. 
To achieve greater consistency and clarity in zoning, the US proposed a ‘core’ set of seven zones, based on zones already adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Parties and currently in use, for potential application as Zoning Guidelines within ASMA and ASPA management plans.  Within ASMAs’ there is no permit system, therefore zones are hortatory, and should be framed as guidelines.
The McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land (ASMA 2) Management Plan was recently revised.  A significant part of the revision was the application of zoning consistent with the core zones described in WP-010 (ATCM XXXIII, 2010).  This presentation will discuss each of the zones and how and why they were applied during the revision ASMA 2 Management Plan. 

6. Monitoring and Management in  CCAMLR with relevance to Antarctic Specially Managed Areas. 
Keith Reid (CCAMLR), Science Officer CCAMLR 
ASMA s provide a means of facilitating management of human activities where there is a perceived risk to particular environmental values.  Managing such risks in the marine environment is central to the approach taken by CCAMLR.  In particular CCAMLR has introduced spatial and temporal restrictions on activities based on the risk of negative impacts (eg seasonal fishery closure to  reduce incidental mortality of seabirds and spatial closures where vulnerable marine ecosystems have been detected).  CCAMLR collects a variety of datasets  to allow it to review the implementation and the efficacy of these measures.  The use of spatial zoning is an important part of  the identification and management of risk and the experience of CCAMLR in implementing this approach may well have utility in the design and implementations of ASMAs.  One aspect of CCAMLR monitoring that has particular relevance to ASMAs is the CEMP programme; not only does the monitoring conducted as part of CEMP have the potential to assist in the management of ASMAs but monitoring proposed as part of ASMA management plans  may also have the potential to contribute to CEMP.  For those ASMAs that contain marine areas the management of fishing in these areas may require coordination between CCAMLR and CEP.  There are currently two ASMAs (ASMA 1 and ASMA 7) that contain marine areas where krill fishing has occurred.  The  management plan for ASMA 7 specifies that harvesting should be coordinated with the research and science values of the ASMA, harvesting/fishing is not mentioned in the management plan for ASMA 1. CCAMLR has agreed a set of milestones to progress the development of a representative system of Marine Protected Areas  in the CAMLR Convention Area. The values and attributes of such areas being afforded protection may overlap with ASMAs and therefore synergies between the work of CCAMLR and the aims of the workshop will be explored.

7. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas: Considerations of best practice and identification of new areas in the Marine Environment
Rob Nicoll (ASOC), Antarctic & Southern Ocean Initiative Manager, WWF Australia
The use of spatial management and protection measures to manage the impact of human activity on the Antarctic and Southern Ocean has a history almost as long as the Antarctic Treaty itself2. This application of spatial management and protection measures within the Antarctic Treaty System has evolved over time to include the provisions of Annex V to the Madrid Protocol and well as spatial management measures under the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) and the Convention of the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS)3. Efforts at applying spatial protection and management measures to the marine environment of the Southern Ocean within the Treaty system are not as advanced as efforts to apply spatial management and protection within the terrestrial environment. CCAMLR’s focus on developing a representative system of marine protected areas provides new impetus for consideration of marine protection measures in the Southern Ocean. At the 2009 joint CEP / SC-CAMLR workshop, both bodies agreed to cooperate on the development of a representative network of MPAs in the Southern Ocean. The workshop agreed that “issues relating to spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity would generally be best led by SC-CAMLR.”  However, the workshop also agreed that this would not “…preclude in any way the development by the CEP of ASPAs and ASMAs which have in whole or in part a marine component.” Therefore consideration of relevant marine management and protection under the Madrid protocol should be a priority both in the shorter and longer term4. 
This presentation will provide some examples of “good practice” with regard to spatial management and protection measures in the marine environment relevant to the ASMA mechanism. Consideration will also be given to identifying the characteristics of potential new ASMAs as well as good practice in design and designation of new protected or managed marine areas.

8. Websites as tools for outreach and management: McMurdo Dry Valleys Website 
Jana Newman, Environmental Advisor, Antarctica New Zealand
This presentation will introduce the McMurdo Dry Valleys ASMA, and the use of a website (http://www.mcmurdodryvalleys.aq/) to support the aims of the ASMA management plan. The effectiveness of the website and the lessons we have learned will be discussed.
The website was developed by the Management Group and launched in 2009 in order to:
    • Be a central source of information for anyone interested in the Area;
    • Provide practical information for anyone visiting or conducting research in the Area;
    • Host the ASMA Management Group’s work;
    • Improve the ease of access to the ASMA Management Plan, training materials, maps, and Management  Plans for ASPAs in the Area;
    • Support work to coordinate activities;
    • Create a platform for the sharing of information on activities in the Area.
The website has proven to be a useful tool to support the goals listed above, and we have received some good feedback. Use of the website by the Management Group does represent a different way of working, and the challenge now is to ensure that we make effective use of the site and that the information on the site is up to date and supports the implementation of the Management Plan.

