





Paying for Ecosystem Services of Antarctica? 





Paying for Ecosystem Services of Antarctica?
Information Paper presented by the Netherlands
1. 	Introduction
This paper describes the options for introducing payment for ecosystem schemes in Antarctica against the background of the concept of ecosystem services, with general and specific examples, and the concept of Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES), again with some general examples.
2.	Ecosystem services
Definition
The benefits people obtain from ecosystems are often described using the concept of ecosystem services. This refers to the flows of biomass, energy and information from ecosystems, as well as the environmental conditions resulting from ecosystems, to human societies (Braat & Ten Brink 2008; De Groot et al., 2010a). Building on the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA 2005), De Groot et al. (2010a) distinguish four categories of ecosystem services (MA 2005):
    • Provisioning services  (wild foods, crops, wood, fresh water);
    • Regulating services (filtration of pollutants, climate regulation and water cycling);
    • Cultural services (recreation, information for cognitive, spiritual and aesthetic experiences); and 
    • Habitat services (nursery service, maintenance of genetic diversity). 
These “supporting services”, which were defined in the MA, are in fact the ecological processes underlying all other services.
From an economic perspective, ecosystem services can be seen as ‘dividend’ that society receives from natural capital. Maintaining stocks of natural capital allows the sustained provision of future flows of ecosystem services, and thereby contributes to human well-being. Insights from the natural sciences are essential to understanding the links between biodiversity and the supply of ecosystem services (De Groot et al. 2010a). Marine ecosystem services refer to benefits that people obtain from marine ecosystems, including the open ocean, coastal seas and estuaries.

Figure 1. (De Groot et al. 2010a)
Origin of the concept
Ehrlich and Ehrlich (1981) coined the term ecosystem services, which replaced the earlier terms  functions of the natural environment (Braat et al. 1979) and functions of nature (De Groot 1987).Economists began writing about ecosystem functions or services in the 1970s (Hueting, 1974; Pearce, 1976) presenting early notions of the value of ecosystems. In the late 1980, the interdisciplinary field of ecological economics developed the concept of natural capital (Costanza and Daly 1992). But it was not until the late 1990s that the concept got widespread attention with the publications by Costanza et al. (1997) and Daily (1997). 
The introduction of the concept of ecosystem services on the global agenda by the MA 2005 provides an important bridge between the imperatives of maintaining biodiversity and our inability to meet the Millennium Development Goals. The TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity) project picked up the thread and published a series of reports at the 2010 Conference of Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in Nagoya, presenting the economics of ecosystem services and biodiversity from scientific, policy and business perspectives (TEEB, 2009, 2010a, b, c).
Biodiversity in the view of ecosystem services science is both an aspect of ecosystems and natural capital, and thereby essential in delivering ecosystem services that underpin our economy. Its degradation and loss jeopardises the provision of these services and thereby put our own well-being and in some cases survival at risk. At the same time, the variety of species and landscapes is perceived as a benefit by people and thus a service in itself.

General examples of the concept of ecosystem services 
De Groot et al. (2010) present a classification of ecosystem services. It illustrates with a few examples per service type the wide variety of benefits for humans derived from ecosystems. Based on this classification, the Table below is extended with examples of (potential) ecosystem services provided by Antarctica. Table 1 lists the ecosystem services with general examples and examples for the Antarctic ecosystems as reported in the literature.

Table 1: Ecosystem services, with general examples for Antarctica
Ecosystem services and general examples
Examples in Antarctica (land and water)
PROVISIONING SERVICES 

1
Food (e.g. fish, game, fruit) 
krill, fish
2
Water (e.g. for drinking, irrigation, cooling) 
fresh water from ice
3
Raw Materials (e.g. fiber, timber, fuel wood, fodder, fertilizer, furs) 
manure from breeding birds
4
Genetic resources (e.g. for crop-improvement and medicinal purposes) 
many endemic microbes; birds, marine species (fish, birds, mammals)
5
Medicinal resources (e.g. biochemical products, models & test-organisms) 
undisclosed potential
6
Ornamental resources (e.g. artisan work, decorative plants, pet animals, fashion) 
Unknown
REGULATING SERVICES 

7
Air quality regulation (e.g. capturing (fine)dust, chemicals) 
no vegetation structure except mosses, lichens, so minimal
8
Climate regulation (incl. C-sequestration, influence of vegetation on rainfall, etc.) 
cold point in earth system; melting will affect albedo and bring fresh water into coastal zone
9
Moderation of extreme events (eg. storm protection and flood prevention) 
no vegetation structure except mosses, lichens, so minimal
10
Regulation of water flows (e.g. natural drainage, irrigation and drought prevention) 
no vegetation structure except mosses, lichens, so minimal
11
Waste treatment (especially water purification) 
algae take up nutrients from manure that flows into sea
12
Erosion prevention 
no vegetation structure except mosses, lichens, so minimal
13
Maintenance of soil fertility (incl. soil formation) 
no vegetation structure except mosses, lichens, so minimal
14
Pollination 
not on continent; maybe on islands
15
Biological control (e.g. seed dispersal, pest and disease control) 
Minimal
HABITAT SERVICES 

16
Maintenance of life cycles of migratory species (incl. nursery service) 
very important for marine species: fish, birds (e.g. penguins) and mammals (seals, whales)
17
Maintenance of genetic diversity (especially in gene pool protection) 
relatively large undisturbed ecosystem; high potential
CULTURAL & AMENITY SERVICES 

18
Aesthetic information 
large potential: landscapes / seascapes rare on earth (film)
19
Opportunities for recreation & tourism 
specialty types of tourism
20
Inspiration for culture, art and design 
large potential
21
Spiritual experience 
Unknown
22
Information for cognitive development 
large potential as it is relatively undisturbed and with extreme conditions; great effort, Earth’s atmospheric history archived in ice cores.


The ecosystem services of Antarctica
Antarctica is one of the last places on Earth with a limited number of human activities.  However, ecosystem services have been provided and used.  Furthermore, the ecosystems harbour a great potential for future use (IUCN, 2009). 
(1) Seal hunting and whaling: When early Antarctic explorers returned home and described the abundance of seals and whales they had seen, sealers and whalers were drawn to Antarctic waters to hunt the valuable animals. Hunting was so intense that some species were driven nearly to extinction, and sealing and whaling slowed down only when there were too few left to make the hunts profitable. Commercial sealing and whaling in the Antarctic region has now been abandoned, and stocks are recovering
(2a) Fisheries: Fish is abundant in the oceans around Antarctica. Dramatic changes in fish populations have occurred in Antarctic waters in recent decades, where overfishing rapidly depleted stocks of marbled notothenia, mackerel, icefish, gray notothenia, and Patagonian toothfish. Some stocks recovered when conservation measures were instituted by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, but others remain at risk by illegal, unregulated, and unreported fishing.
(2b) Krill. There is increasing focus on harvesting Antarctic krill. Factory ships made large catches possible, and some scientists are concerned that so many krill will be taken that it may affect the food supply for Antarctica’s predators.  Many hoped krill would provide a cheap, protein-rich food for the world's famine-plagued regions. However, despite being relatively easy to catch, krill have proved costly to process and difficult to market. Krill must be processed very rapidly or their tissues begin to break down, turning black and mushy. Japan and Russia, which now do most of the krill fishing, have perfected equipment for peeling and processing krill rapidly.
(3) Genetic materials and medicine: There is increasing interest in biological prospecting and applications for patents for commercial exploitation of genetic material from unique organisms (especially extremophiles).
(4) Tourism: There is a rapidly growing tourist trade, with more than 45,000 people visiting the Antarctic in 2007-2008. Tourists predominantly visit coastal areas to view marine birds and seals and to see historic huts and sites used by Antarctic explorers of the early twentieth century, spending most of their time on ships.
(5) Information via research: The only permanent human residents in Antarctica are scientists and support staff who live in research stations and many temporary camps. They number about 4,000 in the three- to four-month summer and 1,000 in winter. Their research examines processes and patterns that can only be explored in extreme conditions, such as the record of Earth’s climate history preserved in ice cores, physiology and organism adaptation in extreme conditions, and the functioning of ecosystems with short food chains..
(6) Water storage. Antarctica stores a potential of 63 meters of sea level rise in its icesheet. The discontinuation of that service would severely impact on human civilisation. 
3. Payment for ecosystem services
Definition
The concept of payments for ecosystem (environmental) services (PES) is at the centre of calls for more direct conservation approaches. As ecosystems are threatened, ecosystems and ecosystem services are becoming increasingly scarce. With PES schemes, external beneficiaries of ecosystem service make direct, contractual and conditional payments to local landholders, land users, and local marine users (fishermen) in return for adopting practices that secure ecosystem conservation and restoration (Wunder, 2005).
Within economics, a scheme is defined as a scheme for the payment for ecosystem (environmental) services if there is (Engel et al., 2008; Wunder, 2005):
(a) 	a voluntary transaction where
(b) 	a well-defined ecosystem service (or a land use likely to secure that service)
(c) 	is purchased by a (minimum one) service buyer
(d) 	from a (minimum one) service provider
(e) 	if and only if the service provider secures the provision of that service (conditionality).

The underlying idea is that PES schemes internalize externalities. In other words, the idea behind PES is that the non-marketed services provided by ecosystems will be taken into account in decision making and allocation of benefits to those who own or manage the systems providing the service (especially regulating and cultural services).The party supplying the environmental services holds the property rights over an environmental good that provides a flow of benefits to the demanding party in return for compensation. Governments may not only be involved through setting rules and regulations for the transactions, but also as land owners and land managers (public lands). Governments can also be involved as an intermediary organisation to buy ecosystem services for their citizens.

In designing PES structures, sellers and buyers have to negotiate the PES scheme. Objectives other than the internalisation of external effects can be the starting point for those negotiations, e.g. poverty alleviation, social equity issues, regional development, or improving governance (implicitly or explicitly) (e.g. Wunder, 2005).

General examples of payment for ecosystem services
    1) The world's largest and longest running PES program is the United States' Conservation Reserve Program, which currently pays about $1.8 billion a year under 766,000 individual contracts with farmers and landowners to “rent” a total 34,700,000 acres (140,000 km2) of what it considers “environmentally-sensitive land.” These farmers agree to plant “long-term, resource-conserving covers to improve water quality, control soil erosion and enhance habitats for waterfowl and wildlife.” This program has existed in some form or another since the wake of the American Dust Bowl, when the federal government began paying farmers to avoid farming on poor quality, erodible land. 
    2) In 2000, the Chinese central government announced an even more expensive project under its $43 billion Grains for Green program, by which it offers farmers grain in exchange for not clearing forested slopes for farming, thereby reducing erosion and saving the streams and rivers below from associated sedimentation. 
    3) Even though it is not actually paying for ecosystem services, some of the PES markets may be modelled on the carbon emissions markets of the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) and the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX), with polluters buying credits from companies or property owners that have taken measures to reduce environmental impacts. 
    4) Other financial mechanisms likely to develop include wetlands mitigation-type markets extended into the marine zone, marine biodiversity offsets, marine species banking, and habitat management supported by the very industries that realize the benefits: the fishing industry protecting nursery habitats, for instance, or the tourism industry protecting shoreline stabilization services. 
Furthermore, China recently enacted a law to mitigate serious marine environmental problems, i.e. the Law on Management of Sea Area Use (Endo, 2008). The law has three main elements. 
    1. The first is a sea-use right that re-allocates the property rights of the sea. In China, the owner of the sea is the government; this law states that the property right will be re-allocated to those who are interested in using marine and coastal resources. 
    2. The second creates marine functional zoning. This is ecosystem-based management based on scientific findings. Based on science, user rights are allocated to all stakeholders in coastal areas. 
    3. The third is the user fee. The law says that anyone interested in developing the coastal area by using marine resources, including fisheries, has to pay.
Together with the sea-use right, the government issues a certificate to those who use and develop coastal areas. The holder of the certificate has the obligation to pay for the use. There is a unified standard sea-use fee, which is set by the central government. The level of the fee depends on categories and uses of the sea area, the land area used and the types of activities. User conflicts were reduced and excessive use is controlled. 

4. 	Options for paying for ecosystem services on Antarctica  

Given the status of Antarctica, and the nature of its set of ecosystem services, most of which are provided through its marine ecosystems, the creation of a Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) schemes poses particular challenges.
The current and potential Antarctic ecosystem services are presented in Table 1. Most of these services can be well-defined and quantified and monitored (e.g. satellite monitoring). There are some identified private users (fishermen; tourist entrepreneurs; prospectors) and some semi-private / semi-government users (scientific research organisations). In the Antarctic context, however, it is not self-evident who will be the seller of the ecosystem services.
Transaction costs are the costs of negotiating, contracting, implementing, and monitoring a PES program. Transaction costs can broadly be divided in two categories: (1) ex ante or initial costs of achieving an agreement, and (2) ex post or costs of implementing an agreement once it is in place. The basic logic of PES dictates that the users pay to the owner, who might be represented by an operational entity, which in turn guarantees, by effective conservation management (including sustainable use quota and associated measures as monitoring and licensing) that the services are provided as defined under the PES scheme..
To investigate the options for implementation of PES schemes on Antarctica, the following questions can be of great relevance:
    1) Who would be the sellers of Antarctic ecosystem services? 
    2) What is the well-defined service?
    3) Who would be eligible buyers?  
    4) What are the transaction costs of the implementation of payment schemes?

REFERENCES

Braat L., and P. ten Brink (Eds.) with J. Bakkes, K. Bolt, I. Braeuer, B. ten Brink, A. Chiabai, H. Ding, H. Gerdes, M. Jeuken, M. Kettunen, U. Kirchholtes, C. Klok, A. Markandya, P. Nunes, M. van Oorschot, N. Peralta-Bezerra, M. Rayment, C. Travisi, and M. Walpole, 2008. The Cost of Policy Inaction (COPI): The Case of not Meeting the 2010 Biodiversity Target. Alterra report 1718, Wageningen; European Commission, Brussels

Braat, L., F. van der Ploeg, F. Bouma, 1979 Functions of the natural environment: an economic-ecological analysis. IvM-VU / WWF-The Netherlands. Amsterdam

Common M. and C. Perrings, 1992. Towards an ecological economics of sustainability. Ecological Economics 6: 7–34.

Costanza, R. and H. Daly, 1992.Natural Capital and Sustainable Development .Conservation Biology 6: 37–46.

Costanza, R., R. d'Arge, R. de Groot, S. Farber, M. Grasso, M., B. Hannon, K. Limburg, S. Naeem, R.V. O'Neill, J. Paruelo, R.G. Raskin, P. Sutton and M. van den Belt, 1997. The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature 387: 253–259.

Daily, G., (Ed.), 1997. Nature’s Services. Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems. Island Press. Washington D.C.

De Groot, R.S., 1987. Environmental Functions as a Unifying Concept for Ecology and Economics. The Environmentalist 7(2): 105–109.

De Groot, R.S., B. Fisher, M. Christie, J. Aronson, L. Braat, J. Gowdy, R. Hanines-Young, E. Maltby, A. Neuville, S. Polasky, R. Portela, I. Ring, 2010.Integrating the Ecological and Economic Dimensions in Biodiversity and Ecosystem Service Valuation. Chapter 1 in: TEEB 2010a: The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Ecological and Economic Foundations. (P. Kumar ed.).Earthscan. London.

EC, 2010.Options for an EU vision and target for biodiversity beyond 2010. COM (2010) 4, Brussels

EC, 2011 COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS Our life insurance, our natural capital: an EU biodiversity strategy to 2020. COM(2011) 244 final. Brussels.

Ehrlich, P.R. and A.H. Ehrlich, 1981. Extinction: the causes and consequences of the disappearance of species. 1st edition. Random House, New York. xiv, 305 pp.

Endo, I, 2008. User-Pay System in Sea Use Law of China (UNDP/GEF Yellow Sea Project ). In: Designing Payments for Ecosystem Services,  Report from the East Asian Regional Workshop (Hanoi, April 2008)

Engel, S., S. Pagiola, and S. Wunder,2008.Designing payments for environmental services in theory and practice: An overview of the issues.EcologicalEconomics65:663-647.

Hueting,R., 1974. Nieuwe Schaarste en Economische Groei. Agon/Elsevier, Amsterdam.

IUCN, 2009.Strategy for IUCN’s Programme and Policy on Antarctic Issues, Gland, Switzerland.

MA, 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Synthesis. Island Press, Wagington, DC.

Pearce, 1976.Environmental Economics. Longman, London.

TEEB 2009	TEEB for Policy Makers
TEEB 2010a	TEEB Ecological and Economic Foundations
TEEB 2010b	TEEB in Business and Enterprise
TEEB 2010c	TEEB in Local Policy
TEEB reports at www.teebweb.org

Wunder, S., 2005.Payments for Environmental Services: Some Nuts and Bolts, CIFOR Occasional Paper 42, Bogor: Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).
---------------------

