IP 40

FIVE DECADES OF COOPERATION AND COMMITMENT TO SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

XXXIV ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING - BUENOS AIRES JUNE 20TH - JULY 1ST. 2011

Agenda Item:              ATCM 11,
                           CEP 10
Presented by:              Australia
Original:                  English

Australian Antarctic Treaty and
Environmental Protocol inspections
January 2011

Attachments: Report of Australian inspections 2011.pdf                                  1
```
Australian Government

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Department of Sustainability, Environment,
Water, Population and Communities

Antarctic Treaty – Australian Observer Team 2011

AUSTRALIAN
ANTARCTIC TREATY INSPECTIONS
January 2011

Vostok and Leningradskaya Stations (Russian Federation)
Gondwana Station (Germany)

Report of an Inspection under
Article VII of
the Antarctic Treaty
and Article 14 of
the Protocol on Environment Protection

May 2011
1
REPORT OF AN INSPECTION UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AND 
ARTICLE 14 OF THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

1. Introduction

2. Overview
  2.1 Conduct of the inspections

3. Acknowledgments

4. Leningradskaya station (Russian Federation)
  4.1 General information
  4.2 Observations
  4.3 Other comments

5. Gondwana Station (Germany)
  5.1 General information
  5.2 Observations
  5.3 Other comments

6. Vostok Station (Russian Federation)
  6.1 General information
  6.2 Observations
  6.3 Other comments

7. Photographs
  7.1 Leningradskaya Station
  7.2 Gondwana Station
  7.3 Vostok Station

2
1. INTRODUCTION

Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty provides that each Consultative Party has the right to designate observers to undertake inspections in Antarctica. Observers have complete freedom of access at any time to any and all areas in Antarctica. Parties are obliged to have all areas of Antarctica, including stations, installations and equipment, open at all times to inspection by designated observers. This also applies to all ships and aircraft at points of discharging or embarking cargoes or personnel in Antarctica. The provision for inspection is a key element of the Treaty and is designed to promote the objectives of the Treaty and ensure observance of its provisions.

Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (the Protocol) also provides for the conduct of inspections, consistent with Article VII of the Treaty, to promote protection of the Antarctic environment and ensure compliance with the Protocol. The Protocol requires that reports of inspections are sent to the Parties whose facilities are subject to inspection and that, after those Parties have been given the opportunity to comment, the report and any comments on it are circulated to the Committee on Environmental Protection, considered at the next Treaty meeting and then made publicly available.

This was the eighth inspection program undertaken by Australia since the entry into force of the Treaty in 1961, and the fourth by Australia since the entry into force of the Protocol in 1998.

3
2. OVERVIEW

2.1 Conduct of the inspections

The Australian inspection team conducted inspections in the Ross Sea region and 
inland East Antarctica over an eight day period from 6 to 12 January 2011. The 
Australian team comprised:
• Dr Tony Worby, Climate Processes and Change, Australian Antarctic Division 
(AAD)
• Ms Gillian Slocum, Strategies Branch, AAD
• Mr Tim Bolotnikoff, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

The inspections and aerial observations were conducted under the provisions of 
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of its Protocol on Environmental 
Protection (the Protocol). In accordance with Article VII of the Treaty, all Parties to 
the Antarctic Treaty were notified, in advance, of the names of the members of the 
Australian observer team.

In order to facilitate the conduct of the inspections, the team included a member fluent 
in Russian.

The activities of the inspection team in Antarctica were subject to an authorisation in 
accordance with sections 12E and 12F of Australia’s Antarctic Treaty (Environment 
Protection) Act 1980 which implements the obligations of the Protocol in Australia’s 
domestic law.

The Australian inspection team:
• conducted an aerial observation of Leningradskaya Station (Russian 
Federation) on 7 January 2011, as provided for under Article VII(4) of the 
Antarctic Treaty;
• inspected Gondwana Station (Germany) on 9 January 2011; and
• inspected Vostok Station (Russian Federation) on 12 January 2011.

While in the Terra Nova Bay region, the team also took the opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the site of the Republic of Korea’s planned Jang Bogo Station. This 
visit did not involve inspection activity.

The team travelled aboard AAD’s air link A319 from Hobart, to Pegasus Runway, 
operated by the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) near McMurdo Station. 
Access to Pegasus Runway and associated aircraft support was kindly provided by the 
USAP. The team met an AAD ski-equipped CASA 212 fixed-wing turboprop, which 
provided intra-continental transport for the period of the inspection activity. The team 
were the guests of the Italian National Antarctic Program (PNRA) at Mario Zuchelli 
Station in the Terra Nova Bay region. The PNRA also generously provided local area 
transport in the Terra Nova Bay area, and aircraft support. The observer team were 
hosted by PNRA and the French National Antarctic Program (IPEV), and provided 
with aircraft support, at Concordia Station (France and Italy) prior to and after the 
4
team's visit to Vostok Station. The team was provided with skiway access at Vostok 
Station by the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). At all occupied facilities the 
observer team was welcomed with the warm hospitality characteristic of the 
cooperative foundations of the Antarctic Treaty. The team proceeded to Casey 
Station (Australia) for other activities, and subsequently departed Antarctica for 
Christchurch, New Zealand, with the kind support of the United States.

In conducting the inspections the observer team was guided in part by the inspection 
checklists adopted under Resolution 3 (2010). The observers carried with them 
information exchanged by the German and Russian Governments in accordance with 
Article VII.5 of the Antarctic Treaty.

In accordance with Article 14(4) of the Protocol, copies of the reports were provided 
to the Russian Federation and Germany for comment. Comments were promptly 
received from both Parties and have been incorporated into this final version of the 
inspection report presented to ATCM XXXIV.

3. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The inspection team was gratified by the friendly welcome and openness of personnel 
at all stations visited and inspected.

Australia thanks: the United States for access to Pegasus Runway and for air transport 
on departure from Antarctica; Italy for the generous hospitality and logistic support 
provided to the inspection team at Mario Zuchelli Station, in the Terra Nova Bay 
region, and at Concordia Station; France for the generous hospitality and logistic 
support provided to the team at Concordia Station; and the Russian Federation for 
skiway access and aircraft communications at Vostok Station.

The inspection team would like to thank the personnel of all stations, facilities, and 
transportations, and in particular the air crew of AAD's CASA 212, for their 
professional skills and valuable assistance.

5
4. LENINGRADSKAYA STATION (RUSSIAN FEDERATION)

4.1 General information

Leningradskaya Station is located atop the Leningradsky Nunatak at 69°30’S,
159°23’E, approximately 5 nautical miles from the Oates Coast. Leningradskaya
Station is operated by the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). The RAE website
reports that the station was opened in February 1971 and was temporarily closed in
1991. The RAE informed Australia that in 2005 the station was given the status of a
seasonal base and in 2008 one automated weather station and one automated GPS
station were installed there. Leningradskaya Station was last inspected in 1988-1989
by the United States, and was inspected once before that, by the United States in
1982-1983.

The station is located on a ridge line of the north-facing cliff of the Leningradsky
Nunatak, 304 metres above sea level. The nunatak protrudes 100-230 metres above
surrounding glaciers, with snow covering around two thirds of the nunatak area. The
station is located in an ice-free area towards the western end of the nunatak.

According to information on the RAE website, the station structures consist of several
accommodation buildings, with living space, a radio-station, a power station, a
meteorological station, an upper-air sounding complex, a garage and a warehouse.
When operational, the station was resupplied by vessels offshore, with personnel and
cargo then delivered to the station by helicopters.

Noting that the RAE website and COMNAP website list Leningradskaya Station as
temporarily closed, Australia contacted the Russian Federation in the planning phase
of the inspection tour to advise that Australia proposed to conduct an aerial
observation of Leningradskaya Station in accordance with Article VII(4) of the
Antarctic Treaty.

4.2 Observations

An aerial observation of Leningradskaya Station was conducted on 7 January 2011
from a CASA 212 aircraft, which departed from and returned to Mario Zuchelli
Station in Terra Nova Bay. Low-speed passes were made over the station over a 50
minute period to allow observation and photography. The inspection team members
were able to obtain a clear view of the station from the rear ramp of the CASA 212
aircraft.

The inspection team noted that while the station itself covers an area of 200-250
metres in length and approximately 50-100 metres in width, scattered materials cover
a substantially larger area.

The inspection team estimated that there are approximately 20 buildings of varying
size and in varying condition. Some buildings appeared in relatively good condition,
others were intact but in a poor condition, some were missing all or part of roofs or
walls, and others were completely collapsed. Debris from collapsed buildings covers
much of the station area.

6
Snow has accumulated in many areas, reaching to the roof line of some buildings, and appears to be doing significant damage to the infrastructure. Some structures were also observed to be snow filled.

At the western end of the station there is a small ice cliff that is partially collapsed that appears to be affecting two buildings. It appeared likely that when the ice cliff collapses further, debris from these buildings will be strewn down the face of the cliff and, in the assessment of the observers, will irretrievably enter the environment. It is not known what is contained or stored in the affected buildings.

The inspection team also observed a collection of 200-300 drums at the base of the cliff, north of the main station area, as drums also litter the cliff face. The inspection team could not determine from the air whether there has been any leakage from these, or other drums, as they were partially covered by snow. The inspection team noted that there is a small fresh water lake at the base of the cliff, very close to the drums.

A small depot of approximately eight drums was seen on the level ice south of the main station, in an area suitable for a skiway. There was no other evidence of a marked skiway. Observers also noted a drum line running approximately north-west from the station towards the coast, which may have been part of a past resupply route.

The inspection team recorded approximately 12 large fuel tanks (each approximately 10,000 litre capacity), along with at least 50 210 litre drums in the main station area. While the large tanks appeared old it is not possible to draw conclusions about their condition or content. No bunding or secondary containment was visible on any fuel tanks.

Several tracked and wheeled vehicles also remain on station. At the western end of the station there is a series of tall masts, most likely used for communications. These are well secured and do not appear to be at risk of falling down.

The inspection team observed that one of the buildings close to the edge of the cliff has what appears to be a waste outlet leading directly over the cliff.

The only wildlife seen in the area was two seals hauled out at a tide crack in the fast ice north of the station. The inspection team saw no evidence of other wildlife.

4.3 Other comments

Australia recognises that the information which can be obtained from an aerial observation is limited, but regards this activity as valuable, particularly given the status of Leningradskaya Station as temporarily closed. The observers assessed that, based on what could be seen from the air, considerable effort would be needed to bring Leningradskaya Station back into operation, to address existing environmental damage, and to ensure that buildings and facilities do not further deteriorate to a point where additional environmental harm becomes a risk.

7
A comprehensive set of photographs of Leningradskaya Station has been supplied to 
the Russian Federation to assist with managing  the station facilities and for use in 
planning future activities.

                                                                                              8
9
5. GONDWANA STATION

5.1 General information

Gondwana Station is located at 74°38’S 164°13’E, on a small peninsula at Gerlache Inlet, Terra Nova Bay in the Ross Sea. Germany established the first building on the site in 1983 and upgraded the facility to a summer station in 1988/89. When open, Gondwana operates from October to March. Gondwana has been previously inspected once, in 1988-1989 by the United States.

Germany reports through the Antarctic Treaty Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) that Gondwana Station is used as a logistic base for field parties, and is operated by the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR). Gondwana Station is reached by ship or fixed wing aircraft and sea ice early in the season and by a snow skiway at Browning Pass, with helicopters providing access to the station, later in the season. The station is located on a gravel terrace on slightly sloped terrain. The area is snow free early in the season and relatively sheltered from katabatic winds.

Information available online (BGR) indicates that the main building comprises two rows of eight 20 foot shipping containers set approximately one metre above the ground on timber footings. Rooms include a workshop, food store, kitchen, mess and sanitary rooms, the radio room, a lounge and further rooms for scientific programs. A separate building contains the generators, a seawater desalination plant and a biological sewage treatment plant. Most expedition members use tents for sleeping, as the station is otherwise fully occupied, with logistics and scientific facilities. The station has a maximum occupancy of 20.

Prior to the inspection activity, Germany informed Australia that Gondwana Station would be unoccupied during the 2010-2011 season. Germany forwarded the station keys to Australia and offered the inspection team open access to all facilities. The keys arrived after the team departed from Australia. The inspection therefore comprised the exterior of the station, and unlocked buildings.

5.2 Observations

The inspection team visited the station on 9 January 2011. The inspection team found the exterior of all station buildings to be in good condition. The inspection team gained access to one free-standing bunkhouse that was unlocked. This is a fibreglass construction on a raised metal frame. Building materials, including timber and plastic (plumbing) pipes, were well secured under the main building. Six 200 litre drums of fuel were well secured outside the services building housing the waste treatment and power generation equipment.

The team inspected two pipes that run to different sides of the small headland west of the station. A small diameter pipe runs north to a small bay, which the inspection team believed to be the water intake for the station, while a larger diameter pipe runs west to a larger bay, which the inspection team believed to be for waste water discharge. Both pipes are mounted to timber supports which were in relatively good condition. The waste water pipe rests directly onto the ground for part of its length.

10
The inspection team noted that the joints between some sections of the water intake pipe, and a large gash caused by a rock fall, will need attention when the station is reoccupied. Germany has advised Australia that they intend to repair the damaged parts of the waste water outlet pipe over the next two seasons.

A toilet building is located some 200 metres from the main station buildings. It was unclear to the inspection team whether the toilet is still utilised as the floorplan for the station (available on the BGR website) shows that there are toilets situated in the main station building, connected to the waste treatment building. Germany has advised Australia that this toilet is only used when there are problems with the toilets situated in the main station building or at times when water is not yet available (during the reoccupation of the station) or shut off (during the closure of the station).

A small congregation of approximately 50 Adélie penguins were observed on a rocky beach approximately 30 metres east of the station buildings. Skuas were plentiful in the rocky outcrops immediately south and east of the station buildings, but not in the immediate station surrounds. No other wildlife was seen.

The station surrounds were found to be very tidy. A couple of pieces of rubbish were found, including a handful of polystyrene foam fragments located near the end of the waste water outlet pipe. All rubbish found was removed from the site by the inspection team.

5.3 Other comments

Overall the inspection team members were impressed with the good condition and small footprint of Gondwana Station. The design and construction of the station has resulted in little physical disturbance to the local environment and the station could most likely be removed leaving little trace of occupation of the site. On the basis of an external inspection while the station was not in operation, the inspection team identified no breaches of obligations under the Antarctic Treaty or the Environmental Protocol.

11
6. VOSTOK STATION

6.1 General Information

Vostok Station is located at 78°28’S and 106°48’E on the snow surface of the ice plateau. The station sits 3448 metres above sea level, and is 1365 kilometres from Casey Station (Australia) and 1260 kilometres from the nearest coastline. It was opened on 16 December 1957 and is a year-round facility operated by the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE). Vostok Station has been previously inspected only once, by the USA in 1964. The inspection was the first since the Protocol entered into force.

Vostok Station is subject to an extreme climate, and is the location of the coldest recorded temperature on earth. The temperature is below minus 50°C for nine months of the year, with much colder temperatures common in mid winter.

Russia reports (on the RAE website) that the following observations are undertaken at Vostok Station:
· meteorological and actinometric observations, snow line measurements;
· total ozone content measurements and observations of the anomalous phenomena in the atmosphere;
· geomagnetic observations, including ionosphere studies and observations of atmospheric electrical field variations;
· upper-air sounding of the atmosphere;
· deep drilling of the Antarctic ice sheet. Based on the deep-drilling results, a sub-glacial lake (Lake Vostok) was discovered which has become a focus for research; and,
· study of the influence of environmental factors and micro-social conditions on the health of the RAE participants.

Russia is undertaking a major scientific project to sample the sub-glacial Lake Vostok. The project has been of considerable interest to the scientific community and the Treaty Parties. The project has been the subject of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) Water Sampling of the Subglacial Lake Vostok. As required by Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Russia provided the draft CEE for comment by Parties to the Protocol in 2003. A final CEE was circulated by Russia in December 2010. The inspection included the Vostok deep drilling and lake sampling project. The RAE informed Australia that it has an official permit from the Russian authorities for this type of activity, granted on 23 November 2010, No. 067.

6.2 Observations

The inspection team visited Vostok Station on 12 January 2011. The Russian Federation made available the prepared skiway for the inspection team to land in the ski-equipped CASA-212 aircraft. The inspection team spent six hours at the station, and during this time the team was able to inspect station facilities and the Lake Vostok drilling and water sampling project. At the time of the inspection there were 22 expeditioners on station, with an expected reduction to 10 over the winter period (mid-February to mid-November).
The inspection team understand that logistical support for the station is provided from Progress Station (Russian Federation). For the 2010/11 season, two traverses visited the station, one in December and one in January, in addition to nine flights, seven in December and two in late January / early February. Neither aircraft nor traverse trains were at Vostok Station at the time of the inspection. The Station Leader advised the inspection team that the traverse vehicles were new and had recently replaced significantly older vehicles.

Station buildings span many decades in age. The original station is completely under snow and the inspection team were advised that it has not been occupied for some time. Of the current buildings occupied, only the power house is free of snow, with all other buildings under snow to some degree.

The main living and work building is completely under the snow and is accessed by a 20-30 metre snow tunnel. Small alcoves have been formed along the tunnel for storage of essential supplies, including snow for making water. Such supplies are essential when blizzards block the entrance to the tunnel and/or make it unsafe to exit the main living and work building.

The station is powered by four diesel generators, one of which is always on standby for emergencies. The power house utilises generators and equipment with few or no electronic components to minimise the risk of system failure in the extreme low temperatures.

The inspection team was advised that the station uses 150,000 litres of fuel per year, of which 11,000 litres per month is utilised over the winter season. Fuel tanks are located both adjacent to the power house and a small distance away. No bunding or secondary containment was apparent on any tanks, however the inspection team was advised that the tanks are checked regularly and are cleaned out once per year, which includes ensuring that there are no holes in the tanks. No sign of fuel spills were observed near any of the tanks or near the power house.

Explosives are kept in a building a short distance from the station. The inspection team was advised that the explosives are used for seismic measurements as part of the science program.

The inspection team observed that current waste generated by the station is managed in a number of ways. Organic waste, including human waste and grey water, is buried in a snow pit within the station limits. Waste considered appropriate to burn is open burnt in several old fuel drums located outside each building or in a large incinerator near the power house.

The inspection team were informed that a mesh cover is placed over the top of the drums and the incinerator to avoid ash and other debris dispersing into the environment during burns. The ash from this burning is returned to Progress Station for removal from Antarctica. Non-burnable waste (such as metal) is collected and also returned to Progress Station, although it is clear that a significant amount of waste has accumulated on station over the years.

13
The inspection team observed that there is a significant amount of waste (in various 
forms) on site. The station leader advised the inspection team that the station seeks to 
utilise any empty space on traverse vehicles returning to Progress Station by filling 
such space with waste from the old waste site. As such the waste is slowly being 
cleaned up on an opportunistic basis. The inspection team observed a large sled 
loaded with old station waste that was due for removal by the incoming traverse party.

Deep ice coring and subglacial Lake Vostok water sampling

The inspection team received a very thorough briefing on the Lake Vostok water 
sampling project from the senior scientist on station, Dr Vladimir Lipenkov. It was 
clear from discussions with Dr Lipenkov and other members of the drilling team that 
they were aware of the sensitivities of drilling into the lake, and were proceeding in 
accordance with the procedures outlined in the CEE.

Most of the Vostok summer expeditioners were focussed on the drilling program, 
with a total of eight engineers, and two scientists conducting continuous operations in 
shifts. The drilling season started on 1 January 2011 and was expected to end on 31 
January 2011. At the time of the inspection team's visit the borehole depth was 3684 
metres. It was not known at the time of the inspection team's visit whether there 
would be sufficient time to penetrate the lake that season, given there was more than 
50 metres of ice to drill through, but the team were advised that it was unlikely. The 
team were able to observe the drilling procedure and the retrieval of 1 metre of core.

The inspection team was advised that penetration into the lake is expected between 
3720 and 3740 metres. The drilling fluid used is a mixture of kerosene and Freon. 
Drip trays were present around the drill hole as well as under the cable and winch.

Approximately six drums of Freon remain on station, but the inspection team were 
advised that none had yet been used in the two weeks prior to the inspection (it is 
injected at depth in the borehole only as necessary). The inspection team noted that 
there was no centrifuge on station for separating drill fluid from ice and water. The 
drilling team explained that any drill fluid that comes from the hole on core retrieval 
is separated from ice swath in a tank and then re-used.

The thermal drill that will be used to penetrate the lake was not yet assembled, given 
space constraints in the drill shelter. The inspection team was therefore not able to 
observe the equipment that is intended to perform the penetration and sampling.

Most of the ice core is kept on station in a storage facility adjacent to the drill shelter. 
Only samples required for analysis are returned to Russia. Thin sections and helium 
isotope analysis are done on site.

It was clear from the inspection team's discussion with Dr Lipenkov that penetration 
of the lake, and sampling the refrozen lake water from the borehole, is regarded as 
only the first step in exploring the lake. Dr Lipenkov indicated that exploration of the 
lake, the lake bottom, and the sediments (if any are present) is desirable, although he 
noted that the technology for doing this is not yet available. Dr Lipenkov advised 
that, in his personal opinion, there will be a joint Russian/French project to explore 
new areas for drilling over the lake in the 2011/12 summer season.

14
6.3 Other comments

Vostok Station supports numerous science projects and the station leader provided 
formal, signed documents showing the activities and level of support being provided 
for each project. In addition to the main drilling activity, summer science projects 
included: investigating the dynamics of movement in the ice sheet; seismology; 
sampling cosmic dust in the snow and ice; and a Russian/German collaboration in 
investigating the ice sheet surface drift by means of GPS measurements. Winter 
science projects that will be conducted this year include: snow processes, 
geomagnetics, geophysics, meteorology observations, space noise, and medical 
research relating to the health of wintering expeditioners.  A number of the winter 
projects are long-term and involve instrumented recording. Temperature logging of 
one of the previous bore holes is being continued at the vertical temperature profile to 
a depth of 100 metres.

The inspection team was advised that plans are underway for the construction of a 
new station, comprising six buildings. The frame for the first building was observed 
by the team. This was erected three years ago.

The station leader advised that further construction work is not expected until a 
rebuilding program at Progress Station is complete (likely to be after 2012). The 
station leader was not aware of plans for the future of the original and current station 
infrastructure when the six new buildings are complete. He did note however that the 
new station would include an incinerator and other infrastructure essential to ensure 
that activities are compliant with the Protocol.

The significant legacy issues of activities prior to the entry into force of the Protocol 
were apparent at Vostok.  However, the station personnel showed a strong 
commitment to improved environmental practices, and to clean up legacies as much 
as possible. Furthermore, the station leader made reference to the recent injection of 
funds and resources to the Russian Antarctic Expedition and advised that the intention 
is to cease activities and practices that do not meet contemporary standards, such as 
open burning, when the new infrastructure is installed. The inspection team regarded 
allocation of adequate resources for addressing these issues as important.

15
7. PHOTOGRAPHS

7.1 Leningradskaya Station

Figure 1: Leningradsky Nunatak

Figure 2: Leningradskaya Station
16
Figure 3: Leningradskaya Station
17
Figure 4: Damaged and snow filled structures

Figure 5: Collapsed and damaged structures
18
Figure 6: Station buildings

Figure 7: Snow accumulation
19
Figure 8: Buildings affected by snow at cliff edge

Figure 9: Leningradsky Nunatak with lake at base
20
Figure 10: Lake at base of nunatak, with drums

Figure 11: Drums
21
Figure 12: Fuel storage, vehicle and drums

Figure 13: Fuel storage, drums, and other equipment
22
Figure 14: Station buildings

Figure 15: Building with outlet over cliff
23
7.2 Gondwana Station

Figure 16: Gondwana Station

Figure 17: Gondwana Station
24
Figure 18: Main station building

Figure 19: Secured drums
25
Figure 20: Pipe leading from station to bay
Figure 21: Pipe on beach
26
Figure 22: Pipe on timber supports
Figure 23: Adélie penguins
27
Figure 24: Inspection team members at Gondwana Station
                                                                 28
7.3 Vostok Station

Figure 25: Vostok Station

Figure 26: Vostok Station

29
Figure 27: Current station buildings

Figure 28: Fuel storage
30
Figure 29: Power house

Figure 30: Incinerator

31
Figure 31: Accumulated waste

Figure 32: Stored waste for return to Progress Station
32
Figure 33: Ice core retrieval

Figure 34: Ice core with drip trays
33
Figure 35: Ice core storage

Figure 36: Drill tower
34
Figure 37: Newly constructed building frame

Figure 38: Inspection team members with Vostok station personnel
35
