





The Construction of an Orthodox Chapel at Vernadsky Station





The Construction of an Orthodox Chapel at Vernadsky Station
Informational Paper, presented by Ukraine

Following the eastern-Slavonic historical tradition to erect ecclesiastical facilities at places of peoples’ presence and their work, including the Polar Regions, during the 2010-2011 austral summer there was installed a small orthodox chapel at Ukrainian Vernadsky station, sponsored by several private charitable foundations. 
Before the beginning of constructing works Ukrainian Antarctic Program prepared a Preliminary Environmental Evaluation and issued the relevant permit АР No 035-10.
In January 2011 the wooden modular constructions of the chapel (12 panel-gluing constructions of 6,5 cubic meters and total weight about 950 kg) were delivered to King-Georg Island by the Chilean MV Viel. Because of unplanned change of the vessel’s route, the construction materials were temporary stored at Chinese Great Wall station till the MV Polar Pioneer arrival in March 2011. The ship was chartered by Ukrainian Antarctic Program in order to deliver winterers team and cargo to Vernadsky station. 
On March 25, a ceremony of consecration of the erected orthodox chapel took place. In order to provide this ceremony, an Archbishop of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and a representative of the project sponsors have arrived at Vernadsky station with a short-term visit together with the 15th Ukrainian Antarctic Expedition members. The chapel was named the Grand Prince St. Vladimir, Equal-to-the-Apls.
This humanitarian project has received the ministrations of the Metropolitan of Kiev and the whole Ukraine Vladimir. In addition, the Icon of the Saint Nicholas was painted specially for this chapel by the icon painters from the School of iconpainting manner of Kryvyi Rih, in compliance with considerations given in Resolution 2 (1996) on Educational and Cultural Activities. In this manner, the orthodox chapel at Vernadsky station has cultural and religious importance, and should serve to strengthening the spirit of peace and mutual understanding in Antarctica, first of all among Slavonic countries. 



The Orthodox Chapel at Vernadsky Station









