





Ukrainian research in Antarctica, 
2002-2011





Ukrainian research in Antarctica, 
2002-2011
Information Paper, presented by Ukraine

Last year the State Antarctic Research Program for 2002-2010 has ended. The scientific and technical findings which were obtained during implementation of this State Program have no analogs in Ukraine, and some of them were carried out on the world level. Achievements of Ukrainian researchers allow to solve a range of both fundamental and applied issues such as academic (getting new knowledge on nature), environmental (the development of nature-conservative technologies), social (getting unique producers of bioactive substances for new drugs), food issue (provision of seafood). The findings also could be used in the following sectors of the national economy: space activity, fishing, hydrometeorological service, geological survey, communication, medicine, as well as in educational and outreach fields. 
Global warming with associated risks, depletion of minerals and fresh water, as well as rapid growth of unpredictable nature catastrophes (notably increase of common level of seismicity) are those problems, which could be solved only within well-rounded research program in Antarctica. Such multi-disciplinary research needs permanent collaboration between central authorities, scientific institutions within National and Sectoral Academies of Sciences, other institutions for political, social-economic and environmental purposes.  
On November 3, 2010 the Cabinet Council of Ukraine adopted the Decree No 1002 “On approval of State Special-Purpose Antarctic Research Program for 2011-2020”. The new State Program objectives are to further provide fundamental and applied research in Antarctica, to carry out obligations in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty, to maintain Ukrainian Antarctic Vernadsky Station.
The Program makes provisions for research projects within the main SCAR-supported directions, including Geosciences, Life Sciences and Physical Sciences. It means geological and geophysical research, hydrometeorology, oceanography, geo-space research, as well as multi-disciplinary investigations such as the development of new technologies on environmental protection in Antarctica. For the first time the current State Program has a new direction on co-operation with international organizations under the Antarctic Treaty System. This direction makes it possible to use more effectively the potential of international legal regime for the Antarctic area.
Such integrated approach allow to carry out international obligations of Ukraine as an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party at a proper level, to prepare scientific-based recommendations concerning Ukraine national interests in the Antarctic region for both near-term and long-term outlooks.

