





Perceptions of Antarctica from the modern travellers’ perspective




Perceptions of Antarctica from the modern travellers’ perspective
Summary
Perception of Antarctica as a travel destination is examined by means of surveys taken to Antarctic visitors who went to Antarctica through Ushuaia during the 2010/2011 summer season. 
Introduction
Nowadays, the study of Antarctic visitors’ travel experiencies becomes more important due to the attitudes derived from this tourist practice in terms of a special appraisal of the attributes that Antarctica offers. This appraisal involves a learning experience, more knowledge about environmental issues and a deeper awareness on the meaning of Antarctica as presented in the XXXIII ATCM IP 130 The Antarctic voyage experience and visitors’ satisfaction for the 2009/2010 season.
During the XXXI ATCM the interest for considering different issues about Antarctic tourism was explicit: “(…) tourism regulation should be carried out consistent with values contained in the Treaty and the Protocol including the aesthetic and wilderness values of Antarctica1”. Furthermore, at the same meeting it was noted, “(…) the nature of the experiences of visitors was an important consideration, as well as the relationship between visitor experiences and the values for which Antarctica is protected2”.
Therefore, some aspects of a broader study related to the voyage experience of Antarctic visitors that is currently underway, is presented in this paper, which focuses on the perception of Antarctica by modern travellers through their visit. In order to achieve this aim, surveys to passengers that had travelled from or to Antarctica using the port of Ushuaia during the 2010/2011 summer season were taken.
Socio-demographic characteristics of respondents 
It is worth mentioning that 33.656 visitors participated on Antarctic voyages through the port of Ushuaia. Of this total, 19.209 went aboard vessels that carried less than 500 passengers being able to make landings at different visit sites. The sample was taken to this group, obtaining 250 valid questionnaires for the analysis. Socio-demographic characteristics are shown in table 1 and nationalities are presented en figure 1.


Table 1. Socio-demographic characteristics

Variables
Percentages
Gender 
Female
57
Male
43
Education level
Without Studies
--
Primary
--
Secondary
7
College/University
93
Age
16-24 years
1
25-44 years
27
45-64 years
49
65 years and older
23
Occupation
Employed
44
Unemployed
1
Self-employed
19
Student
1
Housewife
2
Retired
33
Monthly income
U$S 0-1.700
9
U$S 1.701-3.500
27
U$S 3.501 and over
64
Marital status
Single
23
Married/living as a couple
64
Separated/divorced
8
Widow(er)
5
Figure 1. Country of origin

Antarctic images prior to departure 
The tourist image of a destination refers to the global perception or the mental representations a person has about a place. These impressions can be tangible, abstract, common and unique. The tourist image of a destination can be built through cognitive and affective components. The cognitive image refers to all those attributes which are vastly known and socially accepted for the place, the affective one is directly related to the feelings deposited by a tourist on the destination, the way the person gives value to the objects. (San Martín, 2005). 
Since the previous stage of travelling is characterised by the intangibility of the tourist product, the formation of expectations is very much founded on the grounds of a flow of information of different origins. In the case of Antarctic visitors, this flow of information may come through travel brochures, documentary films, explorers’ narratives, photographs, travel book guides, lectures, web sites, etc. In this way, the beginning of an assessment process about the place is encouraged, shaping a mental construct of Antarctica as a destination. 
In order to know the perceptions that travellers had of Antarctica before the voyage, they were asked what images came to their minds when they thought of Antarctica as a place to visit. Since it is an open ended question passengers included more than one image, so responses could be grouped in two main areas as regards components -cognitive and affective- and, in turn, into different categories. In the first case, images are related to tangible components such as wildlife and elements associated to ice and history. In the latter, more abstract aspects of images which refer to the feelings aroused by the idea of what Antarctica represents were found (see figure 2).
Figure 2. Images mostly perceived

Within the first group it can be clearly seen that the elements associated to ice (icebergs and glaciers were mentioned) get a prominent place among the answers, followed by wildlife, particularly penguins and whales were alluded (becoming penguins really important in the responses). Images associated to history of Antarctic exploration are in the last place.
For the second group, the sensation of cold was the most important of the perceptions, followed by the idea of immensity and desolation. Finally, beauty appears as another component of the Antarctic image.
In another question asking the respondents to use words in order to describe certain elements of the Antarctic scene after having experienced the place, reinforced the gaze towards the components. Results are shown in table 2. In this respect, it can be seen that the idea of “awe” is relevant. This term became noteworthy during the XVIIth century to describe sensations related to the important elements of the cosmos (mountains, deserts, oceans). Nowadays, modern travellers use it to express their feelings towards an amazing and captivating place. A similar idea comes out when qualifying icebergs and glaciers through the words “overwhelming” and “magnificent”. As regards fauna, adjectives to identify penguins and whales as charismatic species were used, being penguins particularly outstanding as an emblematic referent of Antarctica.
Visits to historical sites made passengers think of images associated to hardships in a hostile environment and to the ruggedness of the place for survival. Stations were defined taking into account the remote location of Antarctica and the commitment towards scientific research. In general, the terms chosen by visitors assign specific appraisals related to the aesthetic quality of the landscape. Most likely, these appraisals are very much associated to the impression produced by the distance between Antarctica and industrialized areas as well as by its pristine nature.
Table 2. Words used to qualify each attribute
Attributes
Key words
Landscape or Antarctic scene
Awe
36 %

Breathtaking
25 %

Beyond imagination
18 %
Icebergs
Massive
33 %

Magnificent
13 %

Colourful
9 %
Glaciers
Massive
25 %

Overwhelming
19 %

Magnificent
11 %
Penguins
Cute
62 %

Amazing
16 %

Plentiful
10 %
Whales
Graceful
32 %

Important
21 %

Magnificent
16 %
Historical sites
Hardships
30 %

Interesting
25 %

Epic
16 %
Stations
Interesting
39 %

Remote
13 %

Commitment
8 %
Perceptions of travellers from the Antarctic experience 
In order to build some statements that may allow us to define the perceptions of Antarctic visitors once the voyage experience was achieved, different sources of information were taken into account. On the one hand, aspects that help construct the idea of wilderness3 from the experience perspective, such as primitiveness (in contrast with modern and technological society), timelessness (possibility to escape the constraints of everyday routine, being unaware of the notion of time), solitude (enjoyment of the tranquility and naturalness of wilderness), oneness (opportunity to re-establish a close relationship with oneself), humility (feeling of insignificance in the presence of wilderness) and care (keeping nature the way it is) were considered. On the other hand, previous works on Antarctic visitors’ experience have been taken into account.  Consequently, fourteen statements about modern travellers’ perceptions could be built. Respondents were asked to point out the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with them. In order to do so, a 5 degree scale was used, where 1 referred to a strong disagreement whereas 5 indicated a strong agreement. To this end, the arithmetic mean could be obtained for each statement as shown in table 3.
Table 3. Perceptions of travellers through experience
Statements
Mean
A
I felt totally immersed in pristine and untamed nature
4,41
B
I never cared about what time it was
3,97
C
I really understood the hardships of early explorers in such an extreme place
4,36
D
I felt a sense of an earlier and rugged time in history
3,95
E
I felt a special sense of remoteness from people and cities
4,30
F
I experienced the simplicity of life
3,41
G
I felt the heartbeat of Earth
3,41
H
I was in awe of nature’s creation
4,42
I
I felt humbled by all nature around me
4,41
J
Having reached so far South (i.e. Antarctic Circle) made me feel at the world’s end
3,91
K
I felt the tranquility and peacefulness of Antarctica
4,44
L
The environment was free of human-made noise
4,15
M
I became aware of the need to take care of fragile environments
4,32
N
This voyage turned out to be a life enriching experience, opposed to merely a holiday
4,55
According to the means which were obtained, it is possible to see that all the items reached a high level of agreement, being evident a very reflexive visitors’ attitude once the experience was achieved. Item “N” got the highest mark, showing that the voyage turned into an enriching experience which could not be compared to other trips. Item “K” also became important since affective attributes were assigned to the destination in relation to a place without interferences. Likewise, items “H”, “I” and “A” which refer to the feeling of humility and insignificance at the power of untamed nature, got a high level of agreement; particularly “H” has a special correspondence with the term “awe” which was chosen to qualify the Antarctic landscape or scene (see table 2).
Final remarks
Previous images to the Antarctic voyage are basically reinforced from symbols that represent untamed, wild nature from cognitive components, such as those associated to ice -particularly icebergs and glaciers- and wildlife, being specially important penguins and whales. The affective components of Antarctica are related to the sensation of cold, immensity, desolation and beauty, which strengthen the idea of a remote and hostile destination.
Also, these components get special connotations from the terms chosen to give them meaning. To this end, awe is selected to define the Antarctic scene as an unpredictable landscape, beyond imagination. This definition also applies to consider penguins as the emblematic species of Antarctica, image that stands for the place. Whales get an important point this way as well.
Finally, the special sensitivity of travellers related to Antarctic perceptions once the experience is achieved becomes noteworthy. Positive attitudes that appraise an enriching and singular experience are highlighted as well as special personal states of mind in relation to a place with high environmental value. Most likely, visitors coming from industrialized places feel free of everyday routines once they immerse in wilderness, being connected to more aesthetical qualities, values assigned to the pristine.
Bibliography
Borrie, W. T. and Roggenbuck, J. W. (2001) The dynamic, emergent, and multi-phasic nature of on-site wilderness experiences. Journal of Leisure Research, Vol. 33 (2): 202-228.
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (31st: 2008). Final Report of the Thirty-first Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, 2-13 June 2008, Kyiv, Ukraine. Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, Buenos Aires.
San Martín, H. (2005) Estudio de la imagen del destino turístico y el proceso global de satisfacción: adopción de un enfoque integrador. Tesis doctoral. Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, España.



