





Publication of the book “The Elephant Island. The Adventure of the Uruguayan Pioneers in Antarctica”




Publication of the book “The Elephant Island.  The Adventure of the Uruguayan Pioneers in Antarctica”
Introduction:
“The Elephant Island. The Adventure of the Uruguayan Pioneers in Antarctica” is a graphic narration in comic format, (wrote in Spanish) based on the trip of the  “Fishing Institute N° 1” ship under the command of Navy Lieutenant Ruperto Elichiribehety into the Antarctic waters in 1916 in an attempt to rescue the expedition  of Sir Ernest Shackleton. 
The work was presented to the Competitive Funds of the Ministry of Education and Culture 2010 and won the first prize in its category, so the publication in itself has been subsidized by this Ministry. The book presentation is due to be at the end of May 2011.
Description of the work:
At the beginning of the story there are many independent plot lines that help to present the characters. It starts in London with the presentation of Sir Ernest Shackleton making the arrangements for his expedition then it presents T/N Ruperto Elichiribehety in the Rio de la Plata. Their roads meet when the ship “Endurance” reaches the Montevideo´s port on its way to Antarctica.
The story continues two years later, in the middle of southern winter, with the call for help from Shackleton. A ship mobilizes from Montevideo to the rescue.  Then the story describes the crossing and the frustration facing the impossibility of saving the shipwrecked people because of the ice surrounding the island, despite the efforts of Elichiribehety. 
Even though it is a story recreated as a comic in its design, its plot follows history as it actually occurred and the actions of the characters are constructed in the same fashion as it was registered in the chronicles.
The author was advised by historians and technicians of the Naval Museum. The historical upbringing of the plot took an important amount of investigation, based on press from that time, being the library and archives of the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute one of its main sources of information.
Conclusion:
“The Elephant Island” flows as an enjoyable story that gives a realistic aesthetic amusement choice from the beginning to the end. It is a valuable contribution for giving out to the public knowledge the difficulties that the pioneers of that heroic age had to suffer and overcome in the conquest of Antarctica. And, given its format and plot line, it’s an especially useful tool to reach the youngest.
-All the process of its construction can be followed at: http://laislaelefante.blogspot.com/ 

