





Current status of the Russian drilling project at Vostok station




Current status of the Russian drilling project at Vostok station
Study of the Antarctic subglacial Lake Vostok remains one of the priority areas of the expedition and research activities of Russia in the Antarctic. The basic element of a complex of studies of this subglacial lake is to arrange access to its water body for investigation of its physical, chemical and biological characteristics. Implementation of this activity is impossible without continuing drilling operations in deep borehole 5G at Vostok station for uncovering the subglacial lake using a technology, developed by Russian specialists in 2001. The CEE for this technology was repeatedly presented by the delegation of the Russian Federation at different ATCMs. At ATCM XXXIII in Uruguay in May 2010, Russia presented a working paper WP-59 “Answers to comments on CEE for “Water Sampling of Subglacial Lake Vostok”. This document served as a basis for developing the Final CEE for “Water Sampling of Subglacial Lake Vostok”, which was submitted to the Interagency commission on consideration of applications for activity of Russian individuals and physical entities in the Antarctic Treaty Area and issuance of expert conclusions in compliance with the procedure adopted in the Russian Federation. As a result of considering the materials submitted to the Commission, the Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring has issued on 23 November 2010 to the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) Permit No.067 on performing activities applied for in the Final CEE for the period until 1 March 2012. On 30 November, the Final CEE for “Water Sampling of Subglacial Lake Vostok” translated into English, was circulated among all CEP members. Due to the fact that direct uncovering of the lake could take place not earlier than beginning of February 2011, dissemination of the Final CEE by Russia was in strict compliance with the terms stipulated by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (within 60 days before the start of the Project).
Three members of the seasonal glacial-drilling team have arrived to Vostok station via Novolazarevskaya and Progress stations by the first flight of ВТ-67 (Bassler) aircraft on 13 December 2010. The other three specialists joined the team on 25-27 December 2010. The total duration of seasonal operations of the team at Vostok station was 56 days (13 December 2010 – 6 February 2011).
By the arrival of new participants of the drilling team, the wintering personnel of the station carried out substantial repair and preparatory work. It included measurements of the drilling fluid density, caliper logging and inclinometer survey of the borehole. Significant technical work was performed for preparation of the drilling winch with replacement of cargo-carrying cable. Specialists of the seasonal team have delivered some spares and units, which allowed upgrading of the complex of drilling equipment, adapting it to operations at ultimate depths (below 3700 m). 
After preparation of the drilling equipment was completed, new caliper logging and inclinometer measurements were made in borehole 5G-2 with drilling fluid sampling from 17 horizons. The results of measurements of borehole parameters showed the inclination angle of borehole 5G-2 to be approximately 1 degree less than the inclination angle of borehole 5G -1. This contributes to further deviation of the boreholes. Comparison of caliper curves showed no deformations of the main borehole. However the lower segment from a depth of 3580 m was insignificantly narrowed. It was decided to expand the segment drilled in the season of the 55th RAE to 138 mm. An analysis of the drilling fluid density showed that drilling could be continued without adding the weighting material (Freon F-141b). It was envisaged to perform this procedure after overcoming a depth of 3700 m. The operation was conducted on 27 January 2011, when 320 liters of the weighting material were added to the horizons of 3100, 3200, 3500 and 3600 m.
Monitoring of fluctuations of the drilling fluid level in the borehole showed that it should not be raised higher than a mark of 42 m.
Use of a new cargo-carrying cable has demonstrated a need for cleaning the near-bottom zone of borehole from the products of conservation of the new cable, which were washed out from its surface at a strong pull. This procedure also required significant time. The main drilling operations began on 2 January 2011 and were carried out for 24 h a day. A total of 90 runs were made in total for the season with sampling of 70 m of new ice core. The end depth of the borehole by the ice core is 3720.47 m.
Before the start of drilling operations it was planned to obtain about 1.5 m of the ice core for one drill run. The anticipated results were confirmed in the layer of 3650 - 3685 m. However the drill run rate has sharply dropped in the 3685 – 3688 m depth range. It was caused by accumulation of ice chips in front of the outer bore bit cutter of the drill. Attempts to solve this problem by increasing the circulation rate of the washing pump have not resulted in significant progress. A solution of the problem was found in changing the drilling technology, when drilling was performed in the intermittent mode. Stops were made for 0.5-1 min after drilling of 150-200 mm of the ice core, and geometry of the bore bit cutters was also changed. Another serious problem was separation of the ice core from the main glacial body due to a monocrystalline structure of the latter. So, in 10% of the drill runs the ice core was not torn away, leading to obstruction of the borehole bottom with large ice fragments complicating further drilling. 
The results of drilling operations in the season of 2010-2011 showed that the “warm ice” drilling regime should change in accordance with the changes of properties of this ice. This means that an experimental selection of washing fluid consumption and the bore bit rotation speed is required. Further modification of the drill and ground drilling equipment is planned during the inter-seasonal period, which should increase the capacity of drilling operations and ensure additional reliability of these operations.
The main direction of glaciological studies in the season of 2010-2011 at Vostok station was continuous structural petrology study of lake ice and sampling for isotopic analysis using the new ice core of borehole 5G-2, obtained at a depth range of 3649.78 – 3720.47 m, and also the ice core at a 3615.00 – 3649.78 m range recovered in the previous season. A preliminary analysis of the results of ice structure study by the ice core of borehole 5G-2 showed it to differ significantly at a depth range of 3600-3650 m from the ice structure at the same depths in the core of borehole 5G-1. This is connected with a decrease of the size of ice crystals in the new borehole. According to expert conclusion of Russian specialists, this is caused by the influence of deformation in the sides of borehole 5G-1 due to a decreased drilling fluid pressure on the accident segment of borehole 5G-1. Leveling of the quantitative characteristics of ice structure in the ice cores of both boreholes is observed at a depth range of 3650 - 3660 m. 
Within the newly drilled 54-m ice segment below the horizon of 3666 m to 3720 m, one observes further increase of the size of ice crystals. Mineral inclusions were not observed in the ice core of borehole 5G-2, beginning from a depth of 3618 m.
In the season of 2011-2012, RAE specialists plan to uncover the subglacial Lake Vostok. Based on the data of independent methods of measuring the ice sheet thickness by means of radio-echo sounding and seismic profiling, it was determined in the previous years that this value is equal to 3750±20 m. So, the bottom ice surface is expected to be in the layer of 3730 - 3770 m. These facts and the results of drilling operations in the season of 2010-2011 show the probability of uncovering the lake water body during the forthcoming Antarctic season at Vostok station to be quite high. The adopted ice drilling technology with stops of the bore bit rotation guarantees cautious contact of the bottom drill part with the upper boundary of the lake water body. Further procedures will strictly correspond to technology set forth in the Final CEE for this Project. 
In addition to glacial-drilling studies at Vostok station in the season of 2010-2011, seismic studies of the geological structure of the Earth’s crust of the bed of subglacial lake were carried out over Lake Vostok by means of the method of refracted waves. The results obtained are currently being processed using the known geophysical methodologies. Simultaneously with these studies, over much of the ice sheet surface located above the lake area, high-precision satellite geodetic measurements of the drift vectors of the ice sheet surface were made at 26 landmarks deployed in the season of 2008-2009. These studies were jointly performed by Russian and German geodesists. The results of processing the observations performed will be available by August 2011.


