





Discovery of human activity remains, pre-1958 in the north coast of the King George Island / 25 de Mayo




Discovery of human activity remains, pre-1958 in the north coast of the King George Island / 25 de Mayo

Introduction:
As part of the activities of environmental protection and preservation of Antarctica’s heritage, the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute is working on a survey program about the impact of human footprint in the frozen continent’s nature.
This program includes monitoring the scientific, touristic and logistical activities, developing in the terrestrial and maritime platform zones of influence where the Antarctic National Programs are deployed in the Antarctic Treaty Area.
Findings:
On a beach in the north coast of King George Island / 25 de Mayo, there were found remains of human activity pre 1958, these are being studied in order to start a multi task research line, including the archaeology, anthropology, history and environmental protection areas.
The finding consists in stone gatherings that must have served as a shelter for whale or seal hunters at the end of the XIX century.
The discovery was made in the middle of a marine waste control activity carried on by the UAI. There, in the 2009-2010 season it was confirmed the presence of a piece of wood with bronze nails that seemed to belong to a possible ancient shipwreck.
That piece of wood was the starting point for an exploration of the coast nearby, during January and February 2011.
Next to the stone gatherings, there were found whale bones, woods and other objects, being the highlight a piece of pottery, nails and glass.
These remains, centre of main interest, were geo referenced and taken as samples to be analyzed by a specialist who stated that the glass and the pottery pieces could have been materials of common use from the XIX century.
Conclusion:
The study of these findings will motivate a research line, including laboratory analysis on the samples taken. Such investigation is expected to continue in the field for the next summer campaign, studying the zone in more detail, including a team of archaeologists.

