





Progress Report on the Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”





Progress Report on the Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”
    1. Introduction
At CEP XIII, Germany introduced IP 014 Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”. Aim of this paper was to present the starting German research project and to inform the Treaty Parties about its purpose and methods. In this context, Treaty Parties – especially those having own experiences and knowledge in that field - were invited to cooperate and to comment.
    2. Progress Report and Preliminary Results of the Research Project
The research project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic” was commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency and is carried out by the Senckenberg Museum of Natural History Görlitz, Germany, in close co-operation with international experts on soil invertebrates. Two German cruise tour operators and their expedition leaders kindly support it. The main object of the project is to assess the potential influence of mainly ship-based tourism activities on Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems. The project aims at estimating the anthropogenic influence on both, the introduction of non-native species into as well as the distribution of organisms within Antarctica, especially in frequently visited areas and near research stations. Furthermore, the efficiency of preventive and precautionary measures are analysed and evaluated as far as possible. For more information please contact the Federal Environment Agency (CEP-contactpoint@uba.de).
In the Antarctic summer of 2009/2010 soil samples were taken from nine different sites of the Antarctic Peninsula; six of which were frequently visited by tourists, three by research personal. Sampling took place in statistical block design: areas with high human impacts were compared to neighbouring areas without impacts. Samples were transported to Germany and 1 or 2 weeks later, the soil animals were extracted by various methods and sorted as Collembola, Oribatida, Gamasina, Prostigmata, Nematoda and Tardigrada. European taxonomic specialists examined every single animal under the microscope to determine the species. Vegetation contained in the samples (mostly mosses, lichens and algae) were analysed right after the animals had been extracted. Subsequent chemical and physical analyses of the samples were to ensure the comparability of the compared sampling areas.
Determination of some animal groups is still ongoing. To date over 70 species of soil organisms have been identified and it is expected to detect a lot more. Frequently visited Antarctic sites generally show high wildlife density (penguins, seals). The influence of this wildlife on soils and soil organisms can mask the effects of foot traffic. Despite such difficulties, reduced densities in human-impacted areas could be detected for soil animals in general and especially for Collembola and Oribatida. These preliminary results were, however, site specific. Due to the still ongoing determination, effects on the richness of species cannot be concluded yet. Nonetheless, based on data from Collembola and Oribatida, a reduced variability between species assemblages in human-impacted sites could be statistically identified, albeit somewhat marginally. This indicates a reduced ß-diversity of soil animal communities (“community homogenization”) within these anthropogenically affected areas. However, the data collected from all organism groups have to prove this assumption. As yet, possibly introduced non-indigenous species (Collembola, Prostigmata) have only been identified for one location (Deception Island). Especially this site has a long history of human activity and, in particular, has warmer soils due to volcanic activity enabling the viability of species not adapted to Antarctic environmental conditions.
In the Antarctic summer of 2010/2011 seven sites – five of which were different from the previous year – were sampled as described above. Sample processing is presently ongoing. Additionally, on one cruise ship tour, the efficacy of on-board boot-washing techniques was spot-checked after passengers had boarded the ship again. Preliminary results show that boot-washing was not 100% effective. Individual soil animals (mainly Nematoda) could be sporadically identified even after disinfection and boot-washing. Furthermore, it was not tested whether the soil animals remained viable after disinfection. Direct ecotoxicological experiments with the disinfectant should provide relevant information. 
    3.  Further steps
The project will be continued till the end of 2011. Final results of the study are expected by the beginning of 2012. Germany will inform the Antarctic Treaty Parties about these final results at CEP XV.

