





The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica




The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) for the Proposed Exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, Antarctica 
An Information Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Background
The United Kingdom has prepared a draft CEE for the proposed exploration of Subglacial Lake Ellsworth which has been circulated to Treaty Parties and Observers for review.  
The draft CEE is available for download from http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/ellsworthcee and is attached to this Information Paper. (A copy of the non-technical summary, in all four Treaty languages, is available and attached to WP16.)
An Intersessional Contact Group (convened by Norway) was established to review the draft CEE and participating Parties and Observers provided comments on the CEP forum.  The report of the ICG has been submitted by Norway (WP14).  
Following circulation of the draft CEE,  and as indicated in WP16, the Lake Ellsworth Consortium are pleased to report that Professor Martin Siegert will give a short presentation at CEP XIV to provide further information  on this proposal. The UK will provide further updates and relevant additional information, together with a response to the outstanding comments made by Treaty Parties and Observers, which will be addressed in the final CEE.  
Update & preliminary response to comments
ALE role and associated environmental impacts:
Several of the ICG participants asked for more information on the role and activities of the support contractor Antarctic Logistics & Expedition LLC (ALE).  
ALE are providing services to the Subglacial Lake Ellsworth Consortium as a contractor.  Their primary role will be to provide logistics such as transfer of fuel and equipment to the proposed drilling site.  Any fuel or equipment depots established in advance of the proposed drilling project will be subject to full authorisation under the UK Antarctic Act 1994.  Such activities will be undertaken in line with, and limited to, the normal British Antarctic Survey handling of establishing remote field depots.  Responsibility for the removal of any such depots in the event that the drilling project does not proceed will rest with the British Antarctic Survey.  Should the full drilling project subsequently proceed, any further contractual relationship with ALE will be covered in the final CEE and subject to UK authorisation.  This will include the assessment, and where necessary mitigation, of any impacts resulting from ALE activities associated with this project.  (We have agreed with the US authorities that ALE’s role in this project will not be covered by their multi year IEE).
The UK authorities will not consider any authorisation for the exploration of subglacial Lake Ellsworth until after the draft CEE has been considered by the CEP and all comments have been taken into account in the final CEE.








Further information
The UK welcomes comments and feedback on the draft CEE.  Comments and any requests for further information should be made to:

Rachel Clarke
Senior Environmental Manager
British Antarctic Survey
High Cross
Madingley Road
Cambridge, CB3 0ET, UK

Tel:  00 441223221374
Email:  racl@bas.ac.uk

