





A case of Biological Prospecting





A case of Biological Prospecting

Information paper submitted by the Netherlands

Summary:
In Resolution 7 (2005), the ATCM recommended that “their governments continue to keep under review the question of biological prospecting in the Antarctic Treaty Area, and exchange on an annual basis information and views relating to that question as appropriate”. In compliance with this Resolution the Netherlands is reporting on bioprospecting in Antarctica  in 2010.
---------------------------

Intentions and objective: 
In August 2009, the Netherlands’ Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Conservation and Fisheries (which is the competent authority with regard to issuing permits for Antarctic activities) received a request from the Netherlands’ Museum of Natural History (Naturalis) in Leiden for a permit to engage in biological prospecting activities in Antarctica. 

The application concerned the identification and study of Mollusca occurring in the Antarctic peninsula area. Only the collection of a small inventory was intended: the scientist involved would travel on a tourist cruise and would collect his samples in the tidal zone along the shoreline at the same locations where tourists would be landed. Specimen of a number of mollusc families were targeted and would be collected by hand (e.g. by scraping or brushing them from rocks or by rinsing them from beached seaweeds) or with a landing net. In each location only a limited number of specimen would be taken and preserved in alcohol. Sampling would take place in the last week of January 2010. Identification would take place in the Netherlands. Collected specimen would be added to the collection of the museum.

The objective of the research was to investigate whether 'alien' (non-endemic) species could be identified and, if so, to find out where these could have originated. The collection and identification of species new to science (or new to Antarctica) was not ruled out.

Permit 
A permit was not issued as the activity did not require one. The Netherlands’ authorities considered:

1)	That the taking of limited numbers of molluscs by hand would cause less than a minor or temporary impact on the Antarctic marine or littoral ecosystems;
2)	That the definition of “taking” (or collecting, capturing) of Antarctic organisms in Article 1(g) of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection does not apply to molluscs;
3)	That molluscs are not “native invertebrates” according to the definition in Article 1(d) of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and that, subsequently, molluscs do not fall under the remit of Annex II.

Results
Sampling took place as intended, but in fewer locations than planned as a result of bad weather conditions. Also, in some locations, sampling was difficult because of high tide at the time of arrival. Most specimen collected were smaller than 5 mm. No ‘alien’ or new species were encountered. All specimen collected are included in the collection of Museum ‘Naturalis’ in Leiden and are available for study by other scientists. 

An overview of the specimen collected, their identification, location, etc., is included in the table.


