





Cooperation Management Activities at ASPAs in 25 de Mayo (King George) Island, South Shetland Islands




Cooperation Management Activities at ASPAs in 25 de Mayo (King George) Island, South Shetland Islands
Introduction & Objectives
The purpose of these cooperation activities between the Republic of Korea and Argentina was to initiate a review of the environmental management in two Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) in 25 de Mayo (King George) Island, South Shetland Islands.
The specific objectives of this work were:
–Compare management activities carried out in each site, and evaluate its effectiveness
–Exchange information on the possible mechanisms/methods to evaluate the variation on the ecological integrity of these sites in relation to their use.
–Analyze the contribution of each area to the comprehensive conservation of the environmental values present in the 25 de Mayo (King George) Island. 
The approach of this work also proposes a revision of the procedures and application of guidelines that emerged from Annex V of the Protocol, as well as a comprehensive review and synthesis of the literature and concepts related to Antarctic Special Protected Areas, in the framework of the areas mentioned.
Activities 2010/11
Field activities were performed during the latest summer season by dedicated staff of the National Antarctic Programs of the Republic of Korea and Argentina in ASPA 171 Narębski Point and ASPA 132 Potter Peninsula. These areas were chosen due to their proximity and similarities found between them. 
Field works provided Korean and Argentine environmental officers with the valuable chance to compare both sites, and to foresee likely opportunities to exchange information and to continue to jointly work on these areas in the future. Potential to extend this cooperation scheme to other joint lines of work were also explored. 
This initial experience, based on the spirit of Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol, has strengthened the links between the Korean and Argentine Antarctic Programs, in terms of the environmental management of Antarctic protected Areas. In this sense, an appropriate first step was done to achieve a proper degree of consistency in the management of the ASPAs involved. This works in line with the likely future development of appropriate regional conservation strategies for the values present in these areas.
Finally, logistic support to the participants of these joint activities was provided by staff from both Jubany (Argentina) and King Sejong (Republic of Korea) stations. This was highly valued by the joint team as it enabled them to visit and work together in these protected sites. 


