





Installation of new meteorological equipment at Vernadsky Station




Installation of new meteorological equipment at Vernadsky Station 
Information Paper, presented by Ukraine

As it is well-known, that the Western part of Antarctic Peninsula one of the most intensive rates of lower troposphere air temperature growths can be observed, and meteorological records registered at Faraday / Vernadsky station demonstrate optimally the warming effect.
In the framework of a program on improving the measuring equipment at Vernadsky station a new TROPOSPHERE meteorological complex has been installed in February, 2011. The TROPOSPHERE complex is made in Ukraine, and measures the main meteorological parameters.
High quality of the meteorological complex has been confirmed by certificates of the State Committee of Ukraine on Technical Regulation and Consumer Policy and the State Aviation Administration of the Ministry of Transport and Communication of Ukraine.
Measurement is performed by separate transducers. This approach ensures the implementation of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) recommendations on the accuracy of various meteorological parameters measurement and periodic verification thereof, eliminates the transducers’ mutual influence on each other operation.
Some meteorological sensors have original performance. Relative humidity in the TROPOSPHERE complex is measured by the two-temperature method, free of the sensor’s hysteresis, increases the accuracy of measurements and ensures that the transducer continuously and stably functions in conditions of saturation and at temperatures below 0°C.
The distinctive features of the wind speed and direction transducer are: manometric principle of operation; no moving parts; measurement of two meteorological parameters with a single device; heating system which prevents the transducer from freezing in winter.
Currently two measuring systems operate simultaneously at Vernadsky station, including old UK Modular Automatic Weather station (MAWS). This will allow us to exclude errors in measurements and improve quality in operative and climate data from Vernadsky, which is a part of WMO network in Antarctica. 

