





Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole Antarctica Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 5) 2011 Management Report





Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole Antarctica Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 5) 
2011 Management Report
Introduction
The Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole, operated by the United States Antarctic Program (USAP), was formally adopted as Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 5 by Measure 2, ATCM XXX (New Delhi, 2007).  Increasing Human activity led the United States to propose the ASMA with the purpose of more effective management and coordination of activities in the Area.  The proposal for ASMA designation was made to ensure that the scientific, environmental, and historical values of the Area would be conserved.  ATCM XXXI IP109 Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 5) First Year Management Report described the experiences and challenges encountered during the management plan’s first year.  ATCM XXXIII IP92 Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, South Pole Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA No. 5) 2010 Management Report described management activities, particularly issues related to non-governmental activities during the 2009-20010 season.
This paper summarizes the continuing challenges in managing diverse activities in the ASMA, particularly in relation to the expected increase in non-governmental activities associated with celebrations of the Centenary of Amundsen and Scott reaching the South Pole
Management Activities
The aim of management at South Pole is to coordinate activities in the Area such that scientific and environmental values of the Area can be sustained indefinitely, and the historical values are preserved to the greatest extent practicable.  Management activities undertaken to achieve the goals of the plan focus on advanced planning and coordination of research activities conducted by National Programs, operations conducted for Station maintenance and visits by tour groups or other non-governmental organizations (NGO, collectively).  Additionally National Programs working in the Area and non-governmental groups visiting the Area are to ensure that their respective personnel/participants are aware of the requirements of the management plan.
ATCM XXXIII IP92 introduced two significant activities to address safety issues within the ASMA.  The skiway was moved so that routine traffic between the station facilities and science functions in the Dark Sector no longer had to cross an active airstrip.  This move greatly reduced the potential for accidents and was received well by Station residents.
The second activity involved relocating the NGO camping area, and designated access routes, to an area that was less likely to accumulate large snow drifts near the station.  While the camping area was further away from the Station, the move was received well by the non-governmental community and the drifting problem was significantly reduced.  
The 2010-2011 season was relatively busy in terms of the numbers and amount of time non-governmental visitors were on station.  There was some confusion related to the changes implemented last year and to the arrival of non-governmental groups who had not visited the Station in a number of years.  It is likely the 2011-2012 season will be even busier due to the celebrations associated with the Centenary of the Amundsen and Scott expeditions reaching the South Pole.  
The U.S. Antarctic Program is currently reviewing the Management Plan guidance for non-governmental visits and its ability to engage in the current level of outreach activities.  A number of issues were identified following the 2010-2011 season and these issues are addressed below.
Observations on Management of Non-governmental Activities
Number of non-governmental visitors to the Area
The trend in non-governmental activities (number of visitors and number of station tours given per season) is displayed in Figure 1.  It is expected that the 2011-2012 season will set a record high for the season and for the number of non-governmental visitors present on Station at one time.  We have received indications that non-governmental visitors will exceed 100 in the days surrounding the Amundsen anniversary (December 14, 2011).

Figure 1- The total number of non-governmental visitors and station tours over a five year period
Surface Access Route and Traffic Patterns within the ASMA
During the 2010-2011 season a new surface access route and non-governmental parking sites were identified and presented in ATCM XXX III IP 92.  The new approach was established in order to provide direct access to the Designated Camping Area.  Importantly, the new corridor improved the safety of personnel and operations by bringing visitors to the geographic South Pole via a corridor completely separated from the skiway and other operationally active areas.  When followed, this new routing worked out well.  However some non-governmental groups were either unaware of the new approach route or were uncertain of its exact location.  Some groups entered the ASMA using the old route and others attempted to use the new route, but accidently strayed into science areas.  There was a potentially serious incident when an non-governmental group strayed into the end clear zone while a plane was preparing to land.  The non-governmental group did not see or did not recognize the meaning of the flashing beacon at the designated clear zone crossing, which signalled that it was not safe to cross at that time.
For the 2011-2012 season, we will continue to use the NGO access route as established last season (Map 3, map numbers are the same as in the the ASMA management plan).  We have spent more than a year informing operators about the new access corridor.  Additionally, this year a larger part of the access route will be flagged or otherwise marked.  In the area closest to the Station and within the operations sector, non-governmental routes will be marked with very closely space flags.   Non-governmental vehicles and pedestrians will be restricted to travelling only in the marked routes and designated areas (Maps 3 and 4).  The routes do not cross the skiway or the end clear zone, which should prevent incidents like the one described above from occurring.
South Pole Station Residents have long respected a speed limit of 20 mph (32 kph) for wheeled vehicles, and they considerably slow their speed when in close proximity to buildings, people or other equipment.  With the increase in non-governmental vehicular traffic, it is equally important the non-governmental groups respect this same speed limit and guidance on slowing down.  This will ensure the safety of those in the vehicles and nearby pedestrians.
Location of the designated non-governmental camping area
During the 2010-2011 season the non-governmental camping area was moved to approximately 4000 ft (1200m) grid North of the geographic South Pole marker.  This move greatly alleviated the snow drift problem identified in ATCM XXXIII IP 92.  Many non-governmental visitors appreciated the greater separation from Station activities.  However, there was some concern about the location of the campsite relative to its proximity to the hazardous zone,  the skiway centreline, and the non-governmental aircraft taxi way.  
Therefore the primary designated non-governmental camping area (indicated as “NGO Camping” on Map 4) has been moved slightly grid East.  It is no longer on the centreline of the skiway, nor does it abut the Hazardous Zone.  Further, it is on the same side of the skiway as the South Pole markers, making transit to that area simpler (Map 4).  To accommodate the large number of visitors expected in the Area to celebrate the Centenary of Amundsen and Scott reaching the South Pole, a secondary camping area has been designated (shown as “Overflow NGO Camping” on Map 4).  This overflow area is located along the corridor marked “NGO access route”, grid Northwest of the “NGO Camping” site, and is adjacent to the Dark Sector (Map 4).
Visitor Center
For the 2011-2012 season the United States Antarctic Program will operate a Visitor Center.  The Visitor Center will be located along the NGO access route to the Pole markers, near the NGO day parking area.  The Visitor Center will house educational displays.  The Visitor Center will also host educational presentations given by Station personnel (including seasonal workers and scientists).  Finally there will be a small store selling South Pole souvenirs.  The Visitor Center operation hours, store opening hours, and presentation schedules will be decided  and communicated following consultation with South Pole non-governmental operators.   

Revised guidance to be issued to non-governmental visitors
Appendix A of the Management Plan provides guidelines for non-governmental visits to the South Pole.   The intent of this additional guidance is to inform visitors about onsite resources, expectations and hazards.  The guidance includes information on the surface access route and approaches to the South Pole, guidance for aircraft, location of the Designated camping areas (primary and overflow), limitations of visits to station buildings and the need to be self-sufficient.  Appendix A was recently revised to reflect the changes described earlier in the IP.  Further, visitors will now be allowed to take photographs at both South Pole markers and inside the Station during guided tours.  The USAP conducts guided station tours, when possible, in order to provide educational outreach.  At times, it may not be possible to conduct tours due to operational or scientific activities of station personnel.  It is intended that the displays in the Visitor Center will serve to educate visitors about the Station when tours are not possible.
Summary
Although the Management Plan provides the means for more effective management and coordination of activities in the Area, it will only be effective if all involved in planning and conducting activities within the ASMA are fully aware of the details of the Plan, fully engaged in advanced communication and coordination prior to the field season, and fully committed to the values that underlie the plan. Additionally, all activities conducted within the Area should be planned to minimize the risk to participants and impacts to national programs operating within the Area. 
The move of the Designated Camping Area, change in access routes for surface-based approaches, and marking of non-governmental routes and camping areas will be assessed during the 2011-12 season.  If the changes are successful in meeting the goals of increased safety and decreased impact to the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station science, they will be formally incorporated into the Management Plan during the next revision in 2012. The United States will continue to report on experiences regarding implementation of the Management Plan in future years in order to inform discussion and to consider other potential modifications of the Plan

