





Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Initiatives at Australia’s Antarctic Stations




Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Initiatives at Australia’s Antarctic Stations
Summary
In response to Recommendation 4 of the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance (ATME), this paper provides an overview of selected examples of Australia’s energy management experience to date. 
Introduction 
In 2010 the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance (ATME) recommended that Parties acknowledge and encourage continuing efforts in developing and exchanging experience of energy efficiency and alternative energy practices so as to promote reduction of the carbon footprint of activities in Antarctica and cut fossil fuel use from stations, vessels, ground transportation and aircraft (Recommendation 4). 
Energy saving and renewable energy technologies are employed at Australia’s Antarctic stations Casey, Davis and Mawson.  The use of these technologies helps to reduce the stations’ carbon emissions and also reduces operating costs. Australia’s stations depend upon diesel fuel for the generation of electricity and heat.  When the stations were rebuilt during the 1970s to the 1990s, the new power generation systems incorporated cogeneration, whereby waste heat from the diesel generators is captured and used to heat the station.  This system generates and captures 1kW of heat for every 1 kW of electricity, thereby significantly increasing energy efficiency. Since this early focus on energy efficiency, a number of other initiatives have been adopted. 
This paper provides an overview of selected examples of Australia’s energy management experience to date including two recent projects, the “smart grid” at Mawson station, and the air to air heat exchanger in the new Davis living quarters building.
Wind Turbines at Mawson station
Since 2003, two 300kW wind turbines have provided renewable energy at Mawson station.1  Each year since then, between 30% and 40% of the station’s electrical and heat energy requirements have been provided by the wind turbines.  This significant use of renewable energy has resulted in annual fuel savings of up to 240,000 litres per year.
Smart Grid Technology
To augment the wind turbines at Mawson, a “smart grid” has been installed and is currently in the early stages of commissioning.  The smart grid comprises a network of control devices which share real time power generation data.  In favourable weather conditions, the wind turbines produce enough power for the entire station, although a single diesel generator must still run at low power to provide spinning reserve.  When ample wind power is available, the smart grid will switch on non-essential electrical loads.  If the wind power drops suddenly, the smart grid will switch these loads off.  In this way it helps to maintain the stability of the power system and allows a greater proportion of wind power to be utilised.  The system is currently powering the Mawson melt bell for the station’s potable water supply.  Prior to the installation of the smart grid, ice was melted using a diesel fired boiler.  An electric boiler works in conjunction with the smart grid so that ice can be melted using wind power.  Using smart grid control of the melt bell has the potential to save 25,000 litres of fuel per year.  Another area which will be investigated for smart grid control is electric heating for new buildings.
Cold Pump Technology for Long Term Refrigerated Food Storage
Following the success of the “cold pump” food storage facilities at Mawson station, a similar system is being installed at Davis station.  Presently, perishable foods are stored in electrically heated insulated shipping containers.  This is inefficient and uses a large amount of energy to heat the container to +4°C in an ambient as low as -40°C.  The new facilities have been constructed inside a heated living building.  The building is heated by the station’s efficient cogeneration system.  The refrigerated atmosphere is provided by pumping a glycol-water mix through heat exchangers located outside the building then passing the cooled liquid through a fan-coil unit inside the store room.  This system will provide sufficient cooling while the outside ambient temperature is below -5°C.  During the warmer summer months, a backup chiller unit (using a conventional refrigeration compressor) chills the liquid.  The energy savings are realised by utilising the cold ambient outside temperatures to provide cooling.  During the winter months, the system needs to run only two pumps to circulate the cooled liquid.  Energy usage is expected to be 25kWh per day.  This is a significant saving compared to running a year-round conventional refrigeration compressor at 75kWh per day, and far more efficient than using heated shipping containers at 135kWh per day during winter.
Building Monitoring and Control System (BMCS)
The BMCS was installed in 1999 and since then has provided a detailed analysis of energy usage at Casey, Davis and Mawson.  The system is primarily used to monitor and control the heating and ventilation of buildings.  The energy monitoring feature allowed inefficient heating and ventilation plant to be identified and then replaced or modified to improve the energy efficiency.  The control system has given a greater degree of flexibility in controlling a building’s heating, for example, the amount of fresh air brought into a building can be adjusted according to the interior air quality.  Heating fresh air from a low ambient temperature is energy intensive, so minimising the amount of fresh air required saves considerable amounts of energy.  The system uses a network of temperature, air quality and pressure sensors to control fans, pumps, heating hot water flow rates and motorised ventilation dampers.
Air to Air Heat Exchanger
The new living quarters building at Davis incorporates an air to air heat exchanger.  To maintain air quality in existing buildings, waste air is vented to the atmosphere and is replaced by fresh air at a cold ambient temperature, as described above.  While in most cases, the amount of air is minimised, this is difficult to achieve in the kitchen where cooking fumes must be extracted.  The Davis kitchen caters for up to 100 people, and the extractor fan may run for 14 hours in a 24 hour period.  By passing this exhaust air stream through the air to air heat exchanger, heat from the kitchen exhaust is transferred to the incoming fresh air, saving 300kWh of energy per day.

Australia’s Antarctic stations have a strong history of embracing technology to improve energy efficiency and reduce fuel consumption and carbon emissions.  These initiatives have delivered significant improvements over a number of years.  The Australian Antarctic Division recognises the importance of continuing this program and evaluating and implementing energy efficient technologies well into the future.


