





IAATO Climate Change Working Group: Report of Progress





IAATO’s Climate Change Working Group: Report of Progress
Summary
Following ATME 2010 IP003 IAATO’s Climate Change Working Group IAATO is pleased to report on the progress of work to date. This includes steps towards raising awareness of climate change in the Antarctic resulting from human activities worldwide, developing an estimation of the contribution of carbon footprint for Antarctic tourism operations to total human activity carbon footprint and exploring ways in which IAATO member operators can manage their carbon emissions. 
 
Background
IAATO has discussed climate change implications for Antarctica at its last four annual meetings. This had led to a range of specific measures1 to enhance IAATO operations.  However, at IAATO’s annual meeting in 2009, Members unanimously acknowledged that modern climate change is a significant threat to the Antarctic environment. They also agreed to establish an IAATO working group on climate change, with the aim of developing strategic actions that will raise awareness of climate change in Antarctica and mitigate its effects.

The key objectives of this group are to:

    • Raise awareness amongst IAATO clients on the effects of climate change on the Antarctic environment through various mediums, to help create a ground-swell of interested stakeholders in all Treaty Party countries;
    • Conduct work to assess Member operator’s carbon footprints within the Antarctic Treaty area;
    • Review the current efforts that individual Members are making in terms of carbon offsetting;
    • Research ways that IAATO Members can mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and further support scientific research on climate change in Antarctica. 


Progress To Date
Raising awareness: 
IAATO was very pleased to collaborate with SCAR in the development of an information sheet on Climate Change in the Antarctic, summarising the findings of SCAR’s Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment Report 2009. This Information Sheet is available on the IAATO website in English, Spanish, German and French. 
Assessing Member Operators Carbon Footprint:
In a survey conducted among all IAATO members shortly before the 2009 annual meeting, 47% of Member operators indicated that they analyze or assess in some way their carbon footprint, with 19% participating in offset programs. Looking at all levels of membership, including Associates and Affiliates, 22% noted that they participate in such programs.
Additionally, operators were canvassed to provide their total fuel consumption for ship, yacht and air transport. This was done in confidence, with the assurance to Members that the core information would remain internal to IAATO. CO2 emissions were calculated using the default factors as produced by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 2006 (IPCC 2006) and can be found for verification online at http://www.carbonmetrics.com/tools.html. 

Fourteen ship and aircraft operators participated providing data to develop a preliminary estimate for a number of IAATO activity categories (Yacht, IAATO category 1 vessels, land/air-based and cruise-only).  From this information it was possible to calculate a preliminary estimate of CO2 emissions per person per day for these Antarctic operations. This is a standard means of calculating CO2 footprint within the cruise industry and so provides an easier basis by which to compare operations. Currently this information will remain internal to IAATO but it does allow the organisation to have a starting point by which to aim to improve CO2 emissions for the industry as a whole.

Reviewing current efforts to manage CO2 footprint:
The membership was surveyed to establish levels of awareness amongst operators and their clients regarding climate change in Antarctica and also understand the mitigation practices that are already being undertaken. Results of the survey implied that the operators tend to be more concerned about climate change in Antarctica than the clients – emphasising the need to create additional materials to raise awareness amongst these key Antarctic stakeholders. 

With respect to mitigation measures, many operators are already either taking part in carbon offsetting schemes or facilitating their clients to do so independently. In addition, improved technology including retrofits, voyage planning and home-office ‘greening’ are being employed by a number of operators as a means to improve efficiency and minimise CO2 emissions. 

Next Steps

At IAATO 22 (Hobart, 9-12 May 2011) it was agreed that this preliminary work should be continued and built upon. To that end it was agreed that:

    1. Additional material to continue to raise awareness amongst IAATO member clients will be developed. For example, the creation of a downloadable PowerPoint – preferably in conjunction with other partners – on climate change in the Antarctic environment.
    2. Operators will continue to be canvassed for their seasonal fuel consumption for vessel and air operations in order to improve and refine the estimated CO2 footprint per person per day. 
    3. The IAATO Climate Change Working Group will continue to develop advice on CO2 Management for operations including advice that can be circulated to clients on how they may assist in improving energy efficiency. 

As before, IAATO will continue to provide feedback to CEP and to ATCM on this work, and welcomes comment or feedback from both these forums. 



