




Progress Report on the Research Project “Current Environmental Situation and Management Proposals for the Fildes Region (Antarctic)”




Progress Report on the Research Project “Current Environmental Situation and Management Proposals for the Fildes Region (Antarctic)”
    1. Introduction
At CEP VII, Germany introduced IP 005 Research Project Risk assessment for the Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for desig­nation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas. This paper described the below mentioned German three-year research project (2003 – 2006) and introduced it for the first time. Several CEP members expressed their support for the proposal, and indicated that they would be willing to assist Germany in the project.
At CEP VIII, Germany introduced IP 016 Progress Report on the Research Project Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas. This paper provided an update of the project, noting the excellent cooperation with other Parties in the area through an informal co-ordination group. 
At ATCM XXVIII, Germany agreed that prior to tabling a draft Management Plan for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island (King George Island) and following a proposal by Chile an International Working Group should be established. This Working Group should be composed of those Parties with stations and/or huts in the area, Parties with an interest in the area as well as Observers to the Antarctic Treaty. It should discuss the issues related to the Draft Management Plan. For this purpose, Germany would organize two international workshops, one in September 2005 and another one in January/February 2006, in order to convene the par­ticipants on this issue (Final Report of ATCM XXVIII, para. 90).
At CEP IX, Brazil, China, Germany, the Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation introduced WP 022 Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Proposal to establish an Intersessional Contact Group. This paper reported on the main findings and recommendations of the King George Island Work­shop “Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island” in January/February 2006 as well as on the outcome of the Workshop “Human impact on terrestrial habitats in the Antarctic” in September 2005. Discussion of this paper is reflected in paragraphs 70 to 75 of the CEP Report.
At CEP IX, “Germany expressed satisfaction on reaching agreement with Chile in principle on devel­oping an ASMA for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. They will jointly convene – via note verbal – an inter­national working group (paragraph 74 of the CEP Report). Germany expressed the hope that a substan­tive outcome of the group’s work would be presented to the next ATCM. Chile confirmed that it will host a work­shop to prepare the input on this issue for discussion at CEP X.” (Final Report of ATCM XXIX, para. 77). Pursuant to these understandings an international working group involving government representatives of interested Parties was convened by Germany and Chile in order to discuss management approaches, possibly aiming at drafting a management plan for an ASMA covering the Fildes Peninsula Region (see IP 22 rev. 1 by Germany and Chile). 
At CEP X, Germany introduced IP 112 Possible Modules of a “Fildes Peninsula region” ASMA Management Plan. Further, Germany and Chile introduced IP 22 rev. 1 Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Comments of 15 IWG parties to four questions concerning the future management of the Fildes Peninsula Region were reported. Further, Chile introduced IP 117 Workshop on Coordination of Activities in the Fildes Peninsula Region.
At CEP XI, Germany introduced IP 30 Final Report on the Research Project “Risk assessment for Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island and the development of management plans for designation as Antarctic Specially Protected or Managed Areas“. It contained a proposal for a “Fildes Peninsula region ASMA Man­agement Plan” which was already presented to CEP X as IP 112 (2007) Possible Modules of a ‘Fildes Peninsula region’ ASMA Management Plan and which was uploaded on the IWG web-based Discussion Forum. The final report is available at http://www.umweltbundesamt.de/uba-info-medien/mysql_medien.php?anfrage=Kennummer&Suchwort=3478.
At CEP XII, Chile and Germany introduced WP 004 Second Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island. Chile introduced IP 81 Notes on a Multiple Protection System for some areas in King George Island: Zones under Annex V and their relevance to Fildes Peninsula and adjacent areas.
At CEP XII, Germany introduced IP 50 Research Project “Current Environmental Situation and Management Proposals for the Fildes Region (Antarctic)”. Aim of this paper was to introduce the starting of the German research project and to inform the Treaty Parties about its purpose and methods and to request cooperation, especially from those Antarctic Treaty Parties running stations in the area.
At CEP XIII, Chile and Germany introduced WP 040 Third Progress Report on the Discussion of the International Working Group about Possibilities for Environmental Management of Fildes Peninsula and Ardley Island.
    2. Progress Report and Preliminary Results of the Research Project 
The preliminary results of the research project “Current Environmental Situation and Management Proposals for the Fildes Region (Antarctic)” are shown in the Annex. 
    3.  Further steps
The project will be continued till August 2011. Final results of the study are expected by the end of 2011. Germany will introduce the final results to the International Working Group on Fildes Peninsula and will inform the Antarctic Treaty Parties accordingly at CEP XV.


Annex: Progress Report and Preliminary Results of the Research Project “Current Environmental Situation and Management Proposals for the Fildes Region (Antarctic)”
The Fildes Region, consisting of the Fildes Peninsula, Ardley Island and adjacent islands, is characterized by a high biodiversity and the presence of six permanent stations leading to a conflict of interests between the multiple uses of the region and the regulations of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. In a first research project from 2003 to 2006, commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt), the impacts of human activities in the region were assessed. It was shown that station operations, transport logistics, tourism, scientific research, nature conservation and the protection of historical and geological values regularly overlap in space and time (Peter et al., 2008). A risk analysis was carried out and resulted in a proposal of various possible management measures in order to prevent the region from further habitat degradation. Aim of the recent study was to assess changes in the terrestrial environmental situation by the repetition of the earlier monitoring during three field seasons. Therefore, the data of standardized and GPS/GIS-based assessment of fauna and flora and human activities were compared with the previous findings. First results were presented at the IPY conference in Oslo in 2010 and in a peer-reviewed publication (Polar Research, in press).
The breeding pair numbers of the thirteen seabird species were surveyed. Among that, a new breeding site of light-mantled sooty albatross was detected (Lisovski et al., 2009). The data of penguins breeding on Ardley Island confirmed the significant divergent trends for the three penguin species. While the total number of breeding pairs of gentoo penguins continued to increase, the numbers of Adélie penguins showed a strong decline. After a strong decrease in the past, the population of chinstrap penguins on Ardley Island remained constant on a very low level. The breeding pair numbers and breeding success of southern giant petrels in various colonies in the Fildes Region were subject to strong fluctuations. It is assumed that the decline in some colonies is connected with human disturbance, in particular visits of station personnel in their leisure time. The slight increases of breeding pair numbers in other, non-visited colonies indicates nest site shifts. By means of monthly seal counts several breeding sites of Antarctic fur seals have been confirmed so that meanwhile four seal species reproduce in the Fildes Region. Beside an introduced grass species, detected by the German scientists within a station area, various introduced insects (midges, moths) were reported by station members.
The survey of flight activities revealed no general increase, but a constant high level of days with aircraft use in the Fildes Region. Aircraft activity was observed on average on ~ 68 % of days of the study period. Landings of smaller aircrafts, mainly operating for tourism purposes exceeded logistics flights of Hercules C-130 by far. Furthermore, an increasing concentration of flight activity to certain days (during logistic operations) was noticed. The installation of a Transponder Landing System in the 2009/10 season, allowing flight operations even under conditions of low visibility, will certainly affect the flight activity in the Fildes Region, but did not yet resulted in a significant increase. The flights over the ASPA No. 150 Ardley Island below the defined vertical (610 m; 2000 ft) and horizontal (460 m; 1.500 ft) minimum distance due to Resolution 2 (2004) were conducted almost exclusively by National Antarctic Programs, but their observed number decreased considerably over time.
The observed growth of ship traffic in the Maxwell Bay over the six studied seasons was mainly caused by the increase of arriving supply, research and patrol vessels. At the same time, the number of days with ship traffic did not increase, indicating a growing accumulation of ships. Such peaks of marine activity were often connected with intense air traffic, mainly helicopter movements, cargo transport with heavy land vehicles or inflatable boats and station visits of tourists or ship crews. Despite growing levels of passenger exchange via air-cruise programs, the proportion of cruise vessels approaching Fildes Peninsula was relatively low during the study period, confirming the low attractiveness of the Fildes Region for cruise tourism.
Vehicle use beyond the existing road network was regularly observed, also affecting both, ASPAs No. 125 and No. 150, and often resulted in disturbance of breeding birds or damage of vegetation.
Although meanwhile all stations on Fildes Peninsula operate sewage treatment plants of different levels of sophistication, the observed high turbidity and a pungent smell at some sewage outfalls indicate a poor quality or ineffective sewage treatment. The waste management in some stations still shows severe shortcomings, e.g. the continuation of open burning or open storage of waste. The latter led to a considerable entry of waste materials into the environment, also affecting the ASPA No. 150 Ardley Island. The banned practice of active feeding of skuas and gulls, including even with poultry products, has been reported at all stations on Fildes Peninsula. For the first time it was shown that the Fildes Region is affected to a certain extent by the waste management of neighbouring stations and ships and yachts present in the Maxwell Bay. The known areas with historical waste deposits were updated and thus increased by ~ 23 %.
Minor oil contaminations were constantly observed within the station areas and along the existing road network caused during fuel transfer, leaking station pipelines and tanks or spills from vehicles or the remobilisation of formerly contaminated soil. A major oil spill where several thousand litres of fuel were spilled was documented. As the applied mitigation measures were largely inadequate and failed to prevent chronic and widespread pollution of the local marine environment, negative impacts on the adjacent penguin colony on Ardley Island (ASPA No. 150) are assumed. 
Recently, five out of six stations on Fildes Peninsula have been extended. Thus, the evident trend of extending station facilities has led to substantial improvements regarding scientific facilities and/or station’s operations (e.g. the replacement of corroded single-walled fuel tanks), but was often connected with negative environmental impacts, mainly caused by the local extraction and removal of sand and gravel for building purposes. The impacts ranged from an increasing level of oil pollution by leaking vehicles, the disturbance of resting seals and breeding birds to the complete physical destruction of vegetation, seabird breeding sites and, despite their high scientific value for regional and global palaeoclimate, of beach ridges. As a consequence of the station extensions the land consumption by station buildings increased by ~ 65 % and the number of people living and working in the Fildes Region increased up to ~ 310 during summer and ~ 130 during winter. This is of high importance because, despite the fact that the number of tourists arriving in the Fildes Region far exceeds the number of station personnel, the latter is expected to have a comparatively higher environmental impact as they roam almost freely in the area. This implies a high risk of disturbance of fauna and flora, as a proportion of station members, including scientists, arriving in the Antarctic without an appropriate environmental briefing. Not all station personnel were aware of the existence of the region’s two ASPAs and copies of their management plans were unavailable at some stations. In recent years, all National Antarctic Programmes have increased their scientific activities in the Fildes Region without appropriate coordination. This includes the risk of duplicity of research projects which may lead to detrimental effects on the quality and usefulness of the result and increased cumulative environmental effects. Leisure activities of station personnel probably represent the main contribution to human disturbance of fauna and flora in the region. In particular, excursions into sensitive and/or protected areas, which were not in compliance with the regulations of the ASPA management plans, were often recorded, e.g. for taking pictures or for fishing activities. It is also reported by some station members that local station personnel occasionally touch or catch animals for taking pictures or collect fossils and minerals. Heavy disturbance of resting birds and seals were observed as well as during landings of tourists travelling with ships of National Antarctic Programmes. When queried, some passengers stated that they have not been guided and had no knowledge of the existing visitor guidelines, e.g. those recommended by IAATO and generated by the Antarctic Treaty System. Tourism activities in the Fildes Region take place on a regular basis. Sea-borne tourism (landings of passengers of cruise vessels) did not grow, while, the number of tourist flights has increased, which are connected with one- or two-day programmes involving guided walks (air-borne tourism). The number of passengers transferred between cruise vessels via the Chilean airport on Fildes Peninsula (air-cruise tourism) rose almost tenfold between 2003 and 2010.The environmental impact of the yearly Marathon event was assessed. It is considered to be relatively low, as well as the various types of tourism. In contrast to the station personnel, most tourists are strictly guided, limited to certain routes and are briefed in advance about existing guidelines.
Summarizing the findings of the present study, it is shown that the terrestrial environment in the Fildes Region is under increasing pressure from human activities. The habitat degradation will increase further if no additional management measures are generated and implemented in the near future.

References

