





Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of New Indian Research Station at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica and Update on Construction Activity




Final Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) of New Indian Research Station at Larsemann Hills, Antarctica and Update on Construction Activity
Introduction
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) circulated draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) approved and endorsed by Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India, on 29 December 2006 to all concerned parties and the chair of CEP-X. The report was also circulated to all Consultative Parties through diplomatic channels. Written comments on the draft CEE, were received from, Australia, Germany, United Kingdom and New Zealand. Full text of draft CEE was submitted to XXX-ATCM as an attachment to IP-007 and concurrently non technical summary was submitted as WP-004. During austral summer of 2006-07, additional baseline data were collected and submitted as IP-139 to XXX-ATCM. While draft CEE was presented before CEP-X, suggestions were also received from various parties to improve the draft CEE by taking into consideration, the suggestions and queries of Consultative Parties. The CEP-X had concluded that the draft CEE met the requirements of the Article 3 Annex 1 to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to Antarctic Treaty and recommended it to ATCM for endorsement. 
Final CEE
India updated, CEP on development of the final CEE during XXXI-ATCM (IP-016), XXXII-ATCM (IP-029) and XXXIII-ATCM (IP-006). Final CEE report was prepared incorporating all the valuable suggestions received from the Parties. Details on design of station, baseline information, cumulative impacts, mitigation measures, and logistics arrangements for the station construction were incorporated as suggested. Final CEE was circulated to all treaty members on 30th September 2010. The CEP chair too sent communications to all Consultative Parties informing about the submission of final CEE by India and its availability on the web address “http://www.ncaor.gov.in”.
Construction Activity
M/s IMS Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH, Germany were appointed as Consultant Architect, through a global competition for the project of construction of New Indian station, christened Bharati (India is also known as Bharat in Indian scriptures and literatures), in 2008. Subsequent to signing of the agreement, a series of meetings were held to improve the final design taking into considerations the scientific and logistic requirements, Environmental Protocol and the suggestions/comments received on the draft CEE. An Architect of the consultants was deputed to the proposed station site in February 2009 to evaluate the site conditions, study layout and supervise preparation of landing site for off loading the construction equipment.
By the end of December 2009, basic construction machineries were stationed at the site using Kamov helicopters and by transportation over winter fast ice of more than 1.5 meter thickness.
An IEE was prepared and submitted to the XXXIII-ATCM (IP-001) detailing the progress in the project. During the period water and biological samples were collected from the site in continuation of data collection for environmental monitoring. In view of the findings, as well as to reduce the footprints, minor modifications/alterations in the station site plan were incorporated.
Through a global tendering process, M/s Leonhard Nilson SØnner, Norway was selected and retained for construction of first phase of new station (Bharati), which commenced in the last week of November 2010 and ended in February 2011. The first phase included erecting piles for the foundation, helipad, laying of water and wastewater pipelines, construction of fuel-farm and foundations for satellite dome. 
A temporary shelter hut was also established at the site during first phase to provide emergency accommodation for 25 construction personnel.  M/s Kaefer construction GmbH, Germany, was selected and retained through a global tendering process for second and final phase of station construction, which will commence in austral summer of 2011-12, engaging nearly 65 construction personnel.
India is thankful to the Consultative Parties for providing valuable suggestions on draft CEE leading to an improved final version of CEE. New research station Bharati will be environment friendly and will provide a platform to conduct important scientific activities to Indian and interested international community. During XXXIV-ATCM, softcopy of final CEE will be distributed.


