





The Dutch Science Facility at the UK’s Rothera Research Station




The Dutch Science Facility at the UK’s Rothera Research Station
An Information Paper submitted by the Netherlands and United Kingdom
Introduction
The Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (OCW) aims to create a research climate that fosters high quality scientific achievements. The Netherlands is one of the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty and maintains a high quality polar research programme, the Netherlands Polar Programme (NPP). The NPP is financed by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and the Ministries of Education, Culture and Science (OCW), Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation (EL&I), Infrastructure and the Environment (I&M) and Foreign Affairs (BUZA). NWO operates this programme by order of the ministry of OCW. Dutch researchers have operated in the Polar Regions for many years. 
It is the policy of the Dutch government that it will not build its own research station in the Antarctic. Having no facility, Dutch researchers depend heavily on logistical support of other partners. This has resulted in a variety of collaborations between the Netherlands and international partners in polar science. One of the most important partners in polar research is the United Kingdom. For over 20 years a fruitful and excellent scientific collaboration has been undertaken between the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and NWO, since 1995 recorded in a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between both parties. This enables Dutch scientists to work alongside British scientists and provide opportunities for them to work within the large scale and long running world-class research programme operated by BAS. The present MoU ends this year and both the UK and the Netherlands wish to extend and intensify this collaboration by building a research facility at the UK’s largest science base - Rothera Research Station, Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
Elaboration
The new science facility will house mobile laboratory containers and be built within Rothera Research Station. A docking station in the facility will house the laboratory modules and provide them with the necessary services like running water, gas, electricity, sewage etc. A roof will cover these four lab modules providing additional dry storage capacity and protect inlets and outlets into the lab modules from snow drift. The lab modules will be raised off the surface to prevent them becoming buried in snow. The docking station will be built by BAS. 
At present, a maximum of five lab modules are planned to be designed and build by the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (NIOZ): 
    1. a wet lab;
    2. a dry lab;
    3. a clean-room lab;
    4. a workshop lab;
    5. an atmospheric measuring lab. 
The lab modules are housed in ISO shipping containers, built according to a standard international size to make their deployment highly flexible at relatively low costs. The inside of the modules will be basic, to keep the use of the lab modules flexible. Once the docking station is built, all sorts of already available science modules also become potentially available, once suitably insulated and fitted for polar research. NIOZ will transport the lab modules to Southampton, UK. From Southampton the lab modules will be shipped to Antarctica by BAS. 
The lab modules will be used by Dutch senior scientists, post doctoral researchers and PhD students, who are selected in an open science call within the Netherlands Polar Programme. A first call for research grant proposals was finished in April 2011. A particular focus in this grant round was on NPP-themes “Ice climate and sea level” and “Polar Oceans”. BAS co-operated in reviewing the applications on their scientific value for the proposed collaboration at Rothera Research Station. A second call will be organized in 2013. 
Because of their transportability, the lab modules are highly flexible and can be installed and used when necessary, and renewed or removed when this is required. An additional benefit for the longer term is the potential possibility for other BAS/NWO science partners to use this facility for research, either by using one of the available mobile lab modules, or bringing in their own lab module for temporary use on site as one of the Dutch projects ends. The science facility is expected to be operational at Rothera Research Station for at least ten to fifteen years. However, continuation of the Dutch research beyond 2015 at the station will be subject to evaluation by both parties. 
Location
Rothera Research Station has been chosen as the preferred location for this collaboration because of the excellent available infrastructure at the base, and the long lasting working relationships between BAS and NWO. Dutch research undertaken at Rothera Research Station is aimed to be complementary to existing research in this part of the Antarctic. Rothera is accessible because of its runway and wharf facilities, and has both space and possibilities available for expanding research. It is also a major logistics hub from which it is possible to be transported into a larger area of the Antarctic relevant for Dutch researchers. All necessary facilities to handle container sized labs are available at Rothera. The wharf allows ships to land cargo and mobile cranes to move the labs around, in and out to the docking station. If a lab module for any reason requires special services or further special adaptation for the on-going research programme it will be taken out of its docking station and shipped to the Netherlands for a technical overhaul or update at the end of a summer season to be returned at the start of the next season.
Several alternative locations at Rothera were evaluated on site and reviewed by BAS based on the most recent plans of the existing infrastructure. It is necessary to have enough working space for heavy equipment to move the units in, and occasionally out, of the lab module facility. For safety reasons, large vehicles and cranes must avoid fuel pipes and existing service ducting. After careful investigation, the Bonner Laboratory site at Rothera has been identified as the best location for the docking station. The docking station will be located at the East side of the Bonner lab, and will house four lab modules. Also, a fifth lab module will possibly be placed close to the hangar for atmospheric measurement campaigns. This module could also facilitate some logistics of research projects that need transportation into the region surrounding Rothera. 
Environmental issues
Taking the mobile lab module concept to the Antarctic at Rothera requires the construction of the docking station. This will need the putting in of concrete foundations, erecting an extended roof structure and the extension of all kinds of pipes and cabling for water, electricity and necessary gasses. To compensate for the additional power required by the lab modules and to minimize the environmental impact, it will be investigated whether renewable energy measures can be taken, i.e. solar panels or Heat Pump technology. It is expected that the number of Dutch researchers working at the station will increase. 
BAS is a highly professional organization, having years of experience in building and managing science facilities in this hostile, though pristine environment. Both NWO and BAS are very determined to preserve such an exceptional environment by measuring, understanding and minimizing the effects of human presence, and are committed to delivering polar science with the minimum environmental impact. All of the proposed activities at Rothera will comply with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
BAS has undertaken a Preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment for the docking station, which was completed in 2010 before construction works began. Rothera Research Station has a station operating permit issued under the UK Antarctic Act (1994) by the Foreign & Commonwealth Office for a period of 5 years, including all activities on the base. Shipping from the UK to Rothera Research Station and placement of the lab modules at the station will fall within the scope of this permit.


Laying foundations for the docking station at Rothera Research Station, February 2011
Time schedule
During the Austral summer of 2010-2011 the concrete foundations for the docking station were put in. The steelwork and cladding for the outer building arrived at Rothera at the beginning of March 2011. The research was outlined during a workshop in the Netherlands at the end of May. The first lab module is now complete and expected to be ready for testing in June at NIOZ in the Netherlands. Construction of the docking station will take place during Austral summer 2011 – 2012 and the laboratory modules will be operational in December 2012.

