





Japan’s Antarctic research highlights in 2010–2011 including those related to climate change





Japan’s Antarctic research highlights in 2010–2011
including those related to climate change
Summary
Among various research activities carried out by the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition, four topics are introduced. One project on astronomy has been developed at Dome Fuji Station in collaboration with an Australian university, in which the first unstaffed year-round observation system for astronomy was installed. Other topics relating to climate change include monitoring observations of the atmosphere with measurements of greenhouse gases; the first success in observations with a large atmospheric radar system, PANSY, at Syowa; and ecological study of penguins in response to environmental variability. Basic environmental parameters need to be monitored to obtain a clear image of the changing globe. On the other hand, process-oriented projects, like the PANSY atmospheric radar observation, are indispensable for obtaining a deep understanding of the system, which could provide a practical model for predicting the future global climate.

1.	Introduction
Japan’s national Antarctic program, the Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE), has been organized by a headquarters established in 1955 in the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture (now reorganized to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, or MEXT). The headquarters is composed of many governmental departments and agencies of various ministries, such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; the Ministry of the Environment; the Ministry of Defense; the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism; the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries; and others. Scientific research and observation programs for JARE are considered and decided on at the general meeting of the headquarters as a midterm research plan.
This Information Paper introduces selected highlights from scientific programs, including those related to climate change, carried out by overwintering and summer members of the 51st and 52nd JAREs, respectively, near Syowa Station (69°00′ S, 39°35′ E) and other research fields during the 2010–2011 season.

2. 	Selected research highlights
Year-round observations have been carried out by overwintering personnel of the JARE at and around Syowa Station. Seasonal observations are also carried out by summer expedition personnel aboard the RV Shirase for oceanographic observations and in various field areas, including the inland Dome Fuji Station (77°19′ S, 39°42′ E) area for glaciological and astronomical research and the Sør Rondane Mountains for geological research.
2.1. 	Development of infrared and terahertz astronomy at Dome Fuji Station
The Antarctic inland plateau is an ideal place for astronomical observatories on earth because of its very dry air and low air temperature. An astronomical research project at Dome Fuji Station has been developing in the JAREs, and the first unstaffed year-round observation system for extrasolar planets was installed in the last austral summer (Fig. 1, left). This system was designed in collaboration with an Australian university and contains special generators with solar batteries that can supply electric power to the observation equipment for two years without a supply. 
A telescope of 40 cm in diameter was installed (Fig. 1, right) for the summer season for observation of Venus in the infrared, daytime brightness of the atmosphere, and atmospheric fluctuation. The data obtained should give important feedback for a full-scale astronomical observatory in the near future.

Figure 1. A year-round observation system for extrasolar planets (left) started operation, and seasonal observation with a 40-cm telescope (right) was carried out at Dome Fuji Station in the 2010–2011 austral summer season.

2.2. 	Meteorological observations and monitoring of atmospheric GHGs, stratospheric O3, etc. at Syowa
Year-round meteorological observations of the surface and upper atmosphere have been carried out by the Japan Meteorological Agency at Syowa Station, and some other monitoring observations, including those pertaining to upper atmospheric physics, atmospheric sciences, geophysics, and biology have also been carried out by governmental agencies and the National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Tokyo. Total ozone measurement has been carried out to monitor the thickness of the ozone layer with a Dobson spectrophotometer since 1960 at Syowa, which resulted in the first report of a decrease in total ozone in the Antarctic. Atmospheric greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as CO2, methane (Fig. 2), and CO have been monitored continuously since 1984, 1988, and 2000, respectively. Monitoring and routine observations cover physical, chemical, and biological oceanography carried out along the cruise track of the RV Shirase, including the 110° E and 150° E meridians, as well as sea-level observation at Syowa. Ecological monitoring includes annual observations of terrestrial flora at fixed sites around Syowa and in the Yukidori Zawa and Adélie penguin census at rookeries near Syowa.


Figure 2. Concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) measured at Syowa Station.
2.3. 	A success in the first observation with PANSY large-scale atmospheric radar at Syowa
A large atmospheric radar system named PANSY (Program of ANtarctic SYowa Meso-, Strato-, and Troposphere/Incoherent Scatter [MST/IS] Radar, cf. IP63/XXXIII ATCM) was installed at Syowa Station in the 2010–2011 austral summer season (Fig. 3). The first observation was carried out successfully on March 25 to receive backscatter echoes from the clear-air turbulence in the lower troposphere and 3-dimensional wind velocities up to 5–6 km were profiled. The system was designed to obtain dynamical information for understanding how the atmospheric system from the surface up to 500 km works, with precise measurement of winds and plasma parameters, and to contribute to improving the global atmospheric model for better forecasting the future global climate.
With additional installation work in the next Antarctic season, the system will become fully operational for observing the Antarctic atmosphere, where a number of unique phenomena such as the ozone hole, katabatic winds, polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs), polar mesospheric clouds (PMCs), and auroras occur.

Figure 3. The PANSY radar system installed at Syowa Station in the 2010–2011 Antarctic season.

2.4. 	Responses of penguins to environmental variability
A JARE-52 biology team conducted field observations in the Lützow-Holmbukta region. One worthy of noting is a research program on the ecological responses of penguins to regional climate change. The researchers deployed various data loggers on Adélie penguins breeding near Syowa Station and examined the at-sea behavior and ecology of the penguins (Fig. 4). The obtained data include novel video images of penguin feeding behavior under fast ice (http://www.nipr.ac.jp/info/penguin), detailed foraging locations in relation to sea-ice conditions, and so on. The program will be continued over the next two austral summers and will examine the effect of changing sea-ice conditions and climate on penguin ecology.

Figure 4. An image obtained from a penguin-mounted camera, showing Adélie penguins swimming under sea ice.
