





Review of the Implementation of the Madrid Protocol: Annual report by Parties (Article 17)






Review of the Implementation of the Madrid Protocol:
Annual report by Parties (Article 17)
Summary
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol). This Information Paper addresses the annual reporting duty set out in Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol, which requires Parties to report annually on the steps taken to implement the Protocol.  The level of compliance with this requirement of the Protocol was established by examining all Information Papers available at the Secretariat website for the period1998-2010; annual reports available on national Antarctic programme websites; and annual reports submitted through the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES).   The level of compliance by Parties with their annual reporting duty since the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol, while showing a broadly increasing trend, is still relatively low (below 65% for Consultative Parties, and – most years – equal or below 50% for Non-consultative Parties that are Parties to the Protocol).  Information papers submitted to the CEP and the ElES are the most effective ways available to Parties for complying with annual exchange of information requirements under Article 17 of the Protocol. 
    1. Introduction 
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol).  Through the Madrid Protocol, the Parties committed themselves to a comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and designated Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science.
Over the last two decades, the deliberations of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings have increasingly focused on the protection of the Antarctic environment, in particular since the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol in 1998 and the establishment of the Committee for Environmental Protection the same year. 
The success of the Antarctic Treaty in protecting the Antarctic environment hinges, inter alia, on the compliance of by each individual Party with its environmental obligations, in particular the implementation of the Madrid Protocol.
In order to assist Parties in furthering the protection of the Antarctic environment, UNEP and ASOC decided to review the implementation of the Madrid Protocol.  
As a first step of this review process, UNEP and ASOC are pleased to present this Information Paper on the annual reporting duty set out in Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol.  Under Article 17, “Each Party shall report annually on the steps taken to implement this Protocol.” Such reports shall include notifications of the measures each Party takes within its competence, including:
    • The adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with the Protocol; 
    • Efforts exerted, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no one engages in any activity contrary to the Protocol; 
    • Procedures to provide for prompt and effective response action to emergencies which might arise in the performance of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty;
    • The establishment of contingency plans for response to incidents with potential adverse effects on the Antarctic environment or dependent and associated ecosystems; and,
    • Any other notifications and information called for pursuant to the Protocol for which there is no other provision concerning the circulation and exchange of information. 
    2. Overview of annual reporting practice
The practice of reporting annually on the steps taken to implement the Madrid Protocol has evolved over the years.  
Whilst most Parties were reporting through the submission of an Information Paper to the Committee for Environmental Protection, some Parties reported that their annual reports were made available through their national Antarctic programme website.  Annex 4 of the Final Report of CEP VII (2005) lists internet addresses (URLs) where annual report information is published in accordance with Article 17 of the Protocol.1
In order to streamline the exchange of information, the Parties adopted Resolution 6 (2001) that sets out the information exchange requirements, including the format of the annual report under the Madrid Protocol.  The information exchange requirements are found at Appendix 4 to the Final Report of the XXIV ATCM.
Towards increasing the efficiency of the exchange of information, the Parties adopted Decision 10 (2005) requesting the Secretariat to develop an Electronic Information Exchange System. The Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) became operational on 15 September 2008 by Decision 5 (2008).
    3. Methods
As indicated in the introduction on the annual reporting practice, annual reports have been made available through three different media:
    1) Information papers submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection;
    2) National Antarctic programme websites; and,
    3) Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES).
In order to determine the level of compliance with the annual reporting duty, the following sources of information were used:
All Information Papers available at the Secretariat website from the ATCM XXII (1998) to the ATCM XXXIII (2010);
    4) Annual reports available on national Antarctic programme websites.  The websites visited are those referred to on the Annual Report section of the Secretariat website (Home > Information Exchange > Annual Report), and on the Parties section of the Secretariat website (Home > Antarctic Treaty > Parties), as well as those listed Annex 4 of the Final Report of CEP VII (2005); and,
    5) Annual reports submitted through the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) and referred to on the Annual Report section of the Secretariat website (Home > Information Exchange > Annual Report).
Two parties were also contacted to avail their annual reports as these were not directly available on their national Antarctic programme websites.
    4. Summary findings
    a) Consultative Parties
All Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are also Parties to the Madrid Protocol.  The level of compliance by Consultative Parties with their annual reporting duty since the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol is shown on Figures 1 and 2.  Although there was a significant increase in the level of compliance in the first three years, it remains below 65% since then, with at least one third of the Consultative Parties not reporting in any of the reporting years.

Figure 1: Number of Consultative Parties reporting under Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol since the entry into force of the Protocol



Figure 2: Percentage of Consultative Parties reporting under Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol since the entry into force of the Protocol

The analysis of the reporting frequency is shows in Figure 3.  At one end of the spectrum, only one Party has reported every year since the entry into force of the Protocol.  At the other end, one Party has never made available any annual report since the entry into force of the Protocol, according to the information sources available to UNEP and ASOC.


Figure 3: Reporting frequency by Consultative Parties

    b) Non-consultative Parties
Some of the Antarctic Treaty Non-consultative Parties are also Parties to the Protocol.  The level of compliance by Non-consultative Parties with their annual reporting duty since the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol is shown on Figures 4 and 5.  The level of compliance in most of the years is equal or below 50%. 


Figure 4: Number of Non-consultative Parties reporting under Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol since the entry into force of the Protocol

Figure 5: Percentage of Non-consultative Parties reporting under Article 17 of the Madrid Protocol since the entry into force of the Protocol
The analysis of the reporting frequency is shows in Figure 6.  Two Non-Consultative Parties have never made available any annual report according to the information sources available to UNEP and ASOC. It must be noted that one of these two Parties acceded to the Madrid Protocol in 2009. 


Figure 6: Reporting frequency by Non-consultative Parties
    5. Closing remarks
Information papers submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection and the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) are the most effective ways available to Parties for complying with annual exchange of information requirements under Article 17 of the Protocol.  Unless the information is consolidated into web pages or reports that are clearly labelled and easy to find, information posted at national Antarctic programme websites may not be an effective way of complying with this requirement.  In particular, providing a generic link to the home page of a ministry or a national Antarctic programme does not appear to be an adequate way of ensuring effective exchange of information.
Annual reporting is likely to be one of the simplest obligations for Parties to comply with. However, the reporting practice as assessed through the methods indicated above show that the level of compliance by Parties with their annual reporting duty since the entry into force of the Madrid Protocol, while showing a broadly increasing trend, is still relatively low.  This was already underscored at the XIII meeting of the CEP, which noted that “the Committee agreed that there is an urgent need to ensure that all Parties are fulfilling all information exchange requirements of the Treaty and Article 17 of the Environmental Protocol.” (CEP XIII Final Report, para. 14).  
It should be stressed that this Information Paper focuses solely on whether or not an annual report under Article 17 has been submitted through one of the multiple media available to Parties, as discussed above.  This Information Paper does not evaluate the actual content of the annual reports.  UNEP and ASOC intend to analyse the content of the annual reports in the future.

-----



