





Marine spatial protection and management under the Antarctic Treaty System: new opportunities for implementation and coordination




Marine spatial protection and management under the Antarctic Treaty System: new opportunities for implementation and coordination
Summary
Environmental protection and the sustainable use of living resources have been integral management objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System for several decades. The Antarctic Treaty – with its established mechanism for designating Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMAs) – provides specific tools for spatial management and essential recognition of outstanding values in the Southern Ocean. 
ATCMs are continuously demonstrating leadership in international environmental governance. The implementation of marine spatial protection and management measures in the Antarctic Treaty Area are however primarily small-scale, coastal measures. 
The establishment of effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area will require: 
    1) enhanced commitment and further action from the ATCM to put into operation the specific objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection concerning marine spatial protection and management through the designation of ASMAs and ASPAs; and 
    2) increased collaboration between the ATCM and CCAMLR relating to the identification, management and monitoring of marine areas in a manner consistent with the management objectives that are common to both bodies.
IUCN encourages Antarctic Treaty Parties to work closely with CCAMLR to identify relevant, broad-scale areas which are of interest to both bodies, including: 
    1) Scientific reference areas for climate change and ocean acidification; and 
    2) Representative areas that contribute to improved resilience and adaption of marine ecosystems to climate change and other environmental impacts. 
IUCN encourages the ATCM to take further action to implement the specific management objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to complement CCAMLR objectives and activities.
1. Marine spatial protection and management – an integral part of the Antarctic Treaty since the 1960s
Environmental protection and the sustainable use of living resources have been integral management objectives of the Antarctic Treaty System for several decades.1 During the 1960s, Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCMs) recognized the need to protect living resources from uncontrolled destruction and human interference.2 These two management objectives have been progressively developed within the ATS. Today they form the backbone of marine spatial protection and management in the Southern Ocean.
The need for supplementary management measures for specific areas in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean influenced the development of a framework for designating and managing areas for special protection – i.e. Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMAs) under Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Objectives and criteria for designating ASPAs and ASMAs include the protection of ecological processes and systems, specific scientific areas for comparative studies and areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value. On multiple occasions the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and the ATCM have confirmed marine spatial protection and management in the Southern Ocean as a priority issues.3 
1.1 The current framework for marine spatial protection and management
Recent discussions concerning spatial management measures and protection for areas of outstanding values in the Southern Ocean have occurred against the backdrop of increasing international recognition of the importance of marine spatial protection for sustainable ocean governance. Commitments and recommendations concerning the widespread implementation of networks of marine protected areas (MPAs) have been issued by several multilateral fora, including the 2002 World Summit for Sustainable Development (WSSD), the 2003 World Parks Congress and the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).4
Within international policy frameworks, the term ‘marine protected area’ is used as an umbrella term that refers to a wide range of options for the spatial management of human interactions with the marine environment. Management options include a range from strictly protected no-take reserves to areas in which multiple interactions with the marine environment are allowed. MPAs are being established in many oceans of the world as a tool to achieve objectives including the conservation of biodiversity and habitats, co-ordination of activities in multiple-use areas, maintenance of healthy ecosystems and the sustainable exploitation of marine living resources.5
The Antarctic Treaty – with its established mechanism for designating ASPAs and ASMAs in accordance with Article IX and Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection – provides specific tools for spatial management and essential recognition of outstanding values in the Southern Ocean. Accordingly, ASPAs and ASMAs are properly regarded as a regionally implemented framework for establishing MPAs. 
The ATCM has designated several ASMAs and ASPAs that incorporate marine spaces. These areas target protection of coastal sites as opposed to marine spatial protection and management of marine areas more broadly.6 The CEP has advised the ATCM to “develop a strategy and work towards the establishment of effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area within the next three years, through the designation of Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) and Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) under Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection”.7
ATCMs are continuously demonstrating leadership in international environmental governance. The implementation of marine spatial protection and management measures in the Antarctic Treaty Area are however primarily small-scale, coastal measures.8 They do not at present contribute to effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area and additional action is required. 
1.1 Shared responsibility with CCAMLR
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) share responsibility for managing human interactions with the marine environment surrounding Antarctica with the Commission on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). The Commission is empowered to establish binding measures regarding the conservation and management of marine living resources including measures permitting the harvesting of particular species.9 CCAMLR also has the power and obligation to designate, in a manner consistent with its management objectives, closed areas for the purposes of scientific study or conservation.10 In accordance with Article 6 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection and ATCM Decision 9 (2005), the prior approval of CCAMLR is required with respect of marine areas before ASPAs or ASMAs can be designated by the ATCM. 
In accordance with a series of steps as endorsed by its Scientific Committee (SC), CCAMLR is currently working towards the establishment of a representative system of MPAs in the Southern Ocean by 2012.11 In 2009 CCAMLR adopted a Conservation Measure concerning the ‘Protection of the South Orkney Islands southern shelf’ that designates a marine protected area in which fishing activities are prohibited (subject to exceptions concerning scientific research)12.
2. Need for further implementation of marine spatial protection and management activities by the ATCM
While acknowledging SC-CAMLR13, together with the CAMLR-Commission14, as the lead body on issues relating to spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity, decisions and deliberations of the ATCM have confirmed that: 
    1) this ‘does not preclude in any way the development by the CEP of ASPAs and ASMAs which have in whole or in part a marine component’15; and that 
    2) there is a need for a more coordinated approach to spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity between the two bodies.16
The implementation of complementary and harmonized spatial protection and management of marine biodiversity across the Antarctic Treaty System17 will require: 
    1) enhanced commitment and further action from the ATCM to put into operation the specific objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection concerning marine spatial protection and management through the designation of ASMAs and ASPAs; and 
    2) increased collaboration between the ATCM and CCAMLR relating to the identification, management and monitoring of marine areas in a manner consistent with the management objectives that are common to both bodies.
The ATCM retains its right and obligation to provide a venue for representatives of Antarctic Treaty Parties to consult together on matters of common interest to promote the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty. IUCN welcomes CEP’s forthcoming workshop on Marine and Terrestrial ASMAs and the resulting work towards producing guidelines for preparing marine and terrestrial ASMA management plans. IUCN encourages Committee Members, Observers, and invited experts to discuss at this workshop the need for increased use of ASMAs as effective management measures for marine areas. IUCN also welcomes and encourages further discussion concerning the use of ASPAs to achieve effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity. 
In addition to ongoing discussions within the CEP concerning spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity, further work is needed from the ATCM. IUCN encourages the ATCM to take further action to implement the specific management objectives of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to complement CCAMLR objectives and activities. A key area for further action is the identification of candidate areas for marine spatial protection and management fulfilling the objectives of ASMAs and ASPAs, especially those concerning the protection of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness sites. 
3. Opportunities for increased cooperation between ATCM and CCAMLR
The need – and opportunity – for increased cooperation between the ATCM and CCAMLR arises from the overlap of both bodies’ objectives and competence concerning the identification, management and monitoring of marine areas. As identified by the CCAMLR MPA Workshop and by several parties to the ATCM, the objectives relating to identification and implementation of MPAs under CCAMLR are comparable to those of ASPAs and ASMAs (see tables below). 18 
Below two main fields for increased cooperation between ATCM and CCAMLR are described in more detail: identification, management and monitoring of scientific areas and representative areas.
3.1 Scientific areas
The Protocol on Environmental Protection and the CAMLR Convention both provide for spatial protection and management for the purposes of scientific research. During the CCAMLR MPA Workshop, participants acknowledged the need for such measures. Table 1 contains relevant extracts from the Protocol on Environmental Protection, CAMLR Convention and MPA Workshop report.
Table 1
Protocol on Environmental Protection
CAMLR Convention
CCAMLR MPA workshop

Art 3.1. Any area, including any marine area, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, [...] values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research.

Art. 3.2 Parties shall seek to identify [...] and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Area:

(a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities;

(e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research;

Art 9.1 The function of the Commission shall be to give effect to the objective and principles set out in Article II of this Convention.

Art 9.2 The conservation measures [...] include the following:

(g) the designation of the opening and closing of areas, regions or sub-regions for purposes of scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection and scientific study;

61. The workshop agreed that conservation outcomes appropriate for achieving the objectives in CCAMLR Article II would include the maintenance of biological diversity as well as the maintenance of ecosystem processes.  

62. It was agreed that attention may need to be given to the need for, inter alia, protection of:

(ii) scientific areas to assist with distinguishing between the effects of harvesting and other activities from natural ecosystem changes as well as providing opportunities for understanding the Antarctic marine ecosystem without interference;

Scientific reference areas for climate change and ocean acidification research
The Antarctic environment has been described as the ‘Earth's most powerful natural laboratory’.19 Scientific references areas in the Southern Ocean should be established to enable the study and monitoring of the effects of climate change and ocean acidification on environments and ecosystems that remain largely free from human interference. Improved knowledge of these effects is significant for the Antarctic region, and also for the planet as a whole. Deliberations within the Antarctic treaty system already support the identification and designation of marine scientific reference areas that facilitate, for example, a better understanding of how to manage human activities in light of climate change impacts.20
    • Climate Change 
Globally connected atmospheric and oceanic processes ensure that what is happening around the world will impact Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. Conversely, changes in atmospheric and oceanic circulation in the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean are affecting global weather patterns and other environmental changes.21 Further study of past and present changes to Antarctica’s climate and environment will help to distinguish between natural variability and the impact of human activity on these systems. A more comprehensive knowledge of the physical, biological, chemical and geological processes in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean will improve current coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice models and thus facilitate more accurate calculations of what is most likely to happen in the future.22
    • Ocean Acidification
The Southern Ocean plays a vital role when it comes to ocean acidification – the ‘other CO2 problem’ – the ongoing uptake of human-induced atmospheric CO2 and acidification of the Southern Ocean, producing conditions that are increasingly unfavourable to the life cycle of multiple calcifying plankton species and other calcifying organisms.23 Impacts on phytoplankton and zooplankton will feed up through the food chain and have implications for predators such as fish, birds and mammals. The direct and indirect impacts of ocean acidification and ocean warming on marine ecosystems and productivity have not been comprehensively assessed.24 Because colder waters absorb carbon dioxide more readily than warmer waters, polar and sub-polar areas are predicted to be most severely impacted by ocean acidification over the coming century.25 
Establishing scientific references areas for the purpose of studying climate change and ocean acidification and its potential impacts is of interest to both ATCM and CCAMLR. Parties at the ATCM have recognised the need to address the impacts of climate change and ocean acidification.26 They should now establish ASPAs and ASMAs as an effective regional and global response to this need. Scientific reference areas, kept inviolate from human interference and subject to scientific studies on ocean acidification, will provide important knowledge concerning the human-induced impacts on ecosystems and species that are vital contributors to global food security and sustainable economic development. Components of the Southern Ocean, particularly relatively untouched areas such as the Ross Sea, present a unique opportunity to differentiate the impacts of global climate change from other direct human interactions. Furthermore, relatively undisturbed marine ecosystems in the Southern Ocean are important reference points and benchmarks for efforts to develop of effective methods to mitigate environmental damage and restore degraded systems.
3.2 Representative areas 
As outlined in Table 2, the Protocol on Environmental Protection and the CAMLR Convention also provide for the specific protection and management of representative areas. The CCAMLR MPA Workshop has also acknowledged the need for such measures. 
In 2009, the joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop noted that a representative system of marine protected areas would serve the purpose of conserving representative components of Antarctic marine biodiversity.27
Table 2
Protocol on Environmental Protection
CAMLR Convention
CCAMLR MPA workshop

Art. 3.2 Parties shall seek to identify [...] and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Area:

(b) representative examples of major [...] marine ecosystems;

(c) areas with important or unusual assemblages of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals;

(d) the type locality or only known habitat of any species; 

Art 9.1 The function of the Commission shall be to give effect to the objective and principles set out in Article II of this Convention.

Art 9.2 The conservation measures [...] include the following:

(g) the designation of the opening and closing of areas, regions or sub-regions for purposes of scientific study or conservation, including special areas for protection and scientific study;

61. The workshop agreed that conservation outcomes appropriate for achieving the objectives in CCAMLR Article II would include the maintenance of biological diversity as well as the maintenance of ecosystem processes.  

62. It was agreed that attention may need to be given to the need for, inter alia, protection of:

(i) representative areas28

Representative areas for ecosystem resilience and adaptation
The joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop also noted that a representative system of marine protected areas could also be designed in such a way to ‘provide areas to increase the resilience of the Antarctic marine ecosystem to climate change or other impacts’. 29
Maintaining representative examples of marine ecosystems of sufficient scale, with minimal or no human impact, affords space and time for organisms to adapt to incremental changes in ocean conditions (e.g., salinity, temperature) and sudden shocks including severe storms or undersea earthquakes. Most species have evolved some capacity to survive these periodic stressors. However, research of phenomena such as coral bleaching suggests that species that are less-stressed by human activities have a greater capacity to recover from extreme events.30
Studies in other non-Antarctic ecosystems suggest that reduction of non-climatic stressors enhances the resilience of biodiversity to climate change and ocean acidification.31 Accordingly, ASMAs and ASPAs could provide beneficial conditions for the natural adaptation of species and ecosystems by insulating representative examples from stressors associated with human activity. Parties to the ATCM have previously noted that ASPAs and a protected areas system should become an increasingly important tool for mitigating the impacts of climate change, by ensuring that other pressures are minimized.32
3.3 Identification of areas and predictive management
As noted previously, a network of protected areas in the Southern Ocean would need to flexibly account for the movements of many species across large distances and dramatic changes to their abundance.33 Warming waters, local population shifts and altered regional ecosystems call for the application of predictive spatial protection and management measures in areas expected to be future refugia and areas less likely to drastically change. Allowing for predictive as well as adaptive spatial protection and management is consistent with the need to take a precautionary approach to marine management, which is firmly embedded in the CCAMLR management framework. Operationalizing a precautionary approach also means that scientific uncertainty associated with certain areas of the Southern Ocean should not preclude preventative measures to protect the environment. 
Increased collaboration in the identification, management and monitoring of areas that are of interest to both the ATCM and CCAMLR could be facilitated within the CEP by the following actions:
    1) continuous and increased engagement with SC-CAMLR, for example by providing relevant data and expertise to the appropriate fora and processes such as the CCAMLR MPA workshop (August 2011), or by providing additional information to the protected areas database; 
    2) formal recognition – possibly by an ATCM measure – of the need to enhance collaboration between the ATCM and CCAMLR, incorporating the establishment of procedures concerning the identification, management and monitoring of areas that are of interest to both ATCM and CCAMLR objectives; 
    3) recognition of the need for – and establishment of – further, in-depth joint discussions with CCAMLR concerning the identification, management and monitoring of areas in accordance with ATCM and CCAMLR objectives (such action could include the use of CCAMLR bioregionalization process to support ASPA and ASMA proposals); 
    4) drawing on the above discussions, preparation of ASPA and AMSA proposals in accordance with the ATCM’s rules of procedure and in consultation with CCAMLR.
4. Conclusions 
The Antarctic Treaty System contains detailed and firmly established frameworks for the spatial protection and management of marine environments in the Southern Ocean.
IUCN is encouraged by the forward-looking discussions and decisions taken by the CEP and the ATCM concerning the progressive enhancement of spatial protection of marine biodiversity within the Antarctic Treaty Area. IUCN welcomes CEP’s forthcoming workshop on Marine and Terrestrial ASMAs to exchange best practice and to work towards producing guidelines for preparing marine and terrestrial ASMA management plans. IUCN encourages further discussions on Marine ASPAs concerning the establishment of effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity.
Acknowledging the lead role of SC-CAMLRs on issues relating to spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity, and noting that this role does not preclude in any way the development by the ATCM of ASPAs and ASMAs with a marine component, IUCN encourages Antarctic Treaty Parties to more actively engage in the identification of candidate areas for marine spatial protection and management that fulfill the objectives of ASMAs and ASPAs. 
IUCN welcomes the evolving efforts to establish coordination between ATCM and CCAMLR concerning spatial protection and management of Antarctic marine biodiversity. IUCN encourages Antarctic Treaty Parties to work closely with SC-CAMLR to identify relevant, broad-scale areas which are of interest to both bodies, including: 
    1) Scientific reference areas for climate change and ocean acidification; and 
    2) Representative areas that contribute to the improved resilience and adaption of marine ecosystems to climate change and other environmental impacts. 
While establishing an effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity through a system of specific management measures, attention should be paid to the opportunities to implement different objectives (e.g. scientific areas vs. representative areas) within similar spatial areas. An ecosystem-based management approach reflecting the different management and protection objectives is warranted in addition to detailed consideration of individual areas and would reflect on the obligation in Article 3 of Annex V of the Protocol that “Parties shall seek to identify, within a systematic environmental-geographical framework, and to include in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas: (a) areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be possible with localities that have been affected by human activities; (b) representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems; (e) areas of particular interest to ongoing or planned scientific research; (g) areas of outstanding aesthetic and wilderness value; (h) sites or monuments of recognised historic value”. Increased efforts thus need to be brought into establishing an appropriate, ocean wide strategy as well as adequate individual management plans possibly serving multiple objectives. 
