





New approach to study of climate change based on global albedo monitoring 




New approach to study of climate change based on global albedo monitoring 
The problem of determining the tendencies of global climate change remains to be in the focus of attention not only in scientific circles but also among policy-makers, economists and businessmen. There is no unambiguous understanding of the development of climatic changes on our planet among climatologists. Most of them believe that under a strong anthropogenic environmental impact, irreversible processes have occurred in the Earth’s atmosphere leading to global climate warming. Other scientists keep to the opinion of cyclicity of climate changes on the Earth, which are well-known from the studies of bottom sediments of the water bodies and different characteristics of glaciers. 
The “climate” notion is defined as a statistical multiyear regime of weather conditions. The weather conditions or the state of the atmosphere are determined by physical processes of interaction of the atmosphere with space and the Earth’s surface. The weather is characterized by meteorological elements and their changes. The meteorological elements describe the state of the atmosphere and the atmospheric processes. A full set of meteorological elements allowing us to have a true understanding of weather conditions at the place under consideration at a specific time or over some time interval includes more than 30 items. The most important elements are air temperature, pressure and humidity, wind, cloudiness, atmospheric precipitation, visibility range, sunshine duration, water surface and soil temperature, soil humidity and thickness and state of the snow and ice cover. It should be noted that the meteorological elements are interdependent parameters and many of them determine the feedbacks ensuring climate stability. At the same time the main attention of non-specialists in the field of climatology is focused on the air temperature to which the real climate changes on the Earth on the whole are related. Data of historically formed land network of meteorological stations were exclusively used initially to determine the tendencies of climate change. However the existing network of land meteorological (around 7000) and upper-air stations (around 1700) does not practically cover the oceans and is extremely non-uniformly distributed over the land surface. An analysis of the distribution density of the number of meteorological stations over 20 equal-area regions (~25.5 million km2) shows that the observation network especially in Asia, Africa and South America does not provide for obtaining reliable estimates of the regional air temperatures for most of 20 regions. The regions with the largest number of stations (>1100) refer to North America and partly include Great Britain. The regions with the number of stations of 450 to 800 include Europe, Russia, China, India and North and Central Africa. Finally three more regions where Japan, Australia and Oceania are located, have around 400 stations with an average density of 1 station per 64000 km2. Nine of 20 regions embracing the South Atlantic, the Pacific and Indian Oceans include 15 to 139 stations. The sparsest network of observation stations is located in the polar regions of the planet, which are often considered as the main indicators of global climate changes. Besides, the methodology of calculating mean monthly meteorological parameters and their optimal interpolation by the Earth’s area is questionable to some extent. 
Measurements of the Earth’s surface temperature made from satellites were intended to fill the information gaps of non-uniform distribution of the global meteorological network. As measurement instruments for this purpose, different IR and microwave radiometers are applied. However it should be taken into account that satellite data do not allow us simultaneously to obtain information for the entire Earth’s area and besides satellite sensors do not measure directly the surface air temperature. Satellite measurements cover the period of more than three decades beginning from November 1978 through to present. The instruments used measure the characteristics of the Earth’s surface radiation rather than the air surface temperature. The surface air temperature is determined by means of sophisticated transformation of initial data.  The integrated radiance values obtained in the thermal infrared channels are transformed into effective brightness temperatures according to Planck’s law and the effective temperatures are transformed into brightness temperatures, which are transformed for the materials with known surface emissivity values into the thermodynamic temperatures of the surface and the latter is finally transformed to the surface. At the next stage the brightness temperature for materials with the known emission coefficients is transformed to a thermodynamic surface temperature and the latter is finally transformed to the surface air temperature.
The procedure of atmospheric correction requires a detailed and reliable knowledge of atmospheric characteristics at the entire route along the line of sight from satellite. Model calculations are usually used for atmospheric correction. Recalculation of brightness temperatures to surface temperatures can be performed only at the known emissivity of the observed areas of the Earth’s surface, which is not always possible due to variety of Earth’s landscapes.
Conversion of thermodynamic temperatures to surface air temperatures is the most complicated and arguable transformation, since it is wholly based on theoretical models. It is quite often realized in a simple adiabatic approximation.
In addition to a complicated procedure of transformation of the signals received by satellite instruments to surface air temperature, satellite instruments are intended for every day use in weather forecasting and do not have calibration accuracy required for climate study.
So, the information database, which is used for the analyses of climatic trends is quite non-uniform and has some significant allowances at receiving the end results, which are later analyzed by specialists. It is clear that it is most convenient to use some integral indicators as a certain universal numerical criterion of the atmosphere climate state. In the opinion of some Russian specialists the global albedo value is such an integral indicator. The global albedo is a non-dimensional value characterizing the percentage ratio of reflected solar radiation from the Earth’s surface to the incoming solar radiation value.
In the late 1990s, an almost forgotten technology of measuring the Earth’s global albedo from observations of the earthshine on the Moon was reconstructed. The technology is based on the fact that the Sun and the Moon are the main sources of illumination of the Moon’s surface. The direct solar radiation determines the brightness of the light part of the lunar disc and part of the solar radiation reflected from the Earth – the brightness of its dark part. The glow of the dark part of the lunar disc is observed when the Earth’s hemisphere exposed to the Moon is at least partly illuminated by the Sun. This weak glow is called the earthshine. The earthshine brightness is 4 - 5 orders less than the brightness of its part illuminated by the Sun. The ratio of the earthshine to the brightness of the lunar disc light part gives information about the absolute global albedo value of the Earth’s hemisphere exposed to the Moon. In spite of difficulty of interpreting the earthshine measurements, this experimentally inexpensive method of investigating the global climate changes is promising. Its essence is in measuring the brightness ratio of the lunar disc dark and light parts at symmetrical relative to the lunar disc center reference points. The method was first applied in France in 1928 and was used until 1954. 
Beginning from 1994 after the almost 40-year neglect, the systematic earthshine observations to determine the Earth’s global albedo were continued in the USA. Data obtained by this research group indicate a slight albedo decrease during the first five years of observations and a subsequent likewise slight increase.
The US specialists undertake efforts for expanding the observation network of the Earth’s global albedo by means of the aforementioned method. It is planned for the near future to supplement measurements in California with parallel observations in the Ukraine (Crimea) and in China (Yunnan province).
So the main technologies of monitoring global climate changes were formed by the end of the 20th century.
The Antarctic is one of the most interesting regions for investigating the Earth’s global albedo by the earthshine. Good characteristics of the atmospheric transparency, low concentration of aerosols and a long polar night period allow us to organize specialized studies in this direction at the station located to the south of the South Polar Circle. The Russian Antarctic Novolazarevskaya station, situated in the Schirmacher Oasis on the Queen Maud Land was chosen as a study site. 
The Russian Program of studies and monitoring of climate in 2009-2011 at Novolazarevskaya station included technological observations and collection of preliminary experimental data on the optical earthshine characteristics.
As measurement instruments, an astronomical zenith telescope AZT-7 and improved spectrophotometers earlier applied on Russian spacecraft were used. The measurements were registered by digital photo-cameras with increased resolution. 
As a result of studies made, the experimental data of observations of polar aurora, the Moon shine, the earthshine and some dawn phenomena were obtained. By comparing the brightness of the Sea of Crises on the light part of the lunar disc and the Sea of Moisture on the dark part, an approximate global albedo value of the Earth’s part exposed to the Moon was obtained. It was 0.34, which is close to the average albedo value of 0.32. The studies are continued at the present time.
The proposed method of determining the change of climatic tendencies does not mean in any way a refusal from other studies by means of the known methodologies. The more so as it is aimed at investigating the global climate change on our planet and does not provide information the about regional changes, which can have different trends both by the value and the sign. At the same time, its simplicity and accessibility create reliable conditions for acquisition of objective operational information on the change of climatic processes on a global scale.


