





Publication of the book “Antarctic Verses” in occasion of the 25th anniversary of “Uruguay Consultative Member of the Antarctic Treaty”






Publication of the book “Antarctic Verses” in occasion of the 25th anniversary of “Uruguay Consultative Member of the Antarctic Treaty”
Introduction:
In 2010, in occasion of the “Day of Antarctica” commemorated every year on October 7th in accordance to Act N° 17.727, the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute celebrated with a display of special events.
Among the ceremonies, it was presented a book of poetry (in Spanish) written by Delia Musso entitled “Antarctic Verses”.
Below are the introductory words by Roberto Appratto:
“Antarctica appears here as a territory that poetical language must conquer: the images of whiteness, the extension, the beauty, the strange and constantly changing nature are a landscape that Delia Musso wants “to read” as it is presented to her sight.
It is clear that this reading is not only descriptive; starting from the landscape-object, the amazement it causes, the poetry goes chasing similarities, plastic and cultural suggestions that makes us to look at Antarctica as a craft, a scenery, but also as a vehicle for the senses, carrying them to other spaces (mental, religious, mythical).
 	Other books of Delia Musso make possible to understand the privilege that the use of words with magical function has here, as a part of an incantation that wants to catch the reader and that seems to be natural, in the very essence of Antarctica. From there comes the sensual darkness in which that image lecture develops.
If the magical function of poetry means to move away from its communicative power, it can also establish a dialog through the impact that dream creates, that light characteristic of the descriptions, the tales; the poems in broad sense.
It is understood how poems translate, even when apparently talking about something else, everything the Antarctica gives overflowing.
In this case and also in other works of her, Musso shows that her expressive key, the best of her poetry, lays on the oblique lightness, as of decoding of that translation; in the capacity of going beyond confession to display that space her writing owns, without any other  aim but demonstrating the relationship between experience and language”.
Conclusion:
The presentation took place at the headquarters of the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute and had the participation of Government authorities and media which gave widespread coverage of the event.
A digital version of the book, in Spanish, can be found at this link: 
http://es.scribd.com/doc/39057466/Versos-Antarticos-de-Delia-Musso 

