





Legacy of IPY 2007–2008 for Japan




Legacy of IPY 2007–2008 for Japan 
Summary
The legacy of the International Polar Year2007–2008 (IPY) is introduced with two selected topics relevant to polar research in Japan. As one of the best legacies is to make the best use of IPY data, data management is crucial. IPY data are being incorporated in a new World Data System (WDS), closely related to the Global Change Master Directory. The Japanese National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) is acting as the International Program Office of WDS under the guidance of the ICSU. Another legacy is elevated outreach activities, especially for the younger generation. The Contest on Antarctic and Arctic Science for Junior High and High School Students has been attracting many young students to polar research. Schoolteachers have been dispatched to Syowa Station since 2009 to organize “Antarctic Classes” to introduce the “real” Antarctica to students in Japan. The National Institute of Polar Research’s new Polar Science Museum was established in Tokyo in July 2010 and has attracted about 2,500 visitors so far.

1.	Introduction
International Polar Year 2007–2008 (IPY) was one of the world’s most comprehensive international science programs. It greatly enhanced the exchange of ideas across nations and scientific disciplines. This kind of interdisciplinary exchange helped us understand and address grand challenges such as global environmental change and its impacts on our society. The scientific results from IPY are now emerging, but clearly, deep understanding will require creative use of the huge amount of data from many disciplines. A total of 63 projects, endorsed by the International Program Office of the IPY, were conducted with Japanese participants. Many of these projects provided well-coordinated platforms, and the spirit of most is still alive as a legacy in the post-IPY era. This Information Paper introduces two topics of the legacy relevant to Japan.

2. 	IPY Data Management
2.1. 	Japan’s contribution to IPY data management
The National Institute of Polar Research (NIPR), Japan, is tasked to utilize the science database as one of the National Antarctic Data Centers (NADCs) in the SCAR community, as well as contributing to the Antarctic Master Directories in the Global Change Master Directory (AMD/GCMD) of NASA. In the science database provided by NIPR, a total of 125 metadata sets, including those from IPY projects, have been accumulated so far by March 2011. In contrast, 210 metadata sets have been compiled in the Japanese portal of the AMD/GCMD. Metadata collected by IPY-endorsed projects have been compiled in another portal for the IPY in the GCMD. In the IPY portal server, the total number of metadata sets accumulated from Japanese activities is up to 140.
The Standing Committee on Antarctic Data Management (SCADM) under SCAR has been strongly connected with the activities of the IPY data management community (IPY Data and Information Service; IPY-DIS), as well as the subsequently initiated body of the Polar Information Commons (PIC) in the post-IPY era. The PIC aims at constructing a framework for long-term stewardship of polar data and information by strong collaboration of several multidisciplinary science bodies like the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA), the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC), the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), SCAR, Science Commons, etc., many under the International Council for Science (ICSU). The NIPR and other organizations in Japan have already made a significant contribution to the PIC.
A new World Data System (WDS) has been established on the 50-year legacy of the two ICSU science bodies of the World Data Centre (WDC) and the Federation of Astronomical and Geophysical Data Analysis Services (FAGS) through a decision of the 29th General Assembly of the ICSU in 2008. The new WDS concept aims at a transition from existing standalone WDCs and individual services to a common, globally interoperable, distributed data system that incorporates emerging technologies and new scientific data activities, including polar data as a legacy of IPY. More than 100 data centers expressed interest to join the new WDS. NIPR’s WDC for Aurora, which has been a member of the WDC since 1981, also expressed interest in joining the WDS. 
In October 2010, the ICSU Executive Board accepted the offer from the Japanese National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) to host and financially support the International Programme Office (IPO) for WDS. The office manages and coordinates the establishment and operations of WDS, and takes responsibility for outreach and promotional activities. The first ICSU WDS Conference—Global Data for Global Science (http://wds-kyoto-2011.org/circular.html)—will be held at Kyoto University in September 2011. This is the first international gathering to build a smooth network with advanced interconnections between data management components for disciplinary and multidisciplinary applications for polar regions.
Several different aspects of scientific data collected in polar regions have great significance for global environmental research in this century. For constructing an effective framework for long-term stewardship of the polar data by using a new strategy like the PIC, prompt applicability is required for digital data and Internet technology, by utilizing such a repository network service. In addition to the activities of SCAR, IASC, and IPY, tight linkages with the other science bodies under ICSU, CODATA, and WDS are recommended both for the national and international communities.

Figure 1. Flow of data publication on polar science, including those of IPY 2007–2008.

3. 	Outreach Activities
3.1. 	Polar Open Forum for Junior High and High School Students
An outreach program, the Polar Open Forum for Junior High and High School Students, was launched in 2004 as part of the IPY project by the Science Council of Japan and the NIPR to broaden interest in polar sciences among the next generation. The catchphrase of the forum was “Antarctic and Arctic Proposals from School Students.” The forum has been held annually for five years. 
Successful proposals were implemented by the Japanese Antarctic Research Expeditions (JAREs) over-wintering at Syowa Station. The results of the experiments were reported back to the students through an Intelsat TV conference system from Syowa, while the expedition members enjoyed conducting the experiments.
This five-year outreach campaign was reviewed, and it was decided that this kind of outreach activity for the younger generation should be continued as a legacy of the IPY for recruiting future polar scientists. The title of this campaign was renamed “Contest on Antarctic and Arctic Science for Junior High and High School Students,” and the event to honor and introduce proposals was named the “Junior Forum on the Antarctic and the Arctic for Junior High and High School Students.” A total of 115 proposals from 25 schools were submitted, and three research proposals, including “Responses of plankton to light in polar waters,” from a junior high school student, won the first prize last year. The forum to celebrate the winners and to present the successful proposals was held on November 14, 2010, at the NIPR in Tokyo with about 100 students, teachers, and others. The participants explored the NIPR’s new Polar Science Museum and deepened their understanding of Antarctica and its science. This museum is introduced in section 3.3 of this Information Paper.

Figure 2. Award ceremony for the Contest on Antarctic and Arctic Science for Junior High and High School Students, November 14, 2010, at NIPR.

3.2. 	Antarctic Classes from Syowa Station by schoolteachers
Through communication with students and schoolteachers on the above-mentioned contest, a new program emerged to send schoolteachers to Antarctica with JARE personnel. They are tasked to organize Antarctic Classes utilizing an Intelsat TV conference system from Syowa Station for their students and those in other schools during their stay at Syowa. Two teachers have been selected and dispatched to the Antarctic each year during austral summer by the NIPR since 2009. After their return from the Antarctic, they have been giving lectures on Antarctica and JARE to students of many schools.

Figure 3. Antarctic Class, connecting Syowa Station and a junior high school in Tachikawa City, Tokyo through an Intelsat TV conference system in February 2011.


3.3. 	Polar Science Museum at NIPR
The NIPR established the 1,100 m2 Polar Science Museum in late July 2010 on its campus in Tachikawa City, Tokyo (http://www.nipr.ac.jp/science-museum). It has exhibitions titled “Aurora,” “Atmosphere and Ice,” “Syowa Station,” “History of JARE,” “Rocks and Meteorites,” and “Wildlife,” with a four-meter-diameter domed theater showing films on auroras and polar research topics. Each exhibition displays scientific specimens collected in the Arctic and the Antarctic such as penguins, plants, rocks, meteorites, etc. The museum also exhibits models of ice breakers and used research equipment like an ice drill employed at Dome Fuji Station to collect a 3,025-meter-deep ice core and an old snow vehicle used for a Japanese south pole research traverse in 1968–1969. Films, shown on monitors in the museum, introduce field research, logistic activities, and the life of JARE personnel. This museum has often been utilized for school excursions and on the occasion of the Polar Open Forum for Junior High and High School Students. Events like Science Café have been held in the museum, where scientists give talks on research topics to visitors. More than 2,500 visitors have enjoyed the museum so far.


Figure 4. The National Institute of Polar Research’s Polar Science Museum, Tokyo.


