





The excitement "Antarctica" 
distance in itself invisible





The excitement "Antarctica" 
distance in itself invisible

This project is meant to exhibit the beauty of Antarctic nature and the life of Bulgarians, who are there together with other nations to explore and research. Our willingness is to transfer in our everyday life 
The perception and the understanding of Antarctica,
and to share our concerns about a loss that world may suffer, as a result of a rude industrialization, global warming or a national interest, if the pure, virgin environment is destroyed. Though distant and difficult to reach, Antarctica is a part of our world. “The end of the world” is quite popular in scientific, social and touristic aspect. The mystic appealing power of this land is well known. Many people are dedicated to working there for years, with no significant material incentive. Could this be a result of redefined values of everyone, who has spent few weeks in Antarctica? What would the world lose if it disappears, or it is no more what it is now?
 Livingston Island is scenic and interesting, but has harsh climate – strong winds, unstable weather and relatively low summer temperatures.  The Bulgarian base is located at the East coast of South bay, at the foot of the Friesland Mountain. Seen from above, the base looks like a hut, with clean surroundings and despite the lively colors, it smoothly integrates into the landscape. The main building is situated in a way allowing scenic views in three directions thru the windows of the large room. The room offers multipurpose space for dining, work and leisure. The unique library of the base is also there to add to the very special social climate of the expeditions.


The exhibition has a flexible structure, which adapts to the exhibit space. The inclusion of all elements is not mandatory. For each internal or external space shall be developed specific design, suggesting presence in Antarctic atmosphere. Up to date were prepared four design projects:
    • for open space  or a vast hall, 
    • for the History museum in Sofia, as a part of the exhibition of the Bulgarian Antarctic expedition, 
    • * for the Alma Mater gallery at the Sofia University St Kliment Ohridsky, 
    • * for a small gallery at the Wright State University, Ohio, US,  

(*) the last two are already performed.


The complete version of the installation consists of:

        1. Video expressions
    • 8 video clips, having 4 melodies by the composer Simo Lazarov as a sound track, displayed simultaneously on two screens, as a replica of the main room windows of the base facing Emona bay, the coast and the Friesland mountain, jokingly called  ' TV channel 1' and 'TV channel 2', 
    • Video show on a large semitransparent screen – 1 or 2 clips with nature sounds from Livingston.
 
    2. Sculpture
Three types of objects, plaster and foam cast, in the shape of a tetragonal box, bordered by the plaster shell, with an upper foam surface in a mild color, looking immersed in the plaster body. Each object has its own lighting thus resembling the ice crust of the Livingston Island glittering in the dark. The sculptures are meant to express the intense feeling for color and substance, yielded while looking at the Antarctic scenery.  
 
    3. Photography
Two sets to perform different functions within the installation: 
        ◦ one composed by sceneries, panoramic views and impressions to complete the synchronized video show,  
        ◦ the other is composed by 'portraits of natives’ – penguins, seals, birds, etc. as well as expedition participants. 

    4. A map of Livingston island
The map is printed on a vinyl sheet (3 x 5 m approx.), spread on the floor. Geographical names are in Bulgarian, and among them are places named by the Bulgarian expedition. The map finalizes the installation, providing orientation for the visitor, intensifying the perception for presence. 
