





Medical evacuation reported by the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol





Medical evacuation reported by the 
Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol

Late in the evening of January 31, 2011, the Swedish sailing boat ARTEMISA II anchored in Caleta General Richieri, very close to Brown station facilities. On the following day, three Swedes disembarked. One of them, a 60 year-old man, had symptoms of evident weakness, yellowish skin and difficulty to breath and walk normally.
The sailboat captain requested assistance from Brown Station as regards the actions to be taken for an eventual sanitary evacuation of this crewman, as for being a nurse she understood that this could be a probable clinical manifestation of hepatitis and/or respiratory infection. Brown Station did not have a doctor at that time, besides it was under a refurbishing process.  The possibility of calling a doctor from a tourist cruiser, who are often at the station, was evaluated. Although it was scheduled that a doctor should arrive, no doctor had not arrived yet, so it was decided to request assistance from the Chilean President Gabriel González Station as well as checking the position of Chilean Army vessel Lautaro, that was on guard duty of the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol on that date. 
The captain decided to go on their walk along the area of Brown Station in order to assess the crewman’s health condition, as he stated that he felt better when walking and breathing fresh air. Some minutes later, and at a few meters from the station’s house building, this man, extremely weak, lost control and had to lay on the beach.  He was afterwards taken to the house building on a pneumatic boat.  He was coughing and had difficulty to breath.  Moreover, his heart rhythm went down very abruptly from 120 to 80 beats per minute.  
When contacting González Videla Chilean Station, both chiefs agreed that it was convenient to have the Chilean Station nurse move to Brown Station and, eventually, to transfer the patient to the Chilean station while waiting for the arrival of Lautaro vessel at one-hour sail from that station.  
When the nurse from González Videla Station arrived, he checked that the patient’s beats per minute had declined to 40. It was decided to move him urgently to the medical office at the Chilean Station in order to stabilize him and deliver him emergency oxygen.
Once at the González Videla Station, the patient was stabilized and, in face of the impossibility of having a Chilean Army Force helicopter at that time, he was evacuated on Lautaro vessel to Frei Station, and then by air to Punta Arenas. He was hospitalized there and he recuperated.
These actions show the usefulness of the Combined Antarctic Naval Patrol with respect to the support and safety provided to all who operate in the Antarctic Peninsula area.

