





Report on IPY Oslo Science Conference Session on Non-Native Species




Report on IPY Oslo Science Conference Session on Non-Native Species
Summary
The scientific outputs of the IPY Oslo Science Conference related to Non-Native Species in the Polar Regions are compiled in this Information Paper in order to contribute to the discussion of the Committee on this issue.
Introduction
At CEP XII, 2009, Australia, France and New Zealand presented a proposed work program for CEP action on non-native species, in line with the high priority afforded to this issue through the CEP’s 5 year work plan (ATCM XXXII WP 5). An ICG was established, convened by France, in order to discuss the overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by non-native species, and to develop a suggested set of generally applicable measures to prevent or minimise the risk of the introduction of non-native species (including the transfer of species between sites in Antarctica). The ICG continued to work during a second intersession period, convened by New-Zealand (see ATCM XXXIV WP34)
Meanwhile, the IPY Oslo Science Conference was held in Norway from 6 to12 June 2010. This conference was an opportunity to catch up on the most important scientific outputs of the last IPY. Among the 39 sessions planed by the organizers, one session of the Theme 3 (Polar ecosystems and biodiversity) was dedicated to non-native species (session T3-2 Invasive and introduced species in polar environments). France offered to report to CEP XIV on the outcomes of the session (paragraph 319 of the CEP XIII final Report).
Session T3-2 Invasive and introduced species in polar environments
The session was convened by Kevin A. Hughes (United Kingdom), with the help of two co-convenors, Susan Kutz (United-States) and Jen Lee (South Africa).
Eleven oral communications and 7 posters were presented. They covered a wide range of topics, including vertebrates, invertebrates, plants and microorganisms, based on studies carried out in Arctic, Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic, both in marine and terrestrial habitats.
About 50 -70 people attended this session.
The titles and summaries of the presentations are listed in Annex. 
The objectives of the session was to facilitate discussion of recent Arctic and Antarctic research on non-native species, and to inform the development of future applied in polar invasion biology, including research to assist policy makers.
Several documents arising from the work presented at Oslo have been submitted to CEP XIV in order to assist the Committee’s work on the NNS issue (e.g. ATCM XXXIV WP12 Raising awareness of non-native species introductions: Workshop results and checklists for supply chain managers, COMNAP / SCAR).




Session T.3-2 Invasive and introduced species in polar environments
Friday 11 June and Saturday 12 June 2010

Oral Presentations
Aliens in Antarctica
Y. Frenot1, D. Bergstrom2, S. Chown3, P. Convey4, N. Gremmen5, A. Huiskes5 
1French Polar Institute, 2Australian Government Antarctic Division, 3Centre of Excellence for Invasion Biology, 4British Antarctic Survey, 5Netherlands Institute of Ecology 
Biological invasions are amongst the most significant threats to biodiversity, both threatening individual species, and being responsible for major changes to ecosystem structure and functioning world-wide. Despite Antarctica’s isolation and harsh climatic conditions, invasions are now recognized to constitute a serious risk to the region: the ice-free areas of Antarctica and the surrounding sub-Antarctic islands support a large proportion of the world’s seabird species, and their terrestrial biotas, though species poor, include a high proportion of endemic and well adapted taxa. Species in these ecosystems have not evolved to cope with the impacts of large predators (cats, rats, mice) or terrestrial mammal herbivores (rabbits, reindeers, sheep...) which have been introduced by humans, and native communities are consequently impacted. With rapid climate change occurring in some parts of Antarctica, increased numbers of introductions and enhanced success of colonization by aliens are likely, with consequent increases in impacts on ecosystems, as is already visible in the sub-Antarctic islands. Further development of human activity in these regions (including science, logistics, tourism, fisheries and recreation) will increase the risk of unintentional introductions of organisms which have a suite of life history traits that benefit them during transport, establishment and expansion phases of invasion, and are likely to be favored by warming conditions..
We provide an up-to-date overview of the presence and status of non-native species in Antarctic and sub-Antarctic terrestrial, marine and freshwater ecosystems. The objectives of the IPY program “Aliens in Antarctica” will be presented, which provides, for the first time, quantitative information on the role and importance of different forms of anthropogenic transport of non-native species to Antarctica. The potential outcomes of this program in terms of planning environmental management and conservation will be highlighted.
Aliens in Antarctica - quantifying plant and animal propagules inadvertently carried into the Antarctic
A.H.L. Huiskes1, N.J.M. Gremmen1, D.M. Bergstrom2, K. A. Hughes3, J.E. Lee4 
1Netherlands Institute of Ecology, 2Australian Goverment Antarctic Division, 3British Antarctic Survey, 4Centre of Excellence for Invasion Biology, Stellenbosch University 
The impact of alien (non-native, introduced) species poses a major threat to many of the ecosystems of the world.  Several alien species (vascular plants, invertebrates) have already become established in Antarctica and a much larger number have invaded many of the sub-Antarctic islands. Climate amelioration facilitates successful colonization by non-native species.
The Southern Ocean surrounding the Antarctic continent and the sub-Antarctic islands has until quite recently isolated these areas from the other terrestrial biomes of the world. This barrier has been broken down by the greatly increased transport of people and goods to Antarctica. Although the presence of a number of alien species indicates that organisms from elsewhere can reach the Antarctic, there was a complete absence of information about the frequency with which propagules arrived, and the number of species represented in these propagules.
In our study we sampled visitors and cargo going to the Antarctic, to quantify the propagules load they carried. In addition we collected information about the regions people did visit before they came to the Antarctic, and about the use of the clothing and equipment they brought with them.
Preliminary results show that a considerable proportion of visitors to the Antarctic carry plant seeds with them, from a large number of different species. There are significant differences in the propagule load between different categories of visitors. In cargo destined for Antarctic stations plant seeds were found as well.
The protected status of Antarctica requires visitors to refrain from introducing alien organisms. By reducing the propagule number being carried into the Antarctic the probability of new biological invasions will be reduced. Our data will make it possible to devise an efficient and effective way of assuring that the transport of alien propagules to the Antarctic is minimized.
Quantification and management of a major invasion pathway into Antarctica
J. Lee1, K. Hughes2, N. Gremmen3, A. Huiskes3, D. Bergstrom4, S. Imura5 
1Stellenbosch University, 2British Antarctic Survey, 3Netherlands Institute of Ecology, 4Australian Government Antarctic Division, Kingston, 5National Institute of Polar Research 
Biological invasions threaten biodiversity in every biome on the planet. If biodiversity is to be preserved, the rate and impact of invasions must be reduced.  Importantly, although their impacts are often clear and widely appreciated, a bias exists in research effort to post-dispersal processes because of the difficulties of measuring propagule pressure. The Antarctic provides an ideal model system in which to investigate propagule movements because of the region’s isolation and limited number of entry routes. This study quantified (i) the number of propagules typically transported associated with the cargo of six operators of National Antarctic programs, (ii) cargo used for the construction and maintenance of two research stations, as well as (iii) propagules found associated with construction vehicles. Many of the taxa found to be transported into the region are cosmopolitan weeds, including aliens already present in parts of the Antarctic, indicating that logistics operations form part of a globally self-perpetuating cycle moving alien species between areas of human disturbance. By analyzing differences in propagule loads between cargo with different packaging and storage conditions several cost effective management recommendations have been developed which, if implemented, will substantially reduce the number of alien species entering the Antarctic region.
Human-mediated seed dispersal via footwear in the Arctic
C Ware1,2, D.M Bergstrom3, E Muller1, I.G Alsos1 
1Univeristy Centre in Svalbard, 2University of Tasmania, 3Australian Antarctic Division 
While the impact of alien species in the Antarctic, and particularly the sub-Antarctic, has been well researched, fewer investigations have been made of the threat of alien species to the northern polar region. In this study, we 1) investigated introduction of plant propagules to the high arctic archipelago Svalbard by different categories of visitors, and 2) evaluated the risk of introduced seeds to establish in Svalbard. We sampled the footwear of 260 visitors arriving to Svalbard during summer 2008 for seeds and moss fragments, and germinated them at a realistic Svalbard summer temperature. We found 1019 seeds and 470 moss fragments: an average of four seeds and nearly two moss fragments per visitor. Based on the total number of passengers arriving at the Svalbard airport over the year 2008, this equates to a yearly propagule load of over 390,000 propagules. Of the seeds collected, fifty-three species were identified belonging to 17 families, with the highest diversity and number of seeds in the Poaceae family. The presence and number of seeds on footwear was highest on those that had been used by participants in forests in the six months prior to travelling to Svalbard, while the number of seeds also increased with the amount of soil collected from footwear. In total 26% of the seeds germinated at 10 °C. Temperature increases in the arctic associated with climate change will generally make it easier for new species to establish and spread. Our data demonstrates that a large propagule load can be transported to Svalbard by one vector alone, and that a wide range of more temperate species has the capacity to germinate in the Svalbard climate.
The risk of biological invasions in the Antarctic
P. Convey1 
1British Antarctic Survey 
Ice-free habitats on land in Antarctica are effectively islands surrounded by hostile ice and ocean. Terrestrial ecosystems are extremely isolated, and have developed unique and striking features. True terrestrial vertebrates are absent, meaning that trophic webs consist only of invertebrates. Ecosystem structure is generally simplified, with few true native herbivores or predators present, and the predators in particular having very limited impact on their prey species. Over the last two centuries human activities have led to the accidental introduction and establishment on land of many non-indigenous species of vertebrate, invertebrate and plant, particularly to the ecosystems of the sub-Antarctic islands. These introductions have encompassed a range of trophic functions, some of which are poorly or not represented in indigenous ecosystems, in some cases leading to drastic alterations in ecosystem structure and function. A smaller number of introductions are already apparent in the maritime Antarctic, although the sub-Antarctic provides a direct warning of the likely trajectories of these and any future establishment events. This presentation will give an overview of the impacts of non-indigenous biota in Antarctic ecosystems to date, and their implications in a future where these ecosystems are also faced by some of the most rapid rates of environmental change on the planet.
Managing changes in biodiversity: explicit risk assessment protocols for the Antarctic
S.L. Chown1, J.E. Lee1, P.C. le Roux1, J.D. Shaw1 
1Stellenbosch University 
Biological invasions constitute both a realized and potential threat to Antarctic biodiversity. The realized impacts are widely documented, especially for the Southern Ocean islands. On the basis thereof, and using knowledge of changing climates, increasing human activity, and the life histories of species already invasive in the region, forecasts have been made for increasing potential threats to Antarctic biodiversity. In consequence, much management attention is now being given to the requirements for limiting new invasions. To be effective, management interventions require scientific understanding of the key steps during the invasion process, and how the rates of transition from introduction to invasion can be lowered. This amounts to knowledge of: 
    • the supply chain of goods and services into the region and the major risks that attend each link,
    • the characteristics and, if possible, the identity of species likely to be transported along the supply chain,
    • the non-indigenous species already present in the region and measures of their abundance and distribution through time, and likely causes of any change,
    • the extent to which population differentiation and human movements might elevate the risks of extralimital introductions,
    • the institutional arrangements that might most readily give rise to management action where it is required.
Here we explore the extent of this knowledge for the Antarctic region based on work undertaken prior to and during the IPY. We also provide several new quantitative risk assessment approaches that can be used for vascular plants and invertebrates. We highlight the lack of focus to date on explicit risk assessment protocols, on rapid response procedures for new introductions, and on understanding the ways in which operation of the Antarctic Treaty System influences invasive species management.
Assessing risk in a changing climate:  invasive alien species in the Northwest Territories, Canada
S Carriere1 
1Government of the Northwest Territories 
The Northwest Territories lags behind other jurisdictions in North America in preventing the introduction of, controlling and eradicating invasive alien species (IAS) that could threaten native ecosystems, habitats, or species.  There is a general lack of knowledge and research on these species in the NWT. Organizations, groups and communities are preparing to increase their awareness of the risks related to IAS and to help reduce that risk. Many communities have expressed concern over the potential effects of IAS in our northern ecosystems with a changing climate.  A risk assessment project, the first for this jurisdiction, is increasing opportunities to act early and to share resources now, to reduce future needs for large and expensive eradication/control programs in the North.  Findings and results of the project will be presented, including lessons from the past, entry pathway analysis, known location of IAS, standard monitoring protocols for detecting IAS in a vast jurisdiction with low population density.
Application of the global Invasive Alien Species Indicator in Antarctica
M.A. McGeoch1,2, J.A. Lee3,2, S.L. Chown3,2 
1Cape Research Centre, South African National Parks, 2Centre for Invasion Biology, 3Department of Botany & Zoology, Stellenbosch University 
Invasive alien species (IAS) pose a significant threat to biodiversity. The Convention on Biological Diversity’s 2010 Biodiversity Target, and the associated indicator for IAS,  stimulated globally coordinated efforts to quantify patterns in the extent of biological invasion and their impact on biodiversity and policy responses. Four measures were used in a pressure-state-response framework, i.e. number of documented IAS (pressure), trends in the impact of IAS on biodiversity (state), and trends in international agreements and national policy adoption relevant to reducing IAS threats to biodiversity (response). While the outcome demonstrated that the Target has not been met for this threat to biodiversity, Antarctica and islands were for a variety of reasons largely excluded from expression of the Indicator. Here we assess the relevance and potential for adoption of the IAS Indicator for monitoring and reporting on the status of, and trends in, IAS in the Antarctic region. Similar challenges to expression of the Indicator at global and Antarctic scales included adoption of standardized criteria for designation of species as invasive, sustainable data management and adoption of recommended management practices. However, Antarctic conservation bodies are well positioned to provide quantitative information on species conservation status, and of course the region remains comparatively un-invaded. The IAS Indicator was designed to be scaleable across national to regional and global scales. Its expression for the Antarctic region would contribute significantly not only to management of this threat, but also in future to a more representative global assessment of biological invasion.
Metamorphosis of the arctic terrestrial food webs: between collapse of native species and explosion of exotic predators?
NL Lecomte1, DE Ehrich1, NGY Yoccoz1, RAI Ims1, EF Fuglei2, HS Steen2, SWK Killengreen1, JAH Henden1 
1University of Tromsø, 2Norwegian polar institute 
Arctic terrestrial ecosystems are facing drastic changes in their structure and function, with the collapse of some key herbivores populations (e.g. lemmings) and the increasing presence of exotic predators (e.g. red foxes). Such recent metamorphosis raises conservation issues for native predators such as arctic foxes. Yet, how widespread these changes are still remains unclear. Here we present evidence for the competition between arctic and red foxes at our IPY study sites located in Northern Norway and Western Siberia. This competition occurs through the overlap in both prey and habitat use, where the dominant red fox excludes arctic fox from the richest areas. Historically, native predators have switched between small-mammal prey and migratory birds during the former regular cycles. Thus, we expect alternative prey to constitute a more important part of the diet for native predators in the near future. The resulting picture of the terrestrial Arctic will then imply structural conversion of animal guilds as well as a greater reliance of this ecosystem upon allochthonous flows of energy.
Vulnerability of Native Communities to Invasive Insects and Climate Change on Kerguelen Islands
M. Hullé1,2, M. Lebouvier1,3, A. Marais2,4, Y. Frenot5, D. Renault3 
1University of Rennes 1, 2INRA, 3CNRS, 4University of Bordeaux, 5French Polar Institute 
The sub-Antarctic islands provide a suite of environments and scenarios that give key opportunities to improve our understanding of the consequences of climate change and biological invasions on terrestrial ecosystems. Anthropogenically-related invasions and temperature changes are well documented on Kerguelen Islands (South Indian Ocean) and have profound impacts on indigenous biota. The present synthesis gives an overview of the vulnerability of the terrestrial communities in French sub-Antarctic Islands (Crozet, Kerguelen and Amsterdam) to two interacting factors: climate change and biological invasions.
Among the 15 introduced insect species that successfully established on Kerguelen Islands, one ground beetle, Merizodus soledadinus (Carabidae) and five aphid species (Aphididae) are widely distributed and impact native fauna and flora. In this talk, we will present some of the newest results collected on that species and we will more particularly focus on (i) the competitive interactions between native and introduced insects, including data on the dispersal ability and the trophic plasticity of M. soledadinus and (ii) the possible impact of polyphagous aphids on both native and introduced plants. Because (i) plant viruses are widespread worldwide, (ii) can be vectored by phytophagous insects and (iii) several plant species and vectors such as aphids were introduced on sub-Antarctic islands, we will also present some recent data demonstrating the prevalence of some introduced plant viruses on Kerguelen Islands.
Data were provided by a long term monitoring of fauna and flora (program IPEV Ecobio 136). This research was supported by the French Polar Institute (IPEV 136), CNRS (Zone-Atelier de Recherches sur l’Environnement Antarctique et Subantarctique) and the “Agence Nationale de la Recherche” (ANR-07-VULN-004, EVINCE). This research is linked with the SCAR Evolution and Biodiversity in the Antarctic research programme.
Establishment of the introduced red king crab (Paralithodes camchatchus) and snow crab (Chionocetes opilio) in the Barents Sea, and future development in a changing environment
A.-L. Agnalt1, K.E. Jørstad1, J.H. Sundet1 
1Institute of Marine Research, P.O. Box 1870 Nordnes, N-5817 Bergen 
Two commercially important crab species, red king crab (Paralithodes camchatchus) and snow crab (Chionocetes opilio) is now established as self-sustaining populations in the Barents Sea. Both species are non-native to the Barents Sea ecosystem. They are however, widely distributed in the north Pacific Ocean, and in addition, the snow crab is found naturally occurring in West Greenland and Eastern Canada. The red king crab was intentionally introduced by Russian scientist in the 1960ies. A significant increase in abundance as well as geographic distribution was observed in the 1990is. This led to the development of a fishery that has evolved and become very important commercially, both in Russia and Norway. Genetic comparisons between the Barents Sea red king crab and the Pacific populations have revealed similar levels of genetic variation. Estimated future environmental changes in the region, as e.g. increased temperature may represent new constraints regarding further expansion in distribution. Snow crab has only recently been established in the Barents Sea, in mid 2000. The population is restricted to colder waters in the northeast part of the Barents Sea. The crab is believed to have been accidentally introduced through ballast water. The population has increased rapidly in size, but there is so far no development of a commercial fishery. Preliminary genetic studies cannot exclude linkage to snow crab population in the Bering Sea, but further analysis is needed. The proposed environmental changes will possible restrict snow crab to expand in southern directions. Climate changes in the polar regions can increase the probability of natural migration of a number of species from the Bering Sea and across the Arctic Oceans.
Poster Session
The establishment of an alien invertebrate in terrestrial Antarctica
M R Worland1, K A Hughes1 
1British Antarctic Survey 
The flightless midge Eretmoptera murphyi was accidentally transferred from the sub-Antarctic island of South Georgia to Signy Island in the maritime Antarctic (60°S) during the late 1960s. This study surveyed the area around the site of introduction to assess their change in spatial distribution over the last 50 years and their habitat preference. A separate study examined the cold tolerance of larvae to understand their overwinter survival mechanism.
 Counts of the number of larvae in small cores of substrate showed that the midge is established in soil and moss and occurs in densities of up to 4.1 x 105 larvae m-2 over and area of c. 35,000 m2. Higher numbers of larvae were found in dead moss and peat than in either living moss or inorganic substrates
Experiments to determine the cold tolerance (lower lethal temperature) of summer-collected midge larvae showed that they have a super-cooling point (whole body freezing point or SCP) of c.‑5.0 °C, but survive experimental exposure to ‑13°C, giving them a measure of freeze tolerance. After acclimation at -4°C for 4 days the SCP remained unchanged but the LLT50 decreased to < -19°C.
Adult flies emerge from pupae during early January when the climate is at its mildest. The pathenogenic females lay batches of about 40 eggs which hatch into larvae. These overwinter in the surface layers of soil where the temperature on Signy Island may fall to below ‑10°C, compared with as little as -1.5°C on South Georgia. Higher insects are rare in the Antarctic and the introduction and establishment of a new species is an unusual event. The midge has overcome the two major barriers to colonisation of the Antarctic; its geographical isolation and the severe climate.
Human Influence Observed in The Vicinity of Polish "Arctowski" Station on Bird and Pinniped Local Populations
M Korczak1, K Chwedorzewska1 
1Department of Antarctic Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Ustrzycka 10/12, 02-141 Warsaw 
During thirty three expeditions to the Polish Antarctic Research Station “Arctowski” (65o09’41”S and 58o28’10”W) a significant influence of human activity on the environment was recorded. Also, the constantly growing number of tourist visits seems to change the behavioural response of wildlife. Disorders in numbers of bird and pinniped populations and leaving breeding areas by these species are some of the anthropopressure effects. The long term influence of human presence on the sensitive Antarctic ecosystem on the western shore of Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Archipelago, was studied. In the vicinity of “Arctowski” Station eleven breeding species of birds and five species of pinnipeds are encountered regularly, Leplonychotes weddellii and Mirunga leonina used to breed there. The presented data were gathered from literature and unpublished data collected by regular observations run by the Polish Antarctic research programs.
Some elements of the biome seem to be more sensitive than others, for example: the replacement of breeding areas of two penguin species, one Procellariiformes bird and two species of pinnipeds in the vicinity of “Arctowski”. The local skua population has shown some indication of synanthropization. An increase in population of skuas has been recorded in response to the station garbage. The impact of the human activity may have induced changes of abiotic and biotic factors influencing Antarctic animals and plants, like for example the presence of Salmonella sp. in the intestinal flora of the Pygoscelis papua.
Bio-geographical distribution of cyanobacteria from the Sör Rondane Mountains (East Antarctica)
Z Namsaraev1,2, MJ Mano1, R Fernandez1, P Simon1, A Wilmotte1 
1Centre for Protein Engineering, University of Liege, Liege, 2Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology RAS, Moscow 
The Sör Rondane Mountains are unexplored from the biological point of view. In 2007, 2009 and 2010, terrestrial samples were taken in a 50 km radius around the Belgian Princess Elisabeth station (BELSPO projects ANTAR-IMPACT and BELDIVA), and the cyanobacterial diversity has been studied by a polyphasic approach. This included a molecular study using 16S rRNA gene sequences, an isolation of cyanobacterial strains and a microscopic observation of environmental samples.
At least 16 morphotypes were observed, with a richness ranging from 0 to 11 per sample. Currently, by the molecular approach based on Denaturating Gradient Gel Electrophoresis, 15 OTUs were found : 3 new OTUs that are only found in the Sör Rondane Mountains, 5 OTUs endemic to Antarctica and 7 cosmopolitan OTUs.Among the cosmopolitan OTUs, four contain sequences found in polar and alpine biotopes and three were found in more temperate conditions. Five of the 15 OTUs were only related to uncultured cyanobacteria. Thus, the Western part of the Sör Rondane Mountains harbors a quite large cyanobacterial diversity despite permanently negative air temperatures. This high diversity may be explained by microniches due to local warming of darker rocks and presence of melt water, allowing the growth of cyanobacteria. Such more hospitable biotopes could be the sites of colonization by non-native species, a danger increased by global climate change. Therefore, a long-term monitoring is required.
Aerial biodiversity above two contrasting research stations in Antarctica
D.A. Pearce1, K.A. Hughes1, T Lachlan-Cope1, S.A. Harangozo1, A.E. Jones1 
1British Antarctic Survey 
A study of air-borne microbial biodiversity above two contrasting scientific research stations in Antarctica, one continental, one maritime, was undertaken to establish the potential source of microbial colonists. The study aimed to assess the likely origin, the influence of the local environment and the potential for human impact. Overall, the continental site had low microbial biodiversity, which included many sequence replicates. In common with other environmental studies, particularly in the polar regions, many of the sequences obtained were from as yet uncultivated organisms. No significant patterns were detected in aerial biodiversity between the austral summer and the austral winter. Very few marine sequences were detected irrespective of the distance to open water, and, around one-third of sequences detected were similar to those identified in human studies. For the maritime Antarctic, microorganisms typical of the local terrestrial environment were detected and microorganisms that would be considered evidence of human activity were not found.  The detected aerial microorganisms were therefore markedly different between the continental and maritime Antarctic sites.
Revealing alkane monooxygenase genes in ancient permafrost samples from Arctic and Antarctica
R. T. D. Duarte1, F. S. Paula1, D. C. Franco1, D. A. Gilichinsky2, V. H. Pellizari1 
1University of Sao Paulo, 2 Russian Academy of Sciences 
Polar environments naturally contain low concentration of hydrocarbons that are mainly biogenic in origin, such as alkanes. The presence of alkane degradation genes (alkane monooxygenase - alk) in pristine Antarctic sites brings the questions related to the origin of these genes in Antarctica. Our goal was to analyze the occurrence, diversity and biogeography of alk in ancient polar microbial populations. Antarctic and Siberian permafrosts, dating 5,000 to 8 millions of years, as well as surface soils (modern), were used to access genetic information of alk genes over space and time. To avoid contamination the permafrost cores were sampled with a portable dry drill (no drilling fluids) and its surface was aseptically removed. Clone libraries were constructed from PCR products with degenerate alk primers. Sequences were BLAST-analyzed on GenBank and also compared to our previous results on alk diversity in Antarctic marine sediments. Due to low bacterial content and long-time exposition of DNA to environmental hazards (subzero temperatures, etc.), to date only permafrost samples P07 (Siberia Kolyma lowland, 15,000 years) and P10 (Siberia Kolyma lowland, 120,000 years) and soil sample BAS01 (Antarctica, King George Island, modern surface soil) showed positive amplification for alk genes. Sequences from P10 (an Arctic marine sediment permafrost) matched modern alk from uncultured bacterial clones from modern Antarctic marine sediments (minimum of 93% identity), while P07 and BAS01 sequences were similar to uncultured clones from modern surface soils (81% and 86% identity, respectively). The relative low identities found for P07 and BAS01 suggests these could represent alk genes never studied before. Moreover, our results revealed that these genes were present in cold environments at least since 120,000 years ago, the last time our planet was in a period of warm climate. This finding also represents the oldest alk genes reported.


Molecular systematics of a nonnative vascular plant found near the Syowa Station, Antarctica
Megumu Tsujimoto1,2, Satoshi Imura1,2, Hiroshi Kanda1,2 
1Graduate School for Advanced Studies, 2National Institute of Polar Research 
A tuft of a nonnative vascular plant (Poaceae) was found about 25 km south of Syowa Station during the 36th Japanese Antarctic Research Expedition (JARE 36) in 1995 and later removed entirely during the JARE 49 in 2008.  This species was once identified as Poa trivialis L., a perennial weedy plant widely distributed throughout the northern hemisphere, originating from West Asia and Europe.  However, further study on the ecology of this plant brought the previous identification in question.  Re-identification has been undertaken based upon both morphological characteristics and molecular systematics.  Molecular systematic analysis of chloroplast DNA regions, ndhF and trnT-trnL, and nuclear ribosomal ITS regions indicated that the species belonged to genus Puccinellia instead of genus Poa.  In summer 2009, three species of genus Puccinellia, P. kurilensis, P. nipponica, and P. distans, grow in Japan were collected.  Further analysis was carried out using the sequence data from the collected sample in order to clarify the accurate taxonomic position of the species as well as to determine the possibility of the introduction of this higher plant into continental Antarctica from Japan.
Temporal dynamics of Avian Cholera epidemics observed for the first time among common eider ducks in Arctic Canada
H. G. Gilchrist1,2, C. Soos2, I. Buttler1, G. Seguin3, S. Lair3, A. Dallaire3, D. Blehert4, M. Forbes1 
1Carleton University, 2Environment Canada, 3Canadian Cooperative Wildlife Health Centre, 4United States Geological Survey 
Avian cholera, caused by the bacterium Pasteurella multocida, is one of the most common diseases causing mortality among North American waterfowl It appears to be emerging in new areas of the north, affecting wild bird populations nesting in polar environments. Between 2004 and 2009 we observed annual outbreaks of avian cholera in a breeding population of common eiders (Somateria mollissima) nesting at Southampton Island, Nunavut, Canada. Each year, we monitored disease onset and daily mortality among marked breeding hens.  We performed daily counts of carcasses, assessed total mortality by conducting a post-nesting survey of the entire island colony, and monitored change in colony size and adult survival over the years to explore the within and among year temporal dynamics of the disease. First mortalities were observed in 2004 after the East Bay eider population had increased annually by 16.9% since 2000 from an estimated 3320 to 5860 pairs. Onset dates of the annual epidemics advanced progressively in relation to the breeding phenology of the eiders between 2004 and 2006, but between 2006 and 2008, the epidemics started consistently 6 – 8 days after first nest initiation. Dates of first mortalities and annual mortality were not related to the density of eiders at these population levels.  Instead, total mortality increased with the duration of the epizootic, peaking at over 30% in 2006 and 2008. Risk of mortality increased throughout each season and rose most steeply in 2005 when only bacterial serotype 1 caused deaths, unlike in subsequent years when serotype 3x4 was also present. Overall, repeated avian cholera mortality has reduced the East Bay Island common eider breeding population by 32.2% since 2006. If sustained, this level of mortality may have conservation implications for this population of common eiders.


