





Assessment of wind energy potential at the Norwegian research station Troll





Assessment of wind energy potential at the Norwegian research station Troll
Submitted by Norway

Summary
The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Climate Change (Norway 2011) recommended Parties to use atmospheric models to evaluate the wind regimes around their individual stations, to determine the potential for wind power as a means of cutting fuel costs and greenhouse gas emissions. The Norwegian Polar Institute has over the last three years (Jan 2008 – Dec 2010) conducted an assessment of the wind potential at Troll. It has been concluded that wind energy can within an economically feasible framework replace approx. 15% of the current energy production.  
Energy efficiency at the Troll Station
The Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) operates the year-round (permanent) station Troll in Dronning Maud Land. The NPI has high focus on the environmental aspects of the operations at Troll and continuously works toward increasing the environmental efficiency at the station. 
Energy planning, management and savings are key elements in the NPI’s effort to make Troll “greener” (with additional benefits also to both logistics and economy). An energy strategy was developed and adopted in 2007, in which the NPI set an overarching goal to reduce fuel consumption significantly by 2012, amongst other through introduction of alternative energy systems. Since the adoption of the strategy a number of energy efficiency and savings measures have been instituted, eg. installing more efficient equipment, improving conduct and behaviour, etc. These smaller efforts have all proven to be efficient, but it is envisioned that further savings could be achieved by the use of alternative energies1.  
Wind energy potential at Troll
Wind energy has, in particular, been highlighted as a potential energy contributor at Troll. However, little information about the potential for wind energy at Troll has been available until now. 
In order to assess the potential and consider the development of wind as an energy source at Troll the NPI saw merit in going into partnership with the local energy company Troms Kraft, in order to lean on their expertise in developing and implementing new and alternative technologies for energy production.
Within this cooperative framework between the Norwegian Polar Institute and Troms Kraft the commercial company Kjeller Vindteknikk, one of Norway’s leading companies in wind measurements and analysis, was hired to implement necessary measurements, analyses and assessments for the introduction of wind power at Troll. 
In 2008 Kjeller Vindteknikk erected a wind measure mast at Troll. Measurement data from the mast (from the period January 2008 – December 2010) have now been used to describe the wind conditions as basis for analysis for the energy production potential at Troll. Energy consumption data from the same period have been used as basis for assessing the potential for utilizing this wind energy. Having assessed these data Kjeller Vindteknikk concludes as follows in its recently completed report:

    • Average wind speed at Troll is 4.0 m/s at 49 m height. Analysis of frequency shows that wind speed is dominated by low speeds, and short periods of very high speed with severe turbulence caused by nearby mountains. 
    • While wind speed is unevenly distributed in time, the energy consumption level at Troll is relatively even in time. 
    • This situation is not ideal for utilizing wind for energy production, as the wind speed is normally too low to provide substantial production. Regardless of mill capacity, there will be long periods with no energy production due to too low wind speeds. An extensive storage capacity2 would therefore be required if wind produced during the high wind periods were to be utilized in the periods when no production occurs3. Development within the field of storage of such surplus energy is still in early phases, and not economically viable for use at Troll. 
    • The analysis does show, however, that there can be good economy in replacing a smaller portion of the fuel based energy production at Troll with wind energy. Savings in the range of 10-15% is indicated as economically feasible, depending on type and number of wind mills installed4.
Conclusion
Although the wind situation at Troll has been shown to be in no manner ideal for energy production with current technological advances, the Norwegian Polar Institute, and its cooperative partners, will nevertheless:
    • Initiate phase 2 of the wind energy project and further consider the potential of an economically feasible structure for wind energy with the aim to replace a substantial portion of the conventional energy production at Troll with wind energy
    • Continue to initiate and implement a range of effort s in energy reduction and efficiency.


For more information about the details of the project contact the Norwegian Polar Institute:

Norwegian Polar Institute
Fram Centre
9296 Tromsø
Norway


