





Thala Valley Waste Removal




Thala Valley Waste Removal
Summary
This paper provides a progress report on the removal of waste from the old Thala Valley waste disposal site near Casey station, in accordance with Australia’s obligations under Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. In the 2010/11 season the remaining waste was removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, representing a significant milestone in the comprehensive clean-up process. Monitoring of the long-term ecological recovery of the site and adjacent marine ecosystem is ongoing and is designed to confirm that the clean-up actions have not resulted in a greater adverse environmental impact. It is envisaged that the robust methodology developed by Australia through careful planning and experience will be applicable to the remediation of other sites in Antarctica.
Background
Article I of Annex III to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty requires that past and present waste disposal sites be cleaned up by the generator of the waste, provided the removal of the waste would not result in a greater adverse environmental impact than leaving it in its existing location.
In the early 1990s Australia undertook a preliminary assessment of contaminated sites at each of its stations in Antarctica. Of these, the Thala Valley waste disposal site was identified as a priority for attention. Between 1965 and 1986 waste from Casey Station was dumped and/or burned at Thala Valley. This resulted in high levels of several pollutants, including heavy metals and hydrologically active hydrocarbons (mostly fuel and lubricants), being in the path of a major melt-stream that formed each summer and drained into nearby Brown Bay. Field studies identified significant contamination of terrestrial soils and marine sediments. Marine benthic communities adjacent to the site were found to be significantly different from those in reference areas, showing lower biodiversity, dominance by opportunistic fauna and absence of species found commonly in reference areas. Overall, the site was assessed as a high environmental risk.
In 2000 suitable remediation technologies were identified for both the onsite environmental management of any remediation works, as well as post-removal treatment of the contaminated waste. This included a custom-designed treatment plant capable of separating particulates and dissolved contaminants. The remediation operation began in November 2003 and a monitoring program was established to evaluate its effectiveness. This involved a series of ecological field experiments designed to provide information at different time-scales, and focused on detecting impacts in the marine benthic environment in Brown Bay. Waste and contaminated soil was extracted from frozen ground with excavators and bulldozers, and placed into leak-proof containers. 
In 2003/2004 Australia removed 1000 m3 of a total of approximately 1800 m3 of contaminated waste from Antarctica. The waste was disposed of in accordance with Australia’s procedures for handling contaminated material, at an authorised secure landfill site. The remaining waste was stockpiled at Casey station for removal in subsequent years. Further background information on the Thala Valley clean-up project is provided in Information Papers submitted by Australia to previous CEP meetings.1
Removal of the remaining waste
In March 2011 the remaining 800 m3  of Thala Valley waste was removed from Casey station. The Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE) kindly made available to Australia for charter its resupply vessel, the Xue Long, to transport the 168 purpose-built waste containers to Fremantle, Western Australia. In April 2011 the waste was disposed of in accordance with Australia’s procedures for handling contaminated material, at an authorised secure landfill site.
Australia extends its greatest gratitude to China, CHINARE, and the Captain and crew of the Xue Long for the logistical assistance provided.
Long-term monitoring of remediation operations
The project has now moved to the final site validation stage. Chemical and biological monitoring will continue over the coming years to determine to what degree the clean-up has restored the natural biological and environmental conditions and over what time scale. The objectives for this long-term monitoring include:
    • Determine whether the levels of contaminants in the marine environment are lower following the remediation operation;
    • Determine whether the ecosystem has shown any signs of recovery form the impacts of the waste disposal site now the source of contamination has been removed and predict how long it may take for the ecosystem to fully recover; 
    • Understand the processes that are involved in the geological recovery of the site to aid future management of contaminated site remediation in Antarctica. 
A range of ecosystem characteristics are being measured as part of the long-term monitoring including monitoring changes in:
    • sediment chemistry, metals, organic content and hydrocarbons;
    • infaunal communities in soft sediments;
    • epibenthic communities;
    • communities of sessile invertebrates colonizing settlement panels.
Conclusion
The removal of the remaining waste from Antarctica is a significant milestone in the project to remediate the Thala Valley. A major success of the remediation effort has been the role of science in the planning and execution of the clean-up operation, including the implementation of an integrated monitoring program. The assessment and monitoring work has involved a combination of complementary multidisciplinary research such as chemistry and ecology with extensive sampling and field experiments.
The success of the remediation efforts are yet to be fully evaluated, from both operational and ecological perspectives. Nevertheless, these efforts demonstrate Australia’s current approach to waste management in Antarctica, which recognises the environmental risk posed by contaminated sites and the need to address the present environmental issues resulting from past practices. This project also provides a practical example of how to consider whether a remediation activity will have a greater environmental impact than leaving the material in-situ, and of methods utilised to assess the short-, medium-, and long-term environmental effects of a clean-up operation.
This project required the development of new techniques for remediation of contaminated soils in Antarctica, as well as new ways to monitor the environmental impact. Experiences and the lessons learned have been communicated through international fora, as well as publications in peer-reviewed scientific journals. It is envisaged that the robust methodology that has been developed by Australia through careful planning and experience will be applicable to the remediation of other similar sites in Antarctica. 

