





Commemorative postage stamp issue: “25th anniversary of Uruguay consultative member of the Antarctic Treaty”





Commemorative postage stamp issue: “25th anniversary of Uruguay consultative member of the Antarctic Treaty”

Introduction:
On October 7th 2010, in occasion of the “Day of Antarctica”, celebrated every year in accordance with Law Nº 17.727, The Uruguayan Post Office issued a stamp commemorating the 25th Anniversary of Uruguay Consultative Member of the Antarctic Treaty.
The event took place at the headquarters of the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute among other activities related to the date. The presence of Government authorities and media gave it widespread coverage.
Technical Detail:
Issue date: 10/8/2010
Code: 2010-22-C
Price: $ 37 (Uruguayan Pesos)
Graphic Design: Daniel Pereyra
Print run: 15.000 stamps
Printing Workshop: Sanfer SRL
Sheet: 25 stamps
Category: Commemorative Stamp

Review:
October 7th 2010 marked the 25th Anniversary of the acceptance of Uruguay as a Consultative Member of the Antarctic Treaty.
This milestone meant for our country the recognition to a vast activity related to the Antarctic continent, manifested from the times of the Spanish colony, when in 1776 the Naval Station of Montevideo was established.
The connection to the frozen continent had its ups and downs and was encouraged on the path towards the celebration of the International Geophysical Year 1957-58, which gave birth to the Antarctic Treaty, signed in Washington in 1959 to proclaim Antarctica as a region of peace and cooperation to face the matters of sovereignty demands.
Its main reason is the interest for all mankind that Antarctica continues to be used always for pacific purposes only and that it never becomes a subject or a motive for international dispute.
The Treaty is a basis for many agreements and adopted measures that together receive the denomination of the Antarctic Treaty System.
In Uruguay, in the decade of the 60’s, a group of people strove to convince the Government and citizens about the importance of joining the Antarctic Treaty.
Professor Julio César Musso, became a leader for those people and worked with zeal and profound convictions. His activities included publishing books and magazines, participating in radio talk shows, conferences and paying visits to different authorities. It leads to the foundation of the Uruguayan Antarctic Institute.
The fruits of that seed were harvested when Uruguay asked to join the Antarctic Treaty on January 11th 1980.
From that moment it was necessary to fulfill a series of requirements: demonstrating interest for the Antarctic activity, which implied conducting important scientific research, the participation in international meetings and establishing a scientific permanent facility.
On December 22th 1984, the activities carried out ended in the opening of the Artigas Scientific Base. Thanks to that our country could hope to reach the full membership of the Antarctic Treaty.
Thus, after hard working in diplomatic management, hope became a reality. And that October 7th, in 1985, the Oriental Republic of Uruguay was accepted as a Consultative Member of the Antarctic Treaty with the right to vote, to speak and to debate in the Consultative Meetings that regulate the administration of the Antarctic Continent.

Source: Coordination Philately of the Uruguayan Post Office.
www.correo.com.uy
To see more about the stamp: http://www.correo.com.uy/index.asp?codpag=detProd&smen=filatelia&idp=1004&s=1


