





COMNAP Energy Management Workshop 



COMNAP Energy Management Workshop 
Summary
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) has long been interested in the topic of energy efficiency and energy management in Antarctica. COMNAP approved, for 2010, a project to hold an Energy Management Workshop on the margins of the COMNAP Annual General Meeting (AGM) XXII (Buenos Aires, Argentina).  This was, in part, in response to the ATCM XXXIII (Punta Del Este) discussions under ATCM Agenda Item 13 “Science issues, including climate-related research, scientific cooperation and facilitation”, in particular the discussions in regard to ATCM XXXIII WP63 (Norway) Report from Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance. The COMNAP Energy Management Workshop proved an excellent opportunity to share best practice and the key outcomes are presented below. There is ongoing work on this important topic within COMNAP via its Energy and Technology Expert Group, led by David Blake (BAS) with oversight by COMNAP EXCOM Vice Chair, Yuansheng Li (PRIC).
Background
COMNAP has long been interested in energy efficiency and energy management best practices, first within SCALOP (the Standing Committee for Antarctic Logistics and Operations) and then, from 2000 – 2009 within the “Energy Management Network (ENMANET)”.  Now, COMNAP works through its “Energy and Technology Expert Group” to exchange information on energy management best practice and technologies and to create a forum which enables collaborative projects leading to effective delivery of goals.
In July 2010, considering the discussion that took place at the ATCM and the discussions and recommendations of the ATME, it was proposed that a COMNAP Energy Management Workshop be held on 8 August 2010, in Buenos Aires, Argentina, convened by David Blake with oversight at that time from COMNAP EXCOM Vice Chair, Kazuyuki Shiraishi (NIPR).  The workshop agenda (attachment 1) included presentations (which can be found at www.comnap.aq/publications/workshops/energymanagement) from speakers and also allowed time for discussion in order to share best practice related to energy management in Antarctica. This directly supported bullet point 1of ATME recommendation 4 adopted by the ATCM XXXIII to: “acknowledge and encourage continuing efforts in developing and exchanging experience of energy efficiency and alternative energy practices so as to promote reduction of the carbon footprint of activities in Antarctica and cut fossil fuel use from stations, vessels, ground transportation and aircraft;”.
Outcomes
In addition to the opportunity the workshop provided for the 48 workshop attendees to learn from the presentations and to share ideas and best practice during the discussion sessions, the outcomes of the workshop were:
    • Energy management is a key issue for most national operators and an emerging issue for the other operators.
    • Energy management is necessary to reduce costs and meet carbon budgets.
    • There are positive messages to report on operator initiatives in energy management. The workshop provided an opportunity to exchange experiences and knowledge.
    • There are concerns as to how complex turbines and electrical management systems are supported in the field – train staff or use contractors?
    • A common approach to reporting fuel and energy use, power output, power use/number of staff/volume of facilities etc., would assist operators and enable COMNAP to respond to external requests for energy information.
    • Energy management covers fuel saving on heating systems, vehicles and ships as well as buildings and generators.

Ongoing work
Energy efficiencies and technology discussions are a regular agenda item at the COMNAP AGM under Expert Group Topical Discussions. In 2010, the COMNAP Symposium took place on 11 August, in Buenos Aires, Argentina.  The theme of that Symposium was “Responding to Change through New Approaches”. Over 120 people attended the Symposium. Of the 12 presentations and 15 posters that were presented, almost half of those in total were directly relevant to the topic of energy management and energy efficiency in support of Antarctic science. Symposium Proceedings were published and distributed to all COMNAP Members in November 2010 (ISBN 978-0-473-17888-8). Additional copies have been brought to this ATCM for distribution to those who wish a copy. 
It has been proposed that the theme of the 2012 COMNAP Symposium be, broadly, “sustainability” which will include energy issues. Full discussion of the 2012 Symposium will take place at the 2011 COMNAP AGM to be held in Stockholm, Sweden, in August.
The CEP notes in its current 5-year workplan that, for CEP XV (2012) it will discuss a COMNAP report prepared in response to ATME Recommendations 4, bullet point 2: “solicit from COMNAP a report on progress on the implementation of its Best Practice for Energy Management – Guidance and Recommendations (endorsed by CEP X in Delhi), and ask for an update including details of best practices on energy efficiency and alternative energy deployment;”. As a first step to producing such a report, and in response to the outcomes of the COMNAP Energy Management Workshop, COMNAP is currently in the process of developing standard terminology for energy reporting. This will assist us in providing the report to the CEP in 2012.

Attachment 1: Agenda of the COMNAP Energy Management Workshop

COMNAP Energy Management Workshop
Sunday 8 August, 0900 – 1300 hours
“Salon Patagonia A” Panamericano Hotel, Buenos Aires, Argentina

Project Manager & Convener: David Blake

The purpose of the workshop is for attendees to discuss their activities in an open manner.  Although there is structure to the workshop by declaring the titles of talks, the presentations can range from 5 to 25 minutes.  The concept to be used is that the event is a workshop and not a formal symposium.  If you are presenting on one of the topics as listed below and if you have a PowerPoint presentation please bring that presentation with you to the workshop.
 

Agenda/Format for Workshop

1. Introduction - ATCM requirements and other issues - David Blake

2. The Princess Elisabeth Station Energy Concept - Johan Berte

3. Antarctic Broadband - Daniel Faber

4. Project of Renewable Energy Systems at Dumont d’Urville and Concordia - Patrice Godon

5. Test Operation of a 20 kW Vertical Axis Wind Turbine for Syowa Station - Kenji Ishizawa

6. Antarctica New Zealand Energy Initiatives: An Overview - Iain Miller

7. Wind Project for Jubany Base – Adrian Ilinca

8. Wind Turbines and Energy Management at Australia’s Mawson Station - Rob Clifton

9. The Princess Elisabeth Station Energy Services - Johan Berte

10. Energy and Sustainability at BAS - David Blake



A copy of the recent paper on energy management issues as published in renewable energy is available via the COMNAP web site for background information.

A summary of the outcomes of the workshop will be presented to all COMNAP Members at the COMNAP AGM under agenda item 8.
