





The grounding of the Polar Star




The grounding of the Polar Star

Submitted by Norway

Incident
On 31 January 2011 the Polar Star Expedition vessel MV Polar Star struck an un-surveyed rock – reported at S 66° 51.37’ W 66° 47.81’ – while anchoring just north of Detaille Island at the Antarctic Peninsula. An initial assessment indicated a breach to the outer hull, with the inner hull intact. The vessel’s emergency response systems were effective in dealing with the breach. The relevant Maritime Rescue Coordination Centers (MRCC) were alerted and IAATO instituted internal notification procedures aimed at vessels in the vicinity of the incident.

The vessel headed, on its own keel, to Arctowski Station, where station divers carried through an underwater inspection assessing the damage. Based on this assessment it was decided, as a precautionary measure, to transfer the Polar Star passengers to other vessels, before heading toward Ushuaia (Argentina). MV Polar Star reached Ushuaia safely without further mishaps on the 6th of February.  Temporary repairs were made and with the approval of DNV and Class Polar Star sailed for Las Palmas, Canary Islands for repairs.  Repairs are now complete.
Passenger health and safety
There were 80 passengers and 35 crew members (all in all 17 nationalities) on board the MV Polar Star at the time of the incident.  No passengers or members of the crew were harmed during the incident. Passengers remained onboard during transfer from Detaille Island to Arctowski Station. Based on the underwater assessment conducted at Arctowski it was decided, as a precautionary measure, to transport passengers back to Ushuaia via the following IAATO vessels: MV Marina Svetaeva (One Ocean Expeditions), MV Ushuaia (Antarpply Expeditions), MV Expedition (GAP Adventures). 
Environment
There was no apparent oil spill from the ship due to the grounding. At the time of the incident booms were, however, deployed as a precaution.
The vessel 
The remaining 3 trips scheduled for the MV Polar Star during the 2010/11 season were cancelled as a result of the incident. After temporary repairs in Ushuaia she steamed to Las Palmas for permanent repairs and expects to be back on schedule for the summer season (2011) in Svalbard.  Polar Star is scheduled to return to her normal operations in Antarctica for the 2011/12 season. 


