





Use of dogs in the context of a commemorative centennial expedition




Use of dogs in the context of a commemorative centennial expedition
Submitted by Norway



Summary
Norwegian authorities have the last year received and considered a notification for an expedition in Antarctica involving the use of dogs (in the context of a commemorative expedition). Introduction of dogs to Antarctica is banned through Annex II of the Environmental Protocol and the Norwegian implementing legislation - Regulations relating to protection of the Antarctic environment (paragraph 15).  Exemption from the ban was not granted. This information is provided to Parties as it is deemed useful as reference should similar cases appear in front of other Antarctic competent authorities. 


Background
The austral summer season 2011-12 marks the centennial for the first  humans to reach f the South Pole. As a consequence of this event a relatively high number of non-governmental expeditions have been considered and planned for the upcoming season, with a wider array of potential locations and operational modus involved. 
In this context Norwegian authorities have been approached by several “expeditions in the make” querying the possibility to use dogs in this setting. In all these instances Norwegian authorities have provided information about the clear prohibition in Annex II of the Environmental Protocol and Norwegian legislation, which in most instances have settled the matter for the proponents. 
However, in June 2010 the Norwegian Polar Institute (as competent authority) received a formal notification for an expedition planning to bring along and use a total of 24 dogs on an expedition between Bay of Whales and the South Pole. The purpose was to celebrate the centennial by reenacting Amundsen’s expedition both in spirit and equipment, in which case dogs would be a natural and necessary element. The proponent noted the original reasoning behind the ban relating to risk of disease, but argued that in the event that a dog/dogs break(s) loose, it would be more likely that the dog(s) would die in the harsh conditions of the inland plateau rather than reaching any population of wildlife where there could be a risk of spreading disease.


Regulations relating to the protection of the Antarctic environment 
The Regulations relating to the protection of the Antarctic environment (Antarctic Environmental Regulations – AER) constitutes the Norwegian regulations implementing the Environmental Protocol. Paragraph 15 of the AER clearly states that the introduction of dogs is prohibited. The request would therefore have to be considered as an application for exemption as provided for in paragraph 28 of the AER. Such exemptions can be granted when there are special reasons and when to do so is not contrary to the purpose of the Regulations [AER].


Assessment
In considering the request the Norwegian Polar Institute made a number of observations, of which the following were considered the most essential:
    • Spread of disease from dogs to wildlife (in particular seals) is an element of concern. The risk was an underlying consideration when the prohibition was included in the Protocol, and continues to be so (noting ia. that the prohibition was maintained in the recently concluded CEP/ATCM review of Annex II ). 
    • Even though parts of the expedition would take place in areas where there is little wildlife, the initial phase of the expedition would be in a more sensitive area. 
    • Although the probability of spreading disease would be low, the consequences could be substantial. A precautionary approach would be needed to reduce risk to a minimum. 
    • The desire to use dogs in a commemorative context would not be a substantive enough argument to disregard the risk and the potential consequences that would be in contradiction to the purpose of the AER.
    • The precedence the case would provide both in the national and international setting would be unruly and undesired. 
On the basis of the above considerations (as well as a number of associated elements) the Norwegian Polar Institute refused to grant exemption from the provisions of the AER.  
The proponent placed an appeal against this decision, indicating the will to institute the following measures to reduce risks further:
    • they would move the start point of the expedition further inland
    • they would have double safety modules on the harnesses
    • they would equip each dog with a GPS-sender to enable quick finding of lost dogs
    • they would ensure appropriate vaccination and veterinary certificates for the dogs
Although the Norwegian Polar Institute found these suggested measures commendable, there were no substantial arguments that changed the NPI’s conclusion on the matter. The appeal was therefore forwarded to the Ministry of the Environment according to the rules in the Public Administration Act of 10 February 1967. The Ministry endorsed all of NPI’s arguments/considerations and concluded that it would be in contradiction with the purpose of the AER and the Environmental Protocol to grant exemption from the ban, particularly considering the overarching aim of protecting the Antarctic environment as well as Norway’s international responsibilities in this context. Nor was the Ministry aware of any other Party having made exemptions from the prohibition of the introduction of dogs into Antarctica, as stipulated in article 4 in the Annex II of the Environmental Protocol.


Further information
This information has been provided to Parties as it is deemed useful as reference should similar cases appear in front of other Antarctic competent authorities. For further information contact the Norwegian Polar Institute:

Norwegian Polar Institute
Fram Centre
9296 Tromsø
Norway


