





The Berserk Incident, Ross Sea, 
February 2011





The Berserk Incident, Ross Sea, February 2011
Information Paper submitted by New Zealand, Norway and the United States
1.0 Introduction
This paper has been drafted with reference to Article 13 (4) of the Environment Protocol, ATME Recommendation 1 (2009), and ATCM Resolution 6 (2010), regarding the sharing of information on activities affecting the implementation of the Environment Protocol and incidents involving tourist vessels.
Between 22 February and 1 March 2011, New Zealand’s Rescue Co-ordination Centre (“RCCNZ”) co-ordinated a weeklong international search and rescue (SAR) operation in the McMurdo Sound vicinity for the Norwegian yacht, Berserk.  The SAR response involved the Governments of New Zealand, Norway and the United States, with assistance from the private vessels, Professor Khromov (Spirit of Enderby) and Steve Irwin.  
This paper presents information on the Berserk incident.  Information about the expedition’s alleged breach of the relevant Norwegian regulations and the ongoing police investigation is presented by Norway in a separate paper.
2.0 The Berserk’s “Wild Vikings” Expedition
The 14m yacht Berserk was on a two-year so-called “Wild Vikings” voyage through the Northwest Passage, Alaska, South-East Asia, and New Zealand before arriving at Ross Island in February 2011.
3.0 The Legal Status of the Berserk’s Activity in Antarctica
The “Wild Viking” Antarctic expedition was required to submit notification and an environmental impact assessment to Norwegian authorities in accordance with Norway’s Regulations on the Protection of the Environment in Antarctica.  The expedition was also subject to New Zealand’s Antarctica (Environmental Protection) Act 1994.  
The expedition leader, Mr Jarle Andhoy, was advised of the environmental impact assessment (EIA) and other formal requirements by Norwegian authorities for the first time in June 2010 and by New Zealand authorities in December 2010.  
No EIA was submitted to any Antarctic Treaty Party prior to the expedition’s departure for Antarctica. 
4.0 Timeline of Events
4.1 11 February 2011
Berserk arrived in the McMurdo Sound icebreaker channel.
4.2 14 February 2011 
Mr Andhoy and Mr Samuel Massie set up camp in front of Scott Base with two All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs) and two kayaks.  They shifted their equipment to the McMurdo Ice Shelf transition at Scott Base before departing for the South Pole on 15 February.  Scott Base engineers reported a minor fuel spill in front of the Scott Base reverse osmosis plant while fuelling the ATVs.
4.3 15-22 February 2011 
Berserk anchored in Backdoor Bay at Cape Royds. Mr Andhoy made daily scheduled phone calls to the yacht and his support team in Norway while he and Mr Massie drove their ATVs along the U.S. South Pole traverse route.
4.4 21 February 2011
At 0845, Berserk contacted HMNZS Wellington, which was conducting sea trials in the Ross Sea. Wellington personnel warned Berserk’s crew that the weather forecast was to deteriorate the following day, with southerly winds up to 60 knots. 
4.5 22-23 February 2011 
RCCNZ picked up a signal from a 406MHz Emergency Position-Indicating Radio Beacon (EPIRB) registered to Berserk at 1753 (NZ time) on 22 February.  The yacht’s position (77o25S 166o03E) was 18 nautical miles (33km) north of Scott Base, in McMurdo Sound.  There were three people on board (Mr Robert Skaanes, Mr Tom Bellika and Mr Leonard Banks).  
At 1940, Wellington received notice from RCCNZ of Berserk’s EPIRB signal, 30 nautical miles from the activation point.  Heavy sea and weather conditions (seas of 6-10 metres and winds above 100 knots) prevented Wellington from responding immediately to the distress call. Wellington reached the activation point at 0405 23 February. Following further deterioration in sea and weather conditions, Wellington continued its search downwind and out of the Sound. Wellington suffered storm-related damage.  Her search was terminated in consultation with RCCNZ at 0710 23 February, and she exited into the Ross Sea. 
4.6 23 - 25 February 2011 
Two nearby vessels, Steve Irwin and Professor Khromov, agreed to assist in the search.  The helicopter on Steve Irwin conducted a shoreline search on 24 and 25 February, refuelled at McMurdo Station and continued to conduct searches.
Efforts by RCCNZ to contact the crew on the Berserk via the vessel’s satellite phone were unsuccessful.  The ground party (Mr Andhoy and Mr Massie) called family in Norway by satellite phone on 24 February.  They were 130nm from Scott Base/McMurdo station and indicated their intention to return to Ross Island to assist with the search for Berserk.   RCCNZ remained in regular contact with the ground party via satellite phone.
On the morning of 25 February, Berserk’s unoccupied and damaged life raft was found by the Steve Irwin 45 miles north of the location of Berserk’s original distress beacon alert. It had a torn canopy and was missing its first aid kit and survival knife.  There was no sign the life raft had been occupied and evidence indicated that it had floated free from the vessel and had not been released manually.  
4.7 27 – 28 February 2011 
Mr Andhoy and Mr Massie arrived at Scott Base after three days return travel. They were flown from Pegasus Airfield to Christchurch, New Zealand on the last U.S. Antarctic Program C-17 flight for 2010/11 season. 
Mr. Andhoy and Mr. Massie parked one of their ATVs and personal field equipment, including drummed fuel, on a U.S. snow berm located near Williams Field on the McMurdo Ice Shelf. The remaining ATV and some equipment were left at the McMurdo Ice Shelf transition near Scott Base.
4.8 1 March 2011 
RCCNZ formally suspended the search for Berserk after an extensive search covering more than 25,000 square kilometres of the Ross Sea and using 141 hours of combined search time by the HMNZS Wellington, Professor Khromov and Steve Irwin. The helicopter from Steve Irwin flew 14 hours during the search operation using fuel from McMurdo Station.
New Zealand officials interviewed Mr Andhoy on 28 February and 1 March prior to his departure from New Zealand. Concerns about the apparent lack of adequate preparations and environmental permits were also registered.
4.9 2-3 March 2011
Staff at Scott Base and McMurdo consolidated all of the materiel left behind by the ground party and placed them in a locked container at Scott Base to mitigate any potential environmental impact and secure them until direction for disposal was received.
5.0 ATS Measures and Vessel Safety
This incident raises concerns about unauthorised expeditions in the Antarctic Treaty area.
    1) Rescue efforts for the Berserk were hampered by a lack of information on the expedition’s intended locations and activities, which would have been collected through the EIA process required under Article 8 of the Environmental Protocol. Further, the fuel spill near Scott Base, and the presumed release of petroleum products and other contaminants associated with the sinking of the Berserk, highlight the importance of pre-deployment identification of materials carried into the Antarctic region and prior assessment of potential environmental impacts.  This incident reinforces the importance of Treaty Parties sharing available information concerning non-government expeditions to help identify unauthorised activity at the earliest possible stage. 
    2) Consistent with ATCM Resolution 6 (2010), New Zealand and Norway request (as conditions to all relevant permits) vessels to report their positions regularly to the relevant Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre. Recent reporting of the Berserk’s position would have greatly enhanced the efficiency of the SAR effort.
    3) Consistent with Measure 4 (2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area, it is a condition of permits issued by New Zealand and Norway that appropriate contingency plans and sufficient arrangements for SAR are in place prior to the start of the activity. The end-of-February closure of the United States and New Zealand Antarctic Programmes (and thus significantly reduced ability to assist with SAR) would have been noted had adequate contingency plans been prepared.
    4) Mr Andhoy claimed that a commercial operator1 flew fuel to the South Pole for the ATVs’ return to McMurdo or for continuing on to Troll Station.  This raises concerns about logistical support for unauthorised activity in Antarctica, although in this instance the commercial operator terminated support to the expedition once they learned of the expedition’s legal status.  ATCM Resolution 7 (2009) sets forth several general principles that should be used to inform and guide further work in managing Antarctic tourism activities, including that all tourism activities be conducted in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty, its Environmental Protocol, and relevant ATCM Measures and Resolutions. All commercial operators providing logistical support to expeditions should be encouraged to check that those activities have been authorised or otherwise regulated by a Treaty Party before undertaking any support. 
    5) There could be merit in exploring at the ATCM, possibly through the Tourism Working Group, guidelines for yachts and their related activities operating in Antarctica.  This process may be able to draw on lessons from the Berserk incident once all formal inquiries are completed.
6.0 Assistance by Private Operators 

Two private operators (Sea Shepherd Conservation Society and New Zealand Nature Heritage Cruises) gave willingly of their vessels, Steve Irwin and Professor Khromov, and other resources to assist with significant search efforts, and should be commended.


