





ERICON AB Icebreaker FP7 Project 
A new era in the polar research





ERICON AB Icebreaker
FP7 project
A new era in the polar research


The European Research Icebreaker (ERI) would provide Europe with a capacity to launch autonomous scientific investigations into the central Arctic Ocean during all seasons of the year. The ERICON facility would also be utilized in a targeted way to carry out research investigations around the Antarctic continental shelf areas in support of the Integrated Ocean Drilling Programme (IODP) and multinational scientific investigations. Notably the AURORA BOREALIS Science Perspective (published by the European Science Foundation ESF in 2004) indicates that scientific observations during the winter season are critical for the understanding of the functioning of the dynamic system of the Polar Regions and the climate modifications induced by anthropogenic actions. The vessel will enable scientists to study the most fundamental and outstanding scientific questions of the next decades. (source ERICON Aurora Borealis FP7 Project)

ERICON AB Icebreaker FP7 project -the opportunities for Romanian future research

Romanian Science Plan
In our scientific activities are part of Aurora Borealis science plan namely:
    • climate processes of ocean, ice and atmosphere;
    • polar biosphere; 
      -     deep biosphere;

The fields of interest for Romanian future research and cooperation (national/international) identified in The 2nd International Symposium of Polar Scientific Research, IPY 2007-2009, and The European Polar Research Icebreaker „Aurora Borealis” FP7 Project are the following: 
Paleoceanography & Paleoclimate,
1. Marine environmental, sedimentological history and evolution
2. Paleo-environmental studies
3. Carbon sink in the Arctic and Southern Oceans 
Sea-Ice System
1. Growth/accumulation of microalgae in different types of sea ice
2. Contribution of microbial communities to re-mineralization of organic matter in the ice
3. The role of the sea ecosystem in matter transport to higher trophic levels 
Polar Ecosystems – biodiversity, adaptation and impact of climate change
1. Marine Microbiology 
(sea ice, marine/terrestrial/coast aquatic ecosystems)
     Microorganisms and viruses
- In-situ detection and monitoring of microorganism biodiversity, abundance and activity by molecular biology and genomic techniques
-  Micro-niches sustaining microorganism symbiotic consortia in the ocean, marine sediments and extreme environments
- Stress adaptation mechanisms of microbial psychrophiles (as models of adaptation and survival, and analogues of life on other planets in astrobiology); cold - adapted microbial enzymes and their applications
- Effects of climate change on species long-term prospects
- Biogeochemistry and Pedo-biology in polar coast areas
- Polar marine and coastal areas pollution
Oceanography
a) Marine environmental, sedimentological structures and evolution
b) Possible Romanian contributions to the AURORA BOREALIS Icebreaker design and construction
Geology and geophysics
Medical research in polar zones
Investigation areas: Polar marine and coastal areas and Polar expeditions including “Law-Racovita” Antarctic Base areas.

These sesions involved many early career scientists, and 85 specialists in most different research fields, 14 of which researchers in nine EU States: France (by the ESF representative, Director Dr. Paul Egerton), Germany-Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Reseacrh, Belgium, Austria, Italy, Estonia, Czech Republic, Greece, Bulgaria; and Russian Federation. 19 Romanian institutions participated in the Symposium. 

http://www.esf.org/research-areas/polar-sciences/ericon-aurora-borealis.html
http://www.eri-aurora-borealis.eu/


