XXIV ATCM
Working Paper WP-15
Agenda Item 4g
New Zealand
Original: English

Proposed Historic Monument
"A Hut", Scott Base, Ross Island, Ross Sea Region, Antarctica

New Zealand
Working Paper

Background

In 1956/57 New Zealand took part in the International Geophysical Year (IGY) activities in 
Antarctica as well as in the Commonwealth Trans Antarctic Expedition (TAE) led by Vivian 
Fuchs and Edmund Hillary and involving New Zealand and the United Kingdom. Scott Base was 
established to support the New Zealand TAE party, who were to lay depots for the British party 
led by Fuchs, and the New Zealand scientists, led by Trevor Hatherton, involved in the IGY. The 
government architect of the Ministry of Works and Development, Frank Ponder, designed the 
initial base, which was named in honor of Captain Robert F. Scott. This original Scott Base was 
designed as a series of six huts connected by covered walkways. The original design 
specifications required that the base buildings last a maximum of six years. Frank Ponder 
considered that the huts would still be in "first-class order" in one hundred years.

Four of the huts were constructed in Melbourne, Australia and the final two were constructed in 
the same design but with different materials in New Zealand. They were designed to sit on rafts 
of Oregon timber laid on Jarrah railway sleepers and be tied to the ground with a steel rod net 
over the roof and fastened to anchor rods in the ground. Three of the original huts remain of 
which A Hut is the most significant as it contained the mess (social centre of the base), kitchen, 
radio room, and Edmund Hillary's office. The other remaining huts are G and H huts, which 
contained magnetometers and seismographs

A Hut

The first hut to be built was A Hut, construction of which began on January 12 1957 and finished 
on 20 January 1957 with the official opening ceremony for Scott Base. Edmund Hillary, the TAE 
team leader, used A Hut as both his office and bunkroom, while Peter Mulgrew, another TAE 
member lived in the Radio Room. As well as being the kitchen and mess, A Hut was also used as 
the main social gathering point, briefing room, communications room, library, and church. It was 
the hub of Scott Base.

A Hut continued in use as the Scott Base mess until 1982 when it was replaced by a new building. 
A Hut continued to be an integral part of the base for accommodation until 1989 when it became 
a repository for historical items relating to the hut and to the history of Scott Base.

In December 1989 the hut was shifted to its present position in front of the main Scott Base 
complex. A special committee is currently working on a management plan for the hut and is 
developing recommendations for its future use.

As the first building built in Antarctica to support New Zealand activities including the TAE and 
the IGY and part of the original Scott Base, A Hut has considerable historic importance. Formal
recognition of this importance is sought through the designation of A Hut as an Historic 
Monument under the Antarctic Treaty.

Draft Measure X (2001)

Antarctic Protected Area System
Historic Sites And Monuments

A Hut, Scott Base, Ross Sea Region, Antarctica

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I - IX, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16, XIV-8;

Acknowledging the significance of A Hut, Scott Base to:

• New Zealand Antarctic history
• the establishment of Scott Base
• early scientific investigation in the Ross Sea Region
• the involvement of New Zealand in the International Geophysical Year 1957
• connections between Antarctica and New Zealand
• the Commonwealth Trans Antarctic Expedition 1956/1957

Recommend to all Consultative Parties that:

The following building be added to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and 
described by the Proposing Government or Governments" annexed to Recommendation 
VII-9 and that thereafter it be accorded the respect and protection required by the 
Recommendations recalled above:

The A Hut of Scott Base, being the first New Zealand building in Antarctica sited at 
Pram Point, Ross Island, Ross Sea Region, Antarctica.
Hut Point Peninsula

                    New Zealand
Auckland 
Island 
Macquarie 
Island
                    Ross Island
                    Hut Point
                    10 km

                    Ross Island

Antarctica

Ross Sea
Hut Point
McMurdo Station
Scott Base
                    Ross Ice Shelf

Map A: Location of Scott Base, Ross Island, Antarctica
Map B: Existing Scott Base buildings showing location of A Hut, the 
original Scott Base building that remains.

SCOTT BASE
SCALE 1:1000
      0      10      20      40      60
              metres
