XXIV Консультативное совещание                                  ATCM XXIV
по Договору об Антарктике                                      Working Paper WP-38
XXIV Antarctic Treaty                                            Agenda Item 10
Consultative Meeting
XXIV Reunion Consultative
du Traite sur l'Antarctique
Reunion Consultiva
del Tratado Antartico

St. Petersburg
R U S S I A                                                      New Zealand
July 9-20, 2001                                                  English

LIABILITY:
INFORMAL CONTACT GROUP WORK ON "RESPONSE ACTION",
"PREVENTIVE MEASURES", "OPERATOR AND JURISDICTIONAL
ISSUES" AND "DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS"



Submitted by New Zealand
St. Petersburg, 19 July 2001

Informal Contact Group on Response action

1) The Contact Group covered:
      a) the definition of "response action",
         (Art. 1 para. 2 of the US draft, Art 2 (e) of the Chairman's draft)
      b) procedural aspects with regard to response actions.

2) Definition of "response action":

      a) Despite some reservations against the use of the term "prevent" the group 
         achieved consensus to keep it in the definition.

      b) Several delegations spoke in favour of including "clean up" in the definition
         (1) One alternative considered was to include it after " ... to prevent, 
             minimize, contain or clean up the impact ...".
         (2) Others spoke in favour of adding " ... which measures may include 
             environmental clean up" at the end of the definition
         (3) While recognizing that there may be cases in which response actions 
             should include clean up measures it was stated that there was no obligation 
             to "clean up" under the Protocol and that such an obligation could not be 
             introduced by means of a liability annex.
         (4) It was stated that clean up measures are inherently included in reasonable 
             measures to minimize or contain the impact of an environmental 
             emergency. Thus there would be no need to include the term "clean up" in 
             the definition. It was implicit.
         (5) Further it was suggested that it may be possible to include reference to 
             "clean up" with a qualifier to the effect that same clean up measures may 
             be appropriate as part of the response action to an environmental 
             emergency but it would depend on the circumstances of the incident and a 
             consideration of what is reasonable response in the circumstances.

      c) It was said that - referring to standard provisions in other conventions (e.g. 
         Basel Protocol, HNS, etc.) - it would be indispensable to include the term 
         "restoration and compensation" in the definition. Others considered this 
         proposal to be more of a conceptual nature. On the other hand it was 
         maintained that it goes without saying that only reasonable restoration and 
         compensation measures should be covered and that the process of natural 
         restoration should duly be taken into account.

With regard to b) and c) above:
It was not possible to achieve consensus with regard to "clean up" or "restoration and compensation".

d) Concerns were raised over the use of the term "damage" in the definition of response action (Art. 1 para. 1 US draft) given its emotive connotation. Preference was given to the use in the Chairman's text of "impact".

3) Procedural aspects with regard to response actions:

a) It was underlined that if response action does not occur no private party should be allowed to undertake response action without prior authorization of a Party.

b) Referring to Art. 5 para. 2 of the Chairman's draft it was thought to be necessary to underline the primary obligation of the State Party of the operator by phrasing para. 2 as follows:

"In the event that prompt and effective response action is not taken, the Party of that operator, or other Parties are encouraged ....".

c) The opinion was voiced in favour of using the general term "Parties" instead of "other Parties" in Art. 5 para. 2 of the Chairman's draft.

d) It was discussed whether it would be appropriate to include an indemnity clause when "other" Parties take response action. Reference was made to respective provisions in Conventions such as the Basel Protocol, CRTD, etc..

e) There was agreement to add the clause "acting under their control" at the end of Art. 5 para. 2 of the Chairman's draft.

f) The cumulative use of the terms "endeavour" and "to the extent feasible" in both drafts was considered to be an unnecessary duplication of discretionary provisions. The contact group was in favour of omitting the term "endeavour".

g) Referring to preoccupations already voiced in Lima which favoured an obligation to prior information and request of authorization of the State Party of the operator by the third party planning to take response action, it was considered to replace the term "to the extent feasible" by formulations which would further narrow the discretion of the acting party.

In this context it was alternatively considered to make consultation and coordination obligatory and to add an "escape clause" on the following lines: "Notwithstanding, such a Party may take response action without prior consultation if the threat of an impact on the environment is imminent and it would be unreasonable not to take immediate action".
Summary of discussions in the working group « Preventative 
measures »
13 July 2001

The working group considered the text of Articles 2 and 3 of the US draft text 
(WP6), referring at the same time to the Chairman’s text (WP17).

General principles

Some delegations feel that Art. 3 Environment Protocol obliges parties to require 
preventative measures and contingency plans, and so the present article is just a 
specification of that obligation; other delegations feel that Art. 3 is not relevant to 
this discussion.

Jurisdictional aspects

1. The question of how to deal with government and non-government operators 
(separately, as in the US text, or generally, as in the chairman’s text) was flagged 
but left to the jurisdictional working group to deal with.

2. Various countries have different ways of enforcing the provisions of the 
Environment Protocol (e.g. application of a licensing system or other methods), 
which will carry over into the implementation of this article, but they will not 
necessarily change the effect of these articles.

3. The question of whether to include a reference to Art. VII/5 of the Treaty, as in 
the US text, or the language from Art. 1 of the Chairman’s text was discussed. 
One possible difference between the two approaches relates to the cases of fishing 
vessels and other vessels operating in or transiting through the Antarctic Treaty 
area. This was felt to be a more general question that could not be solved in this 
group, but rather belonged to the remit of the jurisdictional group.
TEXTS (Note: the US text is used, but only the texts actually worked on in the 
group are included. The following does not imply a choice between the US text 
and the Chairman's text as a whole or with regard to parts not quoted)

A consensus was reached in the group on the following amendments:

            Article 2
Preventive measures

1. Parties shall ... undertake, to the maximum extent practicable, reasonable 
preventive measures that are designed to reduce the likelihood of occurrence 
of environmental emergencies and their potential adverse impact.

Preventive measures may include:

a. specialized structures or equipment incorporated into the design and 
construction of facilities, such as secondary containment, drainage controls, 
or security devices to prevent inadvertent operation and means of 
transportation;
b. specialized procedures incorporated into the operation or maintenance of 
facilities such as transfer operation procedures or inspections of storage 
areas and means of transportation; and
c. specialized training of personnel.

....
            Article 3
Contingency Plans

1. In order to minimize damage to the Antarctic environment, Parties shall, ...:

a. establish contingency plans for response to incidents with potential adverse 
effects on the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems; 
and

b. cooperate in the formulation and implementation of such contingency plans

2. Contingency plans shall include, as appropriate, the following components:

a. procedures for conducting an assessment of the nature of the incidents; 
including volumes of spills, migration paths and sensitive locations 
potentially impacted by an incident;

b. notification procedures;
c. identification and mobilization of resources;
d. response plan(s);
d.e. training;
e.f. record keeping;
f.g. demobilization.
Small group on definition of "Operator" and jurisdictional issues.

1. The group was tasked to consider the definition of operator, and jurisdictional 
issues relating to the nexus between "Operator" and State.

2. It was noted that there were a number of different potential links between states and 
operators to consider, namely:

  •  State in which activity organised
  •  State which approves the activity
  •  State of incorporation
  •  State of principal place of business
  •  State of flag of a vessel
  •  State of nationality of individuals
  •  State of departure to / return from Antarctica
  •  State in which action for compensation may be taken
  •  State in which insurance is held

3. Many noted that a different nexus between State and operator might be needed in 
these different scenarios. A number of representatives noted that different nexuses 
might be needed in respect of (i) the duty of a Party to require preventative action and 
contingency plans, and the duty to require response action, and (ii) the duty to pay 
compensation.

4. One participant suggested that, due to the number of potential nexuses, it might be 
preferable to adopt a simple definition of "Operator", and to leave the issue of nexus 
between operator and state, or jurisdiction, to be taken up elsewhere in the text. This 
would permit a different approach to the question of nexus in respect of different 
duties and scenarios. This suggestion found wide support. It was further suggested 
that the first sentence of the Chairman's definition (Article 2(c)) might provide the 
basis for such a definition. Some representatives were attracted to this suggestion. A 
number of possible amendments were put forward. However, others expressed a more 
general concern about the breadth of this provision.

5. The group considered the specific issue of whether a definition of "Operator" 
should cover both State and non-State actors, as in the first sentence of the 
Chairman's definition. The sense of the meeting was that such a definition should be 
possible, as long as any necessary distinctions between State and non-State operators 
were set out elsewhere in the text, including in a possible general scope provision and 
in the context of venues for actions for compensation.

6. The group also noted that Parties have implemented their obligations under the 
Protocol in different ways. One representative suggested that, for the articles on 
preventative action, contingency plans and response action, the nexus could be 
expressed as between a State and "operators subject to its laws and regulations 
implementing the Protocol". This approach attracted significant interest. However, it 
was suggested that a broader formulation might be required to take account of the fact 
that a State might have a range of laws and regulations relating to the implementation 
of the Protocol. Another formulation suggested was "State and operators subject to
the laws and regulations by which the State implements the Protocol". Some 
expressed concerns about a potential overlap of regulation of operators. An 
alternative formulation was, "State and operators subject to the laws and regulations 
by which the State, within its competence, implements the Protocol". It was also 
suggested that relevant articles had to take into account high seas freedoms (vessels in 
transit), the need to avoid any inconsistency with the UN Convention on the Law of 
the Sea, operators of non-parties, and the extent of application to individual tourists.

7. The group discussed a quite different approach for the nexus in the articles on 
compensation, such as principal place of business or place where the activity was 
organised.

8. The group also discussed the scope of activities to be covered, with options 
canvassed including a reference to any activities in Antarctica, to activities in respect 
of which notification under Article VII(5) of the Treaty is required (as in the US text), 
or reliance on a general scope provision similar to that in Article 1 of the Chairman's 
text.

18 July 2001
1730
Final version
DEPENDENT AND ASSOCIATED ECOSYSTEMS

The Group entrusted with the consideration of the eventual possible effect of the concept of dependent and associated ecosystems on liability that might be incurred for harm to those ecosystems identified, to a certain extent, the mature of the problem.

The Group recognized that all the relevant articles of the Protocol mentioned the Antarctic environment jointly with the dependent and associate ecosystems. The fact that sometimes "and" is used and others times "or" is used can be explained in each specific case by the diverse objectives of the specific norm addressed.

Particularly relevant in this context are articles 8,15 and 16. However, the mandate in 16 is to be "consistent" with the systematic protection of these ecosystems. The negotiating history of article 16 does not imply agreement of the "aims" or "objectives" envisaged in the so-called Wolfrum text.

An the other hand, there is no mention of dependent and associated ecosystems in article 12 (particularly in the more relevant paragraph 1 e) and f) nor in the Annexes, except for the guidance provided in article 8 of Annex IV which again calls for "due consideration".

There was no consensus in this Group concerning the question if liability is caused by lack of compliance with the provisions concerning the dependent and associated ecosystems.

Three elements require further exploration of their content and consultations which might be held in the future:

a) The first is the notion that in this first step concerning preventive and response action, lack of consideration of dependent and associated ecosystems may not hinder progress in addressing more pressing issues.

b) The second is, coming from the opposite direction, that harm to dependent and associate ecosystem, constitutes a form of transboundary pollution for which states would be liable under international law

c) The third is that, even though article 6.3 does not mention ecosystems it contains an obligation of avoidance of adverse environmental impacts on adyacent areas.

The chairman of the group could like to comment on these three key elements:

1. A recommendation not to prioritize the dependent and associated ecosystems can probably be endoresed by the group. It has to be
without prejudice to existing treaty obligations such as the parameters of article 15.1.b (contingency plans)

2. The Chairman sympathizes with the approach taken in b). 
Nevertheless, it does seem that "dependent and associated ecosystems" encapsulate two different sets of terms:

    i)  systematic and comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment to which the "dependent" and associated ecosystems act as a shield or buffer zone

    ii) ecosystems of the more vulnerable adyaccent areas.

The transboundary approach would be applicable to the latter but not to the first set.

3. The approach based on cooperation would apply to these vulnerable adyaccent areas. Cooperation entails a full obligation but could, only in this specific case which may include a breach of the duty to cooperate, merit the possibility of:

    i)  Contemplating a liability less than strict, that is fault liability
    ii) Be dealt under one or more of the procedures contained in article 18 rather than the full dispute settlement envisaged by article 19.

The Group appreciated the valuable contribution by SCAR as to the meaning, in various contexts, of "dependence" and "association". 
However, several delegations expressed that the meaning destiled from such information could not easily be asimilated by domestic courts or guarantee uniformity in the legal treatmente of this type of liability.

A recommendation for temporarily putting into brackets (imaginary brackets rather like a husserlian philosophic approach to knowledge) should not be interpreted as limitng the liability exercise to this first step of response to emergencies and precluding treatment of liability based on harm to the environment.
; 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 

