 
 
 
IV CEP 
Working Paper WP-21  
Agenda Item 4g) 
United Kingdom 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System: Revised Management Plan for: 
 
Specially Protected Area No 21 – Avian Island, Marguerite Bay 
 
 
 
Working Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection 
by the United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System. 
 
Revised Management Plan for SPA No 21. 
 
Working Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection  
by the United Kingdom 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Under Resolution 1 (1998), the United Kingdom (UK) was given responsibility for 
revising the Management Plans for a number of Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) and 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs). 
 
A revised draft Management Plan for Avian Island, SPA number 21, is attached to this 
Working Paper for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP).   
 
The draft Management Plan attached to this Working Paper has been prepared in 
accordance with the provisions of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol.  In preparing 
the draft Plan a detailed assessment of the values of the site, and of the measures 
necessary to protect it, was undertaken.  A field visit to Avian Island was made in 
February 2001.  This visit provided an opportunity to verify information and to ensure 
that the information in the draft Plan is accurate and up-to-date. 
 
Field data, collected during the recent visit will also be used to produce a breeding bird 
distribution map in due course.  This will be included within the draft Plan when it 
becomes available later this year.  In the interim, the present maps are considered 
sufficient to allow review of the draft Management Plans by the CEP. 
 
 
Polar Regions Section 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Plan for 
Specially Protected Area No. 21 
AVIAN ISLAND, MARGUERITE BAY, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Avian Island (Latitude 67°46' S, Longitude 68°54' W, 0.49 km2), is situated in north-
western Marguerite Bay, 400 m south of Adelaide Island on the western side of the central 
Antarctic Peninsula.  It was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 
30 under Recommendation XV-6 in 1989 after a proposal by the United Kingdom.  Included was 
the island together with its littoral zone, but excluded was a small area near a refuge on the north-
western coast of the island.  Values protected under the original designation were described as the 
abundance and diversity of breeding seabirds present on the island, that the southern giant petrel 
(Macronectes giganteus) colony is the farthest south known breeding population of this species, 
and that the blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) are breeding close to the southern 
limit of their range.  The Area was therefore considered of outstanding ornithological importance, 
meriting protection from unnecessary human disturbance. 
Designation as an SSSI was terminated with redesignation of Avian Island as a Specially 
Protected Area (SPA) through Recommendation XVI-4 (1990, SPA No. 21) after a proposal by 
the United Kingdom. The boundaries were similar to the original SSSI, but included the entire 
island and the littoral zone without the exclusion zone near the refuge on the north-western coast. 
The values protected were the same as for the SSSI, but with attention drawn to the additional 
important values of: 
• 
“35,600 pairs of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae), which is the largest Adélie colony on 
the Antarctic Peninsula, containing a third of the total breeding population of the region”; 
• 
“670 pairs of blue-eyed cormorants, which are close to the southern limit of their breeding 
range, and one of the largest known breeding colonies in the Antarctic, representing 
approximately 85% of the total population breeding south of the Antarctic Circle”. 
While the size of the Avian Island Adélie penguin colony on the Antarctic Peninsula is not 
substantiated by recent data, this colony and those of several other resident species are 
nonetheless some of the largest in the region, and the values noted in the original SSSI and 
subsequent SPA designations are generally reaffirmed in the present management plan.  Further 
values evident from scientific descriptions of Avian Island are also considered important as 
reasons for special protection of the Area.  These values are:   
• 
the outstanding and unique attribute of being the only known site on the Antarctic Peninsula 
where seven seabird species are breeding in such close proximity to each other within the 
 
 
confined space of a single, small island, with unusually high population densities and 
virtually the whole island occupied by breeding birds throughout the summer; 
• 
Representation of seven of the seabird species breeding along the Antarctic Peninsula;  
• 
the southern giant petrel colony is one of the two largest on the Antarctic Peninsula, 
comprising about one-fifth of the population south of the South Shetland Islands, and these 
birds are extremely vulnerable to disturbance; 
• 
the kelp gull (Larus dominicanus) colony is also large and is breeding near the southern 
extent of its range; 
• 
the southernmost record of breeding brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi) in the Antarctic 
Peninsula region was noted on Avian Island in 1978-79; 
• 
the moss Warnstorfia laculosa (=Calliergidium austro-stramineum) on Avian Island is at the 
southern limit of its known range. 
The boundaries of the Area designated under Recommendation XVI-4 have been changed 
in this management plan to include offshore islets and rocks previously excluded.  The Area is 
now defined to include the whole of Avian Island and the littoral zone, offshore islets and rocks, 
and the surrounding marine environment (including sea ice when present) within 100 m of the 
shoreline of the main island as a buffer zone. 
A summer-only scientific station, Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), is located 1.2 km to the 
north-west, on Adelaide Island.  The nearest year-round station to Avian Island is Rothera 
Research Station (UK), 40 km to the north-east on Rothera Point, also on Adelaide Island.   
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Avian Island aims to: 
• 
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance to the Area; 
• 
allow scientific research on the ecosystem and physical environment, particularly on the 
avifauna, provided it is for compelling reasons which cannot be served elsewhere; 
• 
minimise the risk of introduction of pathogens which may cause disease in bird or mammal 
populations within the Area; 
• 
minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• 
gather data on the population status of the seabirds on the island on a regular basis, preferably 
for all resident breeding species at least once every five years; 
• 
allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
 
 
• 
A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at the stations Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), Rothera (UK) and 
General San Martín (Argentina), where copies of this management plan shall also be made 
available. 
• 
Signs showing the location and boundaries of the Area with clear statements of entry 
restrictions shall be placed in prominent positions on the north-western and eastern coasts of 
the island (Map 2), to help avoid inadvertent entry. 
• 
Markers, signs or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition or removed. 
• 
Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the 
Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated, and in particular to conduct 
bird censuses, and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Avian Island SPA No. 21 in relation to Marguerite Bay, showing the locations of the 
stations Teniente Luis Carvajal (Chile), Rothera (UK) and General San Martín 
(Argentina).  The location of other protected areas within Marguerite Bay (SPA No. 8 at 
Dion Islands, SPA No. 19 at Lagotellerie Island, and SSSI No. 9 at Rothera Point) are 
also shown.  Inset: the location of Avian Island on the Antarctic Peninsula. 
Map 2: Avian Island SPA No. 21: topographic map.  Map specifications: 
 
Projection:  Lambert Conformal Conic;  Standard parallels: 1st 67° 30' 00" S;  2nd  68° 
00' 00"S;  
 
Central Meridian:  68° 55' 00" W;  Latitude of Origin: 68° 00' 00" S; Spheroid: WGS84; 
 
Datum: Mean sea level. Horizontal accuracy: ±0.5 m; vertical accuracy ±1.5 m. Vertical 
contour interval 10 m. 
Map 3: Avian Island SPA No. 21: breeding bird distribution map [TO BE COMPLETED]. 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
See Annex 1 attached. 
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area 
None. 
 
 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
Two small abandoned refuges and two beacon structures are present within the Area.  A 
refuge erected by Chile in 1962 is located on the north-western coast of the island at latitude 
67°46'16" S, longitude 68°54'00" W.  A refuge constructed by Argentina in 1957 is 650 m SE of 
this position, on the eastern coast at latitude 67°46'39" S, longitude 68°53'35" W.  Both refuges 
were in a poor state of repair in February 2001.  Further deterioration of the huts has potential to 
impact on nesting birds. 
An old iron frame structure, believed to have been erected by the UK during the operation 
of Adelaide Base and used as a navigational aid, is located at approximately 38 m near the 
highest point of the island.  The structure remains standing, although is rusting. 
A new beacon was constructed by Chile in February 1998 on an adjacent site at a similar 
elevation.  This structure is a solid cylindrical painted iron tower of approximately 2 m diameter 
and 2.5 m in height, set in a concrete pad of approximately 2.5 x 2.5 m. A lit beacon, protective 
rails and solar panels are affixed to the top of the structure.  No other structures are known to 
exist on the island. 
Four survey control markers were installed on the island on 31 January 1999 (Map 2).  The 
southernmost marker is located adjacent to the navigation beacon and consists of a survey nail in 
bedrock covered by a cairn.  A similar marker is installed on the high point of the low ridge on 
the north-eastern coast of the island, also covered by a cairn.  The remaining two markers are 
survey nails affixed to the roof of each of the refuges. Two signs marking the Area shall be 
installed in prominent positions on the north-western and eastern coasts of the island. 
The nearest scientific research station is 1.2 km north-west at Teniente Luis Carvajal 
(Chile), on southern Adelaide Island (latitude 67°46' S, longitude 68°55' W). Since 1982 this has 
been operated as a summer-only facility, open from October until March. Over this period the 
station has generally accommodated up to 10 personnel.  Formerly, this facility was established 
and operated continuously by the UK from 1961 until 1977. 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Avian Island are the Dion Islands (SPA No. 8) about 12.5 
km SSE, Rothera Point (SSSI No. 9) 40 km to the NE, and Lagotellerie Island (SPA No. 19) 65 
km east (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
 
 
• 
it is issued only for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, in 
particular for scientific study of the avifauna and ecosystem of the Area, or for essential 
management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection, maintenance or 
review; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological or scientific values of the Area; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were 
not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
Vehicles are prohibited on land within the Area and all movement on land within the Area 
shall be on foot. Movement within the Area on foot shall be by routes that minimise any 
disturbance to breeding birds, and to achieve this it may be necessary to take a longer route to the 
destination than would otherwise be the case.  A preferred walking route, which avoids the most 
sensitive bird breeding sites, should be used when traversing across the central part of the island 
where movement in this area is necessary (Map 2).  Access into areas where southern giant 
petrels are nesting (Map 3) shall only be undertaken for purposes specified in the Permit.  When 
access to the beacon is necessary (eg. for maintenance), visitors shall follow the designated 
access route as closely as possible, trying to avoid nesting birds. Much of the area leading up to 
and surrounding the beacon is occupied by breeding petrels, so great care must be exercised.  The 
designated route extends from the central eastern coast up the eastern slopes of the hill (Map 2).  
Visitors should bear in mind that specific nest sites may vary from year to year, and some 
variations on the recommended route may be preferable: the route is intended as a guide, and 
visitors are expected to exercise good judgement to minimise the effects of their presence. In 
other areas, and where practical and safe, it is usually preferable to adopt a route that follows the 
coastline of the Area. 
All visitors shall move carefully to minimise disturbance to the breeding birds and 
vegetated surfaces, and shall pay particular attention to especially sensitive species such as 
southern giant petrels and kelp gulls, which are easily disturbed. Movements should be slow, 
noise kept to a minimum, and the maximum distance practicable should be maintained from 
nesting birds. Visitors shall watch carefully for signs of agitation and preferably retreat from 
approach if significant disturbance is observed. Pedestrian traffic shall be kept to the minimum 
 
 
consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort shall be 
made to minimise effects.  
Small boat landings should be made at the designated locations on the central north-
western coast or on the central eastern coast of the island (Map 2).  If sea or ice conditions render 
this impractical, small boat landings may be made elsewhere along the coast as conditions allow. 
Access by vehicle to the coast when sea ice is present should also use these access points, and 
vehicles shall be parked at the shore.  Travel by small boat or vehicle within the marine part of 
the Area is not confined to specific routes, but shall be by the shortest route consistent with the 
objectives and requirements of the permitted activities. Vehicle or boat crew, or other people on 
vehicles or boats, are prohibited from moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of their 
landing site unless specifically authorised by Permit. 
Aircraft should avoid landing within the Area throughout the year.  Restrictions on 
overflight also apply (see Table 2 below). A Permit may be granted for helicopter use when this 
is considered necessary for essential purposes and where there is no practical alternative, such as 
for the installation, maintenance or removal of structures. In such instances the need for 
helicopter access, including alternatives, and the potential disturbance to breeding birds shall be 
adequately assessed before a Permit may be granted.  Such a Permit shall clearly define the 
conditions for helicopter access based on the findings of the assessment. 
 
Table 2: Aircraft overflight restrictions applying year-round at Avian Island. 
 
Minimum approach distance (m) 
Vertical (above ground) 
Horizontal 
 
 
Aircraft type 
 
Number of  
engines 
Feet 
Metres 
Feet 
Metres 
Helicopter 
1 
2460 
750 
2460 
750 
Helicopter 
2 
3300 
1000 
3300 
1000 
Fixed-wing 
1 or 2 
1480 
450 
1480 
450 
Fixed-wing 
4 
3300 
1000 
3300 
1000 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• 
Scientific research that will not jeopardise the avifauna or ecosystem of the Area, and which 
is for compelling reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; 
• 
Essential management activities, including monitoring; 
 
Restrictions on times at which activities may be conducted apply within the Area, and are 
specified in the relevant sections of this management plan. 
 
 
 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit. Any new 
or additional permanent structures are prohibited.  Existing abandoned or dilapidated structures 
should be removed or renovated by 1 June 2005. Small temporary hides, blinds or screens may be 
constructed for the purpose of scientific study of the avifauna. Before a Permit may be granted 
for the installation, modification or removal of structures, an adequate environmental impact 
assessment shall be undertaken.  Installation, modification, maintenance or removal of structures 
shall be undertaken in a manner that minimises disturbance to breeding birds.  Such activities 
shall be undertaken between 1 February and 30 September inclusive to avoid the main breeding 
season.  All structures, scientific equipment, hides or markers installed within the Area must be 
approved by Permit for a specified period, clearly identified by country, name of the principal 
investigator and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose 
minimal risk of harm to bird populations or of contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific 
equipment, hides or markers for which the period specified in the Permit has expired shall be a 
condition of the Permit. 
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
Camping should be avoided within the Area. However, when necessary for purposes 
specified in the Permit, temporary camping is allowed at two designated campsites: one on the 
central eastern coast of the island and the other on the central north-western coast of the Area 
(Map 2). 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix) below shall be taken to prevent accidental 
introductions. In view of the presence of breeding bird colonies on the island, no poultry 
products, including products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be taken into the Area.  No 
herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-
nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes 
specified in the Permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity 
for which the Permit was granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless specifically 
authorised by Permit for specific scientific or management purposes. Refuelling of aircraft or 
vehicles is prohibited on land within the Area.  Anything introduced shall be for a stated period 
only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and 
 
 
handled so that risk of any introduction into the environment is minimised.  If release occurs 
which is likely to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the 
impact of removal is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The 
appropriate authority should be notified of anything released and not removed that was not 
included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit 
issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a 
minimum standard. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit 
and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.  
Permits shall not be granted if there is a reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would 
take, remove or damage such quantities of soil, native flora or fauna that their distribution or 
abundance on Avian Island would be significantly affected.  Samples of flora or fauna found 
dead within the Area may be removed for analysis or audit without prior authorisation by Permit.  
Material of recent human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not 
brought into the Area by the Permit Holder, or is not otherwise authorised, shall be removed 
unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the 
case the appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, except human wastes, shall be removed from the Area. Human wastes shall 
be removed from the Area or disposed of into the sea. 
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management 
Plan can continue to be met 
1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection 
activities, which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or 
for protective measures. 
2. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
 
 
3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values found at Avian Island visitors shall take 
special precautions against introductions.  Of concern are pathogenic, microbial or plant 
introductions sourced from other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside 
Antarctica. Visitors shall ensure that sampling equipment or markers brought into the Area 
are cleaned or sterilised.  To the maximum extent practicable, footwear and other equipment 
used or brought into the Area (including backpacks, carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly 
cleaned before entering the Area.  
4. Poultry products and other introduced avian products, which may be a vector of avian 
diseases, are prohibited within the Area.  Nearby stations and camps are reminded of 
provisions on waste disposal contained in Annex III, Article 2(3) of the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in order to help safeguard breeding birds on 
Avian Island from introduced pathogens. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, 
as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management 
plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
Bibliography 
Barlow, 1968. Biological Report. Adelaide Island. 1967/68. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. 
AD6/2T/1967/N. 
Bramwell, M.J. 1969. Report on Elephant seal pupping on Avian Island. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS 
Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1969/N. 
Bramwell, M.J. 1970. Journey report: Avian Island 7 Oct – 4 Nov 1969. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS 
Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1969/K3. 
Elliott, M.H. 1969. Summer geological camp on Avian Island 26 Nov – 4 Dec 1968. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey 
report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2T/1968/K3. 
Fox, A. and Gray, M. 1997. Aerial photography field report 1996-97 Antarctic field season. Unpublished British Antarctic 
Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1996/L2. 
Gray, M. and Fox, A. 1997. GPS Survey field report 1996-97 Antarctic field season. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey 
report, BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1996/L1. 
Griffiths, C. 1992. Geological fieldwork on Adelaide Island 1991-92. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS 
Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1991/GL1. 
Harris, C.M. 2001.  Revision of management plans for Antarctic protected areas originally proposed by the United States 
of America and the United Kingdom: Field visit report. Internal report for the National Science Foundation, US, 
and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, UK.  Environmental Research and Assessment, Cambridge. 
Moyes, A.B., Willan, C.F.H., Thomson, J.W. and others 1994. Geological map of Adelaide Island to Foyn Coast, BAS 
GEOMAP Series, Sheet 3, Scale 1:250,000, with supplementary text. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
 
 
Patterson, D.L., Woehler, E.J., Croxall, J.P., Cooper, J., Poncet, S. and Fraser, W.R.  in press.  Breeding distribution and 
population status if the Northern Giant petrel Macronectes halli and the Southern Giant petrel Macronectes 
giganteus.  Submitted to Marine Ornithology. 
Poncet, S. and Poncet, J. 1979. Ornithological report, Avian Island, 1978-79. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report 
BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2R/1978/Q. 
Poncet, S. 1982. Le Grand Hiver: Damien II Base Antarctique.  Les Éditions Arthaud, Paris  
Poncet, S. and Poncet, J. 1987. Censuses of penguin populations of the Antarctic Peninsula, 1983-87. British Antarctic 
Survey Bulletin 77:  109-129. 
Poncet, S. 1990. Avian Island, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, SPA Proposal. Unpublished report to the SCAR 
Group of Specialist on Environmental Affairs and Conservation 1990. 
Smith, H.G. 1978. The distribution and ecology of terrestrial protozoa of sub-Antarctic and maritime Antarctic islands.  
BAS Scientific Report 95, British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
Smith, R.I. Lewis, 1996.  Terrestrial and freshwater biotic components of the western Antarctic Peninsula.  In Ross, R.M., 
Hofmann, E.E. and Quetin, L.B. Foundations for ecological research west of the Antarctic Peninsula.  Antarctic 
Research Series 70: American Geophysical Union, Washington D.C.: 15-59. 
Stonehouse, B. 1949. Report on biological activities at Base E 1948-49. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report BAS 
Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1948/N1. 
Stonehouse, B. 1950. Preliminary report on biological work Base E 1949-50. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report 
BAS Archives Ref. AD6/2E/1949/N. 
Willey, I.M. 1969. Adelaide Island bird report 1968. Unpublished British Antarctic Survey report, BAS Archives Ref. 
AD6/2T/1968/Q. 
Woehler, E.J. (ed) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic penguins. SCAR, Cambridge. 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1 
 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
 
Avian Island (Latitude 67°46' S, Longitude 68°54' W, 0.49 km2), is situated in the north-
west of Marguerite Bay, 400 m south of the south-western extremity of Adelaide Island (Map 1).  
The island is 1.45 km long by 0.8 km at its widest, and is of roughly triangular shape. It is rocky 
with a low relief of generally less than 10 m in the north, rising to about 30 m at the centre, and 
40 m in the south where several rock and ice slopes of up to 30 m drop steeply to the sea. The 
coastline is irregular and rocky with numerous offshore islets, although there are several 
accessible beaches on the northern and eastern coasts.  The island is usually ice-free in summer.  
It contains habitat particularly suitable for a variety of breeding birds: well-drained north-facing 
slopes suitable for blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps); broken rock and boulders 
with crevices suitable for small nesting birds such as Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites 
oceanicus); elevated rocky heights suitable for southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus); 
extensive expanses of snow-free ground for Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae).  The presence 
of the latter attracts skuas (Catharacta maccormicki and C. loennbergi) and kelp gulls (Larus 
dominicanus). 
 
BOUNDARIES 
 
The designated Area comprises the whole of Avian Island and the littoral zone, offshore 
islets and rocks, and a buffer zone of the surrounding marine environment (including sea ice 
when present) within 100 m of the shoreline of the main island (Map 2). Boundary markers have 
not been installed because the coast forms a visually obvious reference for the marine boundary. 
 
CLIMATE AND SEA ICE 
 
No extended meteorological records are available for Avian Island, but records from 1962-
74 for Adelaide Base (formerly UK; now Teniente Luis Carvajal, Chile), 1.2 km distant, show a 
mean daily maximum temperature of 3ºC in February (extreme maximum 9ºC) and a mean daily 
minimum of -8ºC in August (extreme minimum -44ºC). The same general pattern was observed 
in year-round observations made on the island in 1978-79 (Poncet and Poncet 1979). 
 
 
Precipitation on the island in this year was usually as snow, most of which fell between August 
and October, but with occasional snowfalls and some rain in the summer. 
 
Marguerite Bay usually freezes in winter, although the extent and character of sea ice 
shows considerable inter-seasonal variation. Occasionally Marguerite Bay may not clear of ice 
completely until February or March, at which time the sea may again begin to freeze.  Despite the 
extent and frequent persistence of regional sea ice, a recurrent polynya has been observed near 
Avian Island, which can provide locally ice-free conditions from October onward. In addition, 
strong tidal currents around Avian Island help to keep surrounding waters ice-free for much of 
the year, which facilitates easy access to feeding grounds for several species.  The island is not 
particularly windy, with an annual average of 10 knots in 1978-79. However, the strong katabatic 
winds that descend from Adelaide Island, perhaps for 1-3 days a few times every month, reduce 
snow accumulation on the island and push sea ice away from the coast, helping to form the 
polynya.  The relatively snow-free conditions are important for bird colonisation. 
 
GEOLOGY, GEOMORPHOLOGY AND SOILS 
 
The bedrock of Avian Island forms the eastern limb of a NNE – SSW trending synclinal 
structure at the south-western end of Adelaide Island and is composed of interbedded lithic-rich 
and feldspar-rich volcaniclastic sandstones.  Bedded tuffaceaous sandstones, pebbly sandstones 
rich in volcanic lithics, and a volcanic granule breccia also occur.  The latter is probably a 
primary volcanic deposit, while the rest of the sequence is largely composed of reworked 
volcanic material.  The sequence forms part of the Antarctic Peninsula Volcanic Group and is of 
Jurassic to early Tertiary age (Griffiths 1992, Moyes et al 1994). Apart from rock outcrop, the 
surface consists mainly of frost-shattered rock with permafrost. Ornithogenic soils are 
widespread, particularly in the north; organic peat soil is virtually absent, but where present is not 
well-developed and is associated with moss growth. Several raised beaches have been noted on 
Avian Island, but the geomorphology has not otherwise been described. 
 
STREAMS AND LAKES 
 
Avian Island has several ephemeral freshwater ponds of up to 10,000 m2 and of about 40 
cm in depth, the largest being on the eastern coast, at about 5 m altitude, and on the north-western 
coast near sea level. Numerous small pools and meltwater channels develop from seasonal snow 
melt, and small streams drain valleys in the vicinity of the ponds.  Both the ponds and melt-pools 
freeze solid in winter. Freshwater bodies on the island are organically enriched by guano, a 
 
 
source of nutrients, and in summer a number of the ponds show a rich benthic flora and fauna of 
algae, phyllopods, copepods, Nematoda, Protozoa, Rotifera, and Tardigrada. Large numbers of 
the crustacean Branchinecta sp. have also been observed (Poncet and Poncet 1979).  The 
freshwater ecology of the island has not been studied in detail. 
 
BREEDING BIRDS 
 
Seven species of birds breed on Avian Island, which is a relatively high number compared 
to other sites on the Antarctic Peninsula. Several species have unusually high populations, being 
some of the largest for their species in the Antarctic Peninsula region (Map 3). Detailed year-
round data for all species were collected in 1978-79 (Poncet and Poncet 1979), while data are 
otherwise sporadic.  Descriptions below are thus often based on a single season’s observations 
and it should be emphasised that these data are therefore not necessarily representative of longer 
term population trends. However, this is the best information that is presently available. 
 
The most recent data available for Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) on Avian Island 
indicated a population of 35,600 breeding pairs (11/11/78) (Poncet and Poncet 1979, Woehler 
1993) [COUNT FROM DEC 1998 AIR PHOTOS IN PROGRESS]. The colony occupies the 
northern half and central eastern coast of the island (Map 3).  The former management plan 
referred to the Avian Island colony as “the largest on the Antarctic Peninsula [containing] a third 
of the total population breeding in the region”. While this is not substantiated by recent data (e.g. 
one Antarctic Peninsula colony has over 120,000 pairs and several others have over 30,000 
(Woehler 1993)), the Avian Island colony represents one of the largest breeding populations in 
this region.  It contains perhaps as much as 9% of the total Adélie breeding population along the 
Antarctic Peninsula, excluding the South Shetland Islands. 
 
In 1978-79 Adélie penguins were recorded on the island from October until the end of 
April, with egg laying occurring through October and November, and the first chicks hatching 
around mid-December. Chick créches were observed around mid-January, with the first chicks 
becoming independent near the end of January.  Most of the moulting adults and independent 
chicks had departed the island by the third week of February, although groups returned 
periodically throughout March and April.  
 
A large colony of blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) has been recorded in 
three groups located on the south-western coastal extremity of the island (Map 3). Stonehouse 
(1949) reported about 300 birds present in October 1948; a similar number were recorded in mid-
 
 
November 1968, most of which were breeding (Willey 1969). Poncet and Poncet (1979) 
observed 320 pairs in 1978, and approximately 670 pairs on 17 January 1989 (Poncet 1990).  A 
count on 23 February 2001 recorded 185 chicks, although it is probable some had departed by the 
time of the count; approximately 250 nest sites were counted.  In 1968 blue-eyed cormorants 
were observed present on the island from 12 August, with egg laying occurring from November, 
and chicks hatching in December (Willey 1969).  In 1978-79 they were observed from September 
until June, with egg laying occurring from November through to January, when the first chicks 
hatched, and chicks started to become independent in the third week of February (Poncet and 
Poncet 1979) . 
Of the thirteen southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) colonies known south of the 
South Shetland Islands, Avian Island is one of the two largest, and comprises about one fifth of 
the breeding population in the southern Antarctic Peninsula region (Patterson et al in press).  In 
1979 the southern giant petrels occupied principally the elevated rocky outcrops of the central 
and southern half of the island in four main groups (Map 3). Data on the numbers of birds present 
on 
the 
island 
are 
shown 
in 
Table 
1.  
Table 1: Southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus) numbers at Avian Island. 
 
Year 
Number of birds 
Number of pairs 
Number of chicks 
Source 
1948 
~100 
n/a 
n/a 
Stonehouse 1949 
1965 
n/a 
160 
n/a 
Patterson et al 2000 (?) 
1968 
400 
163 
n/a 
Willey 1969 
1979 
n/a 
197 
n/a 
Poncet and Poncet 1979 
1989 
n/a 
250 
n/a 
Poncet 1990 
2001 
n/a 
n/a 
237 
Harris 2001 
 
n/a - not available. 
 
In 1978-79 the birds were present on Avian Island from mid-September through to as late as 
June.  In this season, egg laying occurred from late October through to the end of November, 
with hatching occurring throughout January and chicks generally achieving independence by 
April.  In the 1978-79 austral summer up to 100 non-breeders were observed on the island during 
the courtship period in October, with these numbers decreasing to a few non-breeders as the 
season progressed. 
 
Approximately 200 adult Kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), of which over 60 pairs were 
breeding, were recorded on Avian Island in 1978-79.  These birds were distributed widely, but 
 
 
principally in the elevated central and southern parts of the island (Poncet and Poncet 1979) (Map 
3). In the 1978-79 austral summer the majority of breeders arrived in early October, followed by 
egg-laying around mid-November and hatching a month later.  Detailed data are not available 
because of concern that human disturbance by data collection would seriously impair the 
breeding performance of this species.  However, no more than 12 chicks were observed on the 
island near the end of January 1979, which would suggest breeding performance in this season 
was low: the exact cause – whether human disturbance or natural factors – could not be 
determined. In 1967, 19 pairs and 80-120 birds were recorded (Barlow 1968). 
 
An estimate of at least several hundred pairs of breeding Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites 
oceanicus) on the island was made in 1978-79 (Poncet and Poncet 1979). Wilson’s storm petrels 
were observed on the island from the second week of November, with laying and incubation 
probably occurring through to mid-December.  Departure of adults and independent chicks was 
largely complete by the end of March. Most of the rocky outcrops on the northern half of the 
island and all of the stable rocky slopes in the south are ideal habitat for this species. 
 
In 1978-79 about 25-30 pairs of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) were 
breeding on Avian Island. The skua nests were distributed widely over the island, although the 
majority were on the central and eastern part of the island, especially on slopes overlooking the 
Adélie penguin colony (Map 3).  Large groups of non-breeders (around 150 birds; Poncet and 
Poncet 1979) were observed to congregate around the shallow lake on the eastern side of the 
island. Barlow (1968) reported approximately 200 non-breeding birds in 1968.  In the 1978-79 
austral summer the south polar skuas took up residence around the end of October, with egg-
laying in early December and hatching complete by the end of January.  Independent chicks and 
adults generally departed by the end of March, with some late-breeders remaining until mid-
April.  A breeding success of one chick per nest was reported in the 1978-79 austral summer.  
Barlow (1968) reported 12 breeding pairs of brown (=subantarctic) skuas (Catharacta 
loennbergi), although this number could include south polar skuas.  One breeding pair of brown 
skuas was recorded on the south-west of the island in the 1978-79 austral summer. This is the 
southernmost record of this species breeding along the Antarctic Peninsula.  Several non-
breeding brown skuas were also recorded in the same season.  
 
Several other bird species, known to breed elsewhere in Marguerite Bay, are frequent 
visitors to Avian Island, notably Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata), snow petrels (Pagodroma 
nivea), and southern fulmars (Fulmarus glacialoides).  These species have not been observed to 
nest on Avian Island. Small numbers of Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica) have been seen 
 
 
on a few occasions.  The cape petrel (Daption capense) was observed on Avian Island in October 
1948 (Stonehouse 1949).  Solitary individuals of king (Aptenodytes patagonicus) and chinstrap 
(Pygoscelis antarctica) penguins were observed in 1975 and 1989, respectively. 
 
TERRESTRIAL BIOLOGY 
 
Vegetation on Avian Island is generally sparse, and the flora has not been described in 
detail. Phanerogams are absent from the island and there is a limited range of cryptogams, 
although there is a rich lichen flora.  To date, nine moss and 11 lichen species have been 
identified within the Area.  
 
Mosses described are Andreaea depressinervis, Brachythecium austro-salebrosum, Bryum 
argenteum, B. pseudotriquetrum, Pohlia cruda, P. nutans, Sanionia uncinata (=Drepanocladus 
uncinatus), Syntrichia princeps (=Tortula princeps) and Warnstorfia laculosa (=Calliergidium 
austro-stramineum).  The latter species is at the southern limit of its known range on Avian 
Island (Smith 1996). Moss development is confined to those parts of the island that are 
unoccupied by breeding Adélie penguins or blue-eyed cormorants, and occurs in moist 
depressions or by melt pools. Patches of moss of up to 100 m2 surround the shore of a small pond 
on the hill in the south of the Area, at ca. 30 m elevation.  The green foliose alga Prasiola crispa 
is widespread in wet areas of the island. 
 
Lichens identified on Avian Island are Acarospora macrocyclos, Cladonia fimbriata, C. 
gracilis, Dermatocarpon antarcticum, Lecanora dancoensis, Lecidea brabantica, Physcia caesia, 
Rinodina egentissima, Siphulina orphnina, Thamnolecania brialmontii, and Usnea antarctica.  
The most extensive communities are on the rocky outcrops in the south of the island. 
 
The microinvertebrate fauna, fungi and bacteria on Avian Island have yet to be 
investigated in detail.  Thus far only one mesostigmatid mite (Gamasellus racovitzai) (BAS 
Invertebrate Database 1999) has been described, although a Collembollan (springtail) and several 
species of Acari (mites) have been observed but not identified (Poncet 1990).  A number of 
nematode species (dominated by Plectus sp.) (Spaull 1973) and one fungus (Thyronectria 
hyperantarctica) (BAS Invertebrate Database 1999) have been recorded on the island.  
 
BREEDING MAMMALS AND MARINE ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
 
Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) were common on and around Avian Island in 
1978-79.  During the winter more than a dozen remained, hauled out on coastal ice (Poncet 
1990).  Several pups were born on the shores of the island in the last week of September 1978. 
An elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) was reported pupping on the north-eastern coast of Avian 
Island on 10 October 1969 (Bramwell 1969). Aerial photography taken on 15 December 1998 
revealed 182 elephant seals hauled out in groups, mostly close to the ponds. Leopard seals 
(Hydrurga leptonyx) have been observed around the shoreline, and one was observed ashore in 
winter 1978. A number of non-breeding Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) were 
reported on the island in March 1997 (Gray and Fox 1997), and again at the end of January 1999 
(Fox pers comm 1999).  At least several hundred were present on 23 February 2001 (Harris 
2001), particularly on beaches and low-lying ground in the central and northern parts of the 
island. Crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) are regularly seen in Marguerite Bay, but have 
not been reported on Avian Island.  The marine environment surrounding Avian Island has not 
been investigated. 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES / IMPACTS 
 
Human activity at Avian Island has been sporadic.   The first record of a visit was made in 
October 1948, when members of the UK Stonington Island expedition discovered the large 
Adélie penguin colony on Avian Island (then referred to as one of the Henkes Islands).  
Subsequent visits have comprised a mixture of science, base personnel recreation, tourism and 
logistic activity (survey etc.).  Refuges were constructed on the island in 1957 and 1962 by 
Argentina and Chile respectively (see Section 6(iii)). A geological field party of two camped for 
about 10 days on the south-east of the island in November 1968 (Elliott 1969).  In the same year, 
a UK Naval hydrographic survey team camped on the eastern coast of Avian Island over the 
summer. Permanent chains and rings for mooring lines to the survey vessel were installed in a 
small bay on the north-western coast, and  were still present in 1989 (Poncet 1990).  In 1969, a 
field party camped on the island for a month conducting research on the common cold virus: 
accompanying dogs were inoculated with a virus and then returned to base (Bramwell 1969). 
Dogs often accompanied personnel on the regular visits to Avian Island during the period of 
operation of the UK base on Adelaide Island, but impacts are unknown.  A two-person party 
spent a year on the island in 1978-79, based on the yacht Damien II, making detailed 
observations of the avifauna and other aspects of the biology and natural environment of the 
island (Poncet and Poncet 1979, Poncet 1982, Poncet 1990).  The yacht was moored in a small 
cove on the NW coast.  This yacht party regularly visited the island over the next decade before 
SPA designation.  Map survey work and aerial photography was conducted on and over the 
 
 
island in 1996-98 (Fox and Gray 1997, Gray and Fox 1997), and 1998-99 (Fox pers. 
comm.1999). 
 
The impacts of these activities have not been described and are not known, but are believed 
to have been relatively minor and limited to transient disturbance to breeding birds, campsites, 
footprints, occasional litter, human wastes, scientific sampling and markers. Despite the likely 
transient nature of most disturbance, it has been reported that human visits have caused loss of 
eggs and chicks, either through nest abandonment or by opportunistic predation.  Several species, 
such as southern giant petrels and kelp gulls are particularly vulnerable to disturbance, and have 
been observed to abandon nests at particular periods of the nesting cycle, perhaps at the sight of 
people as much as 100 m distant (Poncet 1990). Approximately 140 people, including a tour 
vessel of 100, were reported to have visited Avian Island in the 1989-90 summer.  Growing 
concern over the number and unregulated nature of visits prompted SPA designation.   
 
The most lasting and visually obvious impacts are associated with the two refuges and 
beacon structures described in Section 6(iii), which are situated close to breeding birds. Both 
refuges were in poor repair in February 2001, with rubbish such as rusting cans, glass, wood, 
roofing iron and empty fuel drums nearby. Birds and seals were observed among this rubbish in 
February 2001.  The older of the two beacon structures is disused and its iron structure, while 
standing, is rusting and deteriorating.  The new beacon, erected in February 1998, was in good 
repair in February 2001.  No information is available regarding any disturbance to nesting birds 
during construction of the beacon. 
 
 
80°W
60°W
40°W
60°S
70°S
Avian
Island
0
25
Km
Lagotellerie Island
SPA No. 19
Rothera
Point
SSSI No. 9
Rothera (UK)
Teniente Luis
Carvajal (Chile)
General San
Martin (Arg)
HORSESHOE
ISLAND
‘BASE Y’
HSM No. 63
MARGUERITE
BAY
69°W
68°
67°W
67°30’S
68°S
ADELAIDE
ISLAND
ARROWSMITH
PENINSULA
POURQUOI
PAS
ISLAND
Map 2
Avian Island
SPA No. 21
Dion Islands
SPA No. 8
NOTE: Overflight
restrictions apply
over this area
Map 1. Avian Island, SPA No. 21, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, location map.
7.9
NOTE: OVERFLIGHT RESTRICTIONS
APPLY OVER THIS AREA: CONSULT
MANAGEMENT PLAN
29
5.9
38.7
22.4
0
500
metres
68°54’W
68°53’W
67°46’30”S
67°46’S
LEGEND
Survey station (occupied)
Spot height (photogrammetric)
22.4
29
Where positions of survey points and refuges
coincide, refuge has priority on map
Designated camp site
Refuge (removal proposed)
Navigation beacon
Contour (5 m)
Coast
SPA boundary
Index contour (25 m)
Pond
AVIAN
ISLAND
ENTRY BY PERMIT
Preferred walking routes
Landing area for
small boats
Landing area for
small boats
Map 2. Avian Island SPA No. 21, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula
