 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CEP IV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Paper WP 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agenda Item 4 g) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chile 
 
 
PROPOSAL TO INCLUDE THE RUINS OF BSE PEDRO AGUIRRE CERDA ON THE 
HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS LIST 
 
The Pedro Aguirre Cerda Base, operated by the Chilean Air Force, was established on 
12 February 1955 at Pendulum Cove, Deception Island, Latitude 62◦ 52`S, 60◦ 36`W.  it 
operated mainly as a meteorological and communications centre until 4 December 
1967, when it was destroyed by a volcanic eruption of unprecedented scale, followed by 
further eruption in 1969 and 1970. 
 
At its inauguration, presided by the Chilean Minster of Defense,, the Base was baptised 
as  Carlos Ibanez del Campo, the name of the incumbent President eho, on his own 
initiative, suggested the change of names in order to honour the Chilean statesman 
responsible for the delimitation of the Chilean Antarctic claim. 
 
This was not the first Chilean presence on Deception island,  Captain Andresen from 
the Sociedad Ballenera de Magallanes, accompanied by Betsy Rassmussen (first 
woman in Antarctica) had a successful whaling operation from 1906 onwards at 
Whalers Bay.  In 1947 the naval vessel Angamos visited Deception and on the same 
year the Vought Sikorski plane flew on reconnaissance missions from Greenwich to 
Deception and Livingston islands. Some refuges were established in the early fifties. 
 The installation, operation and development of the Aguirre Cerda Base reflect the 
characteristics of the pre-IGY period, and also the rivalry, moderated with Antarctic 
cooperation, which existed at the times between the Argentinian,, United Kingdom and 
Chilean bases. Protests were routinely exchanged but did not alter the web of relations 
between the neighbors of Deception Island.  When HRH the Duke of Edinburgh visited 
Deception Island he visited the Argentinian and Chilean Heads of Base who requested, 
as a condition he could not meet, that he visit their bases in return. 
 
The base was endowed with a radar beacon (radiofaro) which allowed planes from the 
mainland to land with sufficient security.  A slipway was built, the Navy installed a water 
deposit one at the dangerous entrance of Neptune`s Bellows.  Two Navy men perished 
in a fire at the Lientur patrol vessel and their funeral was attended both by the crew of 
the ship and personnel from the Aguirre Cerda Base. 
 
Many aspects of the life at the Base are in contradiction with the Antarctic Treaty and 
Protocol practice.  Sheep, hens and Eskimo dogs were brought to Deception island and 
became part of its landscape.  The inorganic growth of the Base doubled in 1963 the 
initial surface and obstruction to wind passage generated obstruction to accesses and 
accumulation of snow which prevented access to the Base. 
 
However, the Base was, until the construction of the Base Eduardo Frei Montalva, the 
main meteorological Antarctic center of the Chilean  Air Force.  In 1965, the University 
of Chile established there the first Volcanological Observatory.  Studies of flora, fauna 
and bentonic communities, oceanography, geology assisted by the presence of the 
Bases damaged in 1967 and totally destroyed in 1969. 
 
 
 
At a recent workshop on Deception Island, held at the Chilean Antarctic Institute in 
Santiago, a consensus emerged that the destroyed base, whose ruins represent in a 
most dramatic way the impact of natural phenomena on an Antarctic Base should be 
afforded the protection of a Historic Site.  It should be preserved in its present state, as 
a ruin, probably with some clean-up of unnecessary debris;  listed as a monument;  and 
protected from tourist and other human interference through visual indications and a 
Code of Conduct. 
 
