 
 
CEP IV 
Working Paper WP-2  
Agenda Item 4g) 
United Kingdom 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System 
Revision of the Status of Specially Protected Area No 18: North Coronation 
Island, South Orkney Islands. 
 
 
 
 
Working Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection 
by the United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System. 
 
Revision of the Status of Specially Protected Area No 18: North Coronation 
Island, South Orkney Islands. 
 
Working Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection  
by the United Kingdom 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Northern Coronation Island (60o33’ South, 45o35’ West), South Orkney Islands, was 
originally designated as Specially Protected Area number 18, by means of 
Recommendation XIII-10 (1985).  Proposed by the UK, the site was designated on 
the grounds that it, “embraces areas of coastal ice-free terrain…with large seabird 
colonies and lichen-dominated cliffs, and….provides an excellent representative area 
of pristine ice environment near the northern limit of maritime Antarctica…” and 
that the area comprises an excellent example of, “…..an integrated coastal, 
permanent ice and sublittoral ecosystem of the maritime Antarctic environment”. 
 
As required by Resolution 1 (1998), the United Kingdom (UK) has completed a 
thorough review of the Management Plan for this site. 
 
However, that review has raised a number of questions about the original basis for 
designation of the site.  These fundamental concerns bring into question how best to 
continue to afford protection to the site, or whether, in fact, protection is required at 
all. 
 
Review of SPA 18 
 
Attempt to revise the Management Plan for this site has raised a number of key 
issues: 
 
• Firstly, access to the site is exceptionally difficult.  This results from a 
combination of the rugged terrain, few practical landing points for boat or 
aircraft, and prevailing poor weather conditions for much of the year (notably 
very low cloud cover).  Consequently few people have ever visited the site.  The 
last recorded visit took place some 25 years ago in 1976/77, although some aerial 
observations were made in 1997.  There is therefore little or no information 
available for the area.  Data to substantiate the values for which the site was 
originally designated have not been obtained.  It is therefore difficult to propose 
 
 
these values as reasons for continued protection of the site with any degree of 
confidence: we simply do not know. 
 
• Given the very low level of visitation to the site (and limitations on access), 
consideration might be given to amending the values of the site and furthering its 
protection on the grounds that it represents an area inviolate from human 
interference.  An alternative option might be to protect the wilderness values of 
the site.  However, owing to the limited data available, even these options have 
proved difficult to substantiate.  Any such proposal would be largely based on 
assumptions.  In respect of the latter option, there is nothing to suggest that this 
site has any greater wilderness value than, for example, much of the Antarctic 
Peninsula.  In that respect certain areas of the Antarctic Peninsula may be more 
deserving of protection (from, for example, adventure tourism) than is Northern 
Coronation Island. 
 
• Finally, consideration might also be given to protecting the site as a scientific 
reference area for use in comparative studies.  However, the lack of any useful 
baseline data coupled with the difficulties of access to the area to enable the 
collection of such data, make this a poor option. 
 
In summary, the North Coronation Island SPA has not been visited for more than 20 
years.  Very few data are available to substantiate the values for which the site was 
originally designated.  And access to the site is severely restricted.  This combination 
of factors makes the preparation of any meaningful Management Plan extremely 
difficult. 
 
Options and Next steps 
 
As a result of the above factors, and after careful review, the UK believes there are 
three options for the future of this protected area. 
 
1. Maintain the status quo.  Continue with protection of the site as an SPA without 
alteration of the values to be protected.  Amend the Management Plan to meet the 
requirements of Annex V, whilst recognising the severe limitations in knowledge 
about the site; 
 
2. Continue with protection of the site as an SPA, but amend the values to be 
protected.  Possibilities include, the potential usefulness of the area as a reference 
and/or wilderness site.  But it would be important to recognise that insufficient 
data are currently available to adequately substantiate such an approach; 
 
 
 
3. Terminate the designation of this SPA on the grounds that insufficient data are 
available to justify continued protection of the site. 
 
The CEP is invited to consider these options and to decide on the most appropriate 
way forward.  
 
Summary 
 
The UK’s attempt to revise the Management Plan for SPA number 18 has identified 
the fact that the original values for protecting this site are largely based on 
assumptions that cannot be substantiated by available data.   
 
Further, significant physical restrictions on access to the site by both sea and air, 
make the collection of data extremely difficult.   
 
Consequently, three options on how best to proceed are presented to the Committee 
for consideration.   
 
Polar Regions Section 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
London 
