 
 
IV CEP 
Working Paper WP-22  
Agenda Item 4g) 
Chile-United Kingdom 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System: Revised Management Plan for 
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6 – Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Paper  
submitted by 
 
Chile and the United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System. 
 
Revised Management Plan for SSSI No 6: Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Under Resolution 1 (1998), Chile and the United Kingdom (UK) were jointly afforded 
responsibility for revising the Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest 
number 6 – Byers Peninsula. 
 
A revised draft Management Plan has now been completed and is attached to this 
Working Paper for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). 
 
The draft Plan has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of Annex V to the 
Environmental Protocol.  In preparing the draft Plan a detailed assessment of the values 
of the site, and of the measures necessary to protect the site was undertaken.  A field visit 
was made in February 2001 to verify information and to ensure that the draft Plan is 
accurate and up-to-date. 
 
A new geological map is currently in preparation.  This will be included within the draft 
Plan when it becomes available later this year.  In the interim, the present maps are 
considered sufficient to allow review of the draft Plan by the CEP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Plan for 
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 6 
BYERS PENINSULA, LIVINGSTON ISLAND, SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Byers Peninsula (latitude 62°34'35" S, longitude 61°13'07" W, 60.6 km2), Livingston 
Island, South Shetland Islands, was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 
10 through Recommendation IV-10 in 1966. This area included the ice-free ground west of the 
western margin of the permanent ice sheet on Livingston Island, below Rotch Dome, as well as 
Window Island about 500 m off the northwest coast and five small ice-free areas on the south 
coast immediately to the east of Byers Peninsula. Values protected under the original designation 
included the diversity of plant and animal life, many invertebrates, a substantial population of 
southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina), small colonies of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus 
gazella), and the outstanding scientific interest associated with such a large variety of plants and 
animals within a relatively small area. 
Designation as an SPA was terminated through Recommendation VIII-2 and redesignation 
as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) was made through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, 
SSSI No. 6).  The new designation as an SSSI more specifically sought to protect three smaller 
ice-free sites on the peninsula of Jurassic and Cretaceous sedimentary and fossiliferous strata, 
considered of outstanding scientific value for study of the former link between Antarctica and 
other southern continents. Following a proposal by the Chile and United Kingdom, the SSSI was 
subsequently extended through Recommendation XVI-5 (1991) to include boundaries similar to 
those of the original SPA:  i.e. the entire ice-free ground of Byers Peninsula west of the margin of 
the permanent Livingston Island ice sheet, including the littoral zone, but excluding Window 
Island and the five southern coastal sites originally included, as well as excluding all offshore 
islets and rocks. Recommendation XVI-5 noted that in addition to the special geological value, 
the Area was also of considerable biological and archaeological importance.  Biological values 
noted were: 
• 
Sparse but diverse flora of calcicolous and calcifuge plants and cyanobacteria associated with 
the lavas and basalts respectively; 
• 
Particularly well-developed vegetation on basaltic plugs; 
• 
Several rare cryptogams and two native vascular plants (Deschampsia antarctica and 
Colobanthus quitensis) occur at several sites; 
• 
Coastal and inland lakes, the latter with a particularly important biota, including aquatic 
mosses, and serving as breeding sites for the midge Parochlus steinenii, the only native 
winged insect in the Antarctic and which has exceptionally restricted distribution; 
 
 
• 
The only other Antarctic dipteran, the wingless midge Belgica antarctica, occurs with 
restricted distribution in stands of moist moss near Cerro Negro. 
 
In addition, the archaeological values were described as unique in possessing the greatest 
concentration of historical sites in Antarctica, namely the remains of refuges, together with 
contemporary artifacts, and shipwrecks of early nineteenth century sealing expeditions. 
 
 
The values noted in the original designation, and contained in the subsequently adopted 
management plans, are reaffirmed in the present management plan.  Further values not referred to 
originally, but evident from scientific descriptions of Byers Peninsula, are also considered 
important as reasons for special protection of the Area.  These values are:   
• 
well-preserved sub-fossil whale bones are present in raised beaches, which are important for 
radiocarbon dating of beach deposits; 
• 
the described terrestrial flora and fauna is of exceptional diversity, with one of the broadest 
representations of species known in the maritime Antarctic; 
• 
with over 60 lakes, numerous freshwater pools and a great variety of often extensive streams, 
it is the most significant limnological site in the South Shetland Islands – and perhaps the 
Antarctica Peninsula region – and also one which has not been subjected to significant levels 
of human disturbance; 
• 
the lakes and their sediments constitute one of the most important archives for study of the 
Holocene palaeoenvironment in the Antarctic Peninsula region, as well as for establishing a 
regional Holocene tephrachronology; 
• 
Parochlus steinenii is of limited distribution in the South Shetland Islands, and Belgica 
antarctica has a very restricted distribution on the Antarctic Peninsula, but both species are 
abundant at several of the lakes and pools on Byers Peninsula;  
• 
unusually thick (3-10 cm) and extensive cyanobacterial mats of Phormidium sp., particularly 
on the upper levels of the central Byers Peninsula plateau, are the best examples so far 
described in the maritime Antarctic; 
• 
the breeding avifauna within the Area is diverse, including two species of penguin (chinstrap 
Pygoscelis antarctica and gentoo P. papua), Antarctic tern (Sterna vittata), Wilson's storm 
petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), cape petrels (Daption capense), kelp gulls (Larus 
dominicanus), southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), black-bellied storm petrels 
(Fregetta tropica), blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps), brown skuas (Catharacta 
loennbergi), and sheathbills (Chionis alba). 
 
 
While the particular status of designation and boundaries have changed from time to time, 
Byers Peninsula has in effect been under special protection for most of the modern era of 
scientific activity in the region.  The nearest long-term scientific stations to Byers Peninsula are 
Base Juan Carlos I (Spain) and St. Kliment Ochridski (Bulgaria), 30 km distant on Hurd 
Peninsula, Livingston Island.  Recent activities within the Area have been almost exclusively for 
scientific research.  Most visits and sampling within the Area, since original designation in 1966, 
have been subject to Permit conditions. 
The boundaries of the Area designated under Recommendation XVI-5 have been changed 
in this management plan.  The Area now includes two islets several hundred metres SW of Devils 
Point and a small area of ice-free ground at Clark Nunatak in the SE corner as these sites also 
support values consistent with the remainder of the Peninsula.  The Area is now defined to 
include the whole of Byers Peninsula west of the permanent ice sheet of Rotch Dome, Livingston 
Island, above the low tide water level, including the two islets adjacent to Devils Point noted 
above, but excluding all other offshore islets and rocks. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at Byers Peninsula aims to: 
• 
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary 
human disturbance; 
• 
allow scientific research on the ecosystem and geology, while ensuring protection from over-
sampling;  
• 
allow other scientific research within the Area provided it is for compelling reasons which 
cannot be served elsewhere; 
• 
allow archaeological research and measures for artifact protection, while protecting historic 
artifacts present within the Area from unnecessary destruction, disturbance, or removal; 
• 
minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area; 
• 
allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities shall be undertaken to protect the values of the Area: 
• 
A map showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be 
displayed prominently at Base Juan Carlos I (Spain) and St. Kliment Ochridski Station 
(Bulgaria) on Hurd Peninsula, where copies of this management plan shall be made 
available; 
• 
Markers, signs, fences or other structures erected within the Area for scientific or 
management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition; 
 
 
• 
Visits shall be made as necessary (preferably no less than once every five years) to assess 
whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure 
management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
 
4. 
Period of designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map 1: Byers Peninsula SSSI No. 6 in relation to the South Shetland Islands, showing the 
location of Base Juan Carlos I (Spain) and St. Kliment Ochridski Station (Bulgaria), and 
showing the location of protected areas within 75 km of the Area.  Inset: the location of 
Livingston Island along the Antarctica Peninsula. 
Map 2: Byers Peninsula SSSI No. 6 topographic map.  Map specifications: Projection  UTM 
Zone 20; Spheroid: WGS84;  Datum: Mean Sea Level.  Horizontal accuracy of control: 
±0.05 m. Vertical contour interval 25 m, vertical accuracy unknown but expected to be 
better than ±12.5 m. 
Map 3: Byers Peninsula SSSI No. 6 geological map.  Map specifications as per Map 2. [TO BE 
COMPLETED]. 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
See Annex 1. 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
None. 
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
Besides the sealers refuges, there are no structures known to be present in the Area.  
Several cairns marking sites used for topographical survey are present within the Area.  The 
nearest scientific research station is 30 km east at Hurd Peninsula, Livingston Island (Base Juan 
Carlos I, Spain), a summer-only facility from which an intensive research programme has been 
carried out since 1987. 
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected areas to Byers Peninsula are: Cape Shirreff, SSSI No. 32, which 
lies about 20 km to the northeast; Port Foster and other parts of Deception Island, SSSIs No. 21 
 
 
and No. 27 respectively, which are approximately 40 km SSE; and ‘Chile Bay’ (Discovery Bay), 
SSSI No. 26, which is about 70 km to the east at Greenwich Island (Map 1). 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by an appropriate 
national authority.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are that: 
• 
it is issued only for scientific study of the ecosystem, geology or archaeology of the Area, or 
for compelling scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere; or  
• 
it is issued for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as 
inspection, maintenance or review; 
• 
the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological, geological, historical or scientific 
values of the Area; 
• 
any management activities are in support of the objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan; 
• 
the Permit, or an authorised copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
permits shall be issued for a stated period; 
• 
the appropriate authority should be notified of any activities/measures undertaken that were 
not included in the authorised Permit. 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
Vehicles are prohibited within the Area and access shall be by small boat or by helicopter. 
There are no special restrictions on landings from the sea, or that apply to the sea routes used to 
move to and from the Area. 
During the period 1 October – 30 April inclusive, aircraft should avoid landing within 500 
m of the coast (Map 2). Within this zone the overflight guidelines, specified in Table 1, should be 
followed to the maximum extent practicable in order to protect the numerous birds and seals 
concentrated along the coast. Helicopters may land elsewhere within the Area when necessary for 
purposes consistent with plan objectives, although landings should, where practicable, be made 
on ridge and raised beach crests. Helicopters should avoid sites where there are concentrations of 
birds or well-developed vegetation. When conditions require aircraft to fly at lower elevations 
than recommended in the guidelines, aircraft should maintain the maximum elevation possible 
and minimise the time taken to transit the coastal zone. Use of helicopter smoke grenades is 
prohibited within the Area unless absolutely necessary for safety.  If used all smoke grenades 
should be retrieved. 
 
 
Subject to the guidelines in Table 1, movement within the Area shall be on foot or by 
helicopter.  Pilots, air or boat crew, or other people on aircraft or boats, are prohibited from 
moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of their landing site unless specifically authorised 
by Permit.  All movement should be undertaken carefully so as to minimise disturbance to 
animals, soils, geomorphological features and vegetated surfaces, walking on rocky terrain or 
ridges if practical to avoid damage to sensitive plants, patterned ground and the often 
waterlogged soils.  Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum consistent with the 
objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise 
trampling effects. 
 
Table 1: Aircraft overflight guidelines applying 1 October – 30 April inclusive within a 500 m 
coastal zone at Byers Peninsula. 
 
Minimum approach distance (m) 
Vertical (above ground) 
 
 
Aircraft type 
 
Number of  
engines 
Feet 
Metres 
Helicopter 
1 
2460 
750 
Helicopter 
2 
3300 
1000 
Fixed-wing 
1 or 2 
1480 
450 
Fixed-wing 
4 
3300 
1000 
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place 
• 
Scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area; 
• 
Essential management activities, including monitoring; 
• 
Specific guidelines on times and locations at which aircraft may operate within the Area 
apply, specified in Section 7 (i) of this Management Plan. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
Structures shall not be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit.  Permanent 
structures are prohibited. All structures or scientific equipment installed in the Area shall be 
approved by Permit for a specified period and clearly identified by country, name of the principal 
investigator and year of installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose 
minimal risk of contamination to the Area.  Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit 
has expired shall be a condition of the Permit. 
 
 
 
 
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
When necessary for purposes specified in the Permit, temporary camping is allowed 
within the Area. Specific camp site locations have not been designated, although camps should be 
located on non-vegetated sites, such as on the drier parts of the raised beaches, or on thick (>0.5 
m) snow-cover when practicable, and should avoid concentrations of breeding birds or mammals.  
It is prohibited to camp within 50 m of any historic sealer’s refuge or shelter. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area and the precautions listed in 7(ix)(3) below shall be taken against accidental 
introductions. In view of the presence of breeding bird colonies on Byers Peninsula, no poultry 
products, including products containing uncooked dried eggs, including wastes from such 
products, shall be released into the Area or into the adjacent sea.  No herbicides or pesticides 
shall be brought into the Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, 
which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be 
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit was 
granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless specifically authorised by Permit for specific 
scientific or management purposes.  Anything introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall 
be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so 
that risk of any introduction into the environment is minimised.  If release occurs which is likely 
to compromise the values of the Area, removal is encouraged only where the impact of removal 
is not likely to be greater than that of leaving the material in situ.  The appropriate authority 
should be notified of anything released and not removed that was not included in the authorised 
Permit. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna is prohibited, except by Permit 
issued in accordance with Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is involved, the SCAR Code of 
Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica should be used as a 
minimum standard. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder shall 
only be in accordance with a Permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet 
scientific, archaeological or management needs.  Permits shall not be granted if there is a 
 
 
reasonable concern that the sampling proposed would take, remove or damage such quantities of 
soil, rock, native flora or fauna that their distribution or abundance on Byers Peninsula would be 
significantly affected.  Anything of recent human origin likely to compromise the values of the 
Area, which was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder, or is not an historic artifact or 
otherwise authorised, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than 
leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area. Human wastes 
may be disposed of into the sea. 
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan 
can continue to be met 
1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out monitoring and site inspection 
activities, which may involve the small-scale collection of samples for analysis or review, or 
for protective measures. 
2. Any specific long-term monitoring sites shall be appropriately marked. 
3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values derived from the relatively low level of 
recent human impact at Byers Peninsula special precautions shall be taken against 
introductions.  Of concern are microbial or plant introductions sourced from other Antarctic 
sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica.  All sampling equipment or 
markers brought into the Area shall be cleaned or sterilised.  To the maximum extent 
practicable, footwear and other equipment used or brought into the Area (including 
backpacks, carry-bags and tents) shall be thoroughly cleaned before entering the Area. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should include, 
as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR.  Parties 
should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should 
provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, 
which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management 
Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a 
publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
 
Bibliography 
Birnie, R.V. and Gordon, J.E. 1980. Drainage systems associated with snow melt, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. 
Geografiska Annaler 62A(1-2): 57-62. 
Björck, S., Hakansson, H, Zale, R., Karlén, W. and Jönsson, B.L. 1991.  A late Holocene lake sediment sequence from 
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, with palaeoclimatic implications.  Antarctic Science 3(1): 61-72. 
Björck, S. Sandgren, P. & Zale, R. 1991. Late Holocene tephrochronology of the Northern Antarctic Peninsula. Quaternary 
Research 36: 322-28. 
Björck, S., Hjort, C, Ingólfsson, O., and Skog, G. 1991.  Radiocarbon dates from the Antarctic Peninsula-  problems and 
potential.  In Lowe, J.J., Radiocarbon dating: recent applications and future potential.  Quaternary Proceedings 1, 
Quaternary Research Association, Cambridge: 55-65. 
Björck, S., Håkansson, H., Olsson, S., Barnekow, L. & Janssens, J. 1993. Palaeoclimatic studies in South Shetland 
Islands, Antarctica, based on numerous stratigraphic variables in lake sediments. Journal of Paleolimnology 8: 
233-72. 
Björck, S. & Zale, R. 1996: Late Holocene tephrochronology and palaeoclimate, based on lake sediment studies. In 
López-Martínez, J., Thomson, M. R. A., Martínez de Pisón, E. and others (Eds.) Geomorphological map of Byers 
Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series Sheet 5-A, 43-48. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Björck, S., Hjort, C., Ingólfsson, O., Zale, R. and Ising, J. 1996: Holocene deglaciation chronology from lake sediments. In 
López-Martínez, J., Thomson, M. R. A., Martínez de Pisón, E. & others (Eds.) Geomorphological map of Byers 
Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series Sheet 5-A, 49-51. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Block, W. and Christensen, B.  1985. Terrestrial Enchytraeidae from South Georgia and the Maritime Antarctic. British 
Antarctic Survey Bulletin  69: 65-70. 
Block, W. and Starý, J. 1996.  Oribatid mites (Acari: Oribatida) of the maritime Antarctic and Antarctic Peninsula. Journal 
of Natural History  30: 1059-67. 
Bonner, W.N. and Smith, R.I.L. (Eds) 1985.  Conservation areas in the Antarctic. SCAR, Cambridge: 147-56. 
Booth, R.G., Edwards, M. and Usher, M.B. 1985. Mites of the genus Eupodes (Acari, Prostigmata) from maritime 
Antarctica: a biometrical and taxonomic study.  Journal of the Zoological Society of London (A) 207: 381-406.  
(samples of Eupodes analysed) 
Convey P., Greenslade P. Richard K.J. and Block W. 1996. The terrestrial arthropod fauna of the Byers Peninsula, 
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands - Collembola. Polar Biology 16(4): 257-59. 
Covacevich V.C. 1976. Fauna valanginiana de Peninsula Byers, Isla Livingston, Antartica. Revista Geologica de Chile 3: 
25-56. 
Crame J.A. 1984. Preliminary bivalve zonation of the Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary in Antarctica. In Perrilliat, M. de C. 
(ed) Memoria, III Congreso Latinamerico de Paleontologia, Mexico, 1984. Mexico City, Universidad Nacional 
Autonoma de Mexico, Instituto de Geologia: 242-54. 
Crame J.A. 1985. New Late Jurassic Oxytomid bivalves from the Antarctic Peninsula region. British Antarctic Survey 
Bulletin  69: 35-55. 
Crame J.A. 1995. Occurrence of the bivalve genus Manticula in the Early Cretaceous of Antarctica. Palaeontology 38 Pt. 
2: 299-312. 
Crame J.A. 1995. A new Oxytomid bivalve from the Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous of Antarctica. Palaeontology 39 Pt. 
3: 615-28. 
Crame J.A. 1996. Early Cretaceous bivalves from the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.  Mitt. Geol-Palaont. Inst. Univ. 
Hamburg  77: 125-127. 
Crame J.A. and Kelly, S.R.A. 1995. Composition and distribution of the Inoceramid bivalve genus Anopaea. 
Palaeontology 38 Pt. 1: 87-103. 
Crame J.A., Pirrie D., Crampton J.S. and Duane A.M.  1993. Stratigraphy and regional significance of the Upper Jurassic - 
Lower Cretaceous Byers Group, Livingston Island, Antarctica. Journal of the Geological Society 150 Pt. 6: 1075-
87. 
Croxall, J.P. and Kirkwood, E.D. 1979. The distribution of penguins on the Antarctic Peninsula and the islands of the 
Scotia Sea. British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge. 
Davey, M.C.  1993. Carbon and nitrogen dynamics in a maritime Antarctic stream. Freshwater Biology 30: 319-30. 
Davey, M.C.  1993. Carbon and nitrogen dynamics in a small pond in the maritime Antarctic. Hydrobiologia 257: 165-75. 
Duane A.M. 1994. Preliminary palynological investigation of the Byers Group (Late Jurassic-Early Cretaceous), Livingston 
Island, Antarctic Peninsula. Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology 84: 113-120. 
Duane A.M. 1996. Palynology of the Byers Group (Late Jurassic-Early Cretaceous) Livingston and Snow Islands, 
Antarctic Peninsula: its biostratigraphical and palaeoenvironmental significance. Review of Palaeobotany and 
Palynology 91: 241-81. 
Duane A.M. 1997. Taxonomic investigations of Palynomorphs from the Byers Group (Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous), 
Livingston and Snow Islands, Antarctic Peninsula. Palynology 21: 123-144. 
Ellis-Evans, J.C. 1996. Biological and chemical features of lakes and streams.  In Lopez-Martínez, J., Thomson M.R.A. 
and Martínez De Pisón E. (eds).  Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP 
Series, Sheet 5-A. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Gonzáles-Ferrán, O. Katsui, Y. and Tavera, J. 1970.  Contribución al conocimiento geológico de la Península Byers, Isla 
Livingston, Islas Shetland del Sur, Antártica. Publ. INACH Ser. Cie.,  1(1): 41-54. 
Gray, N.F. and Smith, R.I. Lewis. 1984. The distribution of nematophagous fungi in the maritime Antarctic. 
Mycopathologia 85: 81-92. 
Harris, C.M. 2001.  Revision of management plans for Antarctic protected areas originally proposed by the United States 
of America and the United Kingdom: Field visit report. Internal report for the National Science Foundation, US, 
and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, UK.  Environmental Research and Assessment, Cambridge. 
 
 
Hansom, J.D. 1979. Radiocarbon dating of a raised beach at 10 m in the South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey 
Bulletin  49: 287. 
Hathway B. 1997. Nonmarine sedimentation in an Early Cretaceous extensional continental-margin arc, Byers Peninsula, 
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. Journal of Sedimentary Research 67(4): 686-697. 
Hathway, B. and Lomas, S.A. 1998. The Upper Jurassic-Lower cretaceous Byers Group, South Shetland Islands, 
Antarctica: revised stratigraphy and regional correlations. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  49: 287. 
Hernandez, P.J and Azcarate, V. 1971.  Estudio paleobotanico preliminar sobre restos de una tafoflora de la Peninsula 
Byers (Cerro Negro), Isla Livingston, Islas Shetland del Sur, Antartica. Publ. INACH Ser. Cie.,  2(1): 15-50. 
Hjort, C., Ingólfsson, O. & Björck, S. 1992: The last major deglaciation in the Antarctic Peninsula region -a review of 
recent Swedish Quaternary research. In (eds. Y. Yoshida et al.) Recent Progress in Antarctic Science. Terra 
Scientific Publishing Company  (TERRAPUB), Tokyo: 741-743 
Hjort, C., Björck, S., Ingólfsson, Ó. & Möller, P. 1998: Holocene deglaciation and climate history of the northern Antarctic 
Peninsula region: a discussion of correlations between the Southern and Northern Hemispheres. Annals of 
Glaciology 27: 110-112. 
Hodgson, D.A., Dyson, C.L., Jones, V.J. and Smellie, J.L. 1998. Tephra analysis of sediments from Midge Lake (South 
Shetland Islands) and Sombre Lake (South Orkney Islands), Antarctica. Antarctic Science 10(1): 13-20. 
John, B.S. and Sugden, D.E. 1971. Raised marine features and phases of glaciation in the South Shetland Islands. British 
Antarctic Survey Bulletin  24: 45-111. 
Jones, V.J., Juggins, S. and Ellis-Evans, J.C. 1993.  The relationship between water chemistry and surface sediment 
diatom assemblages in maritime Antarctic lakes.  Antarctic Science 5(4): 339-48. 
Kelly, S.R.A. 1995. New Trigonioid bivalves from the Early Jurassic to Earliest Cretaceous of the Antarctic Peninsula 
region: systematics and austral paleobiogeography. Journal of Paleontology 69(1): 66-84. 
Lindsay, D.C. 1971. Vegetation of the South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  25: 59-83. 
Lopez-Martínez, J., Thomson M.R.A. and Martínez De Pisón E. (eds). Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, 
Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A, Scale 1:25 000.  Geomorphological map and supplementary 
text. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey, 1996. 
Martínez De Pisón E., Serrano, E., Arche, A and Lopez-Martínez, J. 1996.  Glacial geomorphology. In Lopez-Martínez, J., 
Thomson M.R.A. and Martínez De Pisón E. (eds).  Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. 
BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5- A. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Pankhurst R.J. Weaver S.D. Brook M. and Saunders A.D. 1979. K-Ar chronology of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, 
South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 49: 277-82.  
Richard, K.J., Convey P. and Block, W.  1994.  The terrestrial arthropod fauna of the Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, 
South Shetland Islands.  Polar Biology 14: 371-79. 
Serrano, E., Martínez De Pisón E. and Lopez-Martínez, J. 1996.  Periglacial and nival landforms and deposits. In Lopez-
Martínez, J., Thomson M.R.A. and Martínez De Pisón E. (eds).  Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, 
Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A. Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Smellie J.L., Davies R.E.S. and Thomson M.R.A. 1980.  Geology of a Mesozoic intra-arc sequence on Byers Peninsula, 
Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 50: 55-76. 
Smith, R.I.L. and Simpson, H.W. 1987. Early Nineteeth Century sealers’ refuges on Livingston Island, South Shetland 
Islands. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin  74: 49-72. 
Starý, J. and Block, W. 1998.  Distribution and biogeography of oribatid mites (Acari: Oribatida) in Antarctica, the sub-
Antarctic and nearby land areas. Journal of Natural History  32: 861-94. 
Sugden, D.E. and John, B.S. 1973. The ages of glacier fluctuations in the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica. In van 
Zinderen Bakker, E.M. (ed) Paleoecology of Africa and of the surrounding islands and Antarctica 8.  Cape Town, 
A.A. Balkema: 139-59. 
Thom, G. 1978.  Disruption of bedrock by the growth and collapse of ice lenses. Journal of Glaciology  20: 571-75. 
Torres, D., Cattan, P. and Yanez, J. 1981.  Postbreeding preferences of the Southern Elephant seal Mirounga leonina in 
Livingston Island (South Shetlands). Publ. INACH Ser. Cie.,  27: 13-18. 
Thomson, M.R.A. and López-Martínez, J. 1996. Introduction.  In Lopez-Martínez, J., Thomson M.R.A. and Martínez De 
Pisón E. (eds).  Geomorphological map of Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island. BAS GEOMAP Series, Sheet 5-A. 
Cambridge, British Antarctic Survey. 
Usher, M.B. and Edwards, M. 1986. The selection of conservation areas in Antarctica: an example using the arthropod 
fauna of Antarctic islands.  Environmental Conservation 13(2): 115-22. 
White, M.G. Preliminary report on field studies in the South Shetland Islands 1965/66.  Unpublished field report in BAS 
Archives AD6/2H1966/N6. 
Woehler, E.J. (ed) 1993. The distribution and abundance of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic penguins. SCAR, Cambridge. 
 
 
Annex 1 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 
 
Byers Peninsula (between latitudes 62°34'35" and 62°40'35" S and longitudes 60°54'14" 
and 61°13'07" W, 60.6 km2) is situated at the west end of Livingston Island,  the second-largest 
of the South Shetland Islands (Map 1).  The peninsula has a central west-east extent of about 9 
km and a NW-SE extent of 18.2 km, and is the largest ice-free area in the South Shetland Islands. 
The peninsula is generally of low, gently rolling relief, although there are a number of prominent 
hills ranging in altitude between 80 – 265 m (Map 2). The interior is dominated by a series of 
extensive platforms at altitudes of up to 105 m, interrupted by isolated volcanic plugs such as 
Chester Cone (188 m) and Cerro Negro (143 m) (Thomson and López-Martínez 1996).  There is 
an abundance of rounded, flat landforms resulting from marine, glacial and periglacial erosional 
processes.  The most rugged terrain occurs on Ray Promontory, a ridge forming the northwest-
trending axis of the roughly ‘Y’-shaped peninsula. The coastline at the northern end of Ray 
Promontory is surrounded by precipitous cliffs of up to several hundred metres, with Start Hill 
(265 m) at the NW extremity being the highest point on the peninsula.  
 
The coast of Byers Peninsula has a total length of 71 km (Map 2).  Although of generally 
low relief, the coast is irregular and often rugged, with numerous headlands, cliffs, offshore 
islets, rocks and shoals.  Byers Peninsula is also notable for its broad beaches, prominent features 
on all three coasts (Robbery Beaches in the north, President Beaches in the west, and South 
Beaches).  The South Beaches are the most extensive; extending 12 km along the coast and up to 
almost 0.9 km in width, these are the largest in the South Shetland Islands (Thomson and López-
Martínez 1996). 
 
BOUNDARIES 
 
The designated Area comprises the entire Byers Peninsula west of the permanent ice sheet 
of Rotch Dome, Livingston Island, above the low tide water level (Map 2). The boundary of the 
Area is defined as the ice sheet margin and the coastline, and includes Clark Nunatak and two 
islets several hundred metres SW of Devils Point, but excludes all other offshore islets, rocks and 
shoals. The ice margin and the coast itself form a clearly defined and visually obvious boundary. 
 
CLIMATE 
 
 
 
No extended meteorological records are available for Byers Peninsula, but the climate is 
expected to be similar to that at Base Juan Carlos I, Hurd Peninsula. Conditions there indicate a 
mean annual temperature of below 0º C, with temperatures >0º C for at least several months each 
summer, and a relatively high precipitation rate estimated at about 800 mm/yr, much of which 
falls as rain in summer (Ellis-Evans 1996). The peninsula is snow-covered for much of the year, 
but is usually completely snow-free by the end of the summer.  The peninsula is exposed to 
weather from the Drake Passage in the north and northwest, the directions from which winds 
prevail, and Bransfield Strait to the south. 
 
GEOLOGY  
 
The bedrock of Byers Peninsula is composed of Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous 
marine sedimentary, volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks, intruded by igneous bodies (see Smellie et 
al 1980; Crame et al 1993, Hathway and Lomas 1998) (Map 3 – IN PREP). The rocks represent 
part of a Mesozoic-Cenozoic magmatic arc complex, which is exposed throughout the whole of 
the Antarctic Peninsula region, although most extensively on the Byers Peninsula (Hathway and 
Lomas 1998). The interior, elevated, region of the eastern half of the peninsula – surrounded to 
the north and south by Holocene beach deposits – is dominated by Lower Cretaceous non-marine 
tuffs, volcanic breccias, conglomerates, sandstones and minor mudstones, with intrusions in 
several places by volcanic plugs and sills.  The western half of the peninsula, and extending NW 
half-way along Ray Promontory, is predominantly Upper Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous marine 
mudstones, with sandstones and conglomerates, with frequent intrusions of volcanic sills, plugs 
and other igneous bodies.  The NW half of Ray Promontory comprises mainly volcanic breccias 
of the same age.  Mudstones, sandstones, conglomerates and pyroclastic rocks are the most 
common lithologies found on the peninsula. Expanses of Holocene beach gravels and alluvium 
are found in coastal areas, particularly on South Beaches and the eastern half of Robbery 
Beaches, with less-extensive deposits on President Beaches. 
 
The Area is of high geological value because “the sedimentary and igneous rocks exposed 
at Byers Peninsula constitute the most complete record of the Jurassic-Early Cretaceous period in 
the northern part of the Pacific flank of the magmatic arc complex, and they have proved a key 
succession for the study of marine molluscan faunas (e.g. Crame 1984, 1995, Crame and Kelly 
1995) and non-marine floras (e.g. Hernandez and Azcárte 1971, Philippe et al 1995).” (Hathway 
and Lomas 1998).  
 
 
 
GEOMORPHOLOGY AND SOILS 
 
Much of the terrain consists of lithosols, essentially a layer of shattered rock, with 
permafrost widespread below an active layer of 30-70 cm depth (Thom 1978, Ellis-Evans 1996, 
Serrano et al 1996). Stone fields (consisting of silty fines with dispersed boulders and surficial 
clasts), gelifluction lobes, polygonal ground (both in flooded and dry areas), stone stripes and 
circles, and other periglacial landforms dominate the surface morphology of the upper platforms 
where bedrock outcrop is absent (Serrano at al 1996).  Debris- and mud-flows are observed in 
several localities.  Beneath some of the moss and grass communities there is a 10-20 cm deep 
layer of organic matter although, because vegetation is sparse over most of Byers Peninsula, there 
are no deep accumulations of peat (Bonner and Smith 1985).  Ornithogenic soils are present 
especially in the Devils Point vicinity and on a number of knolls along President Beaches (Ellis-
Evans 1996). 
 
 
Parts of the interior of the peninsula have been shaped by coastal processes, with a series 
of raised beaches ranging from 3 to 54 m in altitude, some of which are over 1 km wide. A 
radiocarbon date for the highest beach deposits suggests that Byers Peninsula was largely free of 
permanent ice by 9700 yr B.P., while the lowest beach deposits are dated at 300 yr B.P (John and 
Sugden 1971, Sugden and John 1973).  Lake sediment analyses, however, suggest a more recent 
general deglaciation of central Byers Peninsula of around 4000-5000 yr B.P., and radiocarbon 
dates in the locality need to be interpreted cautiously (Björck et al 1991a, b).  In several places 
sub-fossil whale bones are embedded in the raised beaches, occasionally as almost entire 
skeletons. Radiocarbon dates of skeletal material from about 10 m a.s.l. on South Beaches 
suggest an age of between 2000 and 2400 yr B.P. (Hansom 1979). Pre-Holocene surfaces of 
Byers Peninsula exhibit clear evidence of a glacial landscape, despite the gentle landforms. 
Today only three small residual glaciers (comprising less then 0.5 km2) remain on Ray 
Promontory.  The pre-existing, glacially modified, landforms have been subsequently overprinted 
by fluvial and periglacial processes, and moraines and other glacial deposits are scarce (Martinez 
de Pison et al 1996). 
 
STREAMS AND LAKES 
 
Byers Peninsula is perhaps the most significant limnological site in the South Shetland 
Islands – Antarctica Peninsula region, with over 60 lakes, numerous freshwater pools 
(differentiated from lakes in that they freeze to the bottom in winter), and a dense and varied 
 
 
stream network probably has the most stream types in the Maritime Antarctic. The gentle terrain 
favours water retention and waterlogged soils are common in the summer. However, the water 
capacity of the thin soils is limited, and many of the channels are frequently dry, with flow often 
intermittent except during periods of substantial snow melt or where they drain glaciers (Lopez-
Martinez et al 1996).  Most of the streams drain seasonal snowfields and are often no more than 
5-10 cm in depth (Ellis-Evans 1996).  The larger streams are up to 4.5 km in length, up to 20 m in 
width, and 30-50 cm in depth in the lower reaches during periods of flow. Streams that drain to 
the west often have sizeable gorges (Lopez-Martinez et al 1996), and gullies up to 30 m in depth 
have been cut into the uppermost, and largest, of the raised marine platforms (Ellis-Evans 1996).  
Above the Holocene raised beaches the valleys are gentle, with widths of up to several hundred 
metres.  
 
Lakes are especially abundant on the higher platforms (i.e. at the heads of basins) and on 
the Holocene raised beaches near the coast.  Midge Lake is the largest at 587x112 m, and deepest 
with a maximum depth of 9.0 m (Map 2). The inland lakes are all nutrient-poor and highly 
transparent, with extensive sediments in deeper water overlain by cyanobacterial mats.  In some 
lakes, notably Chester Cone Lake about 500 m to the south of Midge Lake (Map 2), stands of 
aquatic moss Drepanocladus longifolius(= D. aduncus) are found growing at one to several 
metres in depth. Large masses of this moss are sometimes washed up along parts of the shoreline 
and may serve as an opportunistic habitat for Parochlus larvae (Bonner and Smith 1985). 
 
The lakes are generally frozen to a depth of 1.0-1.5 m for 9-11 months of the year, overlain 
by snow, although surfaces of some of the higher lakes remain frozen year-round (Ellis-Evans 
1996, Lopez-Martinez et al 1996).  On the upper levels of the central plateau, many small, 
shallow, slow-flowing streams flow between lakes and drain onto large flat areas of saturated 
lithosol covered with thick (3-10 cm) cyanobacterial mats of Phormidium sp..  These mats are 
more extensive than in any other Maritime Antarctic site thus far described, and reflect the 
unique geomorphology and relatively high annual precipitation of the Area. With spring melt 
there is considerable flush through most lakes, but outflow from many lakes may cease late in the 
season as seasonal snowmelt decreases.  Some of the streams also contain substantial growths of 
cyanobacterial and green filamentous algae, along with diatoms and copepods. A number of 
relatively saline lakes of lagoonal origin occur close to the shore, particularly on President 
Beaches, and where these are used as southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) wallows these 
have been highly organically enriched.  Those coastal shallow lakes and pools located behind the 
first raised beach often have abundant algal mats and crustaceans, including the copepods 
Boeckella poppei and Parabroteas sorsi, and occasionally the fairy shrimp Branchinecta gainii. 
 
 
 
VEGETATION 
 
Although much of Byers Peninsula lacks abundant vegetation, especially inland (see 
Lindsay 1971), the sparse communities contain a diverse flora, with at least 56 lichen species, 29 
mosses, 5 hepatics and 2 phanerogams having been identified as present within the Area.  
Numerous unidentified lichens and mosses have also been collected.  This suggests the Area 
contains one of the most diverse representations of terrestrial flora known in the maritime 
Antarctic.  A number of the species are rare in this part of the maritime Antarctic.  For example, 
of the bryophytes, Anthelia juratzkana, Brachythecium austroglareosum, Chorisodontium 
aciphyllum, Ditrichum hyalinum, Herzogobryum teres, Hypnum revolutum, Notoligotrichum 
trichodon, Pachyglossa dissitifolia, Platydictya jungermannioides, Sanionia cf. plicata, 
Schistidium occultum, Syntrichia filaris and Syntrichia saxicola are considered rare.  For A. 
juratzkana, D. hyalinum, N. trichodon and S. plicata, their furthest-south record is on Byers 
Peninsula.  Of the lichen flora, Himantormia lugubris, Ochrolechia parella, Peltigera didactyla 
and Pleopsidium chlorophanum are considered rare. 
 
Vegetation development is much greater on the south coast than on the north. Commonly 
found on the higher, drier raised beaches in the south is an open community dominated by 
abundant 
Polytrichastrum 
alpinum 
(=Polytrichum 
alpinum), 
Polytrichum 
piliferum 
(=Polytrichum antarcticum), P. juniperinum, Ceratodon purpureus, and the moss Pohlia nutans 
and several crustose lichens are frequent. Some large stands of mosses occur near President and 
South Beaches, where extensive snow drifts often accumulate at the base of slopes rising behind 
the raised beaches, providing an ample source of meltwater in the summer. These moss stands are 
dominated mainly by Sanionia uncinata (=Drepanocladus uncinatus), which locally forms 
continuous carpets of several hectares. The vegetation composition is more diverse than on the 
higher, drier areas. Inland, wet valley floors have stands of Brachythecium austro-salebrosum, 
Campylium 
polygamum, 
Sanionia 
uncinata, 
Warnstorfia 
laculosa 
(=Calliergidium 
austro-stramineum), and W. sarmentosa (=Calliergon sarmentosum).  In contrast, moss carpets 
are almost non-existent within 250 m of the northern coast, replaced by scant growth of Sanionia 
in hollows between raised beaches of up to 12 m in altitude, and of lichens principally of the 
genera Acarospora, Buellia, Caloplaca, Verrucaria and Xanthoria on the lower (2-5 m) raised 
beach crests, with Sphaerophorus, Stereocaulon and Usnea becoming the more dominant lichens 
with increasing altitude (Lindsay 1971). 
 
 
 
On better drained ash slopes Bryum spp., Dicranoweisia spp., Ditrichum spp., Pohlia spp., 
Schistidium spp., and Tortula spp. are common as isolated cushions and turves with various 
liverworts, lichens (notably the pink Placopsis contortuplicata and black foliose Leptogium 
puberulum), and the cyanobacterium Nostoc commune.  P. contortuplicata occurs in inland and 
upland habitats lacking in nitrogen, and is typical of substrata with some degree of disturbance 
such as solifluction; it is often the only plant to colonise the small rock fragments of stone stripes 
and frost-heave polygons (Lindsay 1971).  It is usually found growing alone, though rarely with 
species of Andreaea and Usnea.  N. commune covers extensive saturated areas on level or gently 
sloping, gravelly boulder clay from altitudes of between 60-150 m, forming discrete rosettes of 
about 5 cm in diameter 10-20 cm apart (Lindsay 1971).  Scattered, almost spherical, cushions of 
Andreaea, Dicranoweisia, and Ditrichum are found on the driest soils. In wet, bird- and 
seal-influenced areas the green foliose alga Prasiola crispa is sometimes abundant. 
 
Rock surfaces on Byers Peninsula are mostly friable, but locally colonised by lichens, 
especially near the coast. Volcanic plugs are composed of harder, more stable rock and are 
densely covered by lichens and occasional mosses. Usnea Plug is remarkable for its luxuriant 
growth of Himantormia lugubris and Usnea aurantiaco-atra (=U. fasciata). More generally, H. 
lugubris and U. aurantiaco-atra are the dominant lichen species on inland exposed montane 
surfaces, growing with the moss Andreaea gainii over much of the exposed rock with up to 80% 
cover of the substratum (Lindsay 1971). In sheltered pockets harbouring small accumulations of 
mineral soil, the liverworts Barbilophozia hatcheri and Cephaloziella varians (=exiliflora) are 
often found, but more frequently intermixed with cushions of Bryum, Ceratodon, Dicranoweisia, 
Pohlia, Sanionia, Schistidium, and Tortula.  Sanionia and Warnstorfia form small stands, 
possibly correlated with the absence of large snow patches and associated melt streams. 
Polytrichastrum alpinum forms small inconspicuous cushions in hollows, but it may merge with 
Andreaea gainii cushions in favourable situations (Lindsay 1971).  
 
Crustose lichens are mainly species of Buellia, Lecanora, Lecedella, Lecidea, Placopsis 
and Rhizocarpon growing on rock, with species of Cladonia and Stereocaulon growing on 
mosses, particularly Andreaea (Lindsay 1971). On the south coast moss carpets are commonly 
colonised by epiphytic lichens, such as Leptogium puberulum, Peltigera rufescens, Psoroma spp., 
together with Coclocaulon aculeata and C. epiphorella.  On sea cliffs Caloplaca and Verrucaria 
spp. dominate on lower surfaces exposed to salt spray up to about 5 m, with nitrophilous species, 
such as Caloplaca regalis, Haematomma erythromma,and Xanthoria elegans often dominant at 
higher altitudes where seabirds are frequently nesting. Elsewhere on dry cliff surfaces a Ramalina 
terebrata - crustose lichen community is common.  A variety of ornithocoprophilous lichens, 
 
 
such as Catillaria corymbosa, Lecania brialmontii, and species of Buellia, Haematomma, 
Lecanora, and Physcia occur on rocks near concentrations of breeding birds, along with the 
foliose lichens Mastodia tessellata, Xanthoria elegans and X. candelaria which are usually 
dominant on dry boulders. 
Antarctic hairgrass (Deschampsia antarctica) is common in several localities, mainly on 
the south coast, and occasionally forms closed swards (e.g. at Sealer Hill); Antarctic pearlwort 
(Colobanthus quitensis) is sometimes associated. Both plants are quite abundant in southern 
gullies with a steep north-facing slope, forming large, occasionally pure stands with thick carpets 
of Brachythecium and Sanionia, although they are rarely found above 50 m in altitude (Lindsay 
1971). An open community of predominantly Deschampsia and Polytrichum piliferum extends 
for several kilometres on the sandy, dry, flat raised beaches on South Beaches.  A unique 
growth-form of the grass, forming isolated mounds 25 cm high and up to 2 m across, occurs on 
the beach near Sealer Hill. Deschampsia has been reported at only one locality on the north coast 
(Lair Point), where it forms small stunted tufts (Lindsay 1971). 
 
INVERTEBRATES, FUNGI AND BACTERIA 
 
The microinvertebrate fauna on Byers Peninsula thus far described comprises 23 taxa 
(Usher and Edwards 1986, Richard et al 1994, Block and Stary 1996, Convey et al 1996): six 
Collembola (Cryptopygus antarcticus, Cryptopygus badasa, Friesea grisea, Friesea 
woyciechowskii, Isotoma (Folsomotoma) octooculata (=Parisotoma octooculata) and Tullbergia 
mixta; one mesostigmatid mite (Gamasellus racovitzai), five cryptostigmatid mites (Alaskozetes 
antarcticus, Edwardzetes dentifer, Globoppia loxolineata (=Oppia loxolineata), Halozetes 
belgicae and Magellozetes antarcticus); nine prostigmatid mites (Bakerdania antarcticus, 
Ereynetes macquariensis, Eupodes minutus, Eupodes parvus grahamensis, Nanorchestes berryi, 
Nanorchestes nivalis, Pretriophtydeus tilbrooki, Rhagidia gerlachei, Rhagidia leechi, and 
Stereotydeus villosus); and two Dipterans (Belgica antarctica and Parochlus steinenii).  
 
Larvae of the wingless midge Belgica antarctica occur in limited numbers in moist moss, 
especially carpets of Sanionia, although it is of very restricted distribution on Byers Peninsula 
(found especially near Cerro Negro) and may be near its northern geographical limit.  The 
winged midge Parochlus steinenii and its larvae inhabit the margins of inland lakes and pools, 
notably Midge Lake and another near Usnea Plug, and are also found amongst the stones of many 
stream beds (Bonner and Smith 1985, Richard et al 1994, Ellis-Evans pers comm 1999).   During 
warm calm weather, swarms of adults may be seen above lake margins.  
 
 
 
The diversity of the arthropod community described at Byers Peninsula is greater than at 
any other documented Antarctic site (Convey et al 1996).  Various studies (Usher and Edwards 
1986, Richard et al 1994, Convey et al 1996) have demonstrated that the arthropod population 
composition on Byers Peninsula varies significantly with habitat over a small area.  Tullbergia 
mixta has been observed in relatively large numbers; it appears to be limited in Antarctic 
distribution to the South Shetland Islands (Usher and Edwards 1986). Locally, the greatest 
diversity is likely to be observed in communities dominated by moss cushions such as Andreaea 
spp. (Usher and Edwards 1986). Further sampling is required to establish populations and 
diversities with greater reliability.  While further sampling at other sites may yet reveal the 
communities described at Byers Peninsula to be typical of similar habitats in the region, available 
data on the microfauna confirm the biological importance of the Area. 
An analysis of soil samples collected from Byers Peninsula yielded several nematophagous 
fungi: in Deschampsia soil Acrostalagmus goniodes, A. obovatus, Cephalosporium balanoides 
and Dactylaria gracilis; in Colobanthus soil, Cephalosporium balanoides and Dactylella 
gephyropaga were found (Gray and Smith 1984). The basidiomycete Omphalina antarctica is 
often abundant on moist stands of the moss Sanionia uncinata (Bonner and Smith 1985). 
 
BREEDING BIRDS 
 
The avifauna of Byers Peninsula is diverse, although breeding colonies are generally not 
large. Two species of penguin, the chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarctica) and the gentoo (P. papua), 
breed in the Area; although widely distributed in the region, Adélie Penguins (P. adeliae) have 
not been observed to breed on Byers Peninsula or its offshore islets.  The principal chinstrap 
penguin colony is at Devils Point in the SW, where a rough estimate of about 3000 pairs was 
made in 1987; a more accurate count made in 1965 indicated about 5300 pairs in four discrete 
colonies, of which almost 95% were nesting on an islet 100 m to the south of Devils Point 
(Croxall and Kirkwood 1979, Woehler 1993).  Small chinstrap penguin colonies have been 
reported on the northern coast, but no breeding pairs were reported in a 1987 survey. Gentoo 
penguins breed at several colonies on Devils Point, with approximately 750 pairs recorded in 
1965. Two smaller gentoo colonies totalling about 400 pairs were reported on the northern coast 
in 1965 (Croxall and Kirkwood 1979, Woehler 1993). More recent data are not available. 
 
The most recent data available for other breeding species are from a detailed survey 
conducted in 1965 (White 1965, in Croxall – BAS internal bird data reports).  The most populous 
breeding species recorded then, with approximately 1760 pairs, was the Antarctic tern (Sterna 
vittata), followed by 1315 pairs of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), approximately 
 
 
570 pairs of cape petrels (Daption capense), 449 pairs of kelp gulls (Larus dominicanus), 216 
pairs of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), 95 pairs of black-bellied storm petrels 
(Fregetta tropica), 47 pairs of blue-eyed cormorants (Phalacrocorax atriceps) (including those 
on nearshore islets), 39 pairs of brown skuas (Catharacta loennbergi), and 3 pairs of sheathbills 
(Chionis alba).  In addition, prions (Pachytilla sp.) and snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) have 
been seen on the peninsula but their breeding presence has not been confirmed. The census of 
burrowing  and scree-nesting birds is considered an underestimate (White pers. comm. 1999).  
The majority of the birds nest in close proximity to the coast, principally in the west and south. 
 
BREEDING MAMMALS 
 
Large groups of southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) breed on the Byers Peninsula 
coast, with a total of over 2500 individuals reported on South Beaches (Torres et al. 1981) – 
which is one of the largest populations of this species recorded in the South Shetland Islands.  
Large numbers haul out in wallows and along beaches in summer. Weddell (Leptonychotes 
weddellii), crabeater (Lobodon carcinophagous) and leopard (Hydrurga leptonyx) seals may be 
seen around the shorelines. Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) were once very abundant 
on Byers Peninsula (see below), but have not substantially recolonised the Area in spite of the 
recent rapid population expansion in other parts of the maritime Antarctic. 
 
HISTORICAL FEATURES 
 
Following discovery of the South Shetland Islands in 1819, intensive sealing at Byers 
Peninsula between 1820 and 1824 exterminated almost all local Antarctic fur seals and southern 
elephant seals (Smith and Simpson 1987). During this period there was a summer population of 
up to 200 American and British sealers living ashore in dry-stone refuges and caves around Byers 
Peninsula (Smith and Simpson 1987). Evidence of their occupation remains in their many 
refuges, many of which still contain artifacts (clothing, implements, structural materials, etc.). 
Several sealing vessels were wrecked near Byers Peninsula and timbers from these ships may be 
found along the shores.  Byers Peninsula has the greatest concentration of early 19th Century 
sealers’ refuges and associated relics in the Antarctic, and these are vulnerable to disturbance 
and/or removal.   
 
Elephant seal numbers, and to some extent fur seal numbers, recovered after 1860, but 
were again decimated by a second sealing cycle extending to the first decade of the twentieth 
century. 
 
 
 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES / IMPACTS 
 
The modern era of human activity at Byers Peninsula has been largely confined to science.  
The impacts of these activities have not been described, but are believed to be minor and limited 
to items such as campsites, footprints, markers of various kinds, seaborne litter washed onto 
beaches (e.g. from fishing vessels), and from human wastes and scientific sampling. Several 
wooden stake markers and a plastic fishing float were observed in the SW of the Area in a brief 
visit made in February 2001 (Harris 2001).   
 
 
 
 
 
56°
62°S
62°30´
63°
63°30´
58°
60°W
80°W
60°W
40°W
60°S
70°S
Byers
Peninsula
Map 1
D R A
K E
PA S S A G E
Map 2
Byers Peninsula
SSSI No. 6
TR
INI
TY
P
S
ENIN
UL
A
KING GEORGE ISLAND
NELSON ISLAND
ROBERT ISLAND
GREENWICH ISLAND
LIVINGSTON ISLAND
DECEPTION ISLAND
SNOW ISLAND
DUNDEE ISLAND
JOINVILLE ISLAND
D’URVILLE ISLAND
SSSI No. 27
SSSI No. 21
Cape Shirreff
SSSI No. 32
Juan Carlos I
(Spain)
St Kliment Ochridski
(Bulgaria)
‘Chile Bay’
SSSI No. 26
B R A N S F I E L D
S T R A I T
S
O
T
U
S
T H
H
S
E
L A
N
N
D
L
I
S
A
D
0
Km
60
Map 1. Byers Peninsula, SSSI No. 6, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, location map. Inset: location of Byers Peninsula on the Antarctic Peninsula
61°15´W
61°10´
61°05´
61°
60°55´
62°40´S
62°38´
62°36´
62°34´
BYERS PENINSULA
B
a
r
c
l
a
y
B a
y
R
O
B
B
E
R
Y
B
E
A
C
H
E
S
N e w
P l y
m o
u t h
RAY
PRO
M
ON
TORY
Window
Island
RUGGED ISLAND
ROTCH
DOME
Vietor Rock
Start Hill
265
Clark
Nunatak
Stackpole
Rocks
Midge Lake
188 Chester
Cone
117Usnea
Plug
91
Sealer Hill
143
Cerro
Negro
Devils Point
Astor
Island
Punta
Campamento
Point
Smellie
Morton
Strait
P
R
E
S
I
D
E
N
T
B
E
C
A
H
E
S
Lair
Point
NOTE: OVERFLIGHT RESTRICTIONS
APPLY OVER COASTAL AREA:
CONSULT MANAGEMENT PLAN
S
O
B
E
A
C
H
E
S
U
T
H
METRES
0
4000
LEGEND
Survey station (occupied)
22.4
Contour (25 m)
Coast
SSSI boundary
Index contour (100 m)
Streams
Lakes
Overflight restriction
ENTRY BY PERMIT
Map 2. Byers Peninsula, SSSI No. 6, topographic map.
