XXIV Консультативное совещание
по Договору об Антарктике
XXIV Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting
XXIV Reunion Consultative
du Traite sur l'Antarctique
XXIV Reunion Consultiva
del Tratado Antartico

St. Petersburg
R U S S I A
July 9-20, 2001

XXIV ATCM
Working Paper WP-26

Agenda Item 11
United Kingdom

Original: English

Final Report of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of
Experts – Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping and
Related Activities

Submitted by United Kingdom
ATCM XXIV
Working Paper WP-26
Agenda Item 11
United Kingdom
Original: English

Final Report of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts - Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping and Related Activities

Working Paper Submitted
by the United Kingdom

2
Final Report of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts - Guidelines for Antarctic Shipping 
and Related Activities

Working Paper Submitted by the United Kingdom

Introduction and Background

1. Development of a Code of Practice for ships operating in the Polar Regions (Polar Code) has 
been under consideration by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) since early 1998.

2. The matter was first addressed by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties at ATCM XXII (Tromso, 
Norway, May 1998). At that meeting Treaty Parties agreed that they should be actively involved 
in the development of such the Polar Code to ensure that Antarctic issues were adequately 
addressed. The Parties adopted Resolution 3 (1998) to this effect.

3. Earlier versions of the draft IMO Polar Code had covered both the Arctic and Antarctica. 
However, at the 71st meeting of IMO's Maritime Safety Committee, the IMO agreed to exclude 
Antarctica from the area of application of the Polar Code unless the Antarctic Treaty Parties 
decided otherwise.

4. In light of this IMO decision, Treaty Parties decided, at ATCM XXIII (Lima, Peru, May 1999) 
separately to develop guidelines for ships operating in Antarctic waters. To make progress on 
this matter Treaty Parties also decided to convene a Meeting of Experts under the provisions of 
Recommendation IV-24. Decision 2 (1999) established the Meeting of Experts and set out its 
terms of reference. The UK's offer to host the Meeting of Experts was accepted.

5. In accordance with paragraph 4 of Recommendation IV-24 and paragraph 9 of Decision 2 (1999), 
the UK, as host Government of the Meeting of Experts, is required to submit a report of the 
meeting to ATCM XXIV.

Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts

6. The Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts to develop guidelines for Antarctic shipping and related 
activities was held in London, 17-19 April 2000.

7. The meeting was attended by maritime and Antarctic experts from 24 Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties, 3 non-Consultative Parties, 2 Antarctic Treaty Observer Organisations and 7 
Invited Experts bodies.

8. Mr Paul Sadler of the UK's Maritime and Coastguard Agency chaired the meeting. Mr Sadler is 
the UK's Deputy Permanent Representative to the IMO.

9. The agenda for the meeting was drawn directly from paragraph 5 of Decision 2 (1999). The 
agenda is included in the Final Report of the meeting.

3
10. The Meeting made good progress in beginning to develop guidelines for Antarctic shipping and 
related activities. A number of key principles for the guidelines were considered, a Framework 
Document was developed as a possible basis for further elaboration of the guidelines and certain 
elements of the framework document were considered in greater detail.

11. On completion of the meeting a draft Final Report was circulated to Heads of all delegations. 
Several comments were received and incorporated into the Report, which was finalised in May 
2001 and submitted to the ATCM Secretariat in June.

12. The Final Report of the meeting is attached. This sets out 7 Recommendations for the ATCM to 
consider.

Polar Regions Section
Overseas Territories Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
London

4
