 
 1
CEP IV/ XXIV ATCM 
Working Paper WP-7  
Agenda Item 8a/18 
Australia 
Original: English 
With Attachments A&B  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT FROM THE INTERSESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP REVIEWING 
INFORMATION EXCHANGE REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report from the Intersessional Contact Group Reviewing Information Exchange 
Requirements 
 
Background 
The issue of improving the Antarctic Treaty system for the annual exchange of information was 
raised at ATCM XXII.  The United States introduced an Information Paper that noted the following 
three issues regarding the current method for information exchange: 
1. overlap and in some cases duplication of information requirements; 
2. outdated and inefficient mechanisms for the preparation and distribution of information; and 
3. loss in timely delivery of information. 
The meeting noted that there is a need to rationalise the information exchange system and that 
consideration should be given to what information is exchanged and why, as well as to how the 
process could be improved.  It was agreed that exchange of information would be a priority item on 
the agenda of ATCM XXIII. 
 
ATCM XXIII examined this issue further and considered three Working Papers that presented ideas 
on how information exchange obligations may be made more timely and efficient.  The meeting 
recognised the benefit of using new technologies to improve the process for exchanging 
information, but also noted that there are a number of policy, legal and technical issues that need to 
be addressed before a conclusion can be drawn on the best way to improve the Antarctic Treaty 
information exchange system.  These issues include: the kind of information that should be 
exchanged; the best way to transmit and present it; the date by which information should be 
provided; who should receive the information that is made available; whether some kinds of 
information should be stored in a central location; and how consistency in the information 
exchanged can be achieved. 
 
The meeting accepted an offer by Australia to co-ordinate an intersessional exchange of views 
between interested Parties and organisations so that an analysis of options could be presented to the 
next meeting.  Subsequent to CEP II the following people participated on the inter-sessional contact 
group (ICG) examining this issue: Dr Peter Clarkson (SCAR), Mr Harlan Cohen (USA), Mr Guy 
Guthridge (USA), Mr Anders Modig (Sweden), Ms Birgit Njaastad (Norway), Mr Warren Papworth 
(Australia), Mr Rodolfo Sanchez (Argentina), Mr Jack Sayers (COMNAP). 
 
Analysis of Issues/Options  
A summary of the ICG's analysis of each of the issues identified at ATCM XXIII follows: 
 
1. What kind of information should be exchanged 
 
To address this issue it is necessary to have a clear focus on why information is exchanged.  Parties 
exchange information annually about their activities in Antarctica to: 
• demonstrate their compliance with the Antarctic Treaty, with measures adopted under the 
Treaty and with the Protocol on Environmental Protection; 
• enhance the safety of operations in Antarctica; 
• promote scientific and logistical cooperation; and 
 
 3
• add to the historical record. 
 
In this context the ICG reviewed current information exchange obligations/requirements in order to 
identify areas of overlap and duplication, whether some of the information currently sought is no 
longer required, or if additional information should be sought. This included obligations arising 
from the Antarctic Treaty, the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, ATCM recommendations, and requirements of 
SCAR and COMNAP.  
 
As a result of this review it became apparent that the information could be sorted into three distinct 
categories: Pre-season, Annual (end of season) and Permanent.  The use of a 'permanent' category 
was considered particularly efficient for information that did not change from year to year but would 
previously have been reported annually, either in pre or post-season reports.  
 
A summary of the ICG's recommendations on the kinds of information that should be exchanged in 
these three categories, is provided in Attachment A.  It should be noted that the ICG could not reach 
agreement on the information to be provided pre-season.  Some members were of the opinion that 
this information is generally received too late to be useful and that consequently little, if any, 
information should be sought at this time.   
 
2. The Best Way to Transmit and Present the Information 
 
The ICG identified the following options for the transmission and presentation of information: 
 
option 1 - display information on national program web sites; 
option 2 - display information on a central web site with information posted electronically to the 
site by Treaty Parties; 
option 3 - use a central web site with links to information on national / COMNAP / SCAR web 
sites; 
option 4 - use a central web site with information recruited electronically from national / 
COMNAP / SCAR web sites; 
option 5 - use multiple web sites such as CEP, ATCM (when established), COMNAP and SCAR 
with each collecting the information relevant to their organisation; 
option 6 - send email with information attached to other Parties' national contact points; and 
option 7 - retain existing system of exchange through diplomatic channels. 
 
A summary of the benefits and disadvantages identified for each option is provided in 
Attachment B. 
 
It was clear from an examination of the above options that use of the world wide web (www) would 
significantly increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the information exchange process.  It 
allows the timely exchange of information, avoids duplication in the submission of information 
(while allowing information to appear at numerous sites), provides an efficient mechanism for the 
submission of information to one or more databases (if required), would provide a central site from 
which all information could be accessed, and potentially allows the presentation of information in a 
variety of formats or languages allowing ready access and the ability to compare and analyse data.  
 
The majority, though not all, of ICG members favoured option 2.  Other members preferred option 
1, or a combination of options 1 and 2.   
 
 
 4
The ICG recommends that a central web site be established for the transmission and presentation of 
this information. 
 
3. The Date by Which Information Should be Provided 
 
The ICG considered the optimum time for the submission of information in each of the three 
categories: Pre-season, Annual (end of season) and Permanent. 
 
Pre-season Information 
Due to the difficulty and complexity of Antarctic operations many Parties plan their operations well 
in advance.  The ICG recommends that Parties be encouraged to submit relevant information from 
these plans as far in advance as is practical so that other Parties can make use of this information 
when planning their own activities.  Information for the coming season would preferably be 
submitted by 1 October, but in all cases before the start of that Party's annual operations.  
 
Annual (end of season) Information 
Collection of much of this information is considered essential if the CEP is to carry out its functions 
as described in Article 12 of the Protocol.  It should be submitted as early as possible after the end 
of the austral summer season and where possible in advance of ATCM and CEP meetings, but in all 
cases before 1 October.  The ICG considered that a reporting period of 30 March to 1 April is 
appropriate.  
 
Permanent Information 
This information, which is often generated through the annual information exchange process, does 
not change much from year to year and includes information that is prepared on an ad hoc basis.  It 
could be submitted at any time (or in accordance with the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and 
Protocol). 
 
The ICG recommends that information be submitted as follows: 
• 
Pre-season information -  Submitted as early as possible, preferably by 1 October, but no 
later than the start of that Party's annual operations. 
• 
Annual information -  
Should be submitted as early as possible after the end of the 
austral summer season, but in all cases before 1 October (with a 
reporting period of 30 March to 1 April). 
• 
Permanent Information -  Submitted at any time (or in accordance with the requirements of 
the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol). 
 
4. Who Should Receive the Information that is Made Available 
 
The ICG identified the following options for who should receive the information that is made 
available: 
 
• 
make information available to Treaty Parties only; 
• 
make all information publicly available; 
• 
make some parts of the information publicly available, with other parts only available to 
Treaty Parties; and 
• 
restrict access to the users of the information. 
 
 
 5
It was noted that the primary users of the information exchanged are the Treaty Parties and that the 
information is provided, in large part, for their use in order to promote international cooperation and 
to permit maximum efficiency of operations.  It was also noted that making this information 
publicly available assists in making the Antarctic Treaty system transparent.  As well, some Parties' 
national legislation requires that this information be made publicly available.  There is however 
some information, such as the satellite telephone numbers of ships and stations, which it was felt 
should be restricted as frequent use of these services by the general public could disrupt operational 
efficiency (particularly in emergency situations).   
 
Consequently, the ICG recommends that, as a general principle, all information be made publicly 
available, but that Parties be given the option of restricting information where public access would 
impede operational efficiency.   
 
 
5. Whether Some Kinds of Information Should be Stored in a Central Location 
 
When addressing this item the ICG identified two issues that it believes ATCM should take into 
consideration.  These are whether information should be stored in a central location, that is a single 
web-site or database where all information is held, or alternatively, a central location from which 
information is accessed, ie providing links to other sites where the information is held.  The www 
can allow these functions to be undertaken separately, or for a combination of them to be used. 
 
The ICG considers that any information that needs to be analysed, compared, or used in the 
production of reports, should be stored centrally in a database that will allow manipulation of the 
data.  Metadata records are one example, although potentially most of the information exchanged 
could fall into this category. 
 
Where there is a diverse array of information being submitted from a variety of sources there are 
clear advantages in having the information accessible from a central location.  The major benefit is 
that information can be readily located, both by frequent users of the information and by infrequent 
users, such as members of the general public.  
 
At this point the ICG does not consider it practical to store all the information that is exchanged on 
a single web-site or database.  It favours a hybrid system, with some information being stored on the 
central site and other information held on remote sites, accessible via links from the central site.  
 
The availability of a central web site would also allow those Treaty Parties that do not currently 
have their own web site to post their information electronically to the central site.  Those Parties that 
do have information displayed on their own web site would only need to provide a link to the 
central site.  Alternatively, www technology would allow information to be copied off Parties' sites 
to the central site, if appropriate.  The information thus gathered could be submitted to a database 
for analysis or use in reports. 
 
The ICG recommends that all three categories of information identified in item 1. above be 
accessible from a central location.  To achieve this a central web site should be established that 
would allow Parties to either submit information directly to the site, or alternatively, provide 
relevant links to their own site.   
 
 
6. How Consistency in the Information Exchanged can be Achieved 
 
 
 6
It is unlikely that complete consistency can be achieved in the information exchanged between 
Treaty Parties as there are significant differences in the way that national programs are operated, as 
well as different languages being used.  However, the ICG believes a high level of consistency can 
be achieved if a common, basic format for reporting is established, with clear instructions and/or 
examples on the level and type of information being sought.  This was achieved with ATCM 
recommendation VIII-6.  However, since then many additional information exchange obligations 
have arisen and it would be appropriate to again consolidate these requirements.  The information 
provided by the ICG in Attachment A could form a useful basis for this consolidation.  
 
The agreed format should establish minimum data requirements that all Treaty Parties provide, but 
it should also allow Parties to provide additional information.  This would allow a degree of 
flexibility to take account of the differences between national operations.   
 
The ICG recommends that a common, basic format be developed identifying the minimum level of 
information required for each reporting obligation, with clear instructions and/or examples on the 
type of information being sought. 
 
 
Recommendations 
The following recommendations are put forward for consideration by ATCM.  That: 
 
1. information be collected according to the following categories, Pre-season, Annual (end of 
season) and Permanent and that agreement be reached on the specific information that is to be 
provided under each of these categories.  The information provided in Attachment A is provided 
as a basis for further discussion; 
2. a central web site be established for the transmission and presentation of this information; 
3. information be submitted as follows: 
• 
Pre-season information -  submitted as early as possible, preferably by 1 October, but no 
later than the start of that Party's annual operations. 
• 
Annual information -  
should be submitted as early as possible after the end of the 
austral summer season, but in all cases before 1 October (with a 
reporting period of 30 March to 1 April). 
• 
Permanent Information -  submitted at any time (or in accordance with the requirements of 
the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol); 
4. as a general principle, all information is made publicly available, but that Parties be given the 
option of restricting information where public access would impede operational efficiency; 
5. all three categories of information identified in item 1 be accessible from a central location.  To 
achieve this a central web site should be established that would allow Parties to either submit 
information directly to the site, or alternatively, provide relevant links to their own site; and 
6. a common, basic format be developed identifying the minimum level of information required for 
each reporting obligation, with clear instructions and/or examples on the type of information 
being sought. 
 
 
 7
Attachment A 
1. Pre-season Information 
 
1.1 
 Operational information 
 
1.1.1 
 National Expeditions 
A. Stations 
 Names of wintering stations (giving region, latitude and longitude), maximum population 
and medical support available.  
 Names of summer stations/bases and field camps (giving region, latitude, longitude), 
operating period, maximum population and medical support available. 
 Names of refuges (region, latitude and longitude) medical facilities and accommodation 
capacity. 
 Other major field activities, e.g. scientific traverse (giving locations) 
[Note: Fixed data drawn from «Permanent Information» source.] 
 
B. Vessels 
 Name of vessels, country of registry of vessels, number of voyages, planned departure dates, 
areas of operation, ports of departure and arrival to and from Antarctica, and purpose of 
voyage (e.g. science deployment, resupply, change-over, oceanography, etc) 
[Note: Fixed data drawn from «Permanent Information» source.] 
 
C. Aircraft 
 Type of aircraft, planned number of flights, period of flights or planned departure dates, 
routes and purpose. 
[Note: Fixed data drawn from «Permanent Information» source.] 
 
E. Science Rockets 
 Coordinates of the place of launching, time and date/period, direction of launching, planned 
maximum altitude, impact area, type and specifications of rockets, purpose and title of 
research project. 
 
E. Military 
 Number and ranks of military personnel participating in expedition, number and type of 
personal armaments carried.   
 Number and type of armaments on ships and aircraft. 
 List of armaments on stations/bases. 
 
1.1.2 
 Non-governmental Expeditions 
A. Ship-based Operations 
 Name of operator, name of vessel, country of registry of vessel, number of voyages, planned 
departure dates, ports of departure and arrival to and from Antarctica, areas of operation 
including the names of proposed landing sites and the planned dates at which these landings 
will take place. 
 
 
 8
B. Land-based Operations 
 Name of expedition, method of transportation to, from and within Antarctica, type of 
adventure/activity, location, dates of expedition, number of personnel involved, contact 
address, web-site address. 
 
 
1.2 Visits to Protected Areas 
 Name and number of protected area, number of people permitted to visit, date/period and 
purpose. 
 
 
2.  Annual Report  
 
2.1  Scientific Information 
 
2.1.1 
Forward Plans 
 Copy (PDF), or contact point for printed version, of strategic or multi-year science plan. 
 List of planned participations in major, international, collaborative science 
programs/projects. 
 
2.1.2 
Science Activities in Previous Year 
 List of research projects undertaken in previous year under science discipline (giving 
location and principal investigator). 
[Note: Links can be provided to national web site for details of each project] 
 
2.2 Operational information 
 
2.2.1 
 National expeditions 
 Update of information given under 1.1.1. 
 
2.2.2  
Non-governmental expeditions 
 Update of information given under 1.1.2. 
 
2.3  Permit Information 
 
2.3.1 Visits to Protected Areas 
 Update of information provided under 1.2. 
 
2.3.2 
 Taking and harmful interference with flora and fauna 
 Species, location, amount, sex, age and purpose. 
 
2.3.3  
Introduction of non-native species 
 Species, location, amount and purpose. 
 
2.4  Environmental Information 
 
2.4.1  
Compliance with the Protocol 
 New measures adopted during past year in accordance with Article 13 of the Environmental 
Protocol giving description of measure, date of effect. 
 
 
 9
2.4.2  
List of IEEs and CEEs 
 List of IEEs/CEEs undertaken during year giving proposed activity, location, level of 
assessment and decision taken. 
 
2.4.3 
Monitoring activities report 
 Name of activity, location, (lat. long), procedures put in place, significant information 
obtained, action taken in consequence thereof.  
 
2.4.4 
Waste Management Plans 
 Waste management plans issued during the year giving title including name of 
station/vessel/location. 
 Report on implementation of waste management plans during the year. 
 
2.5 Relevant National Legislation 
 Measures adopted during the year to give effect to the Antarctic Treaty and to obligations 
arising from ATCM recommendations, giving description of measure and date of effect. 
 
2.6 Other information 
 
2.6.1 
Inspection Reports 
 Report of any inspections conducted under AT Article VII and Article 14 and Article 10 
(Annex V) of the Environmental Protocol during the year giving date of inspection, person/s 
conducting inspection, nationality of inspector/s, locations inspected, where inspection 
report located (URL?).   
 
2.6.2 
 Notice of Activities Undertaken in Case of Emergencies 
 Description of emergency, location (latitude and longitude) and action undertaken. 
 
 
3.  Permanent Information  
 
3.1.  Science Facilities 
 
3.1.1 
 Automatic Recording Stations/Observatories 
 Site name, co-ordinates (latitude and longitude), elevation (m), parameters recorded, 
observation frequency, reference number (e.g. WMO no.)  
 
3.2 Operational Information 
 
A. Stations 
 Name of wintering stations (giving region, latitude and longitude, and maximum 
population), date established and accommodation and medical facilities. 
 Name of summer stations/bases and field camps (giving region, latitude, longitude, operating 
period and maximum population) 
 Names of refuges (region, latitude and longitude) medical facilities and accommodation 
capacity. 
 
B. Vessels 
 Name of vessels, flag state, ice strength, length, beam and gross tonnage. 
[Note: This information is publicly available on the COMNAP web site.] 
 
 
 10
C. Aircraft 
 Number and type of aircraft operated. 
[Note: This information is publicly available on the COMNAP web site.] 
 
D. Aircraft landing facilities (information as per COMNAP requirements) 
[Note: This information is published in the Antarctic Flight Information Manual by COMNAP] 
 
E. Communications facilities and frequencies (information as per COMNAP requirements) 
[Note: This information is published in the Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Handbook 
(ATOM) by COMNAP]. 
 
3.3 Waste Management Plans 
 
 Title of Waste Management Plan, copy (PDF) or contact point for printed version and brief 
report on implementation. 
 
3.4  Contingency Plans 
 Title of Oil Spill Plan, copy (PDF) or contact point for printed version.  Brief report on 
implementation. 
 Title of Emergency Contingency Plan(s) for Oil Spills and other emergencies, copies (PDFs) 
or contact point for printed versions.  Brief report on implementation. 
 
3.5  Inventory of Past Activities 
 Name of station/base/field camp/traverse/crashed aircraft/etc, co-ordinates (latitude and 
longitude) period during which activity undertaken; description/purpose of activities 
undertaken; description of equipment or facilities remaining. 
 
3.6  Relevant National Legislation 
 Description of law, regulation, administrative action or enforcement measure, date of 
effect/enacted, giving copy (PDF) or contact point for printed version. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1
Option 
Benefits 
Disadvantages 
1. Display information on national program web 
sites. 
- 
Information can be automatically updated 
throughout year providing more timely and 
reliable data e.g. shipping schedules. 
- 
No delays in transmission of information. 
- 
Fewer resources required for collation of 
information. 
- 
All exchange information for that  nation's 
program can be found in one location. 
- 
As the information is not in a central database 
it cannot be readily compared or analysed. 
- 
Some national programs may not have a web 
site established although it is likely that this 
will only be a short-term constraint. 
- 
May be difficult to locate individual nation's 
web sites. 
- 
There is a cost involved in setting up and 
maintaining a web site.  However, most 
programs already have sites established and 
would only incur a small incremental cost to 
include ATIE. 
- 
May result in lack of consistency between 
sites. 
• Display on central site with information posted 
electronically to the site by national programs. 
- 
Information would have to be submitted in a 
consistent format.  This would allow data to be 
stored in a database that could then be used to 
analyse/report on the information submitted.  
Potentially very useful for both research and 
operational reasons.  
- 
Would be very easy to find information about 
other nations' programs as all information is 
presented on the one site. 
- 
Fewer resources required for collation of 
information though not as efficient as option 1. 
- 
System could allow national programs to edit 
their own information making the updating of 
information more efficient. 
- 
There would be a cost involved in setting up 
and maintaining the web site however this 
would be less costly than having multiple web 
sites set up for each national program. 
- 
Currently there is no ATCM Secretariat to 
establish and maintain the site. 
3.  Use a central site with links to information on 
-
Easy to find information about other nations' 
-
Relies on national programs maintaining URL 
 
 2
Option 
Benefits 
Disadvantages 
national sites i.e. central web site provides URLs 
to specific information on national web sites. 
programs as all information is accessible from 
one site. 
- 
Fewer resources required for collation of 
information.  Similar efficiencies to option 2. 
- 
Central site would not need to be updated 
continuously as this would be done on national 
sites. 
links to central site.  
- 
May result in a lack of consistency between 
national sites. 
4. Use of a central site with information recruited 
from national sites i.e. central computer 
automatically retrieves information from 
national sites and presents it on a central web 
site. 
- 
Easy to find information about other nations' 
programs as all information is accessible from 
one site. 
- 
Information would have to be available on 
national web sites in a consistent format.  This 
would allow data to be stored in a database 
that could then be used to analyse/report on the 
information submitted.  Potentially very useful 
for both research and operational purposes. 
- 
Central web site could be programmed to 
update information on a regular basis ensuring 
that information is current. 
- 
No resources required from national programs 
to transmit information. 
- 
A cost involved in setting up and maintaining 
a central web site.  Would require resources to 
manage the database and ensure quality control 
on the information received.  
- 
Technically more difficult than other web 
based options. 
5.  Use multiple core web sites such as CEP, 
ATCM (when established), COMNAP and 
SCAR sites to collect information relevant to 
these organisations. 
- 
Information would be stored on web sites 
according to its use e.g. environmental 
information on the CEP site, operational info 
on the COMNAP site, scientific information 
on the SCAR site.  This may make it easier for 
people to find the information they are 
seeking. 
- 
If the information is stored in a database on 
these sites then it could be used to 
- 
Potential for lack of consistency/approach 
between sites.   
- 
Some information may be relevant to more 
than one site leading to duplication of 
information. 
- 
A greater cost involved in setting up and 
maintaining a number of web sites. 
- 
Web sites may have different requirements for 
 
 3
Option 
Benefits 
Disadvantages 
analyse/report on the information submitted.  
Potentially very useful for both research and 
operational purposes. 
the submission of data which may be 
confusing. 
- 
May be more difficult to find information as 
data held on a number of web sites. 
6.  Send email with ATIE attached to other parties' 
national contact points.  (This could be a default 
option for those national programs that don't 
want/haven't got access to a web site.) 
- 
Would allow more timely exchange of 
information compared to the current system. 
- 
Would not cost much to establish and 
maintain. 
- Due to the large amount of information 
exchanged and the different formats used (text, 
tables, diagrams and images) operators who use 
this option are likely to encounter difficulties 
when transmitting data.   
7. Retain existing system of exchange through 
diplomatic channels. 
- All national programs can access this system. 
- Existing inefficiencies and delays in the 
production and transmission of paper reports 
would continue.  
 
 
 
 
