 
 
IV CEP 
Working Paper WP-29  
Agenda Item 4c) 
Russia 
 
 
Expert conclusion for the Project “Justification and development of the ecologically 
clean technology for penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica)” 
In 1999, the Ministry of Industry, Science and Technology of the Russian Federation 
has aproved the Project “Justification and development of the ecologically clean technology 
for penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica)”. The Arctic and Antarctic Research 
Institute of Roshydromet and the St. Petersburg Mining Institute of the Ministry of Education 
of Russia were entrusted with undertaking this Project.A compulsory requirement for the 
work under the agreement was the need of the state ecological expert examination of its 
following main provisions: 
1. Description of technology for penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok with a justification 
of its ecological safety. 
2. Environmental impact assessment during drilling of borehole 5-G1 and penetrating the 
subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica). 
3. Argumentation for the compliance of the materials submitted under the project to the 
requirements of the international agreements on the Antarctic. 
4. Certificates of the compliance and characteristics of the main properties of chemical 
reagents used for Project implementation. 
The work under the Project was completed in 2000 with all materials submitted for the 
State Ecological Expert Examination whose conclusion was ready on March 15, 2001. 
According to the procedure existing in the Russian Federation, this Conclusion was approved 
on March 26, 2001. 
Thus, the developed technology for penetrating the subglacial lake was oficially 
permitted for implementation in the framework of the Russian Antarctic Expedition based on 
the Russian rules and procedures in force. given a large significance of investigating the 
subglafial Lake Vostok in this country and in the international Antarctic community, the 
Russian Party considered it necessary to acquaint all Parties to the Antarctic Treaty with these 
materials in order to obtain comments and proposals  to prepare a final version of the 
Comprehensive Environmental Impact Evaluation according to the CEP requirements.  
 
1. Conclusion of the State Ecological Expert Examination of the Russian 
Federation  
In compliance with the Federal Law “On ecological expert examination”, the 
Administration of the State Ecological Expert Examination of the Ministry of Natural 
Resources of the Russian Federation has carried out the state ecological expert examination of 
the Project “Justification and development of the ecologically clean technology for 
penetrating subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica)” submitted by the Arctic and Antarctic 
Research Institute (AARI).  
 
 
 
Based on the analysis of the submitted materials, the Expert Commission of the State 
Ecological Expert Examination noting that the Project aims in general to observe the nature 
protection requirements and ensure ecological safety, has concluded that the expected 
environmental impact in the process of penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok is permissible 
and that it is necessary during Project implementation and at the detailed design stage to take 
into account the recommendations and proposals set forth in the Conclusion of the Expert 
Commission. 
 
2. Brief characterization of the study area and background information 
The Russian inland Vostok station is located in the plain snow surface of the glacial 
plateau of East Antarctica (78028’ S, 106048’ E) at an elevation of 3488 m above sea level.  
Being in the climatic area of Central Antarctica, the Vostok station is characterized by 
an extremely low air temperature (yearly average of -55.40С, absolute minimum of -89.20С 
and absolute maximum of -13.60С), low atmospheric pressure (yearly average of 624.2 mb) 
and small relative humidity (yearly average of 71 %). The wind regime of the station area is 
distinguished by weak catabatic winds with a yearly average speed of 5.4 m/s and rare storm 
winds with a maximum speed of 32 m/s. Due to severe temperature conditions there is no 
snow melting here. Atmospheric precipitation in the form of snow and ice crystals (with 
accumulation comprising 2.2 g/cm2 year) is subjected to drifting snow transport resulting in 
snow piling up behind the obstacles (buildings). The vicinity of Vostok station presents a flat 
snow plateau with small gently sloping blown snow heaps up to 20 cm in height. 
At the 3310-3370 m depth range, there are some indications of tectonic inconsistency 
in the strata bedding. At the 3460-3538 m range, layered ice is observed, which is 
characterized by alternating layers of fine- and coarse-grained ice. The basal ice layer that was 
detected below a 3538-m mark and traced to the borehole bottom (3623 m) is comprised of 
giant-grained ice  (with ice crystals greater than 1 m in diameter). 
The ice sheet above the lake in the Vostok station area flows southeastward. 
Beginning from the 3460-3540 m depths and higher the ice strata are entrained into 
movement whose rate at the glacial surface comprises around 3 m/year. 
Using remote sensing methods, a subglacial lake with an area of more than 10 
thousands km2 and the water layer depth of up to 700 m was detected at the Antarctic 
continent in the vicinity of Vostok station. The cross size of the lake is 220x70 km. According 
to seismic data, the ice thickness above the lake comprises 3700-4200 m.  The thickness of 
bottom sediments underlying the water column comprises probably up to 330 m.  As the 
glacial surface at Vostok corresponds to a height of 3488 m while the ice sheet thickness is 
estimated as 3750 m, the glacial foot at this location is 262 m below the global ocean level. It 
is mainly assumed that water in the lake might be fresh, which makes possible the existence 
of relict life forms there. The supposed age of the lake is more than 500 ka. 
Super deep drilling of the ice sheet at the Antarctic inland Vostok station to a depth of 
3623 m and study of the extracted ice core have already yielded very important information 
on the global climatic changes over more than 400 ka with identification of four full climatic 
cycles. It was possible to reconstruct the change of the gaseous composition of the 
atmosphere (CO2, CH4) and the dynamics of different aerosol concentrations in the air 
medium throughout the entire period under consideration. 
Long-term studies in the area of geophysics, glaciology, paleo-climatology and 
microbiology that were carried out at Vostok over a wide scientific range have also yielded 
numerous results of unique significance for world science showing an obvious priority of 
Russian science in developing a number of scientific problems. 
Beginning from the 13th Soviet Antarctic Expedition (SAE, 1967), specialists of the 
Chair of Technology and Technique of Drilling Boreholes and of other chairs of the SPbSMI 
 
 
jointly with AARI scientists participated practically in all Soviet and later Russian Antarctic 
Expeditions (RAE) both in the wintering and seasonal teams. More than 18 thousand meters 
with a full ice core extraction were drilled in the Antarctic ice sheet (Vostok station, Mirny 
Observatory and the glaciological Mirny-Vostok-1 profile) and well as in the glaciers of 
Severnaya Zemlya archipelago. Drilling of a deep hole at Vostok station began in the 35th 
SAE (1990) by a thermal method using TELGA and TB3S types of drills. In the 38th RAE 
(1993), borehole 5G-1 reached a depth of 2755. Due to insufficient funding of the 39th RAE 
and some technical and organizational problems, the Vostok station was temporarily 
decommissioned and no drilling activities were undertaken. During the 40th RAE (1995), 
drilling of borehole 5G-1 was resumed from a depth of 2755 by the electrical mechanical 
drill.  
During the season of the 43rd RAE (1997-1998), the hole has reached a unique ice 
depth of 3623 m, which is almost 600 m as great as the maximum depths achieved by 
specialists of EC countries (3032 m and 2953 m) and the USA (3057 m) in drilling boreholes 
under more favorable conditions of Greenland. Drilling of boreholes by the EC specialists 
was stopped due to accidents in these depths. To compensate overburden pressure, the EC 
specialists use a drilling fluid similar to that used by RAE. Its composition includes aviation 
fuel of JP-8 type as the main component and Freon F-141b as filler. Same fluid is applied for 
drilling a deep hole at Dome C in Antarctica under the general European Program EPICA, 
which has achieved a depth of 1450 m by February 1, 2001. 
 The results of drilling hole 5G-1 have finally proved the decisive advantages of the 
technique and technology of deep ice drilling. As compared with other existing coring 
electrical mechanical drills at a carrying cable (US CRREL, Danish-Swedish ISTUK and 
Japanese drills), the Russian drill KEMS-112 is distinguished by simplicity of design and 
reliability of operation.  
Studies of deep holes at Vostok and of the continuous ice core extracted from hole 
5G-1 whose age is greater than 500 kyr, have allowed us to obtain important scientific results: 
- 
scientists of Russia (AARI, Institute of Geography of RAS), France (Laboratory of 
Environmental Glaciology and Geophysics of the National Research Center) and 
the USA (University of Miami) based on the ice core isotope and glaciological 
studies have established for the first time the cyclicity of climate change on Earth 
and identified four Glacial and Interglacial periods; 
- 
methodology for aseptic microbiological sampling from the ice core was 
developed and proved at the level of scientific discovery of duration of anabiosis 
of microorganisms of more than 200 ka (SPSMI jointly with the Institute of 
Microbiology of RAS and AARI); 
- 
data on the temperature regime of the glacial cover were obtained for the first time 
and were used as a basis of mathematical modeling of the heat-mass transfer 
processes in the glacier; 
- 
vertical zonation and typical features of ice metamorphism by depth were 
established. 
 The bases of the theory of thermal and mechanical ice failure and methodology to 
calculate the technological parameters of drilling were created. The choice of the formula of 
non-freezing drilling fluid to prevent borehole narrowing due to overburden pressure and 
increasing natural ice temperature with depth significantly changing its viscous-plastic 
properties was substantiated. Principally new semi-autonomous electrical-thermal (jointly 
with AARI) and electrical-mechanical drill at a carrying cable  (TELGA, TB3S and KEMS), 
complexes of stationary and mobile drilling equipment and systems of the drilling process 
control and automated operation were developed. Special methods and equipment of a 
complex of geophysical studies of boreholes under the extreme conditions of polar glaciers 
 
 
were developed and tested. 
The anthropogenic impact on the environment in the vicinity of Vostok station occurs 
from 1957. To undertake a complex of studies, 14 to 25 people can be accommodated at the 
base depending on the season. There are 5 diesel-generators 100 kW each. From 1970, 5 holes 
15-18 cm in diameter and a depth between 500 to 3623 m were drilled. Contamination with 
domestic wastes in the station area and ice contamination with kerosene near the wellhead is 
noted. In accordance with the Project, it is envisaged to continue drilling by a 4-people team.   
Based on practical and economical considerations (organization and logistics support 
for drilling a new hole), the AARI and SPSMI propose to use the already existing hole 5G-1 
for accessing Lake Vostok and special technical equipment and technology of its ecologically 
safe unsealing. 
To implement this Project, the Vostok station has the following facilities: 
- 
drilling complex including a drilling house with a rig and a set of ground 
equipment; 
- 
glaciological laboratory equipped with necessary facilities and instrumentation for 
the studies of the extracted ice core; 
- 
specially equipped ice core storage space providing its long-term preservation at a 
constant below zero temperature; 
- 
living and auxiliary premises. 
It is planned in the near future to directly penetrate the lake and conduct hydrological, 
microbiological and geological studies. In accordance with the international and Russian 
regulating codes, this penetration should be made provided all ecological safety requirements 
are met.  
Information that will be obtained from the analysis of lake water and bottom 
sediments is valuable not only for characterizing the processes of lake genesis and its present 
state. It will also allow making more specific the results of remote sensing studies and model 
calculations and improving thus these methods. 
 
3. Main engineering and technological decisions of Lake Vostok access 
 
There are several ways of penetrating Lake Vostok proposed by different countries. 
However, they are all based on a preliminary drilling of more than three thousand meters of 
glacial strata. Since at present, the bottom of borehole 5G-1 is in direct proximity from the 
water surface of the lake, it seems to be quite logical to use this borehole 3623 m deep, filled 
with a drilling fluid to penetrate the lake.  
In order to meet all ecological requirements at penetrating water of the lake, the 
Project authors propose to introduce some changes in the drilling methodology. 
A more than 30 year experience of work of a team of drilling specialists allowed 
finding and testing an ecologically clean drilling technology (both in terms of liquidating 
adverse impacts on the ozone layer of the atmosphere and from the viewpoint of ice 
microbiology). 
The proposed method to access Lake Vostok envisages to use primarily the physical 
peculiarities of the state of the “ice sheet-subglacial Lake Vostok” system. The basic fact is 
that the ice sheet is in the floating state with the pressure at the “ice-water” boundary 
corresponding to the ice column weight (overburden pressure). During ice drilling, the 
hydrostatic drilling fluid pressure in the borehole compensates the overburden pressure. 
Decreasing the drilling fluid quantity, it is possible to ensure undercompensation of 
overburden pressure, i.e. create such conditions when the lake water pressure at the given 
point will be greater than the drilling fluid column pressure.  
The Project authors consider that under such conditions, at the hole bottom contacting 
 
 
the lake surface, the drilling fluid will be forced out by lake water upward the borehole to a 
height corresponding to overburden pressure undercompensation. It is believed that 
penetration of the used drilling fluid to the lake can be excluded as it is hydrophobic and is 
much lighter than water. The drill will be extracted from the hole immediately after reaching 
the surface.  
It is obvious that lake water rising up the hole should freeze along the entire 
penetration length. After its freezing, drilling of the ice portion formed of the subsurface 
water layers of Lake Vostok is repeated. Ice remaining below, which is formed of lake water, 
divides the hole bottom and the lake, i.e. prevents their possible contact. Thus, the proposed 
method will allow lake water sampling without a direct incorporation of the drill and 
measurement and sampling instruments to the lake.   
It is planned to realize this method of lake access and its study in several stages 
applying two types of the drill and two types of the drilling fluid.  
The first stage of work envisages additional drilling of around 100 m in borehole 5G-1 
by means of a coring electrical mechanical drill KEMS-132 and a complex of drilling 
equipment used here before. Given a proven reliability and high efficiency of this equipment, 
its use appears to be completely safe in terms of ecology. In addition it will allow extraction 
of approximately a 100 m ice core from the basal layers of the ice sheet containing unique 
information on the lake evolution. 
First, it will be necessary to ensure ecological purity of the lake-drill contact. 
For this, prior to the second stage of work, it is proposed to introduce to the bottom 
portion of the hole a new ecologically clean drilling fluid (neutral in respect of water and 
microorganisms). It can serve as a peculiar liquid plug about 100 m thick between the top and 
clean bottom parts of the hole.  This buffer layer separating the bottom and the earlier used 
drilling fluid (aviation kerosene TC-1/ freon 141b mixture) should have a higher density than 
the drilling fluid of the main hole but lower than the lake water density. 
The aviation kerosene presents a mixture of hydrocarbons of different composition 
and structure including aromatic ones whose fraction comprises 20-22%. Freon 141b presents 
1,1,1 fluoro-dichloro-ethane CH3CFCl2. 
At the second stage (drilling of about 30 m of ice until the contact with the lake) it is 
planned to use a thermal drill with a stepped working body (TBPO-132) due to which a pilot- 
hole with a diameter 3-4 times as small as that of the main hole forms under the drill. During 
drilling, the overburden pressure undercompensation is maintained in the hole.  
A thermal drill TBPO-132 consists of a pilot-chisel and a ring bit connected with the 
electrical power source, which heats them. The drill is also equipped with a pump and the 
feedback system sensors. The thermal drill similar to the electrical-mechanical drill being in 
the hole is suspended at a carrying cable. The rate of running the last 30 m of ice to a contact 
with the lake is to be up to 3 m/hour. 
Upon reaching the lake surface, the solid ice support under the bottom surface of the 
pilot-chisel will disappear to which a contact sensor will respond. The sensor signal will 
switch a packer that serves for isolating the near-bottom section of the hole from the rest of its 
volume. Simultaneously, drilling will be stopped while the readings of sensors will allow an 
evaluation of the hydrostatic pressure difference in the hole and in the lake. 
When the pilot-hole bottom reaches the lake surface, three variants of the ratio of fluid 
column pressure near bottom Pf and water pressure in the lake Pl are possible: 1) Pf < Pl; 2) Pf 
= Pl; 3) Pf > Pl, with the first variant being the most expected and the second and third variants 
as unlikely.  
At Pf < Pl, lake water will rise in the hole to a height h, corresponding to the pressure 
difference in the lake and the hole  ∆ρ = Pf  -  Pl.  At thermal drilling, the working body 
should be in a constant contact  with the bottom surface under the action of the force equal to 
 
 
part of the drill weight. Thus, direct water penetration from the lake to the hole is impossible. 
It can rise to the hole if the drill is raised above the bottom by a carrying cable or by the force 
that can occur at the moment of contact with the lake surface due to pressure difference if it is 
greater than the force pressing the drill to the bottom (the drill weight with deduction of the 
Archimedean  buoyancy force). 
At Pf = Pl, the lake water will rise to the hole at the drill raise with decreasing 
hydrostatic pressure of the drilling fluid, that is, the cable volume retrieved from the hole will 
be substituted by lake water. 
At Pf > Pl, which is practically unlikely, at the pilot thermal chisel contacting the lake 
surface, the force Po will begin acting on the drill pressing it to the ring bottom of the hole. At 
disconnecting the power supply, the ring bit will be pressed against the bottom shoulder of the 
hole isolating it from the lake. 
It will be further necessary to pump part of the fluid from the hole decreasing its level 
to such a value as to ensure inequality Pf < Pl.  The situation will be reduced to the first 
variant and the retrieval of the drill from the hole will begin. 
Thus, the thermal drill will perform a valve function ensuring the ecological safety of 
penetrating the lake disconnecting it and the hole at the moment of contact between the pilot 
thermal chisel and the lake surface. 
To drill the last 30 m of ice up to its contact with the lake, a thermal drill will be used 
without its detachment from the bottom. At ice being melt by the drill, the drill and the cable 
will be naturally cleaned from the drilling fluid by melt water whose column forms one more 
buffer layer below the organic-silicon fluid (polydimethylsiloxane). 
After reaching the Lake Vostok surface (end of the second stage), the operation in 
borehole 5G-1 will be stopped for the period of freezing of lake water introduced to the hole. 
Then, part of ice formed from lake water will be sampled by a coring electrical mechanical 
drill KEMS-132. Core retrieval will be performed observing all precautions for preserving the 
biological purity of the inner portion of this core by means of the method that has already 
been developed by designers, repeatedly used and that has proved its reliability. The 
remaining ice will not be drilled ensuring complete isolation of borehole 5G-1 from the lake 
surface. 
To counteract the overburden pressure, the hole drilled will be filled with a non-
freezing fluid consisting of aviation kerosene TC-1 mixed with filler – Freon 141b in the 
volumetric proportion of 5:1.   
Polydimethylsiloxane in the pure form is a low toxic biologically inert substance, and 
its possible contact with water should not influence the biota state if it is present in the lake. 
Obviously, the most valuable material for future microbiological and other studies will 
be the lower section of the accreted ice column, which is most free from alien admixtures 
entrapped by the water flow rushing to the hole from the lake. 
It is noted in Section 7 of the Project “Scenario of possible emergencies in the process 
of borehole drilling” that “in the event of unplanned drill exit to the lake, an insignificant 
drilling fluid quantity and alien micro-biota with it can penetrate the lake. However, with 
water rising to the hole, all this will be entrained by the water flow back to the hole”.  
In respect of a possible ecological danger of exposure of the relict Lake Vostok to the 
current life on Earth, the following is noted.  
First, lake water samples collected as an ice core will be in the hands and under 
control of competent investigators. 
Second, according to calculated data, a prolonged connection of the lake surface with 
the hole will be fully excluded due to an ice plug at the borehole bottom. 
Third, and the main, according to current understanding, human pathogens appeared 
on Earth with appearance of warm-blooded animals and man. And we deal with the material 
 
 
that had been isolated from current civilization long before it appeared. 
It is also known that the preliminary microbiological studies of the accretion ice layer 
formed of water of the subglacial Lake Vostok, have not revealed any unusual forms of 
microorganisms except for the long known to microbiologists saprophyte forms frequently 
observed in the water medium. 
At present, there are several alternative projects of access to Lake Vostok.  
As an example of a principal technological solution of the problem of penetration 
through an ice shell to the water medium with simultaneous study and minimum 
contamination, the Project described the USA method of using automated devices, the so-
called Cryobot and Hydrobot. It is planned that a Cryobot  about 2 m long and 10-20 cm in 
diameter will be connected with the station on the ice surface by a super-thin cable fulfilling 
the carrying and communication functions. The Cryobot will pass downward through the ice 
sheet due to its own weight. With movement, the cable will unwind from the reel inside the 
Cryobot and remain frozen into the ice behind the device. 
According to the design of the US engineers, at the time of passing through ice, the 
Hydrobot will be accommodated inside the Cryobot.  At the time of Cryobot contacting the 
water layer, the Hydrobot will separate and begin independent studies of the water column 
transmitting information to the Cryobot by cable. A set of information to be transmitted will 
probably include visual imagery (images) of the environment, data on its chemistry, insoluble 
suspended matter, presence of nutrients, etc. 
This technical proposal is attractive by the possibility of ensuring high degree of 
ecological safety during the lake study, however, for its implementation it is necessary to 
deliver the Cryobot to a maximum possible depth to decrease the distance to the lake surface, 
which will require drilling a new borehole. Otherwise, it will be necessary to place a reel with 
a cable 400 m long to the Cryiobot, which is quite unreal. 
The technology of penetrating Lake Vostok proposed by the AARI and the SPSMI, 
differs advantageously from the aforementioned USA technology by its simplicity and 
reliability, possible control over the entire borehole length and automated operation of the 
drilling process. 
The Expert Commission notes the following in respect of this section. In the 
framework of the Project of penetrating the subglacial lake, two components of one complex 
of measures to ensure the ecological safety of drilling operations should be subjected to a 
careful analysis: 
- 
technological component determined by application of different drilling fluids and 
use of mechanical and thermal drilling methods; 
- 
engineering components determined by design parameters of the drilling 
equipment applied. 
 
Technological measures. Before the direct access to the lake, an intermediate buffer 
fluid layer is created that should decrease a possible lake contamination risk. The main 
measure of a technological character excluding the possibility of the drilling fluid penetrating 
the lake is to create in the borehole near-bottom zone the drilling fluid pressure smaller than 
the water pressure in the lake. This is possible only by ensuring a sufficiently high accuracy 
of the drilling fluid pressure measurement in the borehole.  As estimated by the Project 
authors, the accuracy of pressure measurements at present is not less than ±0.9 b. To increase 
this accuracy is the most important reserve in ensuring ecological safety of work. At a high 
resolution of the instrument used, the accuracy of calculating the overburden pressure 
undercompensation at the borehole bottom is relatively low, which results from the low 
accuracy of measuring the borehole depth and the drilling fluid level. The Project does not 
indicate how the moment of ending mechanical drilling and proceeding to thermal drilling 
 
 
will be defined and how the ice layer thickness to the lake surface will be determined and 
with what accuracy. 
Engineering measures. The design parameters of the thermal drill to be used at the 
second stage of lake access exclude the drill exit to lake water and drilling fluid penetration 
from the borehole to the lake. 
In the opinion of the Expert Commission, at accessing the lake using the proposed 
method, there are two ways of contaminants penetrating water of the lake: 
- 
Influx of alien substances at water contact with the drill surface (1), 
- 
Influx of such substances to the lake by their diffusion from the borehole through 
the ice strata (2). 
We shall consider both ways individually. 
First way 
 
When the thermal drill is lowered to the borehole before the final drilling stage, the 
drill should pass through a drilling fluid layer and as a result, its surface will be covered by a 
thin layer of this fluid. 
The presented materials do not indicate at what moment of time the buffer silicon oil 
will be introduced to the hole – before or after the drill is submerged. 
If the drill is submerged to the hole only through a layer of mixed kerosene and filler, 
the molecules of hydrocarbons comprising kerosene and fluorochloromethane will be sorbed 
at its surface. At heating the working part of the drill, the sorbed particles will be partly 
desorbed and transferred to melt water and then to ice. The remaining quantities of sorbed 
hydrocarbons can enter water from the drill surface.   
If the drill after a kerosene layer passes through a 100 m of PMS, it will be practically 
cleaned of kerosene that is soluble in polyorganosiloxanes and will be covered by 
polydimethylsiloxane. In this case, the presence of polydimethylsiloxane molecules at the 
bottom (contact) pilot-chisel surface at its contact with water is quite possible. However, the 
edge angle of wetting the surface covered with polydimethylsiloxane is practically equal to 
900 and due to its hydrophoby, this substance in not soluble in water. When in water, it tends 
to form droplets at its surface or films at very small quantities. If this film forms at lake 
access, which is unlikely, its main portion will go to the borehole at lake water incorporation. 
A possible remainder of PMS in water will be extremely small by mass at a level of 
milligrams or even its fractions. It should also be taken into account that 
polydimethylsiloxane is known as a non-toxic substance inert to biological objects. PMS does 
not react with water and dissolved salts of natural origin. This substance destroys in the water 
medium under the action of alkali and in the atmosphere at heating to the temperatures higher 
than 2500C. In the first case, a silicate anion and methanol and in the second, silica, carbonic 
acid and water are formed as the destruction products. 
The materials submitted for expert examination do not inform how tightly the drill 
closes the lower exit from the hole and whether liquids will seep between the hole walls and 
the drill. If a leak of polydimethylsiloxane to the lake occurs, it will be of a lesser harm 
compared to kerosene whose composition includes aromatic hydrocarbons and other toxic 
substances. 
 
Second way 
 
It is known that oil and oil products are quite well absorbed by sea ice spreading in  it. 
The oil migration rate in the ice strata was determined by the Canadian-US Expedition to the 
Beaufort Sea (1974) as 40 mm a day. During the experiments in Lake Ladoga (1978) 
undertaken by AARI, the rate comprised 50 mm a day. 
 
 It was experimentally determined at the “North Pole-22” station that oil and oil 
product movement in arctic ice occurs both vertically and horizontally with the oil spreading 
 
 
rate in ice depending on the ice structure and composition, oil and oil product density and on 
solar radiation temperature and intensity. In the summertime, the rate increased to 80 mm a 
day decreasing to 20 mm in winter. In multiyear ice, permeated with a large number of pores 
and capillaries, a rate of 490 mm a day was noted. 
 
Obviously, such migration can also occur under the conditions of Antarctica at the 
contact of the drilling fluid with the ice walls of the borehole. The specific conditions of 
Antarctica should also influence this process, however, migration of hydrocarbons comprising 
kerosene to ice also occurs here.  
 
If we take as a basis, the hydrocarbon spreading rate of 10 mm a day, that is half as 
large as the lowest rate observed under the Arctic conditions, then for a period of more than 2 
years (1999-2000), during which borehole 5G-1 is preserved filled with kerosene, the front of 
oil products could advance to all sides from the borehole and downward towards the lake over 
7-8 m.  One should take into account at this that at low Antarctic temperatures, the 
evaporation of hydrocarbons that have reached the ice surface in the course of migration is 
slow and the ice massif self-purification will occur many decades or probably centuries later. 
However, contamination of the Antarctic ice with kerosene from the existing borehole has 
already occurred and this is a real fact.  
 
Migration of polydimethylsiloxane oil in ice has not been studied up to now. It can be 
assumed that it occurs much slower compared to hydrocarbons as the molecules of organic-
silicon oligomer are much larger and less mobile than the molecules of hydrocarbons 
contained in kerosene. The situation is however, complicated by the fact that organosiloxanes 
are well soluble in hydrocarbons and hence both layers – kerosene with filler and 
organosiloxane are early or later will solve in each other and become one phase. 
 
If the ice isthmus between the lake and the drilling fluid are preserved for a long time 
in the borehole, there will be a threat of contamination of the lake complex by hydrocarbons  
or polydimethylsiloxane through the ice of the borehole walls.  
 
The project does not present the calculations of the heat balance change of the melt 
water column forming in the process of drilling with a height of around 30 m.  We cannot 
exclude melt water accretion on the ice walls of the borehole at a below zero temperature and 
full water crystallization in the area of upper horizons until the drill reaches the ice boundary 
with the lake. If this takes place, then the work can be significantly complicated.  
 
At thermal drill operation, there will be simultaneously a gradual cleaning of the drill 
and the carrying cable from the drilling fluids by melt water whose column will create an 
additional buffer layer below the organic silicon fluid. 
It is envisaged that the thermal drill will perform a valve function ensuring the 
ecological safety of penetrating the lake. 
Upon reaching the lake surface, it is proposed to create the conditions for lake water 
incorporation to the hole after which drilling operations are stopped until a complete lake 
water freezing in the borehole. Then, ice sampling from lake water by the electromechanical 
drill KEMS-132 will be carried out. It is unclear in what way melt water will be separated 
from lake water during the study. Part of ice near the boundary with the lake will not be 
drilled in order to ensure isolation of the borehole from the lake and to prevent possible 
adverse environmental consequences. This fact is a very important moment in the studies 
planned and one should keep to this variant.  
In respect of using Freon 141b, the Project “characterizes this substance as practically 
non-impacting the Earth’s ozone layer”. This is incorrect. Freon 141b is a 
hydrochlorofluorocarbon CH3CFCl2. The adopted name of this substance in the Vienna 
Convention (1985) and Montreal Protocol (1987) is HCFC-141b with ozone destroying 
capability of 0.11 (for comparison, CFC-11 has an ozone destroying capability of 1.0). 
HCFC-141b is placed among the regulated substances with a 35% decrease of its 
 
 
consumption by January 1, 2004, 65% by January 1, 2010 and 100% by January 1, 2030. 
However, the appeals for undertaking adequate measures to restrict the use of HCFCs are 
made increasingly more frequent lately at the international meetings on ozone destroying 
substances. Since the system considered under the framework of the submitted Project is 
closed, the emission of Freon 141 to the atmosphere appears to be extremely insignificant. 
The hermetic sealing of the borehole with a thermal drill acting as a valve is not 
sufficiently justified.  
There is no calculation of the heat sink rate and the drill capacity providing sufficient 
ground to think that water will not freeze (“.. the melt water column – a buffer role”). 
A great deal of attention in the Project is given to describing the drilling fluid, its 
components, methods of delivery and storage and its properties. Unfortunately, there are no 
data on bactericide and bacteriostatic features of these liquids and a possible presence of the 
cells of macroorganisms in them. From experience of multiyear microbiological studies of the 
ice core segments from borehole 5G-1, it is known that neither kerosene that has quite a large 
penetrating ability nor the microbial cells that are probably contained in an insignificant 
quantity in the drilling fluids penetrate the central ice core segments. Therefore, the presence 
of the drilling fluid in the borehole did not influence the results of microbiological studies of 
the ice core middle as shown by direct experimental studies. However, at a possible 
penetration of the drilling fluid to the lake, the cells of microorganisms it contains can get to 
the lake.  
The Expert Commission has some comments on the contents of the documents under 
consideration, not directly connected with the ecological purity of the proposed technology. 
All of them refer to an incorrect use of chemical terms and formulas. 
 To increase the reliability and effectiveness of the methods to protect the subglacial 
lake from contamination, the expert commission has some recommendations. 
 
4. Recommendations and proposals  
 
To ensure a guaranteed ecological purity of Project implementation, it is desirable to 
make a preliminary checking of the developed technologies and drilling equipment before 
penetrating Lake Vostok under the field conditions to exclude possible failures. In the opinion 
of the Expert Commission, detailed consideration of the drill design and careful field trials 
before its application in the deep borehole are necessary. 
1. It is desirable to conduct the preliminary studies specifying the parameters, 
processes and design features of the drill. 
2. The same can be said about drilling the last 30 m as here, the cable with a drill will 
entrain part of the buffer fluid downward. Therefore, when operator senses that the drill 
approaches the moment of penetrating the lake, it will be probably necessary to stop drilling 
to give the buffer particles time to surface.  The figure of 30 m requires additional 
justification. 
3. In order to prepare the detailed documentation, the Expert Commission considers it 
necessary to: 
- 
increase the accuracy of determining the pressure difference between the drilling 
fluid in the borehole and the ice massif overburden pressure; 
- 
specify the method of determining the moment of transition to drilling by a 
thermal drill; 
- 
specify the methodology of determining the ice layer thickness between the hole 
bottom and ice surface; 
- 
work out in detail the drill design and make careful field tests before using in the 
deep borehole; 
 
 
- 
specify the method of separating melt water from lake water during the operation 
and the heat sink rate and the thermal drill capacity; 
- 
check experimentally whether there is a leakage of the drilling fluid and 
polydimethylsiloxane oil between the walls of the hole and the drill body. If it 
takes place, it should be eliminated by improving the drill design or in some other 
way; 
- 
take into account the diffuse spreading of hydrocarbons in Antarctic ice and 
calculate on this basis the safe thickness of the ice plug in the hole and the ultimate 
permissible time of kerosene stay in the ice hole; 
- 
develop and test the methods preventing or restricting dissolving of kerosene and 
polydimethylsiloxane oil in each other and use the most optimal solution for 
accessing the lake; 
- 
envisage a possibility of breaking the monolithic character of the ice strata at the 
boundary with water. 
5. In the opinion of the Expert Commission, at all stages of handling the drilling fluid, 
it is necessary if possible to ensure the purity of this fluid. It is noted in the Project that “liquid 
flowing from the cable and the drill at the recovery from the borehole is gathered in trays 
from which it goes again to the borehole”. During this procedure, the maximum cleanliness of 
the trays and other materials contacting the flowing fluid to be repeatedly poured to the hole 
should be observed.  
6. An analysis of all possible cases that might result in emergency with serious 
environmental implications primarily for the lake and the air medium should be presented in 
the detailed documentation. 
7. It is necessary to envisage and eliminate a possible contamination of the buffer 
layer, as to fill 100 m, 10 runs of the drill (descent and recovery) will be necessary, each of 
them resulting in the drilling fluid penetrating the buffer layer medium. Therefore, a more 
careful analysis of this mechanism is required. It can be performed theoretically (using, for 
example, the “boot effect” method) at the laboratory or under the field conditions. 
8. During the work, the bactericide and bacteriological characteristics of the drilling 
fluids should be taken into account.  
 
5. Environmental protection during Project implementation 
 
The technical solutions of penetrating the lake considered in the Project were 
primarily assessed in terms of preventing the contamination of the relict lake. 
The Program of investigating the subglacial Lake Vostok (its origin, regime 
hydrochemistry and possibilities and conditions of existence of hydrobionts in its water and 
their composition) envisages in addition to remote sensing geophysical surveys to use 
mathematical and physical models. It is also planned to directly penetrate lake water and 
conduct in situ studies. It is supposed that the lake access will be short-term. 
An obligatory term for accessing the lake is a guarantee of cleanliness of technical 
equipment and technological operations, which should protect this unique natural object from 
chemical or biological contaminants. 
An important problem of drilling operations at Vostok in order to investigate the 
subglacial lake is to minimize the adverse environmental impact.  This impact can be 
subdivided into 2 categories – direct and indirect. 
The first category includes waste accumulation near the hole, use of mixed drilling 
fluid; deepening of borehole; ice structure change in the hole, unsealing the relict lake without 
penetrating it and an insignificant disturbance of the lake regime by an insignificant ingress of 
1.5 m3 of water to the hole. The second category covers the risk of unplanned environmental 
 
 
impact; a possible loss of the drilling equipment in the lake and penetration of the drilling 
fluid to the lake. 
The Expert Commission notes that all aforementioned aspects of possible 
environmental impact were considered in sufficient detail.  
The aforementioned types of impact will obviously produce some specific 
environmental influence in the vicinity of Vostok station. This specifically concerns the ice 
structure change at additional drilling of 130 m of borehole 5G-1; presence in the hole of the 
special composition of the drilling fluid – aviation kerosene TC-1, Freon 141-b and organic-
silicon fluid; exposure of the subglacial lake and studies at the ice sheet surface. Continuation 
of drilling borehole 5G-1 by a team of 4 people cannot make serious additional environmental 
changes. An assessment of the scale of the environmental impact given the efforts to prevent  
and mitigate this impact shows that in the opinion of the developers, this impact will be quite 
restricted and will not lead to any significant environmental changes.  
The materials submitted by the AARI present a description and evaluation of the 
environmental impact during drilling of borehole 5G-1 and penetration to the subglacial Lake 
Vostok and measures to minimize this impact. 
In accordance with Project calculations, no serious changes in the lake regime and the 
ambient conditions are expected. 
In the opinion of the Expert Commission, the Section “Evaluation of Environmental 
impact of drilling borehole 5G-1 and penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok” mainly takes 
into account all requirements for protection of the specific natural environment at the Vostok 
station as recorded in the international agreements. 
However, the Expert Commission has several recommendations that will allow 
making the protection of such a unique natural body as the subglacial lake more efficient. 
 
5.1. Recommendations and proposals 
 
1. The major recommendation in respect of environmental protection in the area of 
work planned is primarily the control for using a reliable ecologically clean and in situ tested 
technology for accessing Lake Vostok. 
2. In the opinion of the Expert Commission, there should be a reference to Article 8 of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty in the EIA Section and in 
compliance with this Article, a definition of the impact of future activity (drilling and 
penetration) as: 
a) less than a minor or transitory impact, 
b) equal to a minor or transitory impact; or 
c) more than a minor or transitory impact.  
According to the Madrid Protocol, Criteria b) and c) require a Comprehensive 
Environmental Evaluation in strict compliance with Article 3 (Annex 1 to the Protocol) with 
detailed answers on all sub-paragraphs. 
There are such materials (answers) in the Project. It should be precisely stated whether 
the “evaluation” performed refers to category (b) or (c). 
3. The detailed design stage should envisage creation of a comprehensive ecological 
monitoring program. 
 
6. General assessment of the submitted materials  
 
1. The Expert Commission assesses positively in general the Project “Justification and 
development of the ecologically clean technology for penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok 
(Antarctica)” submitted for consideration. 
 
 
In general, the Project is characterized by using sufficiently efficient measures of 
protecting water of the subglacial Lake Vostok from external contamination. It identifies to a 
sufficient extent the ecologically dangerous factors and analyzes the contamination risks of 
ice massif and water of Lake Vostok at the different stages of drilling the borehole. 
The Project uses high level technology and has an obvious scientific value. Its 
implementation is necessary.  
2. It is noted that the proposed further drilling of borehole 5G-1 that has already 
reached a record depth of 3523 m will use tested and efficient technology by means of 
equipment available at Vostok with its insignificant modernizing, which minimizes the risk of 
operation and ensures its sufficiently high reliability. In addition, the studies planned envisage 
a complex of measures to mitigate the environmental impact.  
3. Analysis of engineering and technological parameters of the proposed operations 
indicates that they were worked over in detail although some issues require even a more 
careful consideration. 
This is primarily the control and comprehensive environmental monitoring. 
4. It is noted that a possible environmental impact does not contradict the main 
principles recorded in the legislative documents and regulating acts of the Russian Federation, 
the UN program documents (2nd UN Conference, 1992) and the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty signed in Madrid on October 4, 1991. 
5. The work under consideration contains much interesting evidence and original 
technical solutions and can be in general approved both in terms of science and technology. It 
uses simple but sufficiently efficient measures to protect purity of water of the subglacial 
Lake Vostok. 
6. The calculations of the Project authors aimed to prevent the drilling fluid 
penetration to the lake due to the pressure difference appear to be quite convincing. The 
authors note that the fluid pressure in the borehole will be less than the water pressure in the 
lake, that is, at the moment of accessing the lake, water will be rising to the hole. According 
to calculations, this fact can be regulated by changing the pressure in the drilling fluid column 
in the hole. 
7. The Project considers several degrees of protecting the study object due to 
technology and technical equipment used, which can be considered quite justified. 
The Project considers in detail the physical-chemical properties of the fluids used in 
the process of drilling and penetration to the lake. The choice of hydrophobic and inertial 
organic-silicon fluid  (one of the silicone oils) as a material for a buffer plug at running the 
last 130 m appears to be quite justified.  
Penetration of some significant volumes of the drilling fluid to the lake can be 
probably excluded, as the fluid is hydrophobic and much lighter than water. The Commission 
considers that even a local appearance of trace quantities of polydimethylsiloxane cannot 
produce any significant influence on the lake state either in chemical or biological respect. 
It seems that under the conditions of lake access operation and after it is completed, no 
decomposition of polydimethylsiloxane will occur. 
8. The Project proposes a sufficiently reliable, ingenious, effective and original 
method of solving quite an important and difficult problem based on long-term experience of 
glaciological drilling studies at Vostok station. This project differs advantageously from some 
foreign developments on penetrating Lake Vostok by its simple, relatively cheap, reliable and  
realistic character. 
 
The Project developed  by the AARI and SPSMI under the framework of the Program 
“Comprehensive studies of the oceans and the seas of the Arctic and the Antarctic“ 
“Justification and development of the ecologically clean technology for penetrating the 
subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica)”, seems to be most acceptable compared to the other 
 
 
projects and can be assessed in terms of ecological safety as meeting the requirements made.   
 
9. The submitted materials on the development of the ecologically clean technology 
and assessment of environmental impact during penetration to the subglacial Lake Vostok 
have been prepared at a high professional level and can be approved taking into account the 
recommendations and proposals of the Expert Commission. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
1. The Project “Justification and development of the ecologically clean technology for 
penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok (Antarctica)” by its scope of work and contents 
corresponds in general to the requirements of the legislative acts of the Russian Federation 
and regulating documents.  
 
The Project contains the materials on environmental impact assessment with 
indication of nature protection measures and justification of the ecological permissibility of 
the activity planned. 
 
2. Based on the examination of Project materials and given the submitted certificates 
of the correspondence and characteristics of the main properties of chemical reagents applied 
for Project implementation, the Expert Commission considers that the envisaged 
environmental impact of the Project in the process of penetrating the subglacial Lake Vostok 
is permissible and can be adopted as a basis to develop detailed documentation. 
 
3.  During Project implementation and at the detailed design stage, it is necessary to 
take into account the recommendations and proposals set forth in this Conclusion. 
