 
  
IV CEP 
Working Paper WP-11 
Agenda item 4d 
Australia 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON THE OPEN-ENDED INTERSESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP ON  
DISEASES OF ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE 
 
REPORT 2 – PRACTICAL MEASURES TO DIMINISH RISK (DRAFT) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
Report on the open-ended intersessional contact group on 
diseases of Antarctic wildlife 
Report 2 – Practical measures to diminish risk (draft) 
 
Background 
 
CEP III agreed to the following terms of reference for the open-ended intersessional contact group 
(ICG) on diseases of Antarctic wildlife: 
 
“That the contact group prepare an initial report for CEP IV which: 
• provides a review of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease 
causing agents in Antarctica and provides a risk assessment of those activities which may 
introduce or spread disease causing agents in Antarctica 
• presents practical measures that might be implemented by Parties to diminish the risk to 
Antarctic wildlife of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease 
causing agents; and 
• presents practical measures that may be implemented to determine the cause of unusual 
wildlife mortality and morbidity events in Antarctica and to reduce the likelihood that 
human activity may exacerbate these events.” 
(CEP III Report Paragraph 52) 
 
This paper reports on the work of the ICG in response to the second of the terms of reference. The 
ICG’s draft report is at Annex 1. Australia coordinated the process, with participation from AEON, 
Australia, IAATO, Italy and Sweden.  
 
A report in response to the first of the terms of reference (Review and Risk Assessment) has been 
submitted to CEP IV as an annex to a separate working paper. The ICG does not yet have a draft 
report in response to the third of the terms of reference.  
 
The report on practical measures to diminish risk is presented to CEP IV as a draft to encourage 
further participation in the work of the ICG. The implementation of practical measures is likely to 
have implications for the way that Antarctic activities are undertaken and the establishment of 
practical measures within the Antarctic Treaty System may involve Parties in formal decisions, 
resolutions or measures that could have implications for the domestic legislation of Parties. It is 
therefore important to the success of the practical measures that they are carefully considered. 
 
The practical measures address human activities identified by the ICG as risks through the process 
of review and risk assessment. Before the report on practical measures is finalised it is important 
that the CEP indicates whether or not it endorses the list of human activities identified as a priority 
by the ICG.   
 
The purposes of submitting the work of the ICG on practical measures to CEP IV as a draft are: 
• to ensure they are discussed widely and to encourage the widest possible participation in 
their further development, and 
• to ensure that the ICG has the opportunity to modify the practical measures to address 
priorities determined by CEP in its consideration of the review and risk assessment 
 
Recommendations 
 
It is recommended that: 
• the CEP notes the draft report from the ICG on practical measures to diminish risk 
 
 
3
• the CEP encourages Parties to continue participation in the work of the ICG to further 
develop the draft practical measures to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife of the 
introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease causing agents in Antarctica 
• the CEP asks the ICG to prepare a report for CEP V which: 
a) presents practical measures that might be implemented by Parties to diminish the risk to 
Antarctic wildlife of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease 
causing agents; and 
b) presents practical measures that may be implemented to determine the cause of unusual 
wildlife mortality and morbidity events in Antarctica and to reduce the likelihood that 
human activity may exacerbate these events. 
 
 
 
1
ANNEX 1 
DRAFT REPORT - PRACTICAL MEASURES TO DIMINISH 
THE RISK TO ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE OF THE INTRODUCTION  
AND SPREAD BY HUMAN ACTIVITY OF INFECTIOUS  
DISEASE CAUSING AGENTS 
 
Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction ............................................................................................................2 
2 
Education and awareness .......................................................................................2 
2.1 
Background ....................................................................................................2 
2.2 
Action required...............................................................................................3 
3 
Initial response to unusual mortality events...........................................................3 
3.1 
Background ....................................................................................................3 
3.2 
Action required...............................................................................................4 
4 
Information exchange.............................................................................................4 
4.1 
Background ....................................................................................................4 
4.2 
Action required...............................................................................................4 
5 
Cleaning/sanitising of equipment...........................................................................4 
5.1 
Background ....................................................................................................4 
5.2 
Action required...............................................................................................5 
6 
Source of food supplies..........................................................................................8 
6.1 
Background ....................................................................................................8 
6.2 
Action required...............................................................................................9 
7 
Waste management, sewage treatment and effluent disposal ................................9 
7.1 
Background ....................................................................................................9 
7.2 
Action required.............................................................................................10 
8 
Research priorities................................................................................................10 
8.1 
Background ..................................................................................................10 
8.2 
Action required.............................................................................................12 
9 
References ............................................................................................................12 
 
 
 
 
2
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The open-ended intersessional contact group on diseases of Antarctic wildlife has 
undertaken a review of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious 
disease causing agents, and risk assessment of those activities which may introduce or 
spread disease causing agents in Antarctica. This process identified the following 
human activities as priorities for practical measures that might be implemented by 
Parties to diminish risk, 
 
• Feeding of wildlife 
• Actions following discovery of unusual mortality events 
• Research that involves handling of Antarctic animals, particularly research on 
disease 
• Import of food, particularly poultry products 
• Waste disposal and sewage treatment 
• Use of equipment and clothing before departure to Antarctica 
• Serial visits to wildlife aggregations 
 
A workshop on disease of Antarctic wildlife held in 1998 identified the following as 
general approaches that could contribute to reducing the risk of disease introduction 
and spread by human activity, 
 
• Education and awareness 
• Initial response to unusual mortality events 
• Information exchange 
• Cleaning or sanitising of equipment 
• Source of food supplies 
• Waste management, sewage treatment and effluent disposal 
• Fundamental research on disease in Antarctic wildlife 
 
These approaches have been widely disseminated and discussed, and were in general 
endorsed in a joint SCAR and COMNAP working paper to CEP III (XII 
SATCM/WP20) (SCAR and COMNAP 2000). The approaches are used as the 
framework for developing practical measures to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife 
of disease introduction and spread from those human activities identified as priority 
risks. 
2 
EDUCATION AND AWARENESS 
2.1 
Background 
The success of all the other measures depends on their acceptance and adoption by 
people visiting Antarctica. Measures will not be effective unless the requirement for 
them is disseminated and they will be most effective if people understand the reasons 
for precautions. In addition, people that understand the reasons behind the concern 
about disease introduction will be better prepared to make appropriate decisions if 
presented with an unpredicted situation which has implications for disease 
introduction or spread. 
 
 
 
3
2.2 
Action required 
Encourage operators to include an explanation of the potential for disease introduction 
and translocation, and simple procedures that should be adopted to reduce the 
possibility in pre-departure or in-transit briefings.  
 
Collate a list of educational material on the topic of wildlife disease currently 
available from national Antarctic programs and tourist operators to determine what is 
available and where the gaps are. 
 
Prepare and make available to all national operators and Antarctic tourism operators 
standard educational material such as posters and video/CD-ROMS to convey the 
following information, 
 
1. Antarctic wildlife could be susceptible to wildlife diseases that occur in other 
regions, 
2. People could accidentally introduce infectious disease causing agents from 
other regions of the world to the Antarctic or could accidentally spread 
disease causing agents that occur naturally in the Antarctic between locations, 
3. Activities judged to bring some risk of disease introduction or spread include, 
a. Those that involve close contact with wildlife, such as disease 
research, 
b. The discovery or investigation of unusual mortality events, 
c. Importation of meat, especially poultry products, to the Antarctic, 
d. Feeding Antarctic wildlife, 
e. Disposal of kitchen waste, 
f. Moving between aggregations of wildlife with footwear or other 
clothing, equipment and vehicles that are contaminated with animal 
faeces. 
 
3 
INITIAL RESPONSE TO UNUSUAL MORTALITY EVENTS 
3.1 
Background 
Unusual mortality events among Antarctic wildlife have occurred in the past and are 
by their nature unpredictable. It is unlikely that a wildlife mortality event will be 
discovered by someone with previous experience of such occurrences and it would be 
unwise to leave decisions on how to react to those discovering a mortality event. Most 
people do not know normal mortality rates among Antarctic species and may not 
recognise unusual mortality, as a consequence, information to help recognise unusual 
mortality is required. 
 
A likely first reaction to discovery of an unusual mortality event would be to quickly 
check other localities to determine the spatial extent of the event. Under these 
circumstances, moving from location to location without some precautions could 
cause translocation of infection agents. 
 
Development of a complete response plan for unusual wildlife mortality events in 
Antarctica is the 3rd of the three terms of reference for this Intersessional Contact 
Group and is not considered further here. However, ensuring the correct initial 
response to the discovery of a mortality event that may be caused by disease is an 
 
 
 
4
important practical measure to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife of spread by 
human activity of disease causing agents. 
3.2 
Action required 
If disease is suspected the first response should be to stand back, view widely, 
photograph (preferably digitally), count dead and dying, and note any obvious 
abnormal characteristics that can be seen from a distance, such as inability to stand, 
swellings or skin lesions. As soon as possible this information should be sent to 
Antarctic wildlife experts with expertise sufficient to determine whether the number 
of dead and dying and the characteristics of affected animals are within normal limits. 
Access to the site should be restricted to reduce the risk of transfer to uninfected 
populations until advice is received on whether the mortality event is unusual or likely 
to be caused by disease. 
 
People discovering a suspected disease event should not visit other locations to 
determine the spatial extent of the disease without taking very careful precautions to 
ensure they do not transfer disease causing agents on footwear, clothing and 
equipment. Cleaning methods are discussed in Section 4.   
 
If it is determined that an unusual mortality event has been discovered the response 
plan (to be developed) for unusual wildlife mortality events in Antarctica should be 
implemented. 
 
4 
INFORMATION EXCHANGE 
4.1 
Background 
Exchange of information is an important aspect of most response plans for unusual 
wildlife mortality events developed for other regions and is a key component of the 
response plan developed in response to the 3rd of the terms of reference for this 
Intersessional Contact Group. The Antarctic Treaty System and associated 
organisations (such as SCAR and COMNAP) has established structures for 
information exchange and the use of these structures is preferred. To be effective in 
reducing the likelihood of human exacerbation of unusual mortality events reporting 
to alert others must occur quickly. It is therefore not appropriate to use established 
annual information exchange mechanisms for this purpose. Rather, reporting should 
use proven information networks such as the Antarctic Environmental Officers 
Network and IAATO to disseminate information.  
4.2 
Action required 
A standard procedure for information exchange after the discovery of an unusual 
mortality among Antarctic wildlife is to be included in the response plan (to be 
developed) for unusual wildlife mortality events. 
 
5 
CLEANING/SANITISING OF EQUIPMENT 
5.1 
Background 
Cleansing of clothing, equipment and vehicles is commonly used as a precaution 
against the transfer of disease causing agents in other parts of the world, particularly 
 
 
 
5
when moving from a location in which a disease is known to be present. Priorities for 
cleansing should be, 
 
1. clothing, equipment and vehicles that are to be brought into the Antarctic 
from a location that is experiencing an animal disease outbreak caused by an 
infectious disease causing agent, 
2. clothing, equipment and vehicles that are to be moved from locations within 
the Antarctic region in which unusual wildlife mortality events have occurred 
or are suspected, 
3. clothing, equipment and vehicles that have been in contact with Antarctic 
wildlife, particularly those used for activities such as disease research that 
involve close contact, and 
4. clothing (particularly footwear), equipment and vehicles, that are likely to 
carry animal faeces, before moving from one distinct location to another (the 
term distinct location to be defined). 
 
Simple cleaning of surfaces by steam cleaning or brushing with detergent solution is 
effective in removing viruses and is necessary for removing grease and organic dirt 
prior to any subsequent chemical decontamination, if this is required. Micro-
organisms vary in their susceptibility to disinfectants. The best disinfectant will 
depend on characteristics of the disease causing agent (Table 1). Lipid containing 
viruses and vegetative forms of most bacteria are relatively susceptible. Fungi, acid-
fast bacteria (Mycobacterium spp.) and non-lipid containing viruses are less 
susceptible, and bacterial spores are resistant to many disinfectants. Viruses cause 
most diseases of concern. The lipid content and size of viruses will determine whether 
they are susceptible to decontamination with detergents. Both Newcastle disease 
(paramyxoviridae) and avian influenza (orthomyxoviridae) can be inactivated 
effectively with detergents.   
 
Table 1. The best disinfectants for use against different virus families 
Category of virus 
Virus families 
Best disinfectants 
Category A - Lipid 
containing viruses; 
intermediate to large 
size 
Bunyaviridae, coronaviridae, flaviridae, 
herpesviridae, iridoviridae, orthomyxoviridae, 
paramyxoviridae, poxviridae, retroviridae, 
rhabdoviridae, togaviridae, 
Detergents, 
hypochlorites, alkalis, 
Virkon®, glutaraldehyde 
Category B - No lipid 
in virus; small size 
Caliciridae, picornaviridae, 
Hypochlorites, alkalis, 
Virkon®, glutaraldehyde 
Category C - No lipid 
in virus; intermediate 
size 
Birnaviridae, reoviridae, 
Hypochlorites, alkalis, 
Virkon®, glutaraldehyde 
 
Common bactericides like quaternary ammonium and phenolics are not effective 
against category B and C viruses. 
5.2 
Action required 
The requirement to avoid, to the maximum extent possible, the importation of non-
sterile soil to Antarctica should be re-enforced (Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty, Annex II, Appendix C). 
 
Shortly before departure to Antarctica, equipment and vehicles should be cleaned 
using steam or hot water if possible together with brushing to dislodge encrusted soil 
 
 
 
6
and organic matter. If only cold water is available then using cold water and brushing 
is better than not cleaning at all. Clothing supplied for use in Antarctica should be 
cleaned using normal laundry procedures prior to sending to Antarctica. Footwear 
should be cleaned with detergent and brushing on the ship during transit to Antarctica 
or just prior to boarding the aeroplane if flying. Stronger disinfectants should be used 
(Table 2) if there is reason to think that people, clothing, equipment or vehicles have 
been in contact with diseased animals, disease causing agents or have been in an area 
of known disease risk. 
 
Table 2. Recommended disinfectants and concentrations for inactivation of viruses 
and bacteria 
Disinfectant group 
Dilution/final 
strength/contact time 
Method of application 
and virus category 
Soaps and detergents 
As normal / as normal /10 
minutes 
Thorough cleaning is essential 
before other decontamination 
methods can be used 
effectively; effective for 
Category A viruses 
Oxidising agents 
 Sodium hypochlorite  
 
 
 Calcium hypochlorite 
 
 
 Virkon® 
 
1:5 / 2-3% available chlorine / 
10-30 min 
 
30g/litre / 2-3% available 
chlorine / 10-30 min 
 
20g/litre / 2% w/v / 10 min 
 
Categories A, B and C; not 
effective in presence of organic 
material; less stable in warm, 
sunny conditions (above 15oC) 
 
 
Active against all virus families 
Alkalis 
 Sodium hydroxide 
 
 
 
 Sodium carbonate 
  - anhydrous 
  - washing soda 
 
 
20g/litre / 2% w/v / 10 min 
 
 
 
40g/litre / 4% / 10 min 
100g/litre / 10% / 30 min 
 
Categories A, B and C; do not 
use in presence of aluminium 
and derived alloys (i.e. aircraft) 
 
Effective in presence of high 
concentrations of organic matter 
Acids 
Hydrochloric acid (10 molar) 
 
 
 
 Citric Acid 
 
1:50 / 2% v/v / 10 min 
 
 
 
2g/litre / 02% v/v / 30 min 
 
Use only when better 
disinfectants are not available; 
corrosive 
 
Safe for clothes and body; 
especially useful for foot and 
mouth disease virus 
Aldehydes 
 Glutaraldehyde 
 
 
 Formalin (40%) 
 
As appropriate / 2% w/v / 10-30 
min 
 
1:12 / 8% w/v / 10-30 min 
 
Categories A, B and C 
 
 
Releases irritating, toxic gas 
Phenols 
Polyphenolic complex 
Chlorinated phenols 
 
1:25 / 4% / ?? 
1:20 / 5% / ?? 
All are effective anti-bacterials; 
not efficient against Category B 
viruses 
 
Quaternary ammonium 
compounds 
Benzalkonium chloride 
Chlorohexidine 
Dioctyl dimethylammonium 
 
 
1:10 / 10% / ?? 
1:1,000 / 0.1% / ?? 
1:1,000 / 0.1% / ?? 
All are effective anti-bacterials; 
not efficient against Category B 
and C viruses 
 
 
 
7
chloride 
Iodines 
?? / 0.4% / ?? 
 
 
Organic matter reduces the 
activity; useful in areas used for 
food preparation 
 
In the Antarctic appropriate cleansing procedures will depend on circumstances. 
Under normal circumstances (when disease is not suspected) when moving from the 
vicinity of one ‘discrete population’ to another, footwear should be rinsed with water, 
using several changes of water to achieve the effect of serial dilution (sea-water or 
fresh-water may be used), and should be brushed. 
 
The definition of a discrete population will depend on the species and on the terrain. 
Cleansing with water and brushing should normally occur before moving between 
discrete ice-free areas or before moving between islands. Whether cleansing should be 
performed when moving within ice-free areas and islands will depend on their size 
and on the characteristics of wildlife populations supported. If the wildlife populations 
form discrete aggregations with limited opportunity for natural mixing then cleansing 
before moving between aggregations is recommended. If personnel are visiting 
Antarctica from a ship, boot washing, as described above, should be repeated after 
each landing. 
 
Cleansing procedures following activities that involve close contact with wildlife, 
such as research, should be more stringent and may require the use of stronger 
disinfectants. Environmental impact assessment of such activities should include 
assessment of the possibility of disease transfer and if a risk is identified appropriate 
procedures for cleansing equipment and clothing should be specified as a 
precautionary condition for approval.   
 
Disinfectants are by their nature biocides and their use can cause health or 
environmental problems (Table 3). Strong disinfectants should not be used in a 
manner or situation in which they could cause problems. Hydrochloric acid and the 
aldehydes should only be used when no alternatives exist and then only by 
experienced personnel with appropriate safety equipment. The environmental risks 
associated with the use of disinfectants in Antarctica should be considered as part of 
the environmental impact assessment for any activity for which strong disinfectants 
are deemed necessary. 
 
Table 3. Health and environment aspects of disinfectant use 
Disinfectant 
Health aspects 
Environmental problems 
Hypochlorites 
 
 
Virkon® 
 
Sodium 
hydroxide 
 
Sodium 
carbonate 
 
Hydrochloric 
acid 
 
Toxic for eyes and skin 
 
 
Reasonable care necessary 
 
Caustic for eyes and skin 
 
 
Mildly caustic for eyes and 
skin 
 
Toxic for eyes, skin and 
respiratory tract 
 
Strong bleach; inhibited by organic matter; 
corrosive for metals 
 
 
 
Avoid contact with strong acids; cannot be used 
with aluminium or alloys (aircraft) 
 
Avoid use with aluminium and alloys (aircraft) 
 
 
Corrosive; avoid contact with strong alkalis 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Glutaraldehyde 
 
 
Formalin 
solution 
Avoid contact with eyes and 
skin 
 
Releases toxic gas; irritating 
for mucous membranes 
Toxic to all living tissues 
 
 
Toxic to all living tissues 
 
6 
SOURCE OF FOOD SUPPLIES 
6.1 
Background 
The potential for introduction to Antarctica of disease causing agents with food 
products is recognised by the Antarctic Treaty System. In response, the Madrid 
Protocol includes the requirement to inspect dressed poultry for evidence of disease, 
such as Newcastle disease, tuberculosis and yeast infection, before it is packaged for 
shipment to the Antarctic Treaty area. The Protocol does not specify the type of 
inspection required. The Protocol also requires that non-sterile soil should not be 
imported to Antarctica to the maximum extent practicable. Vegetables sent to 
Antarctica often have non-sterile soil associated with them. 
 
It is not for this group to specify the details of meat industry inspection. Procedures 
are established and enforced by appropriate authorities in each country and the World 
Health Organisation, the World Trade Organisation and the Office International des 
Epizooties (OIE) advises on some international aspects of standards. However, it is 
important that meat that would not be accepted by other markets is not sent to 
Antarctica. Normal meat food industry inspection standards should be applied and 
may include, 
 
1. procedures to detect abnormal signs or death rates during animal production 
(the producer will have commercial reasons for establishing such 
procedures), 
2. procedures to notify unusual disease during production (some diseases must 
be reported, such as those on the OIE lists), 
3. antemortem inspection to ensure that each batch is in good health before 
slaughter, 
4. inspection of carcasses and meat products for signs of disease, 
5. inspection and registration of abattoirs, meat processing and packing 
establishments to ensure sanitary conditions, 
6. procedures for certification, documentation and labelling of meat and meat 
products.  
 
Meat and all other animal products intended for human consumption sent to 
Antarctica should pass inspection to the standard normally applied for domestic 
consumption within the country or to the highest export standard achievable within 
the country by the meat processing industry, whichever is the higher. Meat and animal 
products that are not acceptable, for sanitary reasons, for consumption within the 
country or for export should not be sent to Antarctica. 
 
Meat and animal products sent to Antarctica should be procured from industry 
certified suppliers with documented quality assurance procedures covering the entire 
supply chain from primary producers, through slaughter and meat processing to the 
wholesale and retail outlets. These quality assurance procedures should satisfy all the 
domestic sanitary regulations, established to reduce transfer of disease causing agents, 
 
 
 
9
of the country sending the products to Antarctica or the highest export standards 
achievable by the meat industry in the country, whichever is the higher. 
6.2 
Action required 
Managers of national Antarctic programs, members of the International Association of 
Antarctica Tourism Operators, other tourism operators arranging visits to the 
Antarctic Treaty area and all others organising visits to the Antarctic region should be 
asked to ensure that meat and other animal products intended for human consumption 
in Antarctica should, 
 
1. be procured from industry registered suppliers with documented quality 
assurance procedures that satisfy standards for domestic consumption, or the 
highest export standards achievable by the meat industry in the country, 
whichever is the higher, 
2. pass inspection to the standard normally applied for domestic consumption 
within the country or to the highest export standard achievable within the 
country by the meat processing industry, whichever is the higher. 
 
In addition, Antarctic operators, whether operators of national programs or tourist 
operators, should take steps to ensure that they are aware of animal disease outbreaks 
occurring within the area from which they procure meat and meat products. The 
Office International des Epizooties (OIE, the world organisation for animal health) 
web site (http://www.oie.int) is the definitive source for information on notifiable 
animal diseases. Operators should ensure that susceptible meat and meat products are 
not sourced from the area designated at risk for any notified disease outbreak. 
 
7 
WASTE MANAGEMENT, SEWAGE TREATMENT AND EFFLUENT 
DISPOSAL 
7.1 
Background 
The Antarctic Treaty System recognises the potential for transfer of pathogens to 
Antarctic wildlife from waste generated by Antarctic activities. The Madrid Protocol 
addresses the risk in Annex II, Conservation of Fauna and Flora, Annex III, Waste 
Disposal and Waste Management, and Annex IV, Prevention of Marine Pollution. 
 
Annex II, Conservation of Flora and Fauna, requires that domestic plants and 
laboratory animals, plants and micro-organisms brought to Antarctica under a permit, 
and any poultry or parts not consumed, should be disposed of by incineration or 
equally effective means that eliminates risk to native fauna and flora. 
 
Annex III, Waste Disposal and Waste Management, requires that residues of carcasses 
of imported animals, laboratory cultures of micro-organisms and plant pathogens, and 
introduced avian products should be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area by the 
generator of the wastes, unless incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise treated to be 
sterile. Sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be discharged directly into the sea 
untreated (if the summer station population averages less than 30) or after maceration. 
The by-product of sewage treatment by the rotary biological contacter process or 
similar may be disposed of into the sea. 
 
 
 
 
10
Annex IV Prevention of Marine Pollution, permits disposal of food wastes into the sea 
no less than 12 nautical miles from the nearest land or ice-shelf after the waste has 
been passed through a comminuter, provided the ground waste can pass through a 
screen with openings no greater than 25mm. 
 
Infectious Newcastle disease virus has been recovered from meat after 250 days at –
14oC to –20oC and from skin and bone marrow after 250 days at –4oC (Asplin 1949). 
Viable virus remains in the carcase until decomposition is well advanced. It is stable 
in non-putrefying tissue and organs or faeces if not exposed to high temperatures and 
has been isolated from bone marrow held for several days at 30oC (Omojola and 
Hanson 1986). Frozen meat products have been a significant means of spread of 
Newcastle disease virus when uncooked poultry scraps have been fed to poultry. 
Packaging and the drip that develops during storage can also be contaminated with 
virus from infected carcasses (Lancaster and Alexander 1975).  
 
Minimum core temperatures to kill avian influenza and Newcastle disease viruses in 
poultry are, 
 
• 70oC for a minimum of 30 minutes 
• 75oC for a minimum of 5 minutes 
• 80oC for a minimum of 1 minute 
 
Activities associated with a greater risk of exposing Antarctic wildlife to potential 
pathogens in waste food include, 
 
1. Feeding food scraps to Antarctic wildlife. 
2. Allowing scavengers, such as skuas, access to kitchen and field camp waste 
stored in garbage bags. 
3. Thawing frozen meat and meat products in kitchen sinks and disposing of the 
melt water on to land or to the sea via the sewage treatment system. 
7.2 
Action required 
Feeding of food scraps to Antarctic wildlife is the most direct means by which 
pathogens could be introduced by people and should be explicitly prohibited. 
 
Kitchen and field camp waste should be stored at all times in secure containers 
designed to prevent access by scavengers. As a precaution, uncooked waste meat and 
meat scraps should be boiled for 20 minutes before disposal if there is any chance that 
scavengers can feed on the scraps. 
 
Melt water produced from thawing meat and meat products should be boiled before 
disposal to domestic sewage systems that discharge effluent to the Antarctic 
environment.   
 
8 
RESEARCH PRIORITIES 
8.1 
Background 
Relatively little is known about disease and disease processes in Antarctic wildlife. 
Available information indicates that Antarctic wildlife species carry a diversity of 
 
 
 
11
potential pathogens and display immune reactions to many other disease causing 
agents that have not yet been isolated. Beyond the intrinsic scientific value of 
providing greater understanding of an aspect of Antarctic ecology, the practical 
benefits of research are that it may provide information to reduce the likelihood of 
human introduction or spread of disease causing agents, and that it may provide 
information to help explain the cause of disease events. 
 
The results of research to reduce the likelihood of a human mediated disease event 
will be used to improve practical measures to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife. 
For example, if it can be shown that a cleaning technique is not effective at reducing 
the viability of specific pathogens then the technique could be abandoned. Results of 
research to help explain the cause of a disease event may be used to reduce the risk to 
Antarctic operators of adverse public reaction if an unusual mortality occurs. For 
example, if it can be shown that pathogens associated with an unusual mortality event 
were common among Antarctic wildlife in locations remote from human activity prior 
to the event then it may be inferred that people did not recently introduce the 
pathogen. The growing body of information on immune reactions in Antarctic wildlife 
is already a valuable resource in this respect. 
 
Questions raised during the process of developing practical measures to diminish risk 
to Antarctic wildlife that may warrant research include, 
 
1. How well do potential pathogens survive as viable infectious agents in the 
Antarctic environment? 
2. How effective for eliminating potential pathogens are the methods currently 
used or proposed for cleaning footwear, equipment and vehicles in Antarctic 
operations? 
3. Do current methods of sewage treatment and effluent disposal reduce the risk 
of disease introduction sufficiently? 
 
Research and other activities that may provide information to help explain disease 
events includes, 
 
1. Investigation of the spatial and temporal patterns of disease causing agents 
(including serological evidence) within Antarctic species, 
2. Comparison of the type and diversity of disease causing agents among 
animals that spend their entire life within the Antarctic region and those that 
migrate to other continents, 
3. Development of a tissue bank that in the event of a disease incident could be 
used to do retrospective analyses for evidence of historic occurrences of 
disease causing agents. 
 
Most of the research activities identified could be addressed by individual researchers 
working with the support of national programs without the need for establishing a 
formal structure within the Antarctic Treaty System or SCAR. The establishment of a 
tissue bank would benefit from international coordination however it does not follow 
that the most efficient mechanism would be to establish a single international facility 
to archive Antarctic material. Most countries involved in Antarctic activities already 
have properly curated facilities for archiving non-Antarctic animal tissue. At this 
stage the most efficient mechanism to establish a tissue bank for Antarctic animal 
 
 
 
12
tissue would be to develop cooperative arrangements with established archival 
facilities. Information on Antarctic material held by archival facilities could be made 
available using established Antarctic Treaty System processes for scientific data 
management and data exchange. 
8.2 
Action required 
Request SCAR to endorse the research priorities and other activities identified above 
and to disseminate these to SCAR representatives and to appropriate SCAR Working 
Groups. 
 
Request the Joint Committee for Antarctic Data Management to advise on the 
development of procedures for sharing access to information on tissues stored in 
archival facilities located in different countries.  
 
9 
REFERENCES 
Asplin, F.D. (1949). Observations on the viability of Newcastle disease. Veterinary 
Record, 61(13): 159-160. 
 
Lancaster J. E. and Alexander, D.J. (1975). Newcastle disease virus and spread; a 
review of some of the literature. Canada Department of Agriculture Monograph No. 
11. 
 
Omojola and Hanson (1986). Collection of diagnostic specimens from animals in 
remote areas. World Animal Review, 60: 38-40. 
 
SCAR and COMNAP (2000). Wildlife diseases. XII SATCM/WP 20 
 
 
