XXIV ATCM
Working Paper WP-19
Agenda Item 4g
United States
Original: English

Antarctic Protected Area System: Revised Management Plans for:

Specially Protected Area No. 7 - Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 1 - Cape Royds, Ross Island
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 3 - Barwick and Balham Valleys, South Victoria 
Land
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 4 - Cape Crozier, Ross Island
Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 18 - Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound

Working Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by the
United States of America
Antarctic Protected Areas System

Revised Management Plans for SPA No. 7, SSSI No. 1, SSSI No. 3, SSSI No. 4, and SSSI No. 18

Working Paper Submitted to the Committee for Environmental Protection by the
United States of America

Introduction

Under Resolution 1 (1998), the United States of America (USA) was recognized to have
responsibility for revising the Management Plans for a number of Specially Protected Areas
and Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

Revised draft Management Plans for five of these sites have now been completed and are
attached to this Working Paper for consideration by the Committee for Environmental
Protection (CEP). These are:

- Specially Protected Area No. 7 - Cape Hallett, Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
- Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 1 - Cape Royds, Ross Island
- Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 3 - Barwick and Balham Valleys, South Victoria
Land
- Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 4 - Cape Crozier, Ross Island
- Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 18 - Northwest White Island, McMurdo
Sound

The draft management plans attached to this Working Paper have been prepared in
accordance with the provisions of Annex V to the Environmental Protocol. In preparing
the draft plans a detailed assessment of the values of the sites, and of the measures
necessary to protect the sites was undertaken. Field visits were made to each of these
sites to verify information and to ensure that the information in the draft plans is accurate
and up-to-date.

Draft maps for the management plans are also attached to this Working Paper. Once
boundaries have been agreed to, minor revisions will be made to the maps.
Management Plan for
Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 7

CAPE HALLETT, NORTHERN VICTORIA LAND, ROSS SEA
(Lat. 72°19'S, Long. 170°16'E)

1 Description of values to be protected

An area of approximately 12 ha at Cape Hallett was originally designated in
Recommendation IV-7 (1966, Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 7) after a proposal by
the United States of America on the grounds that the Area provided an outstanding
example of biological diversity, containing, "a small patch of particularly rich and
diverse vegetation which supports a variety of terrestrial fauna". The boundaries of the
Area were enlarged in Recommendation XIII-13 (1985) to include extensive stands of
vegetation to the south and north of the Area, increasing the Area to approximately 32 ha.
The boundaries have been further extended in this plan to include Seabee Hook, the
breeding area of a substantial colony of Adelie penguins, increasing the size of the Area
to 74 ha.

Vegetation surveys in 1957/58 recorded four species of moss, dominated by Bryum
argenteum, and 30 species of lichen. Studies in 1961/62 identified an algal component
composed mainly of Prasiola crispa with associated filamentous and microscopic blue-
green forms. Although few algal species have been identified numerous species are
expected to be present. Further surveys are required to determine the species of moss,
algae and lichen present, their distributions and abundance. In addition, four species of
mites and three of springtails have been identified within the Area. These early
assessments indicate the richness of the site, but it is likely that substantial revisions to
taxonomic descriptions would be necessary should more up-to-date surveys be
undertaken.

Observations in other parts of the Ross Sea undertaken since the original descriptions at
Cape Hallett suggest that the plant communities thus far described may not be as rich and
diverse as at some other sites further south (e.g. in the Terra Nova Bay region), and the
"small patch" originally referred to may more accurately be considered to refer to the
original Area as a whole. Nevertheless, the Area contains a variety of habitats with plant
communities that are considered important as the most extensive, representative,
examples known at the northern end of the latitudinal gradient of Victoria Land and the
Ross Sea. For these reasons, the need for special protection at Cape Hallett is still valid.

South Polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest within the Area and on ice-free
ground. The population declined from 181 breeding pairs in 1960/61 to 98 breeding birds
recorded in both 1968/69 and 1971/72. In January 1983 there was a population of 247
birds (84 breeding pairs and 79 non-breeding birds).

A large Adelie penguin colony inhabits Seabee Hook, on the west side of the Cape
Hallett peninsula between Edisto Inlet and Moubray Bay. Seabee Hook is also the site of
the former Hallett Station, a joint United States and New Zealand station that was open 
from 1956-73. During operation the station and associated infrastructure occupied an 
area of 4.6 ha on land that had formerly been occupied by breeding Adelie penguins. The 
colony is significant in that it was subjected to substantial impacts from the establishment 
and operation of Hallett Station, with the population declining from 62,900 pairs in 1959 
to a low of 37,000 pairs in 1968, although increasing again to 50,156 in 1972. 

Fluctuations in populations may have been exacerbated by changes in sea ice cover 
documented for the entire region. By 1987, the colony had returned to approximately its 
1959 level; however, few areas modified by humans had by that time been fully 
recolonized. The history of human impact on the colony and the subsequent closure of 
the station, together with the availability of reliable and repetitive historical data on 
Adelie population changes, make this site unique and ideal for scientific study of impacts 
on, and recovery of, the colony following substantial ecosystem disturbance. As such, the 
site has high scientific value, and in order to maintain this value it is desirable that any 
further human presence be carefully controlled and monitored: the most effective way in 
which this can be achieved is through the guidance and conditions provided in this 
management plan.

In addition to the ecological and scientific values described, the Area possesses 
outstanding aesthetic values, with its combination of prolific biological resources and the 
impressive surrounding scenery of Edisto Inlet and Mt. Herschel (3,335 m). The Area is 
one of only a few such sites that are relatively accessible in the northern Ross Sea. The 
site of the former station and history of human activity at the site are also of interest to 
visitors. As such, the Area is of high aesthetic, wildlife, and historical value to tourist and 
non-governmental expeditions. To accommodate these interests and allow access under 
controlled conditions, a Managed Zone has been designated within the Area where visits 
for reasons other than science or management are allowed by permit.

2  Aims and objectives

Management at Cape Hallett aims to:

•  avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing 
unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;

•  permit scientific research, in particular on the plant and bird communities, while 
ensuring these are protected from over-sampling;

•  allow environmental clean-up and remediation activities associated with the 
decommissioning and removal of the former Hallett Station as required and 
appropriate, provided the impacts of these activities are not greater than those arising 
from leaving material in situ;

•  minimize the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes into 
the Area;
- allow visits to the Managed Zone for historical, educational, wildlife and scenic viewing purposes under control by permit;

- allow visits for management purposes in support of the protection of the values and features of the Area.

3    Management activities

- Signs showing the location, boundaries and clearly stating entry restrictions shall be placed at appropriate locations at the boundaries of the Area to help avoid inadvertent entry.

- Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition, and removed when no longer necessary.

- Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure that management and maintenance measures are adequate.

- National Antarctic programs operating in the region shall consult together for the purpose of ensuring that the above provisions are implemented.

4    Period of designation

Designated for an indefinite period.

5    Maps

Map A: Cape Hallett Specially Protected Area No. 7 topographic map.

Map specifications:
      Projection: Lambert Conformal conic
      Standard parallels: 1st 74° 20' 00" S; 2nd 71° 40' 00"S
      Central Meridian: 170° 10' 00" E
      Latitude of Origin: 73° 00' 49.201" S
      Spheroid: WGS84
      Datum: USGS Fisher geodetic station 1989-90. ITRF93 Coordinates
        170°12'39.916" E, 72°19' 06.7521" S
      Contour interval 5 m: contours are derived from a digital elevation model used 
      to generate an orthophotograph. The original orthophotograph was 
      prepared at 1:2500 with a positional accuracy of ±5 m (horizontal) and 
      ±2.5 m (vertical) with an on-ground pixel resolution of 0.4 m. [note: 
      provision of elevation data subject to approval].
      Inset: The Moubray Bay region of Northern Victoria Land, Ross Sea
6       Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Cape Hallett is located at the southern end of Moubray Bay, Northern Victoria Land, in 
the western Ross Sea. The protected area occupies ice-free ground of a cuspate spit of 
low elevation known as Seabee Hook and includes the adjacent western slopes of the 
north end of the Cape Hallett Peninsula.

The Area includes Seabee Hook and the adjacent western slopes up to the crest of the 
ridge of the north end of the Cape Hallett Peninsula, east of Willett Cove to the margin of 
the permanent ice sheet (Map A). The sea-level boundary is predominantly defined by 
the coastline of Seabee Hook, and extends south along the east shore of Willett Cove to 
the southernmost boundary at 72°19'30"S (approximately 800 m south of the Moubray 
Bay coast). The east boundary of the Area follows the edge of the permanent ice sheet 
near the ridge of Cape Hallett Peninsula.

The topography of the Area comprises the large flat area of the spit and adjoining steep 
scree slopes that form part of the western side of the Cape Hallett Peninsula. Seabee 
Hook is composed of coarse volcanic material deposited in a series of beach ridges, with 
gently undulating terrain of hummocks and depressions and a number of level areas. 
Many of the depressions contain melt water in the summer season, and are colonized by 
dense mats of algae. In the northeast part of the Area a small meltwater stream flows 
from the western slopes of the Cape Hallett Peninsula down to Willett Cove.

Current information on floral and faunal assemblages in the Area is not available. 
Vegetation assemblages were described in 1963 and 1966, while entomological 
assemblages were most recently described in 1972: the species assemblages described 
below are from these early reports. A number of more recent studies have been 
conducted on the resident Adelie penguin colony.

The vegetation within the Area, with the exception of algae such as Prasiola, is largely 
confined to the ice-free ground not occupied by breeding Adelie penguins, which is to the 
east of Willett Cove and south of 72°19'10"S. This area includes a 100–200 m strip of 
relatively level ground adjacent to Willett Cove and steeper slopes up to the crest of the 
Cape Hallett Peninsula ridge. The strip of flat ground comprises a number of dry, gravel 
hummocks up to 1.5 m high, many of which are occupied by nesting skuas, and in the 
northern part old guano deposits indicate former occupation by Adelie penguins. Small 
patches of moss and algae may be found at the base of these hummocks but the upper 
parts are devoid of vegetation. Substantial beds of moss colonize stable gravel flats in the 
north part of the flat ground where there is a high water table, while scattered patches of 
moss, algae and lichen occur on coarser, more angular, loose rocks in the south. The 
moss becomes more sparse as the ground slopes upwards, with the notable exception of a 
particularly dense and extensive patch covering approximately 3,900 m^(2) with almost 
complete coverage of the substratum occupying a shallow valley on a scree slope in the 
south of the Area. While the perimeter of this and one other of the densest moss beds 
(1,350 m^(2)) were mapped in 1996, a comprehensive program of vegetation mapping has
not yet been undertaken. Bryum argenteum is the dominant moss thus far reported within 
the Area.

The algal component in the Area is comprised mainly of the sheet-like green alga 
Prasiola crispa with associated filamentous algae and cyanobacteria. It is expected that a 
number of other algal species may be present, but information on the algal communities 
in the Area is exceptionally sparse.

The steep scree slope adjoining the largely flat area is dissected by shallow gullies and 
small ridges, with a number of prominent rock outcrops. These rock outcrops, 
particularly in the north of the Area, support large stands of lichens and scattered moss, 
with cover of 70 - 100% in many places. Lichens described within the Area include the 
crustose and foliose rock lichens originally identified as Xanthoria mawsoni, Parmelia 
coreyi (= Physcia caesia), Caloplaca antarctica and Buellia frigida.

Four species of mites, Eupodes wisei, Stereotydeus belli, Protereunetes sp. and 
Coccorhagidia gressittii, and three of springtails, Friesea grisea, Cryptopygus 
cisantarcticus and Isotoma klovstadi, have been recorded from Cape Hallett. F. grisea 
occurs mainly on the scree slopes and adjacent level areas, C. cisantarcticus was reported 
to be associated with moss, occurring plentifully on level ground, while I. klovstadi was 
abundant under stones on the slopes.

Seabee Hook is the site of one of the largest Adelie penguin colonies in the Ross Sea 
region, numbering approximately 66,000 breeding pairs in 1987. Establishment of Hallett 
Station in 1956 required eviction of 7,580 penguins, including 3,318 chicks, in order to 
clear the 0.83 ha required for bulldozing and erection of buildings. Data on the total 
population prior to construction do not appear to be available, with the first accurate 
census of 62,900 pairs made in 1959. Censuses were made regularly over the next decade 
and revealed a pattern of steady decline to 37,000 pairs in 1968, but with a subsequent 
increase to 50,156 pairs in 1972. Since the closure of the station in 1973, the colony has 
increased to near its 1959 population.

South Polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest within the Area and on nearby ice-free 
ground; in January 1983 there was a population of 247 birds (84 breeding pairs and 79 
non-breeding birds).

Emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) have been recorded in the vicinity of the area in 
late December, and solitary chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) have been 
recorded in late January and February. Snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) nest in the cliffs 
at Cape Hallett, and Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and southern giant 
petrels (Macronectes giganteus) have also been sighted frequently in the vicinity of the 
Area. Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) are commonly seen and probably breed 
under the sea ice in Edisto Inlet, and have been recorded ashore on Seabee Hook.

6(ii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area
A managed zone is designated on Seabee Hook to allow access by tourist expeditions to 
the Area subject to permit and the provisions of this management plan. The managed 
zone encompasses the site of the former station, and extends from the northeast corner 
(170° 13'00"E, 72° 40' 00"S) at a rocky part of the north shoreline on Seabee Hook, due 
south for 118 m to a series of mounds used by breeding penguins. The boundary extends 
205 m west following the north side of these mounds, south of a region which was 
leveled for construction of Hallett Station, to the USGS geodetic station 'Fisher' 
(170°12'40"E, 72°19'07"S) which is set in a prominent concrete block structure (2x1x1 
m). The boundary extends from 'Fisher' 150 m due west to a point 25 m inland from the 
coastline. The boundary of the managed zone then extends south as a 25 m wide coastal 
'corridor' around the shores of Seabee Hook to an eastern-most point at the northwest 
corner of Willett Cove (170° 13' 18"E, 72° 19' 08"S).

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area

Cape Hallett Station was established on Seabee Hook in December 1956 and closed in 
February 1973. By 1960 the buildings of Hallett Station occupied 1.8 ha and the 
associated roads, refuse dumps, fuel caches and radio aerials a further 2.8 ha. The station 
was occupied year-round until 1964, from when summer-only operation continued until 
closure. The station was progressively dismantled after 1984 and in 1996 six structures 
remained at the site: four small sheds in various states of repair; a large fuel tank; and a 
small fiberglass dome from the original weather observation building (upgraded and 
moved to its 1996 position in 1984/85). In the summer of 1995 liquid fuel remaining in 
the large metal tank was pumped into barrels, which were stored on site until removed in 
February 1996.

The USGS geodetic station 'Fisher' (170°12'39.916"E, 72°19' 06.7521" S) is situated 70 
m SE of the center of the SE side of the dome building (1996 position) and 24 m south of 
the SE corner of the southernmost hut. The station consists of a standard USGS Antarctic 
brass tablet stamped with "FISHER 1989-90" and is set flush on the top of a large 
concrete block (2x1x1 m) at an elevation of 2.15 m.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area

The nearest protected areas to Cape Hallett are Mt. Melbourne (SSSI-24) and Cryptogam 
Ridge (SPA-22) (also on Mt. Melbourne), Victoria Land, near Wood Bay, 240 km to the 
south.

7. Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit. Conditions for 
issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:

- outside of the managed zone a permit should be issued only for scientific study of the 
ecosystem or for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such 
as assessment or remediation of impacts, inspection or review;
• the actions permitted will not jeopardize the ecological, scientific or aesthetic and wilderness values of the Area;

• access to the managed zone may be permitted for scientific, management, historical, educational or recreational purposes providing they do not conflict with the objectives of this plan;

• the permit, or a copy, shall be carried within the Area;

• a report or reports shall be supplied to the authority or authorities named in the permit;

• permits should be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Access into the Area shall be by small boat, foot or by helicopter. Helicopters should preferably land on adjacent sea ice more than 150 m outside of the Area and land on sea ice near the center of Willett Cove when accessing the campsite. When sea ice conditions and access for permitted activities necessitate a landing within the Area, helicopters should land at the designated site on the east shore and 100 m south of the head of Willett Cove (170°13'34"E, 72°19'13"S) (see Map A). Helicopter approach and departure should follow a route southwest of the landing site along Willett Cove (see Map A for the recommended flying routes). Overflight of the Area is prohibited by single-engine helicopters at altitudes lower than 750 m (~2,500 ft) and by dual-engine helicopters lower than 1,000 m (~3,300 ft), except when required for essential scientific or management purposes specifically authorized by permit. Use of helicopter smoke grenades is prohibited unless absolutely necessary for safety, and all grenades should be retrieved.

There are no special restrictions on where access can be gained to the Area by small boat.

Land vehicles are to be used within the Area only for the purpose of gaining access to the campsite from sea ice in the vicinity of Willett Cove, and use shall be restricted to the site of the former station 'road' on the east shore of Willett Cove. Exceptions to this provision may be granted for the purpose of removing materials associated with the former station. In all cases vehicle movements shall be kept to the minimum necessary for permitted activities and avoid sites of plants or nesting birds.

Access to the managed zone for reasons other than science or management is allowed by permit subject to the conditions of this management plan. Access to the managed zone shall be on foot or by small boat from the coast of Seabee Hook (Map A). Unless specifically authorized by permit, visitors are prohibited from moving into the Area beyond the boundary of the managed zone. When transporting permitted visitors to the managed zone, pilots, air or boat crew, or other people on such aircraft or boats, are permitted to move on foot within the managed zone under the authorization of the permit(s) for those visitors they are transporting, provided they comply with the provisions of this management plan.
All pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the 
objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to 
minimize effects. Visitors should avoid walking on visible vegetation. Care should be 
exercised walking in areas of moist ground, where foot traffic can easily damage 
sensitive soils and plant communities.

7(ii) Activities that may be conducted in the Area

•  scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area;
•  essential management activities, including assessment or remediation of impacts, and 
   monitoring;
•  visits to the managed zone for historical, educational or recreational purposes, subject 
   to the conditions described in this plan;

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a permit. All 
scientific equipment installed in the Area must be authorized by permit and clearly 
identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such 
items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. 
Removal of specific equipment for which the permit has expired shall be a condition of 
the permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Permanent field camps are prohibited within the Area. Temporary camping is permitted 
within the Area at the site designated on the east shore and 100 m south of the head of 
Willett Cove (72°19'13"S, 170°13'34"E). This site comprises unconsolidated beach 
gravels, uncolonized by birds or significant plant communities and lies on the site of a 
former station road (see Map A).

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area
No living animals, plant material, microorganisms or soils shall be deliberately 
introduced into the Area, and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. 
No live poultry shall be brought into the Area. Dressed poultry should be free of disease 
or infection before shipment to the Antarctic and, if introduced into the Protected Area 
for food, all parts and waste of poultry shall be completely removed from the Protected 
Area and incinerated or boiled long enough to kill any potentially infective bacteria or 
viruses. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, 
including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or 
management purposes specified in the permit, shall be removed from the Area at or 
before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted.

Fuel, food, and other materials are not to be deposited in the Area, unless required for 
essential purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. All
materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimized.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference of native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a separate permit issued under Article 3 of Annex II by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not introduced by a visitor.
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by a permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed from any part of the Area unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ. If this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the plan continue to be met

•	Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis.

•	Any specific sites of long-term monitoring should be appropriately marked.

•	To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the isolation and relatively low level of human impact at the Area visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial are vegetation introductions sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. To minimize the risk of introductions, visitors shall thoroughly clean footwear and any equipment to be used in the area - particularly sampling equipment and markers - before entering the Area.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a 
record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organizing 
the scientific use of the Area.

                                   Map A - Cape Hallett, Specially Protected Area No.7: topographic map                                                  

                                                            



    ---   Estimated coastline
    ——    Protected area boundary        Helicopter landing area        Designated camp site        Projection: Lambert conformal conic
    [?]   Managed zone                    Survey mark                  Buildings (1996)            Spheroid: 1963 B4
                                                                                                  Source: Cape Hallett management plan
    [?]   Extensive moss vegetation
Management Plan for
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 1

CAPE ROYDS, ROSS ISLAND

1     Description of values to be protected

An area of about 300 m2 at Cape Royds was originally designated in Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, SSSI No. 1) after a proposal by the United States of America on the grounds that it supports the most southerly established Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colony known. The Adelie penguin population at Cape Royds had declined from 1956 as a consequence of human interference during a period when heavy sea ice cover made the colony particularly susceptible to reduced recruitment. In 1963 United States and New Zealand authorities agreed to restrict activities and develop a management plan for the area. The site was specially protected to allow the population to recover and protect on-going science programs. The population has recovered and now exceeds pre-1956 levels; since 1990 numbers have fluctuated between 2,500 and 4,000 pairs, primarily due to natural variation in local sea ice extent. The colony remains of high scientific and ecological value and as such merits continued long-term special protection, especially in view of ongoing visits to Cape Royds from nearby stations and tourist groups.

The original Area was enlarged in 1985 as a result of a proposal by New Zealand (Recommendation XIII-9) to include a 500 m-wide coastal strip to protect the seaward access and nearshore feeding ground of the Adelie penguins, as well as projected research on the Cape Royds inshore marine ecosystem. This coastal area of Cape Royds is a site of continuing studies on Nototheniid fish population structure and dynamics.

Shackleton’s Hut, Historic Monument No. 15 and SPA No. 27, is located 170 meters to the northeast of the colony and together with the colony itself are attractions to these visitors. Regular and frequent visits to Cape Royds means that the Area could easily be damaged by human impact if not provided with adequate protection. The scientific and ecological values of the Area require long-term protection from possible adverse impacts associated with these activities.

The boundaries have been further extended in this plan to encompass the entire Adelie penguin colony. The new boundary extends farther north to include all of Pony Lake, and farther east to include the penguin nesting areas.

2     Aims and objectives

Management at Cape Royds aims to:

•     avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;
- allow scientific research on the ecosystem, and in particular on the avifauna in the Area, while ensuring protection from over-sampling;

- minimize the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes into the Area;

- allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management plan.

3       Management activities

- Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the helicopter landing sites whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings at the pads in a given season. These should be replaced as needed and removed when no longer required.

- Brightly colored markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no significant threat to the environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing pads.

- Signs illustrating the location and boundaries with clear statements of entry restrictions shall be placed at appropriate locations at the boundaries of the Area to help avoid inadvertent entry. In addition, flags should be placed on the sea-ice in Backdoor Bay along the southeast boundary of the marine area (offshore from Derrick Point) on the first visit over sea-ice each season to indicate the restricted area so those traveling to Cape Royds over sea ice are aware of the marine boundary of the Area. Flags placed shall be removed immediately prior to closure of sea-ice travel each season.

- Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) shall be displayed prominently, and a copy of this management plan shall be kept available, in all research hut facilities located at Cape Royds.

- Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition, and removed when no longer necessary.

- Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.

- National Antarctic Programs operating in the region shall consult together with a view to ensuring these steps are carried out.
4       Period of designation

Designated for an indefinite period.

5       Maps and photographs

Map A: Cape Royds regional topographic map.

The map is derived from digitized contours from NZ Lands and Survey Plan 37/108 
(1982) combined with an orthophotograph using the following specifications:

Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Standard parallels: 1st 76° 40' 00" S; 2nd 79° 20' 00"S
Central Meridian: 166° 10' 00" E
Latitude of Origin: 78° 01' 16.211" S
Spheroid: WGS84. Positional accuracy of original orthophotograph at 1:10,000 
is ±5.0 m (horizontal) and ±5.0 m (vertical) with an on-ground pixel 
resolution: 2-m. Photography: USGS/DoSLI (SN7847) 16 November 
1993.

Inset: Ross Island, showing the location of McMurdo Station (US) and Scott 
Base (NZ), and the location of other nearby protected areas on Ross Island 
(Arrival Heights SSSI-2, Cape Crozier SSSI-4, Tramway Ridge SSSI-11, 
and Coughley Beach SSSI-10 and New College Valley SPA-20 at Cape 
Bird)

Map B: Cape Royds terrestrial area topographic map. Specifications are the same as 
those described in Map A. Contours are derived from the digital elevation model 
used to generate the orthophotograph.

6       Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Cape Royds (166°09'56" E, 77°33'20"S) is situated on the west side of Ross Island, 
McMurdo Sound, at the western extremity of a coastal strip of ice-free land 
approximately 8 km wide, on the west slope of Mount Erebus. The Area comprises both 
a terrestrial and marine component.

The marine component of the Area extends for approximately 5 km from Derrick Point 
in the south to Rocky Point in the north, including Horseshoe Bay. The marine boundary 
is defined from the most easterly corner of the terrestrial boundary at Arrival Bay 
(166°10'06" E, 77°33'15.9"S) as extending NE along the Arrival Bay coastline to Derrick 
Point (166°10'22" E, 77°33'14.1"S). From Derrick Point the marine boundary extends 
offshore 500 m in a SE direction and thence extends parallel along the coast 500 m 
offshore from the mean high water mark, around Cape Royds and north for 5.3 km to 
Rocky Point. At Rocky Point the east boundary extends from the most northerly part of 
the point 500 m due north.
The terrestrial component of the Area consists of ice-free land within approximately 350 
m of Cape Royds itself (166°09'56" E, 77°33'20"S). Much of this land is seasonally 
occupied by a breeding Adelie penguin colony of about 3,500 pairs. The boundary of this 
part of the Area has been revised from the original description so as to include all of the 
area occupied by breeding penguins in 1995/96 and the main southern access route of the 
penguins to the sea. The north boundary of the terrestrial component of the Area extends 
45 m from a small embayment, on the west side and 350 m north of Cape Royds, in a 
straight line NE to a survey mark identified on earlier New Zealand maps as IT2 
(166°09'33.3" E, 77°33'11.1"S), which is an iron tube embedded in the ground. This line 
extends 10 m east from IT2 to a signpost (166°09'34.8" E, 77°33'11.1"S), then a further 
80 m east to a signpost (166°09'46.8" E, 77°33'11.1"S) at the south end of a small pond 
at the north end of Pony Lake. From this signpost the boundary extends in a SE direction 
for 114 m just north of the lake to the eastern edge of the lake (166°10'01.3" E, 
77°33'12.6"S). The east boundary then extends 86 m in a SSE direction to a third 
signpost (166°10'05" E, 77°33'15.2"S), thence to the coast on the east side of Arrival Bay 
(166°10'06.0" E, 77°33'15.9"S). All of the ice-free ground, snow-patches and freshwater 
bodies contained west and south of the line defined above to the coast extending around 
Cape Royds is included within the Area. The terrestrial component of the Area comprises 
terrain of irregular lava flows, volcanic gravels and dark reddish scoria, with a low 3-m 
cliff face on the seaward side. Much of the Area is covered with thick deposits of guano 
and bird remains.

The Area contains the world's most southerly established Adelie penguin colony, with 
annual population numbers currently fluctuating around 4,000 breeding pairs during the 
approximate mid-October to mid-February occupation. The population size in 1959 was 
deemed to be equivalent to that in 1910 but then dropped somewhat, to fewer than 1,000 
breeding pairs in 1963, as a result of severe ice conditions which made the colony more 
susceptible to disturbance by visitation and helicopter movements. Following visitor 
restrictions and relocation of the helicopter pad away from the colony, as well as a shift 
in climate beginning in the late 1970s, numbers have gradually recovered, with the 
population in 1998 standing at 4,000 pairs. The Area has been monitored regularly since 
1965 and has been photographed from the air during the incubation phase of breeding 
annually since 1981.

The marine component of the Area has neither been intensively studied nor fully 
described. To 500 m west of the shore the sea floor generally drops off steeply down to 
several hundred meters. The bottom has not been surveyed fully, but samples show that it 
consists of coarse volcanic gravels and small to large boulders, with some submarine 
cliffs, in the area approximately 100 m offshore from Coast Lake. Research on the 
Nototheniid fish population and structure in this region suggests it is very abundant for 
fish, which have not been subjected to a level of sampling that has occurred close to Hut 
Point further to the south on Ross Island. A series of surveys between 1978–81 suggested 
that Trematomus bernacchii was the most common fish. The survey also recorded the 
presence of Trematomus hansoni, T. centronotus, T. nicolai and Gymnodraco acuticeps. 
The surveys also identified the presence of invertebrates such as echinoids, asteroids (e.g. 
Odontaster validus), ophiuroids, pycnogonids (e.g. Pentanymphon antarcticum,
Colossendeis robusta), pteropods, copepods, amphipods, isopods, hirudinea, bryozoa,
polycheates, ctenophores, mollusca, and medusae.

The coastal region between Arrival Bay and Green Lake is the main access route for 
birds traveling to and from the nesting site, often over the sea ice that can extend up to 40 
km from the colony during the breeding season. When ice-free, the near-shore marine 
area is likely to be an important feeding ground for the birds, and as such may be 
considered an integral part of the Cape Royds ecosystem.

6(ii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area
None.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
Shackleton’s Hut (Historic Monument No. 15 and SPA No. 27) (166°10'06.4" E, 
77°33'10.7"S) is situated approximately 70 m from the NE boundary sign of the 
terrestrial component of the Area, 100 m northeast of which is a small research shelter 
(New Zealand) (166°10'10.6" E, 77°33'07.5"S). Two survey markers are present within 
the Area — marker IT2 is on the north boundary of the terrestrial part of the Area and is 
described above, while marker IT3 (166°09'52.7" E, 77°33'19.7"S) (also an iron tube 
embedded in the ground) is 64 m SW of Flagstaff Hill. Relics at the site of a small depot 
from the time of Shackleton’s voyages are present in a small embayment on the west side 
of the penguin nesting area (166°09'35" E, 77°33'14.3"S: Map B). The depot should 
not be disturbed except by permit for conservation or management purposes.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
The nearest protected areas to Cape Royds are Cape Royds (SPA 27) adjacent to the 
Area, Cape Evans (SPA-25) 10 km to the south, Tramway Ridge (SSSI-11) close to the 
summit of Mt. Erebus situated 20 km east, Caughley Beach (SSSI-10) and New College 
Valley (SPA-20) 35 km to the north at Cape Bird, and Arrival Heights (SSSI-2) which is 
adjacent McMurdo Station 35 km to the south. Cape Crozier (SSI-4) is 75 km to the 
east on Ross Island.

7    Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an 
appropriate national authority. Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the area are that:

•   it is issued for scientific reasons or for essential management purposes consistent 
with plan objectives such as inspection or review;

•   the actions permitted will not jeopardize the ecological or scientific values of the 
Area and support of the objectives of the management plan;

•   the permit, or an copy, shall be carried within the Area;
- a report or reports shall be supplied to the authority or authorities named in the 
permit;

- permits should be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Within the terrestrial part of the Area access shall be on foot and vehicles are prohibited. 
Access into the Area should be from the direction of the helicopter pads, and if arriving 
over the sea ice or by boat, then access should be from the embayment below and east of 
the helicopter pads on the NW shore of Backdoor Bay (see Maps A and B). Access to 
SPA No. 27, including Shackleton’s Hut, is by permit only. Helicopters are prohibited 
from landing within the terrestrial part of the Area. Helicopters should land throughout 
the year at the Primary Pad (166°10'22.9" E, 77°33'03.5"S), 250 m northeast of the 
northern point of Pony Lake.

Overflight of the Area is prohibited by single-engine helicopters to altitudes lower than 
750 m (~2,500 ft), by dual-engine helicopters lower than 1,000 m (~3,300 ft), by single 
or dual engine fixed-wing aircraft lower than 450 m (~1,500 ft), and by quadruple-engine 
fixed-wing aircraft lower than 1000 m (~3,300 ft), except when required for essential 
scientific or management purposes specifically authorized by permit. Minimum 
horizontal distance for aircraft approach is 500 m (~1600 ft) for single-engine 
helicopters, 750 m (~2,500 ft) for dual-engine helicopters, 450 m (~1,500 ft) for single or 
dual engine fixed-wing engines, and 1000 m (~3,300 ft) for quadruple-engine fixed-wing 
aircraft. Use of helicopter smoke grenades is prohibited unless absolutely necessary for 
safety, and all grenades should be retrieved.

Within the marine part of the Area, access should be by foot or vehicle when sea-ice is 
present, or by ship or small boat during open water periods. Overflight below 750 m 
(~2,500 ft) or landing of aircraft within the marine component of the Area is prohibited, 
except when required for essential scientific or management purposes and specifically 
authorized by permit.

Foot traffic within the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the 
objectives of any permitted activities. Permitted visitors should keep to the natural 
penguin access routes through the colony and not approach occupied nests except as 
required for scientific or management purposes. Access to the marine component of the 
Area should generally avoid the main seaward access routes used by the penguins, or be 
from outside of the terrestrial part of the Area.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or 
place

- Scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area;

- Essential management activities, including monitoring and inspection.
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be authorized by permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the permit has expired shall be a condition of the permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping within the terrestrial part of the Area is prohibited. A field camp site exists 175 m northeast of the Area adjacent to the New Zealand shelter. Camping within the marine part of the Area when sea ice is present is allowed by permit. Such camps should avoid the penguin approach routes within 200 m of the breeding colony, but are otherwise not restricted to a particular location.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions should be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted. Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. No live poultry shall be brought into the Area. Dressed poultry should be free of disease or infection before shipment to the Antarctic and, if introduced into the Area for food, all parts and waste of poultry shall be completely removed from the Area and incinerated or boiled long enough to kill any potentially infective bacteria or viruses.

All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimized.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a permit issued under Article 3 of Annex II by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should as a minimum standard be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed
unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if 
this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

Unless specifically authorized by permit, visitors are prohibited from interfering with or 
from handling, taking or damaging any historic artifacts found within the Area. Any new 
artifacts observed should be notified to the appropriate national authority. Relocation or 
removal of artifacts for the purposes of preservation, protection or to re-establish 
historical accuracy is allowable by permit.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
management plan can continue to be met

•   Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and 
site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for 
analysis or audit, to erect or maintain signposts or for management activities.

•   Any specific sites of long-term monitoring should be appropriately marked.

•   To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the isolation and 
relatively low level of human impact at the Area visitors shall take special 
precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial and vegetation 
introductions sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from 
regions outside Antarctica. To minimize the risk of introductions, visitors shall 
thoroughly clean footwear and any equipment to be used in the area - particularly 
sampling equipment and markers - before entering the Area.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should 
include, as appropriate, the information identified in the visit report form suggested by 
SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange 
of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons 
subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit 
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a 
record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organizing 
the scientific use of the Area.
Map A - Cape Royds, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 1: regional topographic map
166°/05'00"-E                                 166°/15'00"-E

Inset: Ross Island showing sites of nearby
protected areas and stations

ROSS SEA

          New College
          Valley
Cape
Royds
Tramway Ridge
Air Erebus
Ross Island
McMurdo
Station
Scott Base
          Ross Ice Shelf

-77°30'00"S                                 -77°30'00"S

McMurdo
Sound

Entry by Permit

Horseshoe
Bay

Rocky Point

Clear Lake
Coast
Lake
Blue Lake
Blackbird Beach
Green
Lake
Map B
Arrival Bay
Blackbird Bay
Mickle Islet

Cape Royds

-77°40'00"S                                 -77°40'00"S

0        meters       1000
Contour interval: 10 m

---   Estimated coastline              Helicopter landing area
—     Protected area boundary         Ship anchorage
•     Lakes/ponds                     Landing place

Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Spheroid: WGS84
Source: Cape Royds management plan
Map B - Cape Royds, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 1: terrestrial area topographic map


                                                                                
                                                                 0 meters         50
                                                      Contour interval: 2 m





McMurdo                                  Projection: Lambert conformal conic
Sound                                    Spheroid: WGS 1984
                                         Source: Cape Royds management plan
Cape Royds

 
Lakes/ponds                          Estimated position of coastline          
 Penguin nesting areas (1990)        Protected area boundary
 Areas suitable for viewing penguins  Preferred walking routes
 Buildings                            Designated helicopter pads
 Survey marks                        Signposts
Management Plan for
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 3

BARWICK and BALHAM VALLEYS, SOUTH VICTORIA LAND

1 Description of values to be protected

An area of 325 km2 at Barwick Valley, including part of adjacent Balham Valley, was originally designated in Recommendation VIII-4 (1975, SSSI No. 3) after a proposal by the United States of America on the grounds that it provided an outstanding example of Antarctic wilderness. The proposal described the Area as, "one of the least disturbed and contaminated of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land". The site is distant from field stations and has not been subjected to intensive visitation or research. The Barwick Valley was first visited in 1958 and several subsequent expeditions were conducted in the 1960s through to 1975, after which time visits have been few because of the designation of the SSSI. Although some human impacts from these early expeditions were visible within the region in 1993-94, Barwick and Balham Valleys are believed to remain one of the least impacted areas in the Victoria Land Dry Valleys region of Antarctica. The region is therefore of high value as a reference area against which to measure changes in comparable ecosystems of other dry valleys, which have undergone a variety of scientific investigations.

The boundaries of the original Area have been enlarged to include more of the Balham Valley catchment, and rationalized to exclude the Victoria Upper Glacier catchment which was previously within the Area, resulting in a total area of 480 km2.

The Victoria Land Dry Valleys have a unique and extreme polar desert ecosystem. The Area contains examples of a wide variety of the environments found in this ecosystem, including desert pavements, sand dunes, patterned ground, glacial and moraine features, streams, freshwater and saline lakes, valleys and high-altitude ice-free ground. Some of the best examples of ventifact pavements and weathering-pitted dolerites are found on the valley floors, along with examples of chasmolithic lichens, layered communities of endolithic lichens, fungi, algae and associated bacteria, and populations of soil and lake microflora. Special protection of the Area provides the opportunity to conserve a relatively pristine example of this ecosystem as a baseline for future reference. Protection on a catchment basis serves to provide greater representation of the ecosystem features, and also facilitates management of the Area as a geographically distinct and integrated ecological system. The high ecological values, as well as the scientific, aesthetic and wilderness values derived from the isolation and relatively low level of human impact are important reasons for special protection at Barwick and Balham Valleys.

2 Aims and objectives

Management at Barwick and Balham Valleys aims to:
- avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;

- preserve the natural ecosystem as a reference area largely undisturbed by direct human activities;

- allow scientific research on the natural ecosystem and physical environment in the Area;

- minimize human disturbance to the Area by preventing unnecessary sampling;

- minimize the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to the Area;

- allow visits for management purposes in support of the protection of the values and features of the Area.

3 Management activities

- Copies of this management plan, including maps, shall be kept available, in the principal research hut facilities within the Area and at McMurdo Station and Scott Base.

- Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.

- National Antarctic Programs operating in the region shall consult together for the purpose of ensuring that the above provisions are implemented.

4 Period of designation

Designated for an indefinite period.

5 Maps

Map A: Barwick and Balham Valleys topographic map.

Map specifications:
  Projection: Lambert conformal conic
  Standard parallels: 1st 79° 18' 00" S; 2nd 76° 42' 00"S
  Central Meridian: 162° 30' 00" E
  Latitude of Origin: 78° 01' 16.2106" S
  Spheroid: WGS84 approximation
  Datum: 'Camp Area' Local
Inset: McMurdo Dry Valleys and Ross Sea Region, showing the location of 
      McMurdo Station (US) and Scott Base (NZ), and the location of the other 
      specially protected areas in the Victoria Land Dry Valleys (Canada 
      Glacier SSSI-12, and Linnaeus Terrace SSSI-19)

6   Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
Barwick Valley is situated about 65 km inland from the Ross Sea coast of South Victoria 
Land. The Area includes Barwick and Balham Valleys and their respective catchments 
and is bordered on the south, west and north by the McKelvey Valley, the Willet Range 
and the divide between the Victoria and Barwick Valleys, respectively.

The boundary of the Area extends from its eastern extremity in the lower Barwick Valley 
(around the confluence of the Barwick, Victoria and McKelvey Valleys) several 
kilometers south towards the ridge leading SW to the summit of Mount Insel (1,345 m), 
from where the boundary follows the high points of the ridge of the Insel Range for 5 km 
before descending to a low pass between the McKelvey and Balham Valleys at the 
location of Bullseye Lake. The boundary crosses the lake before ascending the ridge to a 
further high point on the Insel Range (approximately 1,250 m), and continues towards the 
upper reaches of the Balham Valley. As the terrain becomes gentler in the upper Balham, 
the boundary sweeps NW to the 2,000 m contour line. It follows the contour line around 
the summit of Shapeless Mountain for approximately 13 km and then cuts west to an ice 
field. The boundary joins and follows a prominent ridge to the summit of Mount Bastion 
(2477 m, 160°34’E, 77°19’S). This ridge is followed in a northerly direction to Skew 
Peak (2535 m, 160°26’E, 77°13’S), located at the head of the Barwick Valley. The 
boundary then descends along the East Ridge of Skew Peak above Webb Glacier, before 
following the catchment boundary in a more southerly direction toward Parker Mesa. 
From Parker Mesa the boundary descends further to follow the dividing ridge between 
the catchments of the Victoria Upper Glacier and the Barwick Valley. The boundary 
extends east along this ridge for 13 km to Sponsors Peak (1,454 m, 161°24E, 77°18S). 
The boundary descends the SW Ridge of Sponsors Peak and Nickell Peak 
(approximately 1,400 m) to the lower Barwick to the eastern extremity of the Area, 
which is about 3 km northeast of Lake Vida, Victoria Valley.

An extensive névé south of Skew Peak feeds the Webb Glacier in the upper Barwick 
Valley. Very little ice from the Polar Plateau actually flows over the scarp into the 
Barwick Valley, as flow vectors and debris cover patterns on the Webb Glacier in this 
location indicate that this part of the glacier is almost stationary. The Barwick and 
Balham Valleys merge in the southeast of the Area, 5 km from where the Barwick joins 
the Victoria Valley. A series of lakes occupy the Barwick Valley, the largest being Webb 
Lake (approximate elevation 650 m) at the snout of Webb Glacier. Lake Vashka 
(approximate elevation 507 m), partially filling an unusually deep circular depression, is 
the second largest and 5 km down-valley from Webb Lake. Hourglass Lake (approximate 
elevation 625 m), the next largest, is approximately half way between Webb Lake and 
Lake Vashka. An intermittent stream connecting this series of lakes terminates at Lake
Vashka, which has a level well below its overflow threshold. Early observations of the smooth surfaces of Lakes Webb and Vashka suggested that they are "ice-block" lakes that contain no significant liquid water. However, liquid water up to several meters in depth was observed at the perimeter of Lake Vashka in December 1993. Recent studies on the physical features of any of the Barwick Valley lakes have not been made. Lake Balham, a small lake in a depression (<700 m elevation) below Apocalypse Peaks, is the only lake in Balham Valley (generally around 800 m in elevation).

Multiple glaciations, mainly between 13 Ma and 3.5 Ma ago, have resulted in a thick ground moraine on both valley floors. These deposits are mantled by solifluction sheets at the head of Balham Valley. In addition the valleys bear a small number of fresh and saline lakes on the drift surfaces. In many cases the lakes have evaporated to leave extensive salt deposits. The walls of Barwick and Balham Valleys display remnants of glacial benches at about 800 m and 1,200–1,500 m altitude. The soils near Lake Vashka consist of moraine debris derived largely from dolerite and sandstone, but granites, gneiss and schist make up as much as 35% of boulders locally. Weathering is often indicated by deep red staining due to oxidation of iron compounds, usually eroded by wind-driven sand on the boulders' windward side. The valley floors are extensively covered with patterned ground of sand-wedge polygons, typical of permafrost areas in the Dry Valleys. The majority is old (high centered), with young (hollow centered) polygons found in recent stream channels, and both typically measure 20 m across.

No invertebrates have been found in the dry soils of the Barwick Valley and there is little obvious vegetation. Algal crusts and mats fringe the lakes and streams but the flora reported is essentially microbial: chasmolithic lichens are present in jagged screes of the Apocalypse Range and dense layered communities of endolithic lichens, fungi, algae and associated bacteria are occasionally found in boulders of Beacon Sandstone. Black lichen growth is reported to be well developed in areas of sandstone on the valley floor of Balham Valley. Significant heterotrophic bacterial populations have been reported in sandy samples from Barwick Valley. The population contained lactose-fermenters, nitrate-reducers, nitrogen-fixers, yeasts and algae but no detectable filamentous fungi or Protozoa.

While the Barwick and Balham Valleys are one of the most remote areas of the Dry Valleys, south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) are known to visit the Area, with about 40 carcasses found at Lake Vashka in 1959-60. The mummified carcasses of two seals have been found near the snout of Webb Glacier, and seven more, mainly crabeaters (Lobodon carcinophagus) were found near the Balham / Barwick Valley junction.

Inspection of the Barwick and Balham Valleys in December 1993 from Bullseye Lake to Lake Vashka revealed evidence of prior human activity, particularly around Lake Vashka where field camps had been in use for scientific research in the 1960s. Impacts observed in the Lake Vashka vicinity included stone circles for tents at old camp sites, soil pits and a trench, remains of a wooden crate, a wooden box containing rocks and a paper poster, and a broken food cache partially submerged in the lake. Bamboo poles are situated near
the snout of Webb Glacier and at Vashka Crag. Dynamite charges have been used in the vicinity of Lake Vashka and at least one other unknown location in the Barwick Valley.

6(ii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area
None.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
None.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
The nearest protected areas to Barwick / Balham Valleys are Linnaeus Terrace (SSSI-19) 35 km south in the Wright Valley, and Canada Glacier (SSSI-12) 50 km SE in Taylor Valley (Inset, Map A).

7    Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an appropriate national authority. Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:

-  it is issued for scientific reasons or for essential management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection or review;

-  the actions permitted will not jeopardize the physical, ecological, scientific or aesthetic and wilderness values of the Area;

-  the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan;

-  the permit, or a copy, shall be carried within the Area;

-  a report or reports shall be supplied to the authority or authorities named in the permit;

-  permits should be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Access to the Area shall be by foot and vehicles are prohibited from the Area. Landing of aircraft and overflight below 750 m (~2,500 ft) is prohibited within the Area, except for scientific or management purposes specifically authorized by permit. Use of smoke grenades is prohibited within the Area and discouraged within 1 km of the Area.

No special restrictions apply to the air or land routes used to move to and from the Area. Scientists are encouraged to access the Area at a practicable point closest to their site of study to minimize the amount of the Area that is traversed. Pedestrian routes should avoid lakes, ponds, stream beds, areas of damp ground and areas of soft sediments or dunes. Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the
objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to 
minimize effects.

7(ii) Activities that may be conducted in the Area
Activities that may be conducted within the Area include:

- scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area;
- essential management activities, including monitoring.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a permit. All 
scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by permit and clearly 
identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such 
items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. 
Removal of specific equipment for which the permit has expired shall be a condition of 
the permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping should generally be avoided within the Area, and two campsites outside of, but 
close to, the east and south boundaries are identified for access into the Area. One of 
these is at the confluence of the lower Barwick and Victoria Valleys (161° 41' 15" E, 77° 
21' 45" S), while the other is close to Bullseye Lake in the McKelvey Valley (161° 13' 
08" E, 77° 25' 40" S) (see Maps A and B, Figure 1). If deemed to be essential, camping 
should be at previously impacted sites, preferably on snow or ice-covered ground if 
available. Researchers should consult with the appropriate national authority to obtain 
up-to-date information on any sites where camping may be preferred.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area
No living non-human animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately 
introduced into the Area. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any 
other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for 
scientific or management purposes specified in the permit, shall be removed from the 
Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted. Fuel is 
not to be brought into the Area, unless specifically authorized by permit for specific 
scientific or management purposes. All materials introduced shall be for a stated period 
only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be 
stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimized.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference of native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in 
accordance with a separate permit issued under Article 3 of Annex II by the appropriate 
national authority specifically for that purpose. Where animal taking or harmful 
interference is involved, this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the 
SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not introduced by a visitor
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit
and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs.
Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not
brought into the Area by the permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed
unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if
this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the
management plan can continue to be met
-   Any specific sites of long-term monitoring should be appropriately marked.
-   To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the isolation and relatively
low level of human impact at the Area visitors shall take special precautions against
introductions. Of particular concern are microbial are vegetation introductions
sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside
Antarctica. To minimize the risk of introductions, visitors shall thoroughly clean
footwear and any equipment to be used in the area - particularly sampling
equipment and markers - before entering the Area.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submits to the
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should
include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by
SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange
of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons
subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the
effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a
record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organizing
the scientific use of the Area.
Map A - Barwick Valley, Site of Special Scientific Interest No.3: location map













              0          2           4km
































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Management Plan for
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 4

CAPE CROZIER, ROSS ISLAND

1 Description of values to be protected

An area at Cape Crozier was originally designated as Specially Protected Area No. 6 by
Recommendation IV-6 (1966) after a proposal by the United States of America on the
grounds that the region supports a rich bird and mammal fauna as well as microfauna and
microflora, and that the ecosystem depends on a substantial mixing of marine and
terrestrial elements of outstanding scientific interest. With adoption by Antarctic Treaty
Parties of the Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) category of protection in 1972,
Cape Crozier's designation as an SPA was terminated by Recommendation VIII-2 (1975)
and the site was re-designated as SSSI No. 4 by Recommendation VIII-4 (1975). The
reason for designation of SSSI No. 4 was to protect long-term studies of the population
dynamics and social behavior of Emperor (Aptenodytes forsteri) and Adelie (Pygoscelis
adeliae) penguin colonies in the region. These grounds for protection are still valid.
Information gathered since the original designation supports the inclusion of skua
populations and vegetation assemblages as important values to be protected at Cape
Crozier. The boundaries have been extended south to Igloo Spur to protect the range of
vegetation assemblages representative of the Cape Crozier region.

The Emperor penguin colony at Cape Crozier was first recorded by members of the
British National Antarctic Expedition in 1902. The colony is the most southerly known
and has the longest Emperor population record. The colony breeds on fast ice that forms
between large cracks, which develop where the Ross Ice Shelf abuts Cape Crozier. The
positions of these cracks shift with movement of the ice shelf, and the colony itself is
known to move around different parts of the cracks during the breeding season. The
boundaries of the Area have been designed to include fast-ice areas consistently occupied
by breeding birds.

Cape Crozier has a large Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) population numbering
around 150,000 breeding pairs, and is probably the second-largest Adelie colony in
Antarctica. The colony is divided into two main groups 1 km apart known as East and
West Colonies. Associated with the penguin colonies is a large South Polar skua
(Catharacta maccormicki) colony, estimated at 1,000 breeding pairs.

There are moss, algae and lichen assemblages in the Area. Expanses of snow algae at
Cape Crozier cover an area of more than 4 ha adjacent to the skua and penguin colonies.
Growths as extensive as those at Cape Crozier have been remarked on only once before
in the Continental Antarctic Zone, on the Wilkes Land Coast, and Ross Island has the
southernmost record of snow algae. Lichens are also abundant, with large areas of bright
orange encrusting (crustose) lichens on rocks and stones on the slopes above the Adelie
colony, and rich growths of foliose and fruticose lichens in the vicinity of Wilson’s Stone 
Igloo.

A message post from Scott’s National Antarctic Expedition (1901-04) is situated in West 
Colony (169°16’14’’E, 77°27’15’’S) and was designated Historic Monument No. 69 in 
Measure 4 (1995). Wilson’s Stone Igloo, designated as Historic Site No. 21 in 
Recommendation VII-9 (1972), is situated in the south of the Area (lat/long). The rock 
shelter was constructed in July 1911 by members of the 1910-1913 British Antarctic 
Expedition during their winter journey to Cape Crozier to collect Emperor penguin eggs.

The high scientific, ecological and historic values of this area along with its vulnerability 
to disturbance through trampling, sampling, pollution or alien introduction, are such that 
this Area requires long-term special protection.

2     Aims and objectives

Management at Cape Crozier aims to:

•   avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing 
    unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;

•   allow scientific research on the ecosystem in the Area while ensuring it is protected 
    from oversampling or other possible scientific impacts;

•   minimize the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes into 
    the Area;

•   allow visits to Wilson’s Stone Igloo, but under strict control by permit;

•   allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management 
    plan.

3     Management activities

•   Durable wind direction indicators should be erected close to the designated 
    helicopter landing site whenever it is anticipated there will be a number of landings 
    at the Area in a given season. These should be replaced as needed and removed 
    when no longer required.

•   Brightly colored markers, which should be clearly visible from the air and pose no 
    significant threat to the environment, should be placed to mark the helicopter landing 
    pad.

•   Signs showing the location and boundaries with clear statements of entry restrictions 
    shall be placed at appropriate locations at the boundaries of the Area to help avoid 
    inadvertent entry.
- Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) 
shall be displayed prominently, and a copy of this management plan shall be kept 
available, in the research hut facility at Cape Crozier.

- Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition, and removed when no 
longer necessary.

- Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess 
whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to 
ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.

- National Antarctic Programs operating in the region shall consult together for the 
purpose of ensuring that the above provisions are carried out.

4    Period of designation

Designated for an indefinite period.

5    Maps and photographs

Map A: Cape Crozier regional topographic map.

Map specifications:
      Projection: Lambert conformal conic
      Standard parallels: 1st 76° 40' 00" S; 2nd 79° 20' 00" S
      Central meridian: 166° 10' 00" E
      Latitude of Origin: 78° 01' 16.211" S
      Spheroid: WGS84
      Datum: McMurdo Sound Geodetic Control Network 1992
      Inset: Ross Island region, showing the location of McMurdo Station (US) and 
            Scott Base (NZ), and the location of the other protected areas on Ross 
            Island (Caughley Beach SSSI-10 and New College Valley SPA-20 at 
            Cape Bird, Cape Royds SSSI-1, Arrival Heights SSSI-2, Tramway Ridge 
            SSSI-11 and Lewis Bay ASPA-XYZ)

Map B: Cape Crozier site topographic map. Map specifications are the same as those for 
      Map A.

6    Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features

Cape Crozier is at the eastern extremity of Ross Island, where an ice-free area comprises 
the lower eastern slopes of Mount Terror. The designated area is situated in the vicinity 
of Post Office Hill (407 m), extending to encompass the adjacent Ross Ice Shelf where
large cracks in the shelf are covered by fast-ice which is occupied annually by breeding 
Emperor penguins.

The Area includes the entire terrestrial region and ice shelf above the mean high water 
mark as well as the adjacent fast-ice within the boundaries occupied by breeding 
Emperor penguins. The north boundary of the Area extends 6.5 km along the 77°26'03"S 
line of latitude from 169°11'43"E to 169°28'00"E. The west boundary extends 1.5 km 
south from the northern boundary to the coast, thence in a NE direction following a low 
ice-free ridge that passes 30 m west of the hut and helicopter pad. The boundary then 
follows this ridge in a southerly direction to be SW of the summit of Post Office Hill 
before following another ridge in a SE direction to the summit of a small unnamed peak 
(335 m) 1.2-km SSE of Post Office Hill. The boundary descends down a SW ridgeline, 
before following this ridge to ascend to the summit of a large unnamed volcanic cone 
(520 m) 3.6-km south of Post Office Hill. The boundary follows around the eastern side 
of this cone before descending south through a valley to another unnamed conic peak 
(580 m) 1.5 km NNE of Bomb Peak. The boundary follows a ridge through the middle of 
the cone before descending down a ridge on the southern side of the peak into a valley at 
the base of Bomb Peak. The boundary ascends the northern side of Bomb Peak to the 
summit (>610 m) before extending down a ridge line on the SE side of Bomb Peak to 
Igloo Spur and thence due east along latitude 77°32'00"S to the east boundary at 
169°28'00"E.

The ice-free ground at Cape Crozier is of recent volcanic origin, with numerous small 
cones and craters evident among gentle slopes of scoria and fine-grained basalt lava. 
Several of these hills, including Post Office Hill, shelter the penguin colonies from 
southwesterly winds. On the surface are many volcanic bombs and other evidence of 
small-scale volcanic explosions. To the south of the Area coastal cliffs adjacent to the ice 
shelf are up to 150 m high. The cliff faces show bedded lava and brown palagomite tuffs 
with several lenticular patches of columnar basalt towards the base. Large rocks of 
continental origin transported by glacial action can be found on the northern side of Cape 
Crozier. Prevailing winds tend to be from between the southwest and west, with 
temperatures generally about 8° colder than those at McMurdo Sound.

The Emperor penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri) colony at Cape Crozier was discovered in 
October 1902 by R.S. Skelton, a member of Scott's Discovery Expedition. The presence 
of the colony depends on fast-ice locked between cracks in the Ross Ice Shelf where it 
abuts Cape Crozier. The size of the colony is limited by the area and condition of the fast 
ice, which also affects the availability of breeding sites sheltered from the strong 
katabatic winds that descend from Mount Terror. The location of the colony varies from 
year to year and the colony moves within a breeding season, beginning the season near to 
shore and moving off shore as fledging approaches. The breeding population has 
fluctuated widely since the turn of the century, with 400 adults recorded in 1902, 100 in 
1911, and 1,300 in 1969. In 1983, 78 chicks fledged and the fledging success of the 
colony has improved every year since then. December 1990 counts recorded 324 chicks 
fledging.
A comprehensive population study of Adelie penguins occurred at Cape Crozier from
1961-62 through the 1981-82 austral summers, with 2,000 to 5,000 chicks banded yearly.
There are two Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) colonies at Cape Crozier, known as East and West Colonies. These are about 1 km apart, separated by a 45-m high ridge and
a sloping ice field across which the birds do not travel. A coastline of 1.6 km with three
beaches separated by rock outcrops provides penguins with access to West Colony. By
contrast, East Colony has one 50-m wide rocky beach and 550 m of sea cliffs. The
population of the two colonies has increased substantially over the last 50 years,
numbering 65,000 breeding pairs in 1958, 102,500 in 1966 and 177,083 in 1987.
Numbers fell to 136,249 in 1989 and 106,184 in 1994. The combined population of the
East and West Rookeries at Cape Crozier make it the second largest Adelie colony in
Antarctica after Cape Adare, Northern Victoria Land.

Approximately 1,000 pairs of South Polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) breed on ice-
free ground surrounding the Adelie penguin colony. A demographic study of this colony
began in 1961-62 and was still continuing in 1996-97. Chinstrap penguins (Pygoscelis
antarctica), Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), snow petrels (Pagadroma
nivea), Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica), Southern fulmars (Fulmaris
glacialoides), giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus), black-backed gulls (Larus
dominicanus), and South Polar skuas from more northerly breeding sites, have been
recorded as visitors to Cape Crozier.

Algae can be found throughout the Area on large patches of snow and on soils and
stones, often below the soil surface layer. Large areas of green snow algae, covering
more than 4 ha, can be found in the north of the Area in snowfields around the periphery
of the Adelie penguin colony and skua nesting areas. Particularly large patches have been
reported in the snow-filled valley between the two coastal hills at the northern end of the
Adelie colony, with snow-tinted green over at least one hectare. However, the extent of
snow algae is not always obvious, with the green color often not revealed until a surface
crust of white ice is broken away. Snow algae samples are dominated by a species of
Chlamydomonas, and associated with occasional Ulothrix-like filaments and diatoms.
Growth requires percolating meltwater during summer and nutrients derived from the
bird colonies.

Prasiola crispa grows in slow water flows in the vicinity of the penguin colonies and
ribbon-like growths of P. calophylla are found where water percolates over stones on the
tallus slopes. Numerous small ponds are found throughout the Area, from small pools 1-
m in diameter to a lake 150-m in diameter situated immediately south of The Knoll. The
four ponds in the penguin colonies contain abundant phytoplankton populations of
Chlamydomonas cf. snowiae, while ponds elsewhere support growths of red-brown to
dark blue-green benthic felts dominated by Oscillatoriaceae. Occasional epilithic algae
(dominated by Gloeocapsa, Nostoc and Scytonema) are found as blackish crusts coating
rock surfaces where meltwater percolates.

Mosses are sparse and scattered in their distribution with most occurrences being of one
or a small number of isolated cushions no larger than 10 cm in diameter. Richer growths
than this occur up to 0.5 km NE of the hut on north and NW facing slopes and on slopes 
immediately above the coastal cliffs about 1 km south of the penguin colonies.

Encrusting orange lichens are present in shallow hollows, on rock outcrops, boulders and 
encrusting bryophytes on the slopes above the penguin colonies. Also present adjacent to 
Wilson’s Stone Igloo is the fruticose lichen Usnea and the foliose lichen Umbilicaria, 
both duller in color but structurally more complex. Green algal crusts are found 
throughout the Area

6(ii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area
None.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
The Cape Crozier Hut (US) (169°11’14’’E, 77°27’39’’S) is situated on the NW side of 
Pat’s Peak. An observation hide dating from research programs in the 1960–80 period is 
located at the base of Post Office Hill (north side). An old Jamesway Hut was built on a 
small terrace approximately 1 km NE of the present hut. This was destroyed by fire and 
all hut debris has since been removed. Materials such as nails, screws and hinges remain 
at the site.

A historic message post, designated as Historic Site No. 69 under Measure 4 (1995), is 
situated in the West Rookery on the NE coast of the Area (169°16’14’’E, 77°27’15’’S). 
The post was used by the 1901-04 British National Antarctic Expedition to provide 
information to the expedition’s relief ships. An historic rock hut known as Wilson’s 
Stone Igloo (Historic Monument No. 21) (169°17’48’’E, 77°31’48’’S) is located on Igloo 
Spur.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
The nearest protected areas to Cape Crozier are on Ross Island: Lewis Bay, the site of the 
1979 DC-10 passenger aircraft crash is the closest and 45 km west; Tramway Ridge 
(SSSI-11) near the summit of Mt. Erebus is 55 km west; Arrival Heights (SSSI-2) is 70 
km to the SW adjacent to McMurdo Station; Cape Royds (SSSI-1 and SPA-27) and Cape 
Evans (SPA-25) are 75 km west; and Caughley Beach (SSSI-10) and New College 
Valley (SPA-20) are 75 km NW at Cape Bird.

7. Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by an 
appropriate national authority. Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:

•	it is issued for scientific research, and in particular for research on the bird and 
mammal fauna as well as on the microfauna and microflora in the Area;

•	access to the historic sites may be permitted for scientific, management, or historical 
purposes;
•  the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological, scientific or historic values of the Area;

•  the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan;

•  the permit, or an authorized copy, shall be carried within the Area;

•  a report or reports shall be supplied to the authority or authorities named in the permit;

•  permits should be valid for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area

Access into the Area is permitted by foot or by helicopter. Land vehicles are prohibited within the Area except on the designated route for access to the hut. Helicopters shall land at the designated site (169°11'25"E, 77°27'42"S; elevation 240 m) on the NW side of Pat's Peak, 150 m from the refuge hut, except when specifically authorised by permit for scientific or management purposes. Overflight is prohibited by single-engine helicopters at altitudes lower than 750 m (~2,500 ft) and by dual-engine helicopters lower than 1,000 m (~3,300 ft), except when required for essential scientific or management purposes specifically authorized by permit. Use of helicopter smoke grenades is prohibited unless absolutely necessary for safety, and all grenades should be retrieved.

Pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise effects. Permitted visitors should keep to natural penguin tracks when walking through bird colonies and should not approach occupied nests except as required for scientific or management purposes. Care should be taken to avoid trampling nests when moving through skua territories. Visitors should avoid walking on visible vegetation and care should be exercised walking in areas of moist ground, where foot traffic can easily damage sensitive soils, plant and algal communities and degrade water quality.

Access to historic sites should preferably be from the south of the Area.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place

Activities that may be conducted within the Area include:

•  scientific research that will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area;

•  essential management activities, including monitoring;

•  visits to historic sites for scientific, management or historical reasons subject to the conditions described within this plan;
- activities with the aim of preserving or protecting the historic resources within the Area.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be approved by permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the permit has expired shall be a condition of the permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Camping within the Area should be within a 100-m radius of the hut (169°11'14"E, 77°27'39"S). Camping is permitted outside of the hut vicinity where access is required to distant parts of the Area for extended time periods.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the permit, shall be removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted. Fuel is not to be stored in the Area outside of the hut facilities, unless specifically authorized by permit for specific scientific or management purposes. No live poultry shall be brought into the Area. Dressed poultry should be free of disease or infection before shipment to the Antarctic and, if introduced into the Protected Area for food, all parts and waste of poultry shall be completely removed from the Protected Area and incinerated or boiled long enough to kill any potentially infective bacteria or viruses.

All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimized.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference of native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a permit issued under Article 3 of Annex II by the appropriate national authority specifically for that purpose. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the permit holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed
from any part of the Area, including the restricted zone, unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

Unless specifically authorized by permit, visitors are prohibited from interfering with or attempting restoration of Wilson’s Stone Igloo in any way, or from handling, taking or damaging any artifacts. Evidence of recent changes, damage or new artifacts observed should be notified to the appropriate national authority. Relocation or removal of artifacts for the purposes of preservation, protection, or to re-establish historical accuracy is allowable by permit.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met

- Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or audit, or for protective measures.

- Any specific sites of long-term monitoring shall be appropriately marked.

- To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the isolation and relatively low level of human impact at the Area visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial are vegetation introductions sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. To minimize the risk of introductions, visitors shall thoroughly clean footwear and any equipment to be used in the area - particularly sampling equipment and markers - before entering the Area.

7(x) Requirements for reports
Parties shall ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submits to the appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report Form suggested by SCAR. Parties shall maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange of Information, shall provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both for review of the management plan and in organizing the scientific use of the site.
Map A - Cape Crozier, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 4: regional topographic map

169*10'00"E                  169*20'00"E
77*20'00"S                                                    
                                                                  Williamson's Rock
                                                                  
                                                                  Ice shelf cracks, Nov. 1993
                                                                  
                                                                  Emperor Penguin colony
                                                                  
                                                                  on sea ice, Nov. 1993
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  Map B
ROSS
ICE
SHELF
                                                                  
Cape
Crozier
77*30'00"S                                                    
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
Inset: Ross Island showing sites of
nearby protected areas and stations

ROSS SEA
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                
Map B - Cape Crozier, Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 4: site topographic map



PRIMARY PAD           USAP Hut 
SECONDARY PAD        (preferred camp site)



                      Post Office Hill (407m)



'West Rookery'



Discovery Message Post   Historic Monument No. 60



                      East 'Rookery'



Ice shelf cracks, Nov. 1993



Emperor Penguin colony on sea ice, Nov. 1993



ROSS 
ICE 
SHELF





Protected area boundary          Adélie Penguin colony 
Estimated coastline              Special [?] nesting areas 
Designated helicopter pads       Ice shelf



Projection: Lambert conformal conic 
Spheroid: WGS84 
Source: Cape Crozier management plan
Management Plan for
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 18

NORTHWEST WHITE ISLAND, McMURDO SOUND
       (167° 20' E, 78° 00' S)

1 Description of values to be protected

An area of 150 km² of coastal shelf ice on the northwest side of White Island was originally designated by Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 18) after a proposal by the United States of America on the grounds that this locality contains an unusual breeding population of Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) which is the most southerly known, and which has been physically isolated from other populations by advance of the McMurdo Ice Shelf and Ross Ice Shelf. The original boundaries have been adjusted in the current plan in light of recent data recording the spatial distribution of the seals on the ice shelves. In the south, the boundary of the Area has been shifted north and east to exclude the region north of White Strait where no observations of the seals have been recorded. In the north, the Area has been extended to encompass an additional part of the Ross Ice Shelf in order to ensure inclusion of more of the region within which the seals may be found. The Area is now approximately 130 km².

The colony appears unable to relocate to another area because of its distance from the open ocean of McMurdo Sound, and as such is highly vulnerable to any human impacts that might occur in the vicinity. Year-round studies have detected no evidence of immigration or emigration of seals from the population, which appears to have grown to around 25 to 30 animals from a population of around 11 in the 1960s. The seals do not have the breathing capacity required to dive the 20 km required to reach the open ocean, and there is no evidence that they make the journey over the ice shelf surface.

The seals gain access to the sea below the ice shelf through pressure cracks, which are formed by tidal motion and movement of the McMurdo and Ross ice shelves. Only one crack remains open year-round. The Weddell seals at White Island are on average greater in size and weight than their McMurdo Sound counterparts and have been shown to make more shallow dives. NW White Island is one of very few sites where Weddell seals are known to feed under shelf ice. The population is considered to have exceptional scientific value because of its period of physical isolation from interaction with other seals, thought to be perhaps up to several hundred years, and investigations are being undertaken of the extent to which the group may be considered a genetically distinct population.

NW White Island is relatively accessible by shelf ice from the nearby United States and New Zealand research stations at Hut Point, Ross Island. In addition, a flagged access road between these stations and Black Island traverses within one kilometer of the Area. The Area requires long-term special protection because of the exceptional importance of the Weddell seal colony, outstanding scientific values and opportunities for research, and
the potential vulnerability of the Area to disturbance from scientific and logistic activities 
in the region.

2  Aims and objectives

Management at NW White Island aims to:

-  avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing 
unnecessary human disturbance to the Area;

-  allow scientific research on the ecosystem, in particular on the Weddell seals, while 
ensuring protection from excessive disturbance or other possible scientific impacts;

-  allow other scientific research provided it will not jeopardize the values of the Area;

-  minimize the possibility of introduction of alien animals and microbes into the Area;

-  allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the management 
plan.

3  Management activities

-  To the greatest extent practicable, signs showing the location and boundaries with 
clear statements of entry restrictions shall be placed at appropriate locations at the 
boundaries of the Area to help avoid inadvertent entry.

-  Signs showing the location of the Area (stating the special restrictions that apply) 
shall be displayed prominently, and a copy of this management plan shall be kept 
available in appropriate places, in particular at McMurdo Station, Scott Base and at 
the Black Island facilities.

-  Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition, and removed when no 
longer necessary.

-  Visits shall be made as necessary (no less than once every five years) to assess 
whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and to 
ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate.

-  National Antarctic Programs operating in the region shall consult together for the 
purpose of ensuring these steps are carried out.

4  Period of designation

Designated for an indefinite period.
5     Maps and photographs

Map A:  NW White Island, SSSI-18, topographic map.

Map specifications:
        Projection: Lambert Conformal conic
        Standard parallels: 1st 79° 20' 00" S; 2nd 76° 40' 00"S
        Central Meridian: 167° 30' 00" E
        Latitude of Origin: 78° 01' 16.211" S
        Spheroid: GRS80 shifted to approximate WGS84
        Inset: Ross Island region, showing sites of nearby protected areas and stations

Note:   Map A is derived from the Antarctic Digital Database (Version 1.0, SCAR, 1993). This framework has been identified as positionally inaccurate in the Ross Island / White Island region. Accurate ground control available for 6 sites around Ross Island was used to apply a shift of approximately +160 m (x direction) and +140 m (y direction) in the geographical position of the framework. This shift is considered to improve the accuracy of Map A, but the result is only an approximation. Global Positioning Systems (GPS, in WGS-84) observations of seals shown on Map A was not differentially corrected and are considered accurate to approximately 200 m of their true positions. While most of the positions shown are within 500 m of the sites where they might be expected, most appear systematically shifted to the east of the coastline. Several factors may account for this: error known to exist in the map framework, ambiguity in the actual position of the snowy coastline of White Island, and error within the GPS observations themselves. The several GPS observations recording seals high on White Island appear to be spurious.

6     Description of the Area

6(i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
White Island, part of the McMurdo volcanic complex, is situated approximately 20 km SE of the edge of the McMurdo Ice Shelf and 25 km SE of Hut Point, the location of McMurdo Station (United States) and Scott Base (New Zealand) on Ross Island. The roughly triangular island is approximately 30 km long and 15 km wide at its maximum, and rises to a maximum elevation of 762 m in several locations. The northern and western shores of White Island descend steeply, with water depths of 600 m occurring within 5 km of the island. The island is predominantly ice-covered with most of the rock outcrops being in the north, and is completely surrounded by the permanent shelf ice, between 10 m and 100 m in thickness, of the McMurdo Ice Shelf and Ross Ice Shelf. Black Island is situated 2.5 km west of White Island, separated by the shelf ice of White Strait. The GPS entry and exit points for the access road to Black Island from McMurdo are 78° 08' 19" S, 166° 50'43" E and 78° 11' 30" S, 166° 50' 43" E, respectively.

The westward movement of the McMurdo Ice Shelf is greatest at the northern end of White Island and movement of ice away from the NW coast ensures open water in cracks
in the shelf at this locality is present year-round. The Weddell seal population uses the cracks for access to seawater and feeding grounds under the shelf ice, and inhabits and breeds in the region within approximately 5-km of their positions. The cracks occur parallel to and within a few hundred meters of the coast of White Island, and intermittently extend along the coast from the northern extremity of the island up to 15 km to the south.

The Area includes 130 km² of the shelf ice and open-water cracks of both the Ross Ice Shelf and McMurdo Ice Shelf up to 5-km offshore northeast, north and west from the White Island coast. The Area extends along the coast from a northern point on the east side of Cape Spencer-Smith (167° 32' 42" E, 78° 00' 43" S) 19 km south to the southern-most significant coastal outcrop of rock on the NW side of White Island (167° 05' 00" E, 78° 09' 08" S). At this southern point, the boundary extends approximately 1 km due west to the 167° 00' 00" E parallel, from where it extends due north to the 78° 05' 00" S latitude, after which the boundary continues north at a constant distance of 5 km from the shore of White Island to the eastern extremity of the Area at 167° 41' 35" E, 77° 58' 48" S. The White Island coast is distinguished by a change in surface slope where the transition between the floating ice-shelf and land occurs: the transition is in some places gradual and indistinct, and the exact position of the coast is not precisely known. For this reason the coastal (generally east) boundary of the Area is considered to follow the line of the coast as evidenced by a surface elevation rise towards the land of two meters above the average elevation of the adjacent McMurdo Ice Shelf.

The Weddell seal population was estimated at around 25 to 30 animals in 1991. A 1981 study estimated "about 30" seals, while 1991 studies estimated 26 seals greater than one year of age. Between two and four live pups have been recorded in several seasons for which reliable data are available (1963-1968, 1981, 1991). The seals are physically isolated by the barrier of the shelf ice, and are unable to swim the 20 km distance under the ice to reach the seasonally open waters of McMurdo Sound: Weddell seals have been estimated to be capable of swimming a distance of around 4.6 km (2.5 nautical miles) on a single breath. The apparent isolation of the colony is substantiated by tag observation data on Weddell seals in McMurdo Sound, where in more than 100,000 tag observations over a 20-year period no tagged seals from White Island have been observed in McMurdo Sound. These data suggest that the White Island seals do not generally traverse the 20 km distance to the open ocean over the surface of the shelf ice.

Adult female seals begin to appear on the shelf ice in early November, one month later than other pupping areas in the southern Ross Sea. They pup at the NW extremity of the island during which time sub-adults and non-breeding adults can be found up to 15 km to the SW near open cracks on the west side of the island. Adult male seals are not observed on the sea-ice during this time, remaining in the water to establish and defend territories. The females remain on the ice until pups are weaned at about 6-8 weeks of age. After December, adults and sub-adults mix in the pupping area and along the cracks formed at the NW corner of the island.
It is thought that the harsh surface conditions confine the seals to the water during the winter months. Winter surface temperatures reach as low as -60°C and it is thought that the seals expend considerable time maintaining an open air hole in the cracks. This is thought to be a key factor limiting the population size, with pups and sub-adults possibly excluded from use of the limited breathing holes by more dominant and aggressive adults. Some pups may be unable to maintain their own breathing holes and may become trapped on the ice surface if dominant seals do not allow them entry into the water.

Studies have suggested that the Weddell seals at White Island have a similar diet to their counterparts at McMurdo Sound. Studies of fish otoliths recovered from Weddell seal fecal samples have revealed a diet comprised primarily of the nototheniid fish Pleuragramma antarcticum, also with fish from the genus Trematomus. Invertebrates are thought to comprise the remainder of the diet along with a cephalopod belonging to the family Mastogoteuthidae. Consumption of the latter was found to be considerably greater amongst White Island seals than those at McMurdo Sound.

Other aspects of the physiology and behavior of seals at White Island appear to differ from nearby populations at McMurdo Sound and at Terra Nova Bay: the seals at White Island appear to be significantly fatter, with recorded weights of up to 686 kg (1500 lb.) at White Island compared to no more than 500 kg at McMurdo Sound or Terra Nova Bay. A 1991 study revealed that on average adult female seals are considerably longer than those in McMurdo Sound, and young seals at White Island have been observed to exhibit faster growth rates than their McMurdo counterparts. Average diving depths at White Island are shallower than at McMurdo Sound.

6(ii) Restricted and managed zones within the Area
None.

6(iii) Structures within and near the Area
There are no structures within or near the Area.

6(iv) Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area
The nearest protected areas to NW White Island are on Ross Island: Arrival Heights (SSSI-2) adjacent to McMurdo Station is the closest at 20 km to the north; Cape Evans (SPA-25) and Cape Royds (SSSI-1 and SPA-25) are 47 km and 55 km north respectively; Tramway Ridge (SSSI-11) near the summit of Mt. Erebus is 60 km north; and Cape Crozier (SSSI-4) is 80 km NE.

7 Permit conditions

Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by appropriate national authorities. Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:

- it is issued only for scientific study of the Weddell seal ecosystem, or for scientific reasons or management purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection or review;
- the actions permitted will not jeopardize the ecological or scientific values of the Area;

- the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan;

- the permit, or a copy, shall be carried within the Area;

- a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the permit;

- permits shall be issued for a stated period.

7(i) Access to and movement within the Area
Access into the Area is permitted on foot, by vehicle, or by aircraft. Landing of aircraft and overflight lower than 750 m (~2,500 ft) within the Area, is normally prohibited. When required for scientific or management purposes, transient overflight down to a minimum altitude of 250 m (800 ft) or landing may be allowed within the Area. Conduct of such overflights or landings must be specifically authorized by permit. Use of helicopter smoke grenades is prohibited unless absolutely necessary for safety, and all grenades should be retrieved.

Vehicles are strongly discouraged from approaching closer than 50 m from seals, and closer approaches should be on foot. Vehicle and pedestrian traffic should be kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities and every reasonable effort should be made to minimize effects.

7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time or place
Activities that may be conducted within the Area include:

- scientific research that will not jeopardize the ecosystem of the Area;

- essential management activities, including monitoring.

7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a permit. All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be authorized by permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of installation. All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of contamination of the Area. Removal of specific equipment for which the permit has expired shall be a condition of the permit.

7(iv) Location of field camps
Permanent field camps are prohibited within the Area. Temporary campsites are permitted within the Area. There are no specific restrictions to a precise locality for temporary camp sites within the Area, although sites selected shall be more than 200 m
from the ice-shelf cracks inhabited by the seals, unless authorized by permit when deemed necessary to the accomplishment of specific research goals.

7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that can be brought into the Area
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the permit, shall be removed from the Area to the maximum extent practicable at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the permit was granted. Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes connected with the activity for which the permit has been granted. All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment is minimized.

7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna
Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in accordance with a separate permit issued under Article 3 of Annex II by the appropriate national authority specifically for this purpose. Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should, as a minimum standard, be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica.

7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a permit and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which was not brought into the Area by the permit holder or otherwise authorized, may be removed unless the impact of removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the appropriate authority should be notified.

7(viii) Disposal of waste
All wastes shall be removed from the Area.

7(ix) Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the management plan can continue to be met
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis or audit, or for protective measures.

Any specific sites of long-term monitoring shall be appropriately marked.

The use of explosives is prohibited within the Area.

To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the Area visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular concern are microbial or viral
introductions sourced from other seal populations. Precautions should also be exercised if 
such activities are being undertaken on seals originating from the White Island colony but 
which may have wandered outside of the Area.

7(x) Requirements for reports

Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should 
include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by 
SCAR. Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange 
of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activitites conducted by persons 
subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the management plan. Parties should, wherever possible, deposit 
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a 
record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in organizing 
the scientific use of the Area.
Map A - NW White Island, Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 18: topographic map

                                                 
                                 166°40'E                  167°00'E                  166°20'E                  167°40'E

Inset: Ross Island showing sites of nearby 
protected areas and stations

ROSS SEA

New College 
Valley                   Cape 
Royds                   Cape 
Evans
                                                                                                                              Tr[?]mley Ridge
                                                                                                                              *Lewis
                                                                                                                              Scott Base
                                                                                                                              Williams Field
                                                                                                                              Ross Island
                                                                                                                              McMurdo 
                                                                                                                              Annual Heights 
                                                                                                                              Ice Runway
                                                                                                                              McMurdo 
                                                                                                                              Station
                                                                                                                              *Arrival Heights
                                                                                                                              *Williams Field
                                                                                                                              Ross Ice Shelf
                                                                                                                              Black Island
                                                                                                                              Scott Base
                                                                                                                              *MB Evans

                                                                                                                              20km

                                                                 TM 9050S
McMurdo 
Ice Shelf


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
