 
1
IV CEP  
Working Paper WP-10 
Agenda item 4d 
Australia 
Original: English 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON THE OPEN-ENDED INTERSESSIONAL CONTACT 
 GROUP ON DISEASES OF ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE 
 
REPORT 1 – REVIEW AND RISK ASSESSMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
Report on the open-ended intersessional contact group on 
diseases of Antarctic wildlife 
Report 1 – Review and risk assessment 
 
Background 
 
CEP III agreed to the following terms of reference for the open-ended intersessional contact group 
(ICG) on diseases of Antarctic wildlife: 
 
That the contact group prepare an initial report for CEP IV which: 
• provides a review of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease 
causing agents in Antarctica and provides a risk assessment of those activities which may 
introduce or spread disease causing agents in Antarctica; 
• presents practical measures that might be implemented by Parties to diminish the risk to 
Antarctic wildlife of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease 
causing agents; and 
• presents practical measures that may be implemented to determine the cause of unusual 
wildlife mortality and morbidity events in Antarctica and to reduce the likelihood that 
human activity may exacerbate these events. 
(CEP III Report Paragraph 52) 
 
This paper reports on the work of the ICG in response to the first of the terms of reference. The 
ICG’s report is at Annex 1. Australia coordinated the process, with participation from AEON, 
ASOC, IAATO, Italy, Norway and Sweden. 
 
The review and risk assessment were used by the ICG to identify those human activities that are a 
priority for practical measures to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife from the introduction and 
spread by human activity of infectious disease causing agents. The ICG seeks CEP endorsement of 
the list of activities identified as priorities and will then complete work on practical measures to 
diminish risk. 
 
A draft report prepared by the ICG in response to the second of the terms of reference on practical 
measures is submitted as an annex to a separate working paper.  The ICG does not yet have a draft 
report in response to the third of the terms of reference. 
 
Outcome of review and risk assessment 
 
The ICG reached a number of conclusions on the basis of the review and risk assessment. 
 
Risk assessment methodology 
1. There is insufficient information available to conduct a reliable quantitative risk assessment 
of disease introduction and spread to Antarctic wildlife. 
2. A qualitative risk assessment approach should be sufficient to indicate priorities for 
precautionary measures. 
 
Historic information on disease 
3. No diseases have been demonstrated to have been introduced to Antarctic wildlife or spread 
by human activities. 
4. No systematic studies of disease in Antarctica have been undertaken and it is unlikely that 
conclusive evidence of human involvement in disease events would be available. 
 
3
5. There is recent evidence to indicate that some microorganisms have been introduced to 
Antarctic wildlife and spread as a consequence of human activity. 
6. Seven unusual mortality events in which disease was suspected have been recorded for 
Antarctic wildlife. Only one was investigated and the causes of the others are not known. 
7. A seal mass mortality event on the Auckland Islands in 1998 was well investigated but the 
causal agent is still not known with certainty, indicating that identification of the cause of a 
mortality event is not always possible.  
8. Clinical and serological evidence indicates that many Antarctic and sub-Antarctic penguins 
and seals have been exposed to infectious disease causing agents, indicating that they are not 
completely naïve populations with respect to disease. 
9. Captive Antarctic birds and seals have exhibited symptoms of a variety of diseases known in 
other wildlife populations, indicating that they are susceptible to a range of diseases. 
10. Disease is suspected in a significant number of the marine mammal mass mortality events 
reported in non-Antarctic regions. 
11. Most of the diseases on the Office International des Epizooties (OIE), the world organisation 
for animal health, List A of transmissible diseases with the potential for very serious and 
rapid spread occur in countries that participate in Antarctic activities. This indicates that, 
despite the economic incentives to prevent them and the large preventive effort, serious 
transmissible diseases of animals occur in most countries. 
12. Most OIE List A diseases would not be transmissible to birds and seals, however, there is 
evidence that birds and seals are susceptible to some, such as Newcastle disease and avian 
influenza.  
13. Newcastle disease has occurred widely in ATCP countries in recent years and may be the 
disease most likely to be a risk to Antarctic wildlife. 
14. Diseases most likely to be of risk of introduction and spread by people are those that are 
established in the home countries of people visiting Antarctica, can survive well without a 
host, do not require a vector that is not present and can infect different hosts, examples 
include Newcastle disease, avian influenza and the morbilliviruses causing canine and 
phocine distemper. 
15. It is not possible to identify all diseases with the potential for introduction and this is not 
necessary as a precursor to implementation of precautions. 
 
Factors that could influence disease introduction or spread 
16. Environmental conditions in parts of the Antarctic are similar to conditions elsewhere and so 
mechanisms for disease transfer that occur in these places are likely to also occur in 
Antarctica. 
17. The cold and lack of available water may make otherwise simple precautions difficult or 
impossible under some circumstances such as at remote field locations. 
18. Animal behaviour will influence the likelihood of disease transmission within populations 
and between species. 
19. Several Antarctic species migrate beyond the Antarctic to regions where they could be in 
contact with disease causing agents carried by other wildlife and in human waste at sewage 
effluent outfalls and waste disposal tips.  
20. Carrion feeders are most likely to be in direct contact with diseased or dying animals of 
other species. 
21. Opportunist scavengers are most likely to feed on waste generated by human activity if 
precautions are not taken to prevent access. 
22. Skuas are among the most likely species to be the point of entry of disease from waste 
because they are not shy of people and they will scavenge on station waste given the 
 
4
opportunity. They are also among the most likely routes of transfer to other species because 
of their habit of associating with other species. 
 
Human activities which may introduce or spread disease 
23. Activities undertaken before going to Antarctica, including precautions, will determine 
whether people bring infectious disease with them. 
24. Activities in Antarctica most likely to cause disease introduction or spread are those that 
involve close contact with wildlife or those that allow wildlife to come in contact with waste 
generated from human activities. 
25. Certain combinations of activities may significantly increase the risks. 
26. Precautions should be prioritised to target the most likely pathways of disease introduction 
or spread. 
27. Human activities identified as priorities for practical measures to diminish risk are, 
• Feeding of wildlife 
• Actions following discovery of unusual mortality events  
• Research that involves handling of Antarctic animals, particularly research on 
disease 
• Import of food, particularly poultry products 
• Waste disposal and sewage treatment 
• Use of equipment and clothing before departure to Antarctica 
• Serial visits to wildlife aggregations 
 
Recommendations 
 
It is recommended that: 
 
• the CEP accepts the attached report (Annex 1) from the ICG in fulfilment of the requirement 
to provide CEP with a review of the introduction and spread by human activity of infectious 
disease causing agents in Antarctica and to provide a risk assessment of those activities 
which may introduce or spread disease causing agents in Antarctica 
• the CEP notes the conclusions of the ICG 
• the CEP considers the list of human activities identified by the ICG as priorities for practical 
measures to diminish risk and, if appropriate, endorses these as the basis for further work by 
the ICG on practical measures to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife of the introduction 
and spread by human activity of infectious disease causing agents 
• the CEP encourages Parties, COMNAP, SCAR, CCAMLR and other expert bodies such as 
IUCN to nominate relevant specialists to participate in the continued work of the open-
ended contact group. 
 
 
 
1
ANNEX 1 
 
REVIEW OF THE INTRODUCTION AND SPREAD BY HUMAN ACTIVITY 
OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE CAUSING AGENTS AND RISK ASSESSMENT 
OF THOSE ACTIVITIES WHICH MAY INTRODUCE OR SPREAD 
DISEASE CAUSING AGENTS IN ANTARCTICA  
 
 
Table of contents 
1 
Methodology for review and risk assessment....................................................... 2 
2 
Diseases that may be a risk to Antarctic wildlife.................................................. 2 
2.1 
Diseases known to have been introduced to Antarctic wildlife or 
spread by human activity............................................................................. 2 
2.2 
Documented wildlife mass mortality events in Antarctica and the 
subantarctic.................................................................................................. 3 
2.3 
Indications that Antarctic and sub-Antarctic wildlife have been 
exposed to infectious disease causing agents .............................................. 4 
2.4 
Diseases considered a risk to wildlife in other regions................................ 7 
2.5 
Characteristics of disease that influence their risk..................................... 12 
3 
Factors that could influence the introduction and spread of disease among 
Antarctic wildlife ................................................................................................ 13 
3.1 
Environmental conditions .......................................................................... 13 
3.2 
Animal behaviour....................................................................................... 15 
4 
Human activities which may introduce or spread disease .................................. 16 
4.1 
Human activities and their implications for disease introduction or 
spread......................................................................................................... 16 
4.2 
Combinations of activities and the risk of disease introduction or 
spread......................................................................................................... 20 
4.3 
Human activities identified as priority risks .............................................. 21 
5 
Summary and conclusions .................................................................................. 21 
6 
References........................................................................................................... 24 
Attachment 1 – Risk assessment process................................................................... 32 
Likelihood.............................................................................................................. 33 
Consequences ........................................................................................................ 34 
Overall risk ............................................................................................................ 34 
 
 
2
1 
METHODOLOGY FOR REVIEW AND RISK ASSESSMENT 
 
The review and risk assessment process included the following steps, 
 
1. agreement on the risk assessment approach to be used (a discussion of the risk 
assessment procedure used is included as Attachment 1); 
2. review of historic information on wildlife diseases in Antarctica and 
elsewhere to determine if particular diseases should be a concern, including, 
a. diseases known to have been introduced to Antarctic wildlife or 
spread by human activity 
b. documented wildlife mass mortality events in Antarctica and the 
subantarctic 
c. indications that Antarctic and sub-Antarctic wildlife have been 
exposed to infectious disease causing agents 
d. diseases considered a risk to wildlife in other regions 
e. characteristics of disease that influence their risk 
3. assessment of characteristics of the Antarctic environment and biota to 
determine, 
a. whether there are particular characteristics that increase the chance of 
disease introduction, 
b. whether particular species are at greater risk; 
4. assessment of human activities to determine whether there are particular 
activities that have an increased chance of causing introduction or spread of 
disease. 
5. identification of combinations of activities (scenarios) that increase risk 
    
2 
DISEASES THAT MAY BE A RISK TO ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE 
2.1 
Diseases known to have been introduced to Antarctic wildlife or spread by 
human activity 
 
No diseases have been demonstrated to have been introduced to Antarctic wildlife or 
spread among them as a consequence of human activity. The epidemiology of disease 
in Antarctic wildlife has been little studied and on the basis of information currently 
available, it is unlikely that past disease events could have been attributed 
unequivocally to the activities of people. To date there have been no concerted studies 
designed to determine the origin of disease agents in Antarctic wildlife or their mode 
of introduction. Recent evidence indicates that some microorganisms have been 
introduced to Antarctic wildlife and spread as a consequence of human activity 
(Broman et al 2000, Palmgren et al 2000). 
 
In other regions of the world significant resources are directed towards determining 
the cause of disease outbreaks, often without success. However, despite the lack of 
direct proof of human involvement in many disease events, humans are recognised as 
potential disease vectors and appropriate precautions are taken. The absence of 
evidence for the past involvement of people in disease introduction in Antarctica is 
not evidence that people have not been involved or that they could not be involved in 
future.  
 
3
2.2 
Documented wildlife mass mortality events in Antarctica and the 
subantarctic 
 
Disease has been suspected in six recorded unusual mortality events of birds and one 
of seals in the Antarctic Treaty area. There have been few cases where a disease has 
been expressed and the cause identified. An exception is the case of avian cholera, 
Pasteurella multocida (strain 1-X73), in which four pairs of the brown skua, 
Catharacta lonnbergi, died suddenly on Livingston Island (Parmelee, 1979). The 
disease has also been observed on more than one occasion on sub-Antarctic Campbell 
Island where P. multocida has been isolated from dead rockhopper penguins (de Lisle 
et al, 1990). A 90% mortality of banded brown skuas at Admiralty Bay on King 
George Island in 1981 was reported as being similar to the mortality on Livingston 
Island (Trivelpiece et al, 1981) but no evidence for cause was reported. 
 
38 adult subantarctic skuas, Catharacta antarctica, were found dead at Hope Bay on 
the Antarctic Peninsula in 1990 (Montalti et al, 1996). The animals showed no 
unusual pathological signs but no analyses for disease agents were undertaken. 
 
37 sheathbills, Chionis alba, were found dead in the vicinity of Factory Cove on 
Signey Island between July and October 1965 (Howie et al 1968). Bacteriological, 
histological and parasitological examinations of three carcasses were negative. 
Extreme weather conditions could have contributed to some of the deaths and 
poisoning from chemical waste from a station was also suggested as a possible cause.  
 
Several hundred gentoo penguin chicks were found dead on Signy Island, Antarctica 
(MacDonald and Conroy, 1971). The symptoms were described as similar to the viral 
disease puffinosis that occurs in Manx shearwaters (Puffinus puffinus). Body 
condition appeared to be good, however, all had multiple ulcers, 2-4 mm in diameter, 
on the dorsal surfaces of their feet. Many were found lying face down and those that 
were still alive were unable to stand unaided. The causal agent was not identified. 
Adélie and chinstrap penguins in adjacent colonies were not affected. 
 
Large numbers of plump and apparently well-nourished Adélie penguin chicks were 
found dead and dying at Low Tongue approximately 40 km west of Mawson in 
February 1972 (Kerry et al, 1996). 65% of chicks had died recently and many of those 
still alive were found face down and could not stand on their own. The cause of death 
was not investigated at the time and remains unknown. 
 
At least 1500 crabeater seals, Lobodon carcinophagus, were found dead in the Crown 
Prince Gustav Channel, Antarctic Peninsula in 1955 (Laws and Taylor, 1957). All 
affected seals had swollen necks and blood running from their mouths, on dissection 
their guts were empty, their livers pallid and pus oozed from the neck glands when 
incised (Fuchs, 1982). The cause was suspected to be a highly contagious virus 
possibly exacerbated by stress from crowding and partial starvation as a result of 
being trapped by ice. The cause of death was not investigated and remains unknown. 
 
A mass mortality of New Zealand sea lions, Phocarctos hookeri, on the New Zealand 
sub-Antarctic Auckland Islands, in January-February 1998 (Gales and Childerhouse, 
1999) is better documented than any of the events that occurred in the Antarctic. 
About 1600 pups and an unrecorded number of adults died. At the start of the event 
 
4
dead pups were in good condition (plenty of fat) but as the event progressed more 
lean and apparently starving pups were found. Pups had few clinical signs of disease 
although some showed paralysis in the hind limbs that appeared to be associated with 
an abscess. Other clinical signs were noted but these could have been secondary. The 
most common symptom of the adults was swelling in the throat region that appeared 
to be caused by an extensive abscess in the tissue surrounding the salivary gland. 
Some animals also had a number of raised swellings, about 1 cm in diameter in the 
ventral region of the body. A few adults were apparently paralysed in the hind limbs 
as seen in the pups. Animals were autopsied and samples of tissue, serum, milk and 
faeces were collected. Examination included gross pathology, histopathology, 
virology, serology, parasitology and chemical analysis for organochlorine pesticides. 
Other investigations included analysis for algal biotoxins and documentation of 
oceanographic conditions. A previously unidentified bacterium (Campylobacter like) 
is thought to have been the primary pathogenic agent, however, despite the thorough 
investigation, the cause remains uncertain. This illustrates the difficulty in identifying 
causal agents for mass mortalities. 
 
These events indicate that mass mortalities occur in Antarctic and sub-Antarctic 
wildlife and that unless samples are collected during or soon after the event there is 
very little likelihood of identifying the causal agent. The experience on the Auckland 
Islands demonstrates that even after intense sampling and investigation by skilled 
people with appropriate expertise the causative agent may not be identified. If the 
causative agent is not known it is not likely that humans could be implicated or 
disregarded with confidence as agents of introduction or spread of the causative agent. 
2.3 
Indications that Antarctic and sub-Antarctic wildlife have been exposed to 
infectious disease causing agents 
 
Evidence from clinical examination, pathology and serology indicates that Antarctic 
and sub-Antarctic wildlife have been exposed to a variety of infectious disease 
causing agents in the past (Table 1). Much of the evidence is based on antibody 
reactions and in most cases there were no clinical signs of disease. Serological 
evidence, such as anti-body reactions, is not conclusive proof of past exposure to 
infectious disease causing agents. To confirm the presence of a disease causing agent 
it must be isolated, however, isolation of an agent does not prove that it has caused 
disease.  
 
Serological evidence (Table 1) indicates that Antarctic wildlife have been exposed to 
a variety of agents that cause antibody reactions that are the same as, or similar to, 
those caused by known infectious disease causing agents. The presence of antibodies 
also indicates that these species have active immune systems and have survived 
exposure to these agents. 
 
There are no published accounts of systematic studies designed to determine whether 
humans have been involved in the introduction or spread of infectious disease causing 
agents to Antarctica. As a consequence, there is no conclusive evidence that human 
activity has or has not been responsible for the introduction to the Antarctic region of 
the agents causing the antibody reactions or the pathological or clinical signs observed 
in Antarctic wildlife. 
 
5
Table 1. Evidence for exposure of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic birds and mammals to 
infectious disease causing agents (based on Clark and Kerry, 2000 and other sources) 
 
Disease causing agent 
and associated disease 
Host species and 
location 
Type of 
evidence 
Reference 
Bacteria and fungi 
Borrelia burgdorferi sensu 
lato (Lyme disease) 
King penguins 
(Crozet) 
Antibodies 
Gauthier-Clerc et al 1999 
Salmonella 
 
 
Salmonella enteritidis 
 
Salmonella enteritidis 
Adélie penguins (Ross 
Island) and south polar 
skuas 
Gentoo penguins (Bird 
Island) 
Fur seals, black 
browed albatross, 
gentoo penguins 
Isolated 
 
 
Isolated 
 
Isolated 
Oelke and Steiniger 1973 
 
 
Olsen et al 1996 
 
Palmgren et al 2000 
Chlamydia sp 
 
 
 
 
Chlamydia psittaci 
Emperor penguin 
(Auster) and 
rockhopper, royal and 
gentoo penguins 
(Macquarie Island) 
Brown skua 
Antibodies 
 
 
 
 
DNA detection 
Moore and Cameron 1969, 
Cameron 1968 
 
 
 
Herman et al 2000 
Pastuerella multocida 
(avian cholera) 
Rockhopper penguins 
(Campbell Island) 
Brown skua (Palmer) 
Isolated 
 
Mortality, 
agent isolated 
Lisle et al 1990 
 
Parmelee et al 1978 
Brucella sp (brucellosis) 
Weddell and fur seals 
Antibodies 
Retamal et al 2000, Blank 
et al 2000 
Campylobacter jejuni 
Birds and seals (South 
Georgia) 
Isolated 
Broman et al 2000 
Mycobacteria (tuberculosis) 
Fur seal 
Pathology, 
isolated 
Bastida et al 1999 
Viruses 
Avian  paramyxovirus 
(Newcastle disease) 
 
Non-pathogenic 
paramyxovirus strains 
Adélie and royal 
penguins 
 
Royal and king 
penguins 
Adélie penguins 
Antibodies 
 
 
Isolated 
 
Antibodies 
Morgan et al 1978,  
 
 
Morgan and Westbury 
1988 
Morgan and Westbury 
1981 
Avian influenza (influenza 
A) 
Adélie penguins 
(Casey) 
Adélie penguins and 
Antarctic skuas (Ross 
Sea)  
Antibodies 
 
Antibodies 
Morgan and Westbury 
1981 
Austin and Webster 1993 
Flaviviruses 
Various penguins 
(sub-Antarctic) 
Antibodies 
Morgan et al 1985 
Birnavirus (infectious bursal 
disease virus or Gumboro 
disease) 
Shearwaters, Adélie 
and emperor penguins 
Antibodies 
Gardner et al 1997 
Avian  adenovirus 
Rockhopper penguins 
Antibodies 
Karesh 1999 
Avian encephalomyelitis 
virus 
Rockhopper penguins 
Antibodies 
Karesh 1999 
Coronavirus (infectious 
bronchitis virus) 
Rockhopper penguins 
Antibodies 
Karesh 1999 
Avian reovirus 
Rockhopper penguins 
Antibodies 
Karesh 1999 
Unknown virus (puffinosis) 
Gentoo penguins 
(Signy Island) 
Clinical signs 
similar to those 
MacDonald and Conroy 
1971 
 
6
of puffinosis 
Morbilliviruses  
Canine distemper virus 
 
Leopard and crabeater 
seals (Antarctic 
Peninsula) 
 
Antibodies 
 
Bengtson and Boveng 1991 
Herpesviruses 
European phocine 
herpesvirus 
 
 
 
Phocine herpesvirus 
 
Weddell and crabeater 
seals (Weddell Sea) 
 
 
Weddell seal 
 
Clinical signs 
of respiratory 
disease and 
antibodies to 
herpesvirus 
Antibodies 
 
Harder et al 1991 
 
 
 
 
Stenvers et al., 1992 
 
The occurrence of disease among captive representatives of Antarctic species (Table 
2) indicates that, under certain conditions, these animals are susceptible to, and will 
express the symptoms of, diseases known from non-Antarctic regions. 
 
Table 2. Evidence of infectious disease in captive Antarctic birds and mammals 
 
Disease causing agent 
(and associated 
disease) 
Host species 
Evidence 
Reference 
Protozoa 
Plasmodium (avian malaria) 
Penguins 
 
King penguin 
Histopathology 
 
Clinical signs, agent 
isolated 
Stoskopf and Beier 
1979 
Penrith et al 1996 
Coccidia (coccidiosis) 
Common seals 
Clinical signs, 
histopathology, agent 
isolated 
Munro and Synge 
1991 
Bacteria and fungi 
Salmonella 
Penguins 
 
Cockburn 1947 
Pastuerella multocida (avian 
cholera) 
Unspecified seals 
 
Lynch 1999 
Non-specific bacterial 
infection (bumblefoot) 
Penguins 
Clinical signs 
Gailey-Phipps 1978, 
Stoskopf and Beall 
1980 
Clostridium perfringens 
King Penguins 
Gentoo penguins 
Clinical signs, agent 
isolated 
Clinical signs, agent 
isolated 
Penrith et al 1996 
Fielding 2000 
Aspergillus (aspergillosis) 
Penguins 
 
Gentoo penguins 
Presence of spores 
 
Clinical signs, agent 
isolated 
Stoskopf and Beall 
1980 
Fielding 2000, Flach 
et al 1990 
Viruses 
Avian  paramyxovirus 
(Newcastle Disease) 
Adélie penguin 
 
King penguins  
Clinical signs of 
Newcastle disease 
Isolated 
Pierson and Pfow 
1975 
Krauss et al 1963 
Herpesvirus-like 
Blackfooted 
penguins 
Clinical signs, isolated 
and electron microscopy 
Kincaid et al 1988 
 
 
 
 
7
2.4 
Diseases considered a risk to wildlife in other regions 
 
There is an enormous literature reporting diseases and the occurrence of infectious 
disease causing agents among wild stocks of non-Antarctic species of seals and 
penguins and other sea mammals and sea-birds. It is not possible or necessary to 
undertake a complete review of this literature. Examples are provided to illustrate the 
range of diseases reported on the basis of clinical signs, pathology and antibody 
reactions (Table 3). Clearly elsewhere in the world many diseases are circulating 
actively among birds and marine mammals.   
 
Table 3. Evidence of infectious disease in wild stocks of non-Antarctic seals, and 
penguin and other marine mammals and sea-birds. 
 
Disease causing agent (and 
associated disease) 
Host species 
Evidence 
Reference 
Ectoparasites 
Nasal mites 
Young fur seals 
Presence 
Kim et al 1980 
Endoparasitic Worms 
Nematodes - gastric 
Seals 
Presence 
Baker 1987, Baker 
1989 
Nematodes - hookworm 
Seals 
Presence 
Abegglen et al 1958, 
George-Nascimento 
et al 1992, Lyons et 
al 1997 
Nematodes – lungworm 
Microfilaria 
Seals 
Presence 
Ridgeway et al 1972 
Protozoa 
Giardia 
Ringed seals 
(Arctic) 
Antibodies 
Olson 1997 
Bacteria and fungi 
Vancomycin resistant Enterococci 
Black headed gulls 
(Sweden) 
Isolated 
Sellin et al 2000 
Brucella (Brucellosis) 
Many marine 
mammals 
including seals, 
whales dolphins 
Antibodies, agent 
isolated  
Tryland et al 1999, 
Jensen et al 1999, 
Garner et al 1997 
 
Salmonella 
 
 
 
Antibiotic resistant Salmonella 
Californian sea 
lions. Northern fur 
seals 
 
Black headed gulls 
(Sweden) 
Isolated 
Gilmartin 1979, 
Baker et al 1995, 
Stroud and Roelke 
1980 
Palmgren et al 1997 
Leptospirosis 
(meningoenchephalomyelitis) 
California sea 
lions, northern fur 
seals 
Isolated and 
antibodies 
Dierauf et al 1985, 
Smith 1977 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(tuberculosis) 
New Zealand and 
Australian fur 
seals, Australian 
sea lions 
Arctic marine 
mammals 
Isolated 
Forshaw 1991, 
Cousins et al 1993, 
Romano et al 1995 
 
Tryland, 2000 
Mycoplasma 
Northern 
hemisphere seals 
Isolated and 
inoculation 
Geraci et al 1984 
Borrelia burgdorferi s.l. 
Puffins (Northern 
Hemisphere) 
Isolated 
Gylfe et al 1999 
 
8
Aspergillus 
Little penguin 
(Australia) 
 
Obendorf and McColl 
1980 
Viruses 
Avian  paramyxovirus 
(Newcastle Disease) 
Double crested 
cormorants 
 
Little penguins 
Clinical signs, 
agent isolated, 
antibodies. 
Antibodies 
Meteyer et al 1997, 
Glaser et al 1999 
 
Morgan et al 1985 
Avian influenza (influenza A) 
Harbour seals 
(New England) 
 
Ring billed gulls, 
common terns 
Pathology, 
isolation and 
inoculation. 
Antibodies, 
isolated agent and 
electron 
microscopy 
Geraci et al 1982; 
Geraci et al 1984; 
Callan et al 1995 
Graves 1992, Becker 
1966 
Influenza B 
Harbor seals 
(Dutch coast) 
Antibodies and 
virus isolated 
Osterhaus et al 2000 
Birnavirus (infectious bursal 
disease virus or Gumboro disease) 
Fleshy footed 
shear water, sooty 
tern, silver gull 
Antibodies 
Wilcox et al 1983 
Calicivirus (San Miguel sea lion 
virus) 
 
(Vesicular disease) 
Grey Seals (North 
Atlantic) 
 
White tern 
Isolated and 
electron 
microscopy 
Clinical signs, 
DNA probe 
Stack et al 1993, 
Barlough et al 1986 
 
Poet et al 1996 
Parapox virus 
Grey Seals (North 
Atlantic) 
 
Manx shearwater 
Isolated and 
electron 
microscopy. 
Clinical signs, 
agent isolated, 
electron 
microscopy, 
inoculation 
Stack et al 1993; 
Simpson et al 1994; 
Nettleton et al 1995 
Nuttal et al 1985 
Rabies virus 
Ringed seals 
(Svalbard) 
Isolated and 
inoculation 
Odegaard 1981 
Adenovirus (viral hepatitis) 
California seal 
lions 
Isolated and 
electron 
microscopy 
Brit et al 1979; 
Dierauf 1981 
Herpervirus 
Harbor seals 
Serology, isolated 
and electron 
microscopy 
Osterhaus et al 1985 
Unknown virus (puffinosis) 
Manx shearwaters 
Clinical signs 
Harris 1965 
Morbilliviruses  
phocine distemper virus and 
canine distemper virus 
Lake Baikal seals 
 
 
Harbour and grey 
seals (North and 
Baltic Seas) 
 
Harp seals (Arctic) 
 
 
 
Monk seals (west 
Africa) 
 
Caspian seals 
Mass mortality 
 
 
Isolated 
 
 
 
Antibodies 
 
 
 
 
Antibodies, agent 
isolated 
 
Serology, PCR 
Grachev et al 1989, 
Mamaev 1995, 
Barrett et al 1995 
Osterhaus et al 1988 
 
 
 
Goodhart 1988, Dietz 
et al 1989, Markussen 
and Have 1992, 
Barrett et al 1995 
Osterhaus et al 1997 
 
 
Kennedy et al 2000 
 
 
9
There have been suggestions that some of these diseases are linked to human activity, 
such as exposure of wildlife to domestic animals (Barrett et al 1995), pollution (Harve 
et al 1999), however, these links are very difficult to prove and there is little 
conclusive evidence for human involvement. One notable exception is a controlled 
experiment that indicated pollution might have contributed to the severity and extent 
of recent morbillivirus infections among seals (Osterhaus et al 1995). 
 
Of 22 marine mammal mortality events reported by the US National Marine Mammal 
Fisheries Service (of NOAA) for the period 1978-1996 (Wilkinson, 1996) bacterial or 
viral diseases were implicated in 9, algal biotoxins were implicated in 5, 
environmental extremes (El Nino) were implicated in 2, oil spill or toxic discharge 
were implicated in 2, gun shot was the cause of 1 and the causes of 4 were not 
determined (disease and biotoxins were together implicated as the cause of one 
event). Bacterial or viral diseases have therefore been implicated in nearly half these 
mass mortality events. Two cases were identified as influenza A virus in seals, two as 
phocine distemper virus (a morbillivirus), 4 cases as an undetermined morbillivirus (3 
in dolphins and 1 in seals) and one case as the bacterial disease, leptospirosis, in sea 
lions. 
  
The Office International des Epizooties (OIE), the world organisation for animal 
health, has a list of 15 transmissible diseases (OIE List A) which have the potential 
for very serious and rapid spread, irrespective of national borders, which are of 
serious socio-economic or public health consequence and which are of major 
importance in the international trade of animals and animal products (Table 4). 
Reports on these diseases must be provided to the OIE when the disease first occurs 
and at monthly intervals until the area is declared free of the disease. The OIE also 
has a list of over 90 transmissible diseases (OIE List B) which are considered to be of 
socio-economic and/or public health importance within countries and which are 
significant in the international trade of animals and animal products.  
 
Table 4. The OIE List A of transmissible diseases with potential for very serious and 
rapid spread irrespective of national borders, which are of serious socio-economic or 
public health consequence and which are of major importance in the international 
trade of animals and animal products. 
 
Disease and 
causative agent 
Hosts 
Mode of 
transmission 
Number of ATCP 
countries 
experiencing 
outbreaks (and 
number of 
outbreaks in ATCP 
countries) during 
1996-99 
Foot and mouth 
disease  
Family: Picornaviradae 
Genus: Aphthovirus 
Most livestock 
Direct and indirect contact 
(droplets). Animate 
vectors (humans). 
Inanimate vectors 
(vehicles etc), airborne (60 
km overland, 300 km over 
sea) 
6 (6691) 
Vesicular stomatitis 
Human 
Contamination by 
4 (866) 
 
10
Family: Rhabdoviridae 
Genus: Vesiculovirus 
Domestic: horses, 
sheep and pigs 
Wild: white tailed 
deer and many 
small tropical 
mammals 
transcutaneous or 
transmucosal route 
Arthropod transmission 
Swine vesicular 
disease  
Family: Picornaviradae 
Genus: Enterovirus 
Humans 
Pigs 
 
Direct contact or contact 
with excretions from 
infected animals. 
Faecal contamination 
Meat scraps and swill 
1 (62) 
Rinderpest  
Family: 
Paramyxoviridae 
Genus: Morbillivirus 
Cattle, sheep, goats 
and pigs. 
Many species of 
wild animal 
Direct or close indirect 
contact 
1 (1) 
Peste des petits 
ruminants  
Family: 
Paramyxoviridae 
Genus: Morbillivirus 
Sheep and goats. 
Captive wild 
ungulates 
Direct contact between 
animals 
1 (248) 
Contagious bovine 
pleuropneumonia 
Bacterial, Mycoplasma 
Mycoplasma mycoides 
Cattle, zebu and 
water buffalo. Wild 
bovids are resistant 
Aerial, mostly by direct 
contact: droplets from 
coughing, saliva and urine 
0 (0) 
Lumpy skin disease 
Family: Poxviridae 
Genus: Capripoxvirus 
Cattle, zebu, 
domestic buffalo, 
oryx, giraffe and 
impala 
Infected saliva. No 
specific vector identified 
but flies and mosquitos 
could play a role 
1 (909) 
Rift Valley fever 
Family: Bunyaviridae 
Genus: Phlebovirus 
Cattle, sheep, 
goats, camels, 
rodents, wild 
ruminants. African 
monkees and 
domestic 
carnivores 
Human very 
susceptible 
Haematophagous 
mosquitoes of many 
genera. 
Direct contact when 
handling infected animals 
and meat 
1 (1) 
Bluetongue  
Family: Reoviridae 
Genus: Orbivirus 
Sheep (as disease) 
also in cattle, 
goats, camels and 
wild ruminants as 
inapparent 
infection 
Biological vectors 
Culicoides spp. 
9 (1973) 
Sheep pox and goat 
pox 
Family: Poxviridae 
Genus: Capripoxvirus 
Sheep and goats 
Direct contact, inhalation, 
subcutaneous inoculation; 
indirect transmission by 
contaminated implements, 
vehicles or products; 
insects as mechanical 
vectors 
3 (2148) 
African horse sickness 
Family: Reoviridae 
Genus: Orbivirus 
Reservoir host 
unknown; usual 
host are horses, 
mules, donkeys, 
zebra; occasionally 
elephants, onager, 
camels, dogs 
Not directly contagious; 
usually transmitted by 
Culicoides spp, 
occasionally by 
mosquitoes and ticks 
1 (259) 
African swine fever 
Unclassified DNA 
virus, with 
Pigs including 
some wild pigs 
Direct contact with sick 
animals; feeding on 
infected meat; soft ticks of 
2 (140) 
 
11
characteristics of 
Iridovirus and Poxvirus 
the genus Ornithodoros; 
vehicles, implements, 
clothes 
Classical swine fever 
Family: Flaviviridae 
Genus: Pestivirus 
Pigs and wild boar 
Direct contact with sick 
animals; vistors to 
infected areas and 
implements, vehicles; 
insufficiently cooked 
waste food fed to pigs 
12 (1506) 
Highly pathogenic 
avian influenza 
Family: 
Orthomyxoviridae 
Genus: Influenzavirus 
A (subtypes H5 and 
H7) 
Isolated in 
chickens and 
turkeys; assumed 
all avians are 
susceptible 
Direct contact with 
secretions especially 
faeces; contaminated feed, 
water, equipment, 
clothing; carrier waterfowl 
and sea birds; eggs 
2 (77) 
Newcastle disease 
Family: 
Paramyxoviridae 
Genus: Paramyxovirus 
Many species of 
domestic and wild 
birds 
Direct contact with 
secretions especially 
faeces; contaminated 
water, clothing, 
implements; carriers in 
psittacine and other birds 
19 (2623) 
 
Fourteen of the 15 OIE List A diseases have occurred within the 27 Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Party (ATCP) countries during the period 1996-1999 for which OIE 
notification data is currently available. The only List A disease not to have occurred 
in an ATCP country during the reporting period is contagious bovine 
pleuropneumonia. 22 of the 27 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties reported at least 
one of the List A diseases within this period. The OIE database records that there have 
been cases of at least one List A disease in the other five ATCP countries during the 
50 years preceding the OIE notification period. Within the ATCP countries the most 
widely reported List A disease is Newcastle disease, which was reported by 19 ATCP 
countries in the period 1996-1999. 2623 outbreaks of Newcastle disease were reported 
from ATCP countries in the period. 
 
The occurrence of OIE List A diseases in ATCP countries indicates that infectious 
diseases of animals, with the potential for very serious and rapid spread, are occurring 
in domestic animal stocks and in wildlife populations in countries actively involved in 
Antarctic operations. Many of the List A diseases require the presence of specific 
vectors for transmission or for completion of their life cycle. Many of these vectors 
are not present in Antarctica and therefore these diseases are not likely to infect 
Antarctic animals. It is also likely that Antarctic wildlife would not be susceptible to 
many of the List A diseases even if they were to come in contact with them. For 
example, diseases that are known to be limited to particular animal groups, such as 
swine vesicular disease, may be less likely to make the switch to Antarctic species 
than diseases that are known to be capable of infecting diverse species. However, 
there is good evidence to indicate that Antarctic birds and seals could be susceptible 
to at least two of the List A diseases. Captive penguins have been diagnosed with the 
clinical signs of Newcastle disease (Pierson and Pfow 1975) and some non-Antarctic 
seals have been diagnosed with avian influenza (Geraci et al 1982). 
 
Many important wildlife diseases do not appear on the OIE lists because they are not 
significant in the international trade of animals and animal products. Occurrences of 
these diseases are not required to be reported and as a consequence their frequency of 
 
12
occurrence and worldwide regional distribution are not known. It will never be 
possible to identify in advance all diseases that could be introduced to Antarctic 
wildlife. Precautions implemented in response to known diseases may also reduce the 
risk from unknown diseases. 
2.5 
Characteristics of disease that influence their risk 
 
The individual characteristics of diseases will influence whether they are more likely 
to be translocated and successfully introduced to previously naïve populations (Table 
5). Among the most critical characteristics are the duration of survival of the pathogen 
in a potentially infective form and its means of transmission (Wilson 1995). Infectious 
Newcastle disease has been recovered from meat after 250 days at -14oC to -20 oC and 
from skin and bone marrow after 250 days at -4 oC (Asplin, 1949). Avian Influenza  
virus can survive in faeces for at least 35 days at 4 oC, virus is stable over a pH range 
of 5.5 – 8 and can remain infective in lake water for up to 4 days at 22 oC and over 30 
days at 0 oC (Webster et al, 1978). Survival is prolonged by low relative humidity and 
low temperature in aerosols whereas low temperature and high moisture levels 
prolong survival in faeces. Avian Influenza virus survives only several days in 
carcases at ambient temperature compared with up to 23 days at refrigeration 
temperatures. 
 
Disease agents that cannot remain viable without a host will not be successfully 
transferred to Antarctica by people on equipment such as vehicles and clothing. 
Diseases that require the direct transfer of body fluids are unlikely to be mediated by 
humans except under very particular circumstances, such as by some invasive 
scientific procedures.  Diseases with an obligate relationship with a specific vector 
will not become established if the vector is not present. 
 
  Table 5. Characteristics of diseases or their causative agents and implications for 
transmission in Antarctica 
 
Characteristic of 
disease 
Implications for 
transmission of 
disease in Antarctica 
Examples 
Present in animal 
populations of countries 
participating in 
Antarctic activities 
Creates the possibility that 
people or equipment may be 
in contact with the disease 
before visiting Antarctica 
Newcastle disease, avian influenza 
Requires intervention by 
vector 
Disease cannot be 
transmitted if vector is not 
present; disease may 
become a risk if the vector 
extends its geographic 
range.  
Blue tongue (OIE List A) is unlikely to be a 
risk to Antarctic wildlife because the 
vectors, Culicoides spp, are not present. 
Lyme disease spirochetes may be involved 
in enzootic cycles on sub-Antarctic islands 
involving seabirds and the sea-bird 
associated tick Ixodes uriae.   
Able to survive well 
without host 
Increases the chance of 
transmission on equipment, 
vehicles or clothing 
Newcastle disease, avian influenza, 
infectious bursal disease virus 
Tendency to form new 
strains  
Host switching 
Morbilliviruses 
Ability to infect 
different hosts across 
taxonomic groups 
Caliciviruses can infect 
mammals, birds, fish and 
maybe molluscs 
Caliciviruses (Smith et al 1998) 
 
13
 
Some pathogens, particularly viruses, are capable of infecting different host species. 
This may be because the pathogen is flexible, such as the caliciviruses, or it may be 
that it mutates rapidly to form new strains, for example, the morbilliviruses. 
 
Many common diseases, including some of the OIE List A diseases, require a vector 
for transmission or for completion of their life cycle. Although many disease vectors 
are not present in Antarctica some, such as ticks of the genus Ixodes, have been 
recorded among parasites collected from Antarctic and sub-Antarctic seals and birds 
(Table 6).  
 
Table 6. Parasites recorded from Antarctic penguins and seals 
 
 
Host species and 
location 
Reference 
Ectoparasites 
Ticks – 
Ixodes 
Penguins and seals – sub-
Antarctic and Antarctic 
Peninsula 
Zumpt, 1952, Murray and Vestjens 1967, Hawkey et al 
1989, Murray et al 1990, Bergström et al 1999a, 
Bergström et al 1999b 
Fleas 
Penguins – sub-Antarctic 
only 
Dunnet 1964, Murray et al 1967, Murray et al 1990 
Biting lice 
Penguin – most sub-
Antarctic and Antarctic 
species 
Murray 1964, Murray et al 1990 
Sucking lice 
Seals – all species 
Murray et al 1965, Murray 1967, Harder et al 1991 
Endoparasitic worms 
Nematodes 
Penguins and seals 
Mawson 1953, 
Cestodes 
Penguins and seals 
Prudoe 1969,  
Trematodes 
Seals 
 
 
Diseases most likely to be of risk of introduction and spread by people are those that 
are established in the home countries of people visiting the Antarctic, can survive well 
without a host, do not require a vector that is not present and are able to infect 
different hosts. There are several diseases, common elsewhere, that are likely to result 
in the death of many animals if they are introduced successfully to Antarctic 
populations, examples include Newcastle disease, avian influenza and the 
morbilliviruses that cause canine and phocine distemper. 
 
3 
FACTORS THAT COULD INFLUENCE THE INTRODUCTION AND 
SPREAD OF DISEASE AMONG ANTARCTIC WILDLIFE 
3.1 
Environmental conditions  
 
Environmental conditions will influence the chance of disease introduction and spread 
both directly and indirectly (Table 7). Factors such as temperature, humidity, wind, 
available water etc will directly influence the survival times of pathogens in the 
environment. There is little published work on the survivability of pathogens in 
Antarctica, however, the information available indicates that micro-organisms may 
survive in Antarctica at least as well as they do in other environments. Human enteric 
bacteria introduced to the Antarctic environment with untreated sewage effluent are 
able to persist for long periods (up to 54 days) in a viable but non-culturable state 
 
14
(Smith et al 1994). The human bacterium Clostridium perfringens is known to persist 
in Antarctic marine sediments and be ingested by marine invertebrates (Edwards et al 
1998, Conlon et al 2000). There is some indication that seals in the vicinity of a 
sewage outfall can be infected by Clostridium perfringens (McFeters and Edwards, in 
press, cited in Conlon et al 2000). Environmental conditions may extend the viability 
of some disease causing agents and reduce the viability of others. 
 
Table 7. Environmental conditions in Antarctica and implications for disease 
transmission. 
 
Environmental 
condition 
Implication to survival or 
transmission of disease causing 
agents 
Implication to precautions 
against transmission of 
disease causing agents 
Temperature 
Some infectious agents may be susceptible 
to low temperatures; others may survive 
well. Temperature controls availability of 
water (see below). Low temperatures may 
render introduced vectors immobile but 
may not effect indigenous vectors. 
Low temperature can make 
otherwise simple precautions 
difficult or impossible to 
implement. Warming of parts of 
Antarctica may increase the range 
of some vectors. 
Humidity 
Low humidity may cause desiccation of 
some pathogens and reduce survival away 
from a host. Higher humidity in the 
maritime environment of the Antarctic 
Peninsula may add transmission by 
droplets. 
 
Availability of water 
Shortage of water may cause desiccation 
of some pathogens and reduce survival 
away from a host 
Lack of available water can make 
otherwise simple precautions 
difficult or impossible to 
implement  
Winds 
High winds may cause desiccation of some 
pathogens and reduce survival away from 
a host; wind may assist transmission of 
disease as aerosol 
High winds can make otherwise 
simple precautions difficult or 
impossible to implement 
Snow cover 
Snow at colonies may protect debris, 
feathers, faeces from dispersion by wind; 
on melting it provides a source of water 
 
Sea-ice 
Annual sea-ice is transient; a site that is 
infected by disease-causing agents will 
eventually be replaced. 
For some species replacement of 
annual sea-ice may provide an 
effective natural method for 
limiting disease transfer between 
years 
Distance from other 
continents 
May limit contact with some species 
including humans 
Provides opportunity for 
quarantine procedures 
 
Environmental conditions across the continent are not constant and regional 
differences may influence the likelihood of disease transmission. The maritime 
environment of the Antarctic Peninsula is warmer and more humid than eastern 
Antarctica. The distance separating Antarctica from other land masses also varies 
considerably depending on locality and will influence the frequency of interactions 
between Antarctic species and animals from other regions. 
 
Indirectly the environment determines all aspects of animal behaviour and, as a 
consequence, can influence disease transfer between animals. The environment also 
affects the activities that people undertake, which in turn, can influence their role in 
disease transfer. In particular, the difficult nature of working in Antarctica can reduce 
 
15
human motivation to follow precautionary procedures and, in a practical sense, the 
scarcity of liquid water at some locations can make otherwise simple precautions a 
major burden. 
3.2 
Animal behaviour  
 
Animal behaviour will influence the potential for introduction and spread of 
infectious disease-causing agents in several ways (Table 8). The tendency to form 
aggregations will increase the opportunities for infectious agents to be spread within a 
population. The mode of feeding will influence the probability of coming into contact 
with the body fluids of other species. Of all feeding types, scavengers and carrion 
feeders are probably the ones most likely to be in contact with tissues of infected 
animals or human food. Migration patterns will affect the chance that a species may 
translocate a disease-causing agent. Many species travel between Antarctica and other 
regions and may be exposed to diseases by contact with wildlife or as a consequence 
of human activity, such as waste disposal, in these regions. 
  
The animals most likely to come into contact with pathogens as a result of human 
activity are those that will feed on waste generated by people given the opportunity. 
Species that also scavenge at aggregations, such as breeding colonies, are most likely 
to be agents of disease transfer to other Antarctic species. 
 
Table 8. Behaviour of Antarctic wildlife and implications for disease transmission 
 
Behaviour 
Implications to disease transmission 
Species 
Solitary or colonial 
Solitary or 
small groups 
 
Leopard seals 
Dispersed 
colony 
May have only limited intra-specific 
interactions within the colony but may form 
aggregations during the breeding season at 
other locations 
Wilson’s storm petrels, snow 
petrels 
Dense colony 
on ice 
Forms colony on ‘fresh’ ice at the start of each 
breeding season so no chance that infectious 
agents remaining from previous season will be 
transmitted to reformed colony 
Emperor penguins 
Dense colony 
on rock 
Faeces, feathers etc from previous seasons will 
be exposed during the summer melt; 
opportunity for infectious agents to be 
transmitted from one breeding season to the 
next 
Adélie, chinstrap, gentoo 
penguins, blue-eyed shag. 
Feeding type 
Carnivore – 
feeding on 
invertebrates or 
fish  
In general, disease transfer between phyla is 
less likely than between more closely related 
species. However, some invertebrate species 
may act as an intermediate host. 
Penguin species, Weddell and 
crabeater seals 
Carnivore – 
feeding on birds 
or mammals 
May come in contact with diseases that use 
prey species as reservoir. In general, the more 
closely related the prey, the more likely it is 
that diseases carried will be transmissible to the 
predator. Identical isolates of campylobacter 
jejuni in prey and predator species within a 
food chain indicates that pathogens can be 
passed along the food chain (Olsen pers. 
Leopard seals 
 
16
comm.) 
Carnivore – 
scavenger or 
carrion feeder 
Generalist scavengers are most likely to come 
into contact with disease causing agents, e.g. by 
feeding on dead and dying diseased animals, by 
feeding at sewage outlets. Wide ranging 
scavengers are a likely vector for translocation 
of disease causing agents. Scavengers and 
carrion feeders are likely to have evolved 
effective defence mechanisms against disease 
Brown and southern polar skua, 
northern and southern giant 
petrel, kelp gull, sheathbill 
Aggression  
Non-aggressive 
May be the subject of aggression; wounding 
can create a route for disease transfer 
 
Displays inter-
specific 
aggression 
Aggression leading to wounding can create a 
route for disease transfer 
 
Displays intra-
specific 
aggression 
Greater opportunity of transfer of diseases 
requiring direct contact with bodily secretions 
(mucus, blood, urine, faeces) 
 
Migration patterns 
Does not 
migrate 
May be local reservoirs of microrganisms 
Sheathbills in sub-Antarctica 
Travels widely 
within the 
Antarctic 
region 
May provide a mechanism for translocation of 
disease within Antarctica  
 
Travels 
between 
Antarctica and 
other regions 
May be in contact with disease carrying 
animals from other regions; may feed at rubbish 
disposal sites, sewage outfalls, abattoir effluent 
outfalls and other sites where the chances of 
coming in contact with infectious disease 
causing agents is high. 
Wilson’s storm petrel, Southern 
giant petrel, brown skua, Arctic 
tern,  Antarctic tern, Dominican 
gull, greater sheathbill, kelp gull, 
southern elephant seal, fur seals, 
fin whales, humpback whales, 
blue whales, minke whales, and 
possibly many species of dolphin. 
 
4 
HUMAN ACTIVITIES WHICH MAY INTRODUCE OR SPREAD 
DISEASE 
4.1 
Human activities and their implications for disease introduction or spread 
Common human activities undertaken in Antarctica and elsewhere that may lead to 
disease introduction and spread are listed in Table 9. The type of activities undertaken 
before going to Antarctica, their locations and subsequent precautions will determine 
whether people bring infectious disease causing agents with them to Antarctica. The 
types of activities and how they are undertaken within Antarctica will determine 
whether pathogens brought into the region could be transmitted to wildlife or whether 
people could translocate indigenous pathogens. 
 
17
 
Table 9. Common human activities and implications for disease transmission in 
Antarctica 
 
Human activity 
Implications for disease transmission 
Activities outside Antarctica 
International travel 
Travel between countries is recognised as one of the major 
factors causing the rapid spread of disease around the globe; 
visits to different countries and different environments increase 
the chance of coming into contact with a variety of diseases  
Visits to farms, abattoirs, food-
processing plants, zoos, scientific 
animal houses etc 
Visits to locations where animals are held will all increase the 
chance of people coming in contact with diseased animals or 
their products (eg faeces) 
Use of equipment in other regions 
(field training, scientific etc) 
Use of Antarctic equipment in other regions will increase the 
chance that it may be contaminated with disease causing agents  
Release of captive animals 
The risk of disease introduction associated with re-release to the 
wild of captive animals has been recognised. SCAR 
recommends against the release of captive animals, however, 
there is no specific ATS recommendation on this.  
Activities within Antarctica 
Logistics 
 
Import of equipment, vehicles and 
clothing 
There is no specific AT requirement to clean vehicles, clothing 
or equipment before sending to Antarctica or moving between 
locations in Antarctica. However, import of non-sterile soil must 
be avoided to the maximum extent practicable. 
Import of non-indigenous plants 
and animals 
Non-indigenous plants and animals (except food) cannot be 
introduced to Antarctica without a permit and after use must be 
disposed of by incineration or equally effective means. These 
requirements are in response to concerns about the potential for 
disease introduction with plants or animals, however this 
remains a risk as there has not been complete compliance 
Import of food  
No live animals can be imported for food. Precautions are 
required to prevent the introduction of micro-organisms (eg 
viruses, bacteria, parasites, yeasts, fungi) not present in the 
native fauna and flora. Poultry must be inspected for evidence of 
disease, such as Newcastle’s Disease, tuberculosis, and yeast 
infection. These requirements are in response to concerns about 
the risk to wildlife of disease associated with food (poultry in 
particular).  
Waste disposal 
Human waste and food waste are the most likely sources of 
bacterial and viral introductions to Antarctica. Whether they 
contain infectious disease causing agents will depend on their 
source, treatment and subsequent method of disposal 
Sewage treatment  
Sewage and domestic waste may be discharged directly to the 
sea. Treatment, at least by maceration, is required for 
populations of 30 or more. People will carry many opportunist 
infectious agents and these will be shed in faeces. Sewage 
treatment techniques used in Antarctica by most operators are 
not designed to kill pathogens.  
Kitchen waste 
Kitchen waste must be either incinerated or removed from the 
Antarctic. Stored waste needs to be in robust containers to 
prevent interference by scavengers. Frozen meat including 
poultry is commonly defrosted in kitchen sinks and the melted 
water passed through sewage treatment (if present) before 
disposal to the environment. 
Feeding wildlife 
Feeding of wildlife is not permitted under many national 
regulations however feeding of wild life is not specifically 
prohibited under any AT measure. Feeding of waste food 
 
18
(particularly poultry products) to wildlife is among the most 
direct ways that disease could be introduced to wildlife. 
 
Field camps 
The practicalities of living in field camps make some 
precautions that would be relatively simple to instigate at 
stations very difficult to follow. 
Storage of food 
Scavengers may gain access to food or food waste unless 
precautions are taken. 
Waste disposal 
Sewage and domestic liquid wastes from field camps cannot be 
disposed of to ice-free areas or fresh water systems. Waste may 
be disposed of in deep ice pits. To the maximum extent 
practicable waste should be removed to stations or ships for 
disposal. Handling of human waste from field camps can create 
hygiene and disease risk to people. 
 
Science 
Permits from national authorities are required for any direct 
contact with wildlife. Permits are more likely to be given for 
scientific purposes than for other types of activities. 
Scientific observations 
Scientific observations, such as surveys, may not require contact 
with the animals but may involve approaches closer than 
otherwise permitted. Surveys at more than one location may 
create the risk of translocation of microorganisms between sites.  
Scientific manipulations 
Science involving manipulations of wildlife are the only planned 
activities in which contact between animals and people occur. 
Translocation of microorganisms between animals and sites will 
occur unless hygiene precautions such as cleansing of people 
and equipment are followed.      
Feeding of wildlife for dietary 
experiments such as the use of 
radio-labelled food or replacement 
of food after stomach flushing 
Food provided to wildlife could contain disease causing agents. 
 
Recreation 
Most visitors to Antarctica, whether as scientists, in support of 
science or as tourists, will visit breeding aggregations of 
wildlife, such as penguin colonies, if given the opportunity. 
Visits to wildlife aggregations 
Recreational visitors to wildlife aggregations will not be in direct 
contact with animals if normal guidelines are followed. 
Footwear is likely to be in contact with animal faeces and this 
could be transferred among locations if precautions such as 
cleansing are not followed. Several tourism companies use the 
opportunity to visit multiple wildlife colonies in their marketing. 
Commercial tourists are usually supervised and return to ship 
between visits to wildlife colonies. Personnel from national 
Antarctic programs are more likely to visit wildlife aggregations 
unsupervised and may visit several colonies, at different 
locations, in a single day.  
Fishing 
 
Bait used for long-line fishing 
Fish used as bait for long-line fishing could be infected with 
disease causing agents  
Waste discharges from fishing 
boats 
Waste discharged from fishing boats is the most significant 
attractor of wildlife in sub-Antarctic waters 
 
A recent assessment of the risk of disease to wildlife on the Antarctic Peninsula 
(Pfennigwerth, 2001) developed a qualitative approach to assessing the likelihood that 
activities would cause a disease event. This method has been adapted and applied here 
to the activities identified in Table 9. The activities are considered in relation to each 
of the steps leading to a disease event (Table 10). Likelihood has been assessed on a 
 
19
simple relative scale of low, medium/low, medium, high and very high based on the 
responses to each of the questions. 
 
Table 10. Qualitative assessment of those activities which may introduce or spread 
disease causing agents in Antarctica (based on Pfennigwerth, 2001) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 
Are 
pathogens 
that could 
cause 
wildlife 
disease 
likely to 
be 
present?1 
If present 
could 
pathogens 
be 
released 
during 
this 
activity? 
If released 
could 
pathogens 
survive in the 
environment? 
Could 
activity 
assist 
pathogens 
to 
multiply? 
Could 
activity 
contribute 
to dispersal 
of 
pathogens? 
Could 
wildlife 
come into 
contact 
with 
pathogens 
as a result 
of this 
activity? 
Relative 
likelihood 
of causing 
disease 
Import of 
equipment, 
vehicles and 
clothing 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
no 
yes 
possibly 
low 
Import of 
non-
indigenous 
plants and 
animals 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
possibly 
high 
Import of 
food 
possibly 
yes 
yes 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
 medium 
Waste 
disposal 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
no 
possibly 
possibly 
low 
Sewage 
effluent 
disposal 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
possibly 
yes 
yes 
medium 
Kitchen waste 
disposal 
possibly 
yes 
yes 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
medium 
Deliberate 
feeding of 
wildlife  
possibly 
yes 
not necessary, 
direct transfer 
possible 
yes 
yes 
yes 
very high 
Storage of 
food at field 
camps 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
possibly 
possibly 
possibly 
medium-
low 
Waste 
disposal at 
field camps 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
possibly 
possibly 
possibly 
medium-
low 
Scientific 
observations 
of wildlife 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
unlikely 
yes 
possibly 
low 
Scientific 
manipulations 
of wildlife 
possibly 
yes 
not necessary, 
direct transfer 
possible 
yes 
yes 
yes 
very high 
Feeding of 
wildlife for 
dietary 
experiments 
possibly 
yes 
not necessary, 
direct transfer 
possible 
yes 
yes 
yes 
very high 
Discovery of 
unusual 
mortality 
events 
possibly 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
very high 
Recreational 
visits to 
wildlife 
aggregations 
possibly 
yes 
possibly 
unlikely 
yes 
possibly 
low 
Long-line 
fishing using 
bait 
possibly 
yes 
not necessary, 
direct transfer 
possible 
possibly 
yes 
yes 
high 
    1Based on the disease status of operator nations 
 
20
4.2 
Combinations of activities and the risk of disease introduction or spread 
This approach is useful for indicating the relative likelihood of disease events arising 
from individual activities, however, activities do not happen in isolation. Antarctic 
operations consist of many combinations of these activities. Some will operate 
synergistically to increase the likelihood, while others will be antagonistic and so 
reduce the chance of disease introduction. Activities will be combined in many 
complex ways and may have unpredictable effects on the probability of disease 
introduction. 
 
Consideration of specific scenarios could assist in focussing attention on activities and 
combinations of activities that have a greater likelihood of bringing disease into 
Antarctica. 
 
Scenario 1 – Scientists working on disease in Antarctic wildlife 
 
Among visitors to Antarctica, scientists involved in disease research are more likely 
than others to be in contact with diseased animals before travelling to Antarctica. 
Their equipment may be in close contact with animals both in Antarctica and 
elsewhere, creating opportunities for transfer of pathogens. Their research may entail 
visiting several sites including breeding aggregations, which creates the possibility of 
spreading disease-causing agents. All these factors will combine to increase the 
chance of disease introduction or spread. On the other side of the equation, scientists 
working in this field are likely to be aware of the risks, should know what precautions 
are necessary and should have their own procedures for ensuring their studies are not 
confounded by cross-contamination of samples. Scientists working with wildlife for 
reasons other than the study of disease will also be in contact with animals if their 
research involves direct manipulations. 
 
Scenario 2 – Investigation of an unusual mortality event 
 
Unusual mortality events are by their nature unpredictable. It is unlikely that a 
wildlife mortality event will be discovered by someone with previous experience of 
such occurrences and it would be unwise to leave decisions on how to react to those 
discovering a mortality event. Most people do not know normal mortality rates among 
Antarctic species and may not recognise unusual mortality. A likely first reaction to 
discovery of an unusual mortality event would be to quickly check other localities to 
determine the spatial extent of the event. Moving from location to location without 
some precautions could cause translocation of infection disease causing agents. 
 
Scenario 3 – Use of poultry products by Antarctic personnel 
 
The Madrid Protocol requires that dressed poultry should be inspected for disease 
before sending to Antarctica because of the perceived risk from diseases such as 
Newcastle disease, however, inspection is not a reliable method for detecting many 
diseases including Newcastle disease. Frozen chicken products are commonly thawed 
in kitchens and the resulting melted liquid discarded with other domestic grey water. 
Treatment of grey water is limited to the level of treatment available for sewage, 
which in most cases is not sufficient to kill pathogens. Disposal of sewage effluent is 
permitted to the marine environment. 
 
 
21
Scenario 4 – Recreational visits to wildlife aggregations 
 
Members of national Antarctic programs will frequently take the opportunity to visit 
breeding aggregations of wildlife for recreational purposes. Those who enjoy outdoor 
activities are more likely to take the opportunity to visit several breeding sites while in 
Antarctica. As a generalisation, the type of person who enjoys outdoor pursuits may 
own their own footwear and use these in preference to footwear issued specifically for 
Antarctica. They may use their footwear before going to Antarctica, possibly in 
circumstances that could expose them to pathogens. Currently people visiting 
Antarctica do not necessarily receive advice to suggest that cleaning of footwear is a 
sensible precaution. 
4.3 
Human activities identified as priority risks 
 
The following human activities are identified as the priority risks. Details of the 
precautions suggested to reduce these risks are to be developed as the second of the 
three Terms of Reference of the Intersessional Contact Group on Disease in Antarctic 
wildlife (Practical measures to diminish the risk to Antarctic wildlife of the 
introduction and spread by human activity of infectious disease causing agents), 
 
1. Feeding of wildlife 
2. Actions following discovery of unusual mortality events  
3. Research that involves handling of Antarctic animals, particularly research on 
disease 
4. Import of food, particularly poultry products 
5. Waste disposal and sewage treatment 
6. Use of equipment and clothing before departure to Antarctica 
7. Serial visits to wildlife aggregations 
 
5 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
The following conclusions are numbered sequentially but are grouped according to 
the section in the report from which they are derived.  
 
Risk Assessment Methodology 
1. There is insufficient information available to conduct a reliable quantitative 
risk assessment of disease introduction and spread to Antarctic wildlife. 
2. A qualitative risk assessment approach should be sufficient to indicate 
priorities for precautionary measures. 
 
Historic Information on Disease 
3. No diseases have been demonstrated to have been introduced to Antarctic 
wildlife or spread by human activities. 
4. No systematic studies of disease in Antarctica have been undertaken and it is 
unlikely that conclusive evidence of human involvement in disease events 
would be available. 
5. There is recent evidence to indicate that some microorganisms have been 
introduced to Antarctic wildlife and spread as a consequence of human 
activity. 
 
22
6. Seven unusual mortality events in which disease was suspected have been 
recorded for Antarctic wildlife. Only one was investigated and the causes of 
the others are not known. 
7. A seal mass mortality event on the Auckland Islands in 1998 was well 
investigated but the causal agent is still not known with certainty, indicating 
that identification of the cause of a mortality event is not always possible.  
8. Clinical and serological evidence indicates that many Antarctic and sub-
Antarctic penguins and seals have been exposed to infectious disease causing 
agents, indicating that they are not completely naïve populations with respect 
to disease. 
9. Captive Antarctic birds and seals have exhibited symptoms of a variety of 
diseases known in other wildlife populations, indicating that they are 
susceptible to a range of diseases. 
10. Disease is suspected in a significant number of the marine mammal mass 
mortality events reported in non-Antarctic regions. 
11. Most of the OIE List A of transmissible diseases with the potential for very 
serious and rapid spread occur in countries that participate in Antarctic 
activities. This indicates that, despite the economic incentives to prevent them 
and the large preventive effort, serious transmissible disease of animals occur 
in most countries. 
12. Most OIE List A diseases would not be transmissible to birds and seals, 
however, there is evidence that birds and seals are susceptible to some, such 
as Newcastle disease and avian influenza.  
13. Newcastle disease has occurred widely in ATCP countries in recent years and 
may be the disease most likely to be a risk to Antarctic wildlife. 
14. Diseases most likely to be of risk of introduction and spread by people are 
those that are established in the home countries of people visiting Antarctica, 
can survive well without a host, do not require a vector that is not present and 
can infect different hosts, examples include Newcastle disease, avian 
influenza and the morbilliviruses causing canine and phocine distemper. 
15. It is not possible to identify all diseases with the potential for introduction and 
this is not necessary as a precursor to implementation of precautions. 
 
Factors that could influence disease introduction or spread 
16. Environmental conditions in parts of the Antarctic are similar to conditions 
elsewhere and so mechanisms for disease transfer that occur in these places 
are likely to also occur in Antarctica. 
17. The cold and lack of available water may make otherwise simple precautions 
difficult or impossible under some circumstances such as at remote field 
locations. 
18. Animal behaviour will influence the likelihood of disease transmission within 
populations and between species. 
19. Several Antarctic species migrate beyond the Antarctic to regions where they 
could be in contact with disease causing agents carried by other wildlife and 
in human waste at sewage effluent outfalls and waste disposal tips.  
20. Carrion feeders are most likely to be in direct contact with diseased or dying 
animals of other species. 
21. Opportunist scavengers are most likely to feed on waste generated by human 
activity if precautions are not taken to prevent access. 
 
23
22. Skuas are among the most likely species to be the point of entry of disease 
from waste because they are not shy of people and they will scavenge on 
station waste given the opportunity. They are also among the most likely 
routes of transfer to other species because of their habit of associating with 
other species. 
 
Human activities which may introduce or spread disease 
23. Activities undertaken before going to Antarctica, including precautions, will 
determine whether people bring infectious disease with them. 
24. Activities in Antarctica most likely to cause disease introduction or spread are 
those that involve close contact with wildlife or those that allow wildlife to 
come in contact with waste generated from human activities. 
25. Certain combinations of activities may significantly increase the risks. 
26. Precautions should be prioritised to target the most likely pathways of disease 
introduction or spread. 
27. Human activities identified as priorities for practical measures to diminish 
risk are, 
• Feeding of wildlife 
• Actions following discovery of unusual mortality events  
• Research that involves handling of Antarctic animals, particularly 
research on disease 
• Import of food, particularly poultry products 
• Waste disposal and sewage treatment 
• Use of equipment and clothing before departure to Antarctica 
• Serial visits to wildlife aggregations 
 
24
6 
REFERENCES 
Abegglen, C.E., Roppel, A.Y. and Wilke, F. 1958. Alaska fur seal investigations 
Pribilof Islands, Alaska U.S. Fish and Wildlife service. Bureau of Commercial 
Fisheries, Report of Field Activities 
Asplin G.G. (1949). Observations on the viability of Newcastle disease. Veterinary 
Record, 61(13):159-160 
Austin, F.J. and Webster, R.G. 1993. Evidence of ortho- and paramyxoviruses in 
fauna from Antarctica. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 29(4):568-571 
Baker, J.R.  1987. Causes of mortality and morbidity in wild juvenile and adult grey 
seals (Halichoerus grypus).  British Veterinary Journal 143:203-220 
Baker, J.R., 1989. Natural causes of death in non-suckling grey seals. Veterinary 
Record November:500-503 
Baker, J.R., Hall, A., Hiby, L., Munro, R., Robinson, I., Ross, H.M. and Watkins, J.R, 
1995. Isolation of salmonellae from seals from UK waters. Veterinary Record 
136:471-472 
Barlough, J.E., Berry, E.S., Skilling, D.E.  and Smith, A.W. 1986. Sea lions, 
caliciviruses and the sea. Avian/exotic Practice 3(1):8-19 
Barrett, T., Blixenkrone-Möller, M., Guardo, G. Di., Domingo, M., Duignan, P., Hall, 
A., Mamaev, L.. and Osterhaus, A.D.M.E. 1995. Morbilliviruses in aquatic mammals: 
report on round table discussion. Veterinary Microbiology 44:261-265 
Bastida R., Loureiro J., Quse V., Bernardelli A., Rodriguez D., Costa E. 1999. 
Tuberculosis in a wild subantarctic fur seal from Argentina. Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases 35(4): 796-8. 
Becker, W.B., 1966. The isolation and classification of Tern virus:Influenza Virus 
A/Tern/South Africa/1961. Journal of Hygiene 64:309-320 
Bengtson, J.L., Boveng, P., Franzen, U., Heide-Jorgensen, M.P. and Harkonen, T.J. 
1991. Antibodies to canine distemper virus in Antarctic Seals. Marine Mammal 
Science 7(1):85-87 
Bergström, S., Haemig, P., and Olsen, B. 1999a. Distribution and abundance of the 
tick Ixodes uriae in a subantarctic seabird and mammal community. Journal of 
Parasitology 85:25-27. 
Bergström S., Haemig P.D., and Olsen B. 1999b. Increased mortality of black-browed 
albatross chicks at a colony heavily-infested with the tick Ixodes uriae. International 
Journal for Parasitology 29:1359-61 
Blank, O., Retamal, P., Torres, D. and Abalos, P. 2000. New data on anti-brucella 
antibodies detection in Arctocephalus gazella from Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island, 
Antarctica. SC-CAMLR-XIX/BG/10 
Brit, J.O., Nagy, A.Z. and Howard, E.B. 1979. Acute viral hepatitis in California sea 
lions. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 175:921-923 
Broman, T., Bergström, S., On, S.L.W., Palmgren, H., McCafferty, D.J., Sellin M. 
and Olsen, B. 2000. Isolation and characterization of Campylobacter jejuni subspecies 
 
25
jejuni strains from Macaroni Penguins (Eudyptes chrysolophus) in sub-Antarctica. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 66; 449-452, 2000. 
Callan, R.J., Early, G., Kida, H. and Hinshaw, V.S. 1995. The appearance of H3 
influenza viruses in seals. Journal of General Virology 76:199-203 
Cameron, A.S. 1968. The isolation of a psittacosis-lymphogranuloma venereum (pl) 
agent from an emperor penguin Aptenodytes forsteri chick.  Australian Journal of 
Experimental Biology and Medical Science 46:647-649 
Clark, J. and Kerry, K. 2000. Diseases and parasites of penguins. Penguin 
Conservation 13(1):5-24 
Cockburn, T.A. 1947. Salmonella typhi murium in penguins. Journal of Comparative 
Pathology 57:77-78 
Conlon, K.E., Rau, G.H., McFeters, G.A. and Kvitek, R.G. 2000. Influence of 
McMurdo station sewage on Antarctic marine benthos: evidence from stable isotopes, 
bacteria, and biotic indices. In: Davidson, W., Howard-Williams, C. and Broady, P. 
(eds) Antarctic ecosystems: models for wider ecological understanding. New Zealand 
Natural Sciences, Canterbury University, Christchurch, 315-318. 
Cousins, D.V., Williams, S.N., Reuter, R., Forshaw, D., Chadwick, B.. Coughran, D., 
Collins, P. and Gales, N. 1993. Tuberculosis in wild seals and characterisation of the 
seal bacillus. Australian Veterinary Journal 70(3):92-97 
Dierauf, L.A. , Lowenstine, L.J. and Jerome, C. 1981. Viral hepatitis (Adenovirus) in 
a California sea lion. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 
179:1194-1197 
Dierauf, L.A., Vandebroek, D.J., Roletto, J., Koskis, M., Amaya, L. and Gage, L.J. 
1985. An epizootic of leptospirosis in California sea lions. Journal of the American 
Veterinary Medical Association 187(11): 1145-1148 
Dietz, R., Ansen, C.T., Have, P. and Heide-Jørgensen, M.-P. 1989. Clue to seal 
Epizootic? Nature 338:627 
Dunnet, G.M. 1964. Distribution and host relationships of fleas in the Antarctic and 
Subantarctic. In: Carrick, R., Holdgate, M. and Prévost, J. (eds) Biologie Antarctique 
223-239 
Edwards, D.D., McFeters, G.A. and Venkatesan, M. 1998. Distribution of Clostridium 
perfringens and fecal sterols in a Benthic Coastal marine enviroment influenced by 
the sewage outfall from McMurdo Station, Antarctica. Applied and Enviromental 
Microbiology 64(7):2596-2600 
Fielding, M.J. 2000. Deaths in captive penguins. Veterinary Record 146:199-200 
Flach, E.J., Stevenson, M.F. and Henderson, G.M. 1990. Aspegillosis in Gentoo 
penguins Pygoscelis papua at Edinburgh Zoo, Scotland UK 1964 to 1988. Veterinary 
Record 126:81-85 
Forshaw, D.  and Phelps, G.R 1991. Tuberculosis in a captive colony of pinnipeds. 
Journal of Wildlife Diseases 27(12):288-295 
Fuchs, V.E. 1982. Of ice and men. Anthony Nelson, England. 
Gales, N. and Childerhouse, S. 1999. Field observations and sampling regime. In: 
Baker, A. (ed) Unusual mortality of the New Zealand sea lion, Phocarctos hookeri, 
 
26
Auckland Islands, January-February 1988: report of a workshop held 8-9 June 1998, 
Wellington, and a contingency plan for future events. Department of Conservation, 
Wellington, N.Z. 
Gardner, H., Kerry, K. and Riddle, M.  1997. Poultry virus infection in Antarctic 
penguins.  Nature 387:245 
Garner, M.M., Lambourn, D.M., Jeffries, S. J., Briggs, Hall, P., Rhyan, J.C., Ewalt, 
D.R., Polzin, L.M. and Cheville, N.F. 1997. Evidence of Brucella infection in 
Parafilaroides lungworm in a pacific harbor seal Phoca vitulina richardsi. Journal of 
Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation 9:298-303 
Gauthier-Clerc, M., Jaulhac, B., Frenot, Y., Bachelard, C., Monteil, H., Le Maho, 
Y.and  Handrich, Y. 1999. Prevalence of Borrelia burgdorferi (the lyme disease 
agent) antibodies in king penguin Aptenodytes patagonicus in Crozet Archipelago. 
Polar Biology  22:141-143 
George-Nascimento, M., Lima, M. and Ortiz, E. 1993. A case of parasite-mediated 
competition? 
Phenotypic 
differentiation 
among 
hookworms 
Uncinaria 
sp. 
(Nemotada:Ancylostomatidae) in sympatric and allopatric populations of South 
American sea lions Otaria byronia, and fur seals Arctocephalus australis  (Carnivora: 
Otariidae).  Marine Biology 112:527-533 
Geraci, J.R., St. Aubin, D.J., Barker, I.K., Hinshaw, V.S., Webster, R.G. and Ruhnke, 
H.L. 1984. Susceptibility of grey Halichoerus grypus and harp Phoca groenlandica 
seals to the influenza virus and mycoplasma of epizootic pneumonia of harbor seals 
Phoca vitulina. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 41:151-156 
Geraci, J.R., St. Aubin, D.J., Barker, I.K., Webster, R.G., Hinshaw, V.S., Bean, W.J., 
Ruhnke, H.L., Prescott, J.H., Early, G., Baker, A.S., Madoff, S. and Schooley, R.T. 
1982. Mass mortality of harbor seals. Science 215:1129-1131 
Gilmartin, W.G., Vainik, P.M. and Neill, V.M. 1979. Salmonellae in feral pinnipeds 
of the southern Californian coast.. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 15:511-514 
Glaser, L.C., Barker, I.K.,Weseloh, D.V.C., Ludwig, J., Windingstad, R.M., Key, 
D.W. and Bollinger, T.K. 1999. The 1992 epizootic of Newcastle disease in double-
crested cormorants in North America. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 35(2):319-330 
Goodhart, C.B. 1988. Did virus transfer from harp seals to common seals? Nature   
336:21 
Grachev, M. A., Kumarev, V. P., Mamaev, L.V., Zorin, V. L., Baranova, L.V. 
Denikina, N. N., Belikova, S. I., Petrov, E. A., Kolesnik, V. S., Kolesnik, R.S., 
Dorofeev, V. N., Beim, A. M., Kudelin, V. N., Nagieva, F. G.and Sidorov. V. N. 
1989. Distemper virus in Baikal seals. Nature 338:209-210 
Graves, I.L. 1992. Influenza viruses in birds of the Atlantic flyway.  Avian Diseases 
36:1-10 
Gylfe, Å., Olsen, B., Ras, N.M., Strasevicius, D., Noppa, L., Östberg, Y., Weihe, P. 
and Bergström, S. 1999. Isolation of Lyme disease Borrelia from Puffins (Fratercula 
arctica) and seabird ticks (Ixodes uriae) on Faeroe Islands. Journal of Clinical 
Microbiology. 37:890-896, 1999. 
Harder, T.C., Plotz, J. and Liess, B. 1991. Antibodies against european phocine 
herpesvirus isolates detected in sera of Antarctic  seals. Polar Biology 11:509-512 
 
27
Harder, T.C., Plotz, J. and Liess, B. 1991. Antibodies against european phocine 
herpesvirus isolates detected in sera of Antarctic  seals. Polar Biology 11:509-512 
Harris, M.P. 1965. Puffinosis among manx shearwaters on Skokholm. British Birds 
58:426-434 
Harvell, C.D., Kim, K., Burkholder, J.M., Colwell, R.R., Epstein, P.R., Grimes, D.J., 
Hofmann, E.E., Lipp, E.K., Osterhaus, A.D.M.E., Overstreet, R.M., Porter, J.W., 
Smith, G.W. and Vasta, G.R. 1999. Emerging marine diseases – climate links and 
anthropogenic factors. Science 285:1505-1510 
Hawkey, C.M., Horsley, D.T. and Keymer, I.F. 1989. Haematology of wild penguins 
(Sphenisciformes) in the Falkland Islands. Avian Pathology 18:495-502 
Hayes, K.R. 1997. A review of ecological risk assessment methodologies. Centre for 
Research on Introduced Marine Pests, Technical Report 13 116pp 
Herrmann B., Rahman R., Bergström S., Bonnedahl J., Olsen B. 2000. 
Chlamydophila abortus in a Brown skua (Catharacta antarctica, lonnbergi) from a 
sub-Antarctic island. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66:3654-56 
Jensen, A.E., Cheville, N.F., Thoen, C.O, MacMillan, A.P. and Miller, W.G. 1999. 
Genomic fingerprinting and development of a dendrogram for Brucella spp. isolated 
from seals, porpoises, and dolphins. Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation 
11:152-157 
Karesh, W.B., Marcela, D.V.M., Uhart, M., Frere, E., Gandini, P., Braselton, W.E., 
Puche, H. and Cook, R.A. 1999. Health evaluation of free-ranging rockhopper 
penguins (Eudyptes chrysocomes) in Argentina. Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 
30(1):25-31 
Kennedy, S., Kuiken, T., Jepson, K.D., Deavill, R., Forsyth, M., Barrett, T., van de 
Bildt, M.W.G., Osterhaus, A.D.M.E., Eybatov, T., Duck, C., Kydyrmonov, A., 
Mitrofanov, I.W., Wilson, S. 2000. Mass die-off of Caspian seals caused by canine 
distemper virus. CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 6:6 5 
Kerry, K., Gardner, H. and Clarke, J.  1996. Penguin deaths: diet or disease?  
Microbiology Australia May 1996 16 
Kim, K.C., Haas, V.L. and Keyes, M.C. 1980. Populations, microhabitat preference 
and effects of infestation of two species of Orthohalarachne  (Halarachnidae: Acarina) 
in the northern fur seal. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 16(1):45-51 
Kincaid, A.L., Bunton, T.E. and Cranfield, M. 1988.  Herpesvirus-like infection in 
black-footed penguins (Spheniscus demersus). Journal of Wildlife Diseases 
24(1):173-175 
Krauss, H., Paulick, C., Huchzermeyer, F. and  Gylstorff, I. 1963. Atypische 
Geflügelpest bei einem Königspinguin (Aptenodytes patachonica). Deutsche 
Tierärztliche Wochenschrift 70:307-309 
Laws, R.M. and Taylor, R.J.F. 1957. A mass dying of crabeater seals Lobodon 
carcinophagus (Gray) Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 129:315-325 
Lisle, G.W. De., Stanislawek, W.L. and Moors, P.J. 1990. Pasteurella multocida 
infections in Rockhopper penguins (Eudyptes chrysocome) from Campbell Island, 
New Zealand. Journal of Wildlife Diseases   26(2):283-285 
 
28
Lynch, M. 1999 Pinnipeds – anaesthesia, medicine and surgery. Wildlife Veterinary 
Post-Graduate Proceedings (September 1999). 
Lyons, E.T., KeLong, R.L., Melin, S.R. and Tolliver, S .C. 1997. Uncinariasis in 
northern fur seal and California sea lion pups from California. Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases 33(4):848-852 
MacDonald, J.W. and Conroy, J.W.H. 1971. Virus disease resembling puffinosis in 
the gentoo penguin Pygoscelis papua on Signy Island, South Orkney Islands.  British 
Antarctic Survey Bulletin   (26): 80-83 
Mamaev, L.V., Denikina, N.N., Belikov, S.I., Volchkov, V.E., Visser, I.K.G., 
Fleming, M., Kai, C., Harder, T.C., Liess, B., Osterhaus, A.D.M.E. and Barrett, T.  
1995 . Characterisation of morbilliviruses isolated from Lake Baikal seal Phoca 
sibirica. Veterinary Microbiology 44:251-259 
Markussen, N.H. and Have, P. 1992. Phocine distemper virus infection in harp seals 
Phoca groenlandica. Marine Mammal Science  8(1):19-26 
Mawson, P.M. 1953. Parasitic nematoda collected by the Australian national 
Antarctic research expedition: Heard Island and Macquarie Island 1948-1951. 
Parasitology 53:2-3  291-297 
Meteyer, C.U. Docherty, D.E., Glaser, L.C., Franson, J.C., Senne, D.A. and Duncan, 
R. 1997. Diagnostic findings in the 1992 epornitic of neurotropic velogenic Newcastle 
disease in double-crested cormorants from the upper midwestern United States.  
Avian Diseases 41:171-180 
Montalti, D., Coria, N.R. and Curtosi A. 1996. Unusual deaths of subantarctic skuas 
Catharacta antarctica at Hope Bay, Antarctica. Marine Ornithology 24:39-40 
Moore, B.W. and Cameron, A.S.  1969. Chlamydia antibodies in Antarctic fauna. 
Avian Diseases 1113:681-684 
Morgan, I.R., Caple, I.W., Westbury, H.A. and Campbell, J. 1978. Disease 
investigations of penguins and elephant seals on Macquarie Island. Research project 
series 47  
Morgan, I.R. and Westbury, H.A. 1981. Virological studies of Adélie penguins 
(Pygoscelis adeliae) in Antarctica.  Avian Diseases 24(5):1019-1026 
Morgan, I.R. and Westbury, H.A. 1988.  Studies of viruses in penguins in the 
Vestfold Hills. Hydrobiologia 156:263-269 
Morgan, I.R., Westbury, H.A. and Campbell, J. 1985.  Viral infections of little blue 
penguins (Eudyptula minor) along the Southern Coast of Australia.  Journal of 
Wildlife Diseases 21(3):193-198 
Munro, R. and Synge, B. 1991. Coccidiosis in seals. Veterinary Record 129:179-180 
Murray, M.D. 1964 Ecology of the ectoparasites of seals and penguins. In: Carrick, 
R., Holdgate, M. and Prévost, J. (eds) Biologie Antarctique 241-245 
Murray, M.D. 1967. Ectoparasites of Antarctic seals and birds. JARE Scientific 
reports 1:185-191 
Murray, M.D. and Vestjens, W.J.M., 1967. Studies on the ectoparasites of seals and 
penguins. Australian Journal of Zoology 15:715-725 
 
29
Murray, M.D., Palma, R.L., Pilgrim, R.L.C. 1990. Ectoparasites of Australian, New 
Zealand and Antarctic Birds. In: Handbook of Australian, New Zealand and Antarctic 
Birds. Volume 1 Ratites to Ducks. (Coordinators Marchant, S. and Higgins, P.J.) 
O.U.P., Melbourne. 1990: 1365-1374. 
Murray, M.D., Smith, M.S.R. and Soucek, Z. 1965. Studies on the ectoparasites of 
seals and penguins II The ecology of the louse Antarctophthirus ogmorhini Enderlein 
on the Weddell seal, Leptonychotes weddelli Lesson. Australian Journal of Zoology 
13:761-771 
Nettleton, P.F., Munro, R., Pow, I., Gilray, J., Gray, E.W. and Reid, H.W. 1995. 
Isolation of a parapoxvirus from a grey seal (Halichoerus grypus). Veterinary Record 
November 1995:562-564 
Nuttall, P.A., Brooke, M. De L. and Perrins, C.M. 1985. Poxvirus infection of the 
Manx shearwater (Puffinus puffinus). Journal of Wildlife Diseases 21(2):120-124 
Obendorf, D.L. and McColl, K. 1980. Mortality in Little penguins (Eudyptula minor) 
along the coast of Victoria, Australia. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 16(2):251-259 
Ødegaard, Ø.A. and Krogsrud, J. 1981. Rabies in Svalbard: infection diagnosed in 
arctic fox, reindeer and seal. Veterinary Record 109:141-142 
Oelke, H. and Steiniger, F 1973. Salmonella in Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) 
and south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) on Ross Island Antarctica.  Avian 
Diseases 17:568-573 
Olsen, B., Bergstrom, S., MaCafferty, D.J., Sellin, M. and Wistrom, J. 1996. 
Salmonella enteritidis in Antarctica: zoonosis in man or humanosis in penguins? 
Lancet  348:1319-1320 
Olson, M.E., Roach, P.D. and Chan, W. 1997. Giardiasis in ringed seals from the 
Western Arctic. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 33(3):646-648 
Osterhaus, A., Groen, J., Niesters, H., Van de Bildt, M., Martina, B., Vedder, L., Vos, 
J., van Egmond, H. Sidi, B.A., Barham, M.E.O. 1997. Morbillivirus in monk seal 
mass mortality. Nature 388:833-834 
Osterhaus, A.D.M.E. 1988. Seal death. Nature 334:301-302 
Osterhaus, A.D.M.E., Yang, H., Spijkers, H.E.M., Groen, J., Teppema, J.S. and van 
Steenis, G. 1985. The isolation and partial characterization of a highly pathogenic 
herpesvirus from the harbour seal (Phoca vitulina). Archives of Virology 86:239-251 
Osterhaus A.D., Rimmelzwaan G.F., Martina B.E., Bestebroer T.M., Fouchier R.A. 
2000. Influenza B virus in seals. Science 288(5468): 1051-3. 
Palmgren, H., Sellin, M., Bergström, S. and Olsen B. 1997 Enteropathogenic bacteria 
in migrating birds arriving in Sweden. Scandinavian . Journal of Infectious Diseases 
29:565-568 
Palmgren, H., Bergström, S., Broman, T., McCafferty, D.J., Sellin, M. and Olsen, B. 
2000. Characterisation of Salmonella spp isolated from Fur Seals and seabirds in 
Antarctica. Epidemiology and Infection 125:257-262 
Parmelee, D.F., Maxson, S.J. and Bernstein, N.P. 1979. Fowl cholera outbreak among 
brown skuas at Palmer Station.  Antarctic Journal of the United States  14(5):168-169 
 
30
Pfennigwerth, S. 2001. Disease in Antarctic wildlife: An assessment of risk. 
Cooperative Research Centre for Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, Research Report 
21, Antarctic CRC, Hobart, 99p. 
Pierson, G.P. and Pfow, C.J. 1975. Newcastle disease surveillance in the United 
States. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 801-803 
Penrith, M-L., Huchzermeyer, F.W., De Wet, S.C., and Penrith, M.J. 1996. 
Concurrent infection with Clostridium and Plasmodium in a captive king penguin 
Aptenodytes patagonicus. Avian Pathology, 23:373-380 
Poet, S.E., Skilling, D.E., Megyesi, J.L., Gilmartin, W.G. and Smith, A.W. 1996.  
Detection of a non-cultivatable calicivirus from the white tern (Gygis alba 
rothschildi). Journal of Wildlife Diseases 32(3):461-467 
Prudhoe, S. 1969. Cestodes from fish, birds and whales. B.A.N.Z.A.R.E. Reports 
VIII(9):172-193 
Retamal, P., Blank, O., Abalos, P. and Torres, D. 2000. Detection of anti-Brucella 
antibodies in Pinnipeds from the Antarctic territory. The Veterinary Record 146:166-
177. 
Ridgeway, S.H., Geraci, J.R. and Medway, W. 1975. Diseases of pinnipeds. Rapports 
et Precès-verbaux des Réunions Conseil International pour L’Exploration de la Mer 
169:327-337 
Romano, M.I., Alito, A., Bigi, F., Fisanotti, J.C., Cataldi, A. 1995. Genetic 
characterization of mycobacteria from South American wild seals. Veterinary 
Microbiology  47(1-2):89-98 
Sellin, M., Palmgren, H., Broman, T., Bergström, S. and Olsen B. 2000. Involving 
Ornithologists in the Surveillance of Vancomycin Resistant Enterococci. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases 6:87-88 
Simpson, V.R., Stuart, N.C., Stack, M.J., Ross, H.A, and Head, J.C.H. 1994. Parapox 
infection in grey seals Halchoerus grypus) in Cornwall. Veterinary Record March 
1994:292-296 
Smith, A.W., Brown, R.J., Skilling, D.E., Bray, H.L., Keyes, M.C. 1977. Naturally 
occurring leptospirosis in northern fur seals Callorhinus ursinus.  Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases 12:144-148 
Smith, A.W., Skilling D. E. Cherry, N., Mead, J. H. and Matson, D. O. (1998). 
Calicivirus emergence from ocean reservoirs: zoonotic and interspecies movements. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases 4(1) 
Smith, J.J., Howington, J.P. and McFeters, G.A. (1994) Survival, physiological 
response, and recovery of enteric bacteria exposed to a polar marine environment. 
Applied Environmental Microbiology 60:2868-2875 
Stack, M.J., Simpson, V.R. and Scott, A.C. 1993. Mixed poxvirus and calicivirus 
infections of grey seals Halichoerus grypus) in Cornwall. Veterinary Record February 
1993:163-165 
Stenvers O., Plotz J., Ludwig H. 1992. Antarctic seals carry antibodies against seal 
herpesvirus. Archives of Virology 123 (3-4): 421-4. 
 
31
Stoskopf, M.K. and Beall, F.B. 1980. The husbandry and medicine of captive 
penguins. Annual proceedings of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians 81-
96 
Stoskopf, M.K. and Beier, J. 1979. Avian malaria in African black-footed penguins. 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 175(9):944-947 
Stroud, R.K. and  Roelke, M.E. 1980. Salmonella meningoencephalomyelitis in a 
northern fur seal. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 16(1):15-18 
Tryland, M., Kleivane, L., Alfredsson, A.. Kjeld, M., Arnason, A., Stuen, S. and 
Godfroid, J. 1999. Evidence of  Brucella infection in marine mammals in the North 
Atlantic Ocean. Veterinary Record 144(21):588-592 
Trivelpiece, W., Butler, R.G. and Volkman, N. 1981. Pygoscelid penguin research in 
Admiralty Bay. Antarctic Journal of the United States 16(5):150-152 
Webster, R.G., Yakhno, M., Hinshaw, V.S., Bean, W.J. and Murti, K.G. 1978. 
Intestinal influenza: replication and characterisation of influenza viruses in ducks. 
Virology 84:268-276 
Wilcox, G.E., Flower, R.L.P., Baxendale, W. and Mackenzie, J.S. 1983. Serological 
survey of wild birds in Australia for the prevalence of antibodies to egg drop 
syndrome 1976 (EDS-76) and infectious bursal disease viruses. Avian Pathology 
12:135-139 
Wilkinson, D.M. (1996). National contingency plan for response to unusual marine 
mammal mortality events. U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical 
Memorandum NMFS-opr-9, 118pp. 
Wilson, M.E. (1995) Travel and the emergence of infectious diseases. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases 1(2), 
Zumpt, F. 1952. The ticks of sea birds. ANARE Reports. Series B V1 Zoology:12-19 
 
 
32
ATTACHMENT 1 – RISK ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
 
Processes called risk analysis are used in many different fields and different 
terminologies have evolved. In veterinary medicine the phrase risk analysis is 
generally used as the term for the overall process for dealing with risks. In the 
framework established by the Office International des Epizooties (OIE), the world 
organisation for animal health, risk analysis consists of, 
 
• Hazard identification – the process of identifying pathogenic agents that 
could be introduced 
• Risk assessment – evaluation of the likelihood and consequences of 
introducing a pathogen 
• Risk management – the process of identifying, selecting and implementing 
measures to reduce the level of risk, including determination of acceptable 
risk 
• Risk communication – the interactive exchange of information on risk among 
interested parties 
 
The process of hazard identification used here was to review historic information on 
wildlife diseases in Antarctica and from elsewhere to determine if particular diseases 
should be a concern. Risk was assessed using information on the nature of the 
pathogens, environmental conditions, the biology and behaviour of the animals of 
concern and the activities of people visiting Antarctica. Risk management and risk 
communication are the subject of the other terms of reference of this intersessional 
contact group. 
 
Risk is the product of the likelihood of an event happening and the consequences of 
the event should it occur. The smallest risks are associated with activities that are 
unlikely to occur and are of little consequence; the greatest risks are those that are 
likely to occur and are of great consequence. Between these extremes are various 
combinations of likelihood and consequence (Table 11). 
 
 
Table 11. Level of risk based on assessment of likelihood of an event and 
consequences of the event 
Severity of consequences 
 
Likelihood 
extreme 
very high
medium
low 
negligible 
almost certain 
very severe 
severe 
high 
major 
significant 
likely 
severe 
high 
major 
significant 
moderate 
moderate 
high 
major 
significant 
moderate 
low 
unlikely 
major 
significant 
moderate 
low 
very low 
extremely unlikely significant  
moderate 
low 
very low 
negligible 
 
Risk assessments may be either quantitative or qualitative; both approaches will 
involve some degree of uncertainty. Qualitative risk assessments may appear to be 
more objective however this may be illusionary. If probability data are not available, 
but are estimated and the estimates are subsequently used as the basis for calculation 
of likelihood, the subjective nature of the assessment may be obscured. Any risk 
 
33
assessment should include an indication of the source and scale of uncertainty in the 
information on which it is based. 
 
Risk management is based on the precept that risk cannot be eliminated completely 
but if the sources of greatest risk are recognised in advance they can be reduced. An 
important component of risk management is the decision on what constitutes an 
acceptable risk. 
Likelihood 
In a quantitative risk assessment, such as those for the importation of farm animals to 
a country (Hayes, 1997), the risk assessment may commence with review of the 
prevalence of the infectious agent in the country of origin. The next step would be to 
assign a probability to each of the steps that must be completed if the disease is to be 
established in the importing country. For a disease to cause an epidemic a series of 
steps must each take place. In a quantitative assessment the overall probability for 
successful disease introduction is calculated as the product of the individual 
probabilities of each step. For this process to be applied to disease importation to 
Antarctic wildlife, the probability of each of the following would be required, 
 
1. a piece of equipment, food or a person is infected with the disease causing 
agent; 
2. the agent survives handling, treatment and transit time; 
3. wildlife are exposed to the agent; 
4. the agent is exposed to a portal of entry  (e.g. a wound, inhaled etc); 
5. the agent induces infection; 
6. the infection induces disease; and, 
7. the disease spreads. 
 
When this process is used in non-Antarctic regions probabilities are estimated on the 
basis of prior information. For Antarctic activities, sufficient information is not 
currently available to provide a meaningful estimate of probability for any of the 
steps. Because the method is based on the mathematical product of the probabilities of 
each step, the individual uncertainties associated with each step compound; as a 
consequence it is unlikely that a method based on the probabilities for a series of steps 
will be useful at this stage. 
 
An alternative, qualitative approach used here is to consider the range of possible 
consequences of disease introduction and to assign a rough indication of the 
likelihood that each consequence could occur. This is used as the basis for 
determining whether any of the possible consequences are a sufficiently high risk that 
precautionary measures are warranted. The next step is to identify qualitatively which 
human activities are most likely to create exposure and transmission pathways, and 
which species are most vulnerable. This information may then be used as the basis for 
practical measures to reduce risk. 
 
After the qualitative risk assessment, if it is still unclear whether the risks are 
sufficient to warrant preventative measures, it may be necessary to embark on an 
extensive information gathering process to acquire data sufficient for a quantitative 
risk assessment. This effort should not be necessary if the qualitative assessment 
 
34
clearly indicates that there are significant risks that could be prevented or that the 
risks are acceptable.    
Consequences 
 
Some potential consequences of taking pathogens to Antarctica, listed in increasing 
order of severity and reducing likelihood, are, 
 
1. the pathogen is not exposed to a suitable host and dies;  
2. transient sickness and distress to individual animals;  
3. establishment of a non-native micro-organism; 
4. loss of productivity or breeding success; 
5. death of a few animals; 
6. death of many animals; 
7. eradication of local populations; 
8. disruption of a component of the ecosystem; 
9. extinction of a species. 
 
It is inevitable that people will take some pathogens with them when they visit 
Antarctica. Pathogens that are taken to Antarctica and subsequently die without 
infecting a suitable host will have a negligible impact. Their effects, if any, are of 
little consequence as they are both short-term and local. A pathogen that becomes 
established within a population without causing the outward signs of disease may 
have no ecological effect but may become a long-term addition to the biota of 
Antarctica. A pathogen that becomes established without causing disease may have a 
minor impact on the population and may have no wider ecological implications, 
however, if it is established, it is, by definition, not transitory. 
 
Pathogens that cause sickness and distress to infected animals may have transient 
effects on individual animals and may have few, if any, wider ecological 
consequences.  However, if the disease persists in the population and continues to 
infect other individuals, the consequences of the introduction are not transient. 
Diseases that cause the death of animals obviously have a permanent effect on the 
infected animals. Whether the disease causes lasting change to a population or has 
wider ecological implications will depend on a number of factors, including the 
number, age-cohort or sex of animals killed. 
 
Extinction of a species is the most serious effect that any human activity could cause 
because it is both permanent and widespread. However, experience in other regions 
indicates that species extinction is a very unlikely consequence of disease introduction 
without the co-occurrence of other stress factors. 
Overall risk 
 
It is impossible to accurately predict the likelihood and consequences of disease 
introduction to a population in which the disease has not previously occurred (Table 
12). Both likelihood and consequences will vary according to characteristics of the 
pathogen and the affected species, including host range, means of transmission, 
degree of exposure, immune status and response to the potential hosts. In general, the 
consequences of disease are more severe in naïve populations than in populations 
 
35
previously exposed. Knowledge of the full consequences of introduction is not a 
necessary precursor to the implementation of methods to reduce the likelihood of an 
introduction. If establishment of a non-native pathogen is undesirable and precautions 
are taken to reduce the likelihood of this happening, these precautions will also reduce 
the likelihood of other, more serious consequences such as death of animals. 
 
Table 12. Potential consequences of taking pathogens to Antarctica and their 
likelihood, severity and indication of the overall risk. 
 
Potential consequence 
Likelihood 
Severity of 
consequences 
Overall 
risk 
1. pathogens are introduced but are not 
exposed to a suitable hosts and die;  
certain 
negligible 
significant 
2. transient sickness and distress to 
individual animals; 
moderate 
low 
moderate 
3. establishment of a non-native micro-
organism; 
moderate 
medium 
significant 
4. loss of productivity or breeding 
success; 
moderate 
medium 
significant 
5. death of a few animals; 
moderate 
medium 
significant 
6. death of many animals; 
unlikely 
very high 
significant 
7. eradication of local populations; 
unlikely 
very high 
significant 
8. disruption of a component of the 
ecosystem; 
unlikely 
extreme 
major 
9. extinction of a species. 
extremely 
unlikely 
Extreme 
significant 
 
 
 
