 
 
1
CEP IV 
Working Paper WP-5 
Agenda Item 4d) 
Argentina 
Original: Spanlish 
Translation: English 
 
 
 
PROGRESS REPORT  
OF THE INTER-SESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP  
ON SPECIALLY PROTECTED SPECIES IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
 
1. Background 
 
During CEP II (1999), the United Kingdom presented CEPII/WP 24 “Specially 
Protected Species in Antarctica”, stressing the need to revise the list of Specially 
Protected Species (SPS) of Appendix A, Annex II of the Protocol. As a result of that, 
the Committee prepared Resolution 2 (1999), charging SCAR with such a revision. 
Likewise, at the CEP III, Argentina presented WP 17 (Considerations about the 
protection of native Antarctic flora and fauna) which underlined that the category of 
“Antarctic Specially Protected Species” did not provide elements to ensure additional 
protection to species so designated. According to the document, Art. 3 of Annex II did 
not establish criteria to designate a species as SPS, and neither did it provided 
mechanisms to afford extra protection to species so designated. Finally, the paper 
stressed the need to extend the consideration of special protection to species other than 
birds, mammals and flora.  
 
At this respect, the CEP III Final Report states: “The Committee noted that Article 3 of 
Annex II needs clarification in relation to the nature of the special protection afforded 
by designation as an Antarctic Protected Species”. 
 
As a consequence, the CEP established an Inter-sessional Contact Group and charged it 
with the following Terms of Reference (ToRs): 
 
a) Consider if some Antarctic native species require additional protection by 
designation beyond that afforded to all native species by the Madrid Protocol, and the 
reasons for this;  
 
b) identify criteria that could be used for assessing a species  for inclusion in this 
category, if additional protection is considered necessary; 
 
c) propose practical mechanisms that might be implemented to provide the appropriate 
level of extra protection; and 
 
d) consider if the status of Antarctic Specially Protected Species should be applicable to 
classes of Antarctic organisms besides birds, mammals, and flora. 
 
 
 
2
 
During the inter-sessional period, the following Parties and Observers have participated 
of this group: Argentina (coordination), Australia, Chile, New Zealand, Norway, 
Sweden, United Kingdom, United States and ASOC. 
 
 
 
 
2. Methodology  
 
The ICG had three rounds of discussions before tabling this Progress Report. The 
original sequence of ToRs was modified, in order to adequately address the issues 
contained therein: general aspects were discussed in first place, while more specific and 
methodological issues were left to be debated afterwards. Thus, the order the four ToRs 
have been eventually discussed was: a), d), b) and c). 
 
The methodology used consisted of a series of key triggering questions, associated with 
the requirements of each ToR. Such questions were agreed by the group, and included 
as part of this Progress Report, after each Term of Reference.  
 
The ICG submits this Progress report to the CEP for its proper consideration. It 
represents a summary of the issues the group is debating on, based on the four ToRs 
during this first inter-sessional period. As charged by the CEP III, a final report of this 
ICG will be presented to the next CEP V, once conclusions have been reached and 
agreed during a second inter-sessional period have been drawn.  
 
 
 
 
3. Discussion 
 
 
First Term of Reference (ToR a): Consider if some Antarctic native species require 
additional protection by designation beyond that afforded to all native species by the 
Madrid Protocol, and the reasons for this. 
 
Question 1: Taking into account all the elements of protection given by Annex II 
and the rest of the Protocol for species not designated as Specially Protected 
Species;  
• up to what extent the existence of the category “Specially Protected Species” is 
needed? And why? 
 
There was general agreement in that the SPS category is still needed. However, the 
purpose and implementation of SPS status requires scrutiny in order to better deploy 
this mechanism as a conservation tool. Different reasons were presented supporting the 
permanence of the SPS category: 
  
 
• It may be helpful to have a particular category open to taxa which (for whatever 
reason) appear to be at particular risk. This argument is linked with the fact that, as 
 
 
3
informed by SCAR to the CEP III, populations of certain species are currently 
declining. 
• The existing elements of the ATS are not giving adequate protection to flora and 
fauna, evidence of which is the fact that several species of Antarctic seabirds are 
being significantly reduced by human activities with the result that these species are 
now assessed as vulnerable to extinction. 
• The Protocol, through its article 3.2, establishes the need to avoid detrimental 
changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of species or populations of 
flora an fauna and further jeopardy endangered or threatened species. In this sense: 
 The SPS category will assist in creating an environment that could help in 
reversing a declining trend. 
 Giving a species a special protection will result in a higher threshold for 
planned activities with expected impacts, compared with non SPS; and will 
put higher emphasis for monitoring and research activities on these species. 
• Special protection will give an extra focus on certain species and, therefore, will 
strengthen implementation of other provisions of the Protocol 
• Since some species migrate outside the AT Area, this category may give incentives 
for nations or international bodies outside the AT Area to take appropriate action. 
• The SPS category could provide the means by which both the CEP and other 
instruments with jurisdiction work together to identify common issues, develop 
conservation measures and monitor their success. 
• Categorizing species as SPS (or similar) is the most widely used conservation tool 
available in the world. 
 
 
Question 2: Admitting the fact that no concrete differences exist between the 
elements of protection afforded to SPSs and those afforded to species not so 
designated in Article 3 of Annex II;  
• is it possible to change such a situation without modifying/amending/updating 
the text of this Article? 
 
The group concluded that it is necessary  to establish a proper framework to ensure that 
the  implementation of the SPS category is feasible, practical and effective. Most of 
participants acknowledged that the Antarctic Treaty System should rely on some kind of 
written regulation to support the category. At this respect, different alternatives were 
proposed within the ICG. A variety of pros and cons have been associated to each of 
them. The proposals include: 
 
1. Modification of Art. 3, Annex II of the Protocol: 
• Any measure included in the text of the Protocol would result in  
 a higher degree of “enforceability” 
 a more concentrated, single body of Antarctic environmental legislation 
• All participants recognised that amending this article is possible, through the 
provisions of Protocol´s Art. 12 and Annex II, Art. 9. 
• Modifying the Protocol may prove administratively difficult for some countries, and 
may take some time to achieve full ratification of amendments. 
 
2. Adoption of guidelines 
 
 
4
• Guidelines have proven very useful in creating a consistent approach to 
implementing the Protocol, 
• although guidelines are not as enforceable as amendments to the Protocol, they can 
include stringent measures as guidance to Parties. 
 
3. Other options raised during the first round of discussions included: 
• interpretation through language 
• inclusion in the CEP Agenda - as an standing item under conservation of flora and 
fauna- reports against an interim measure which gives effect to SPS mechanisms,   
• adoption of mandatory requirements by means of a Measure.  
 
Despite of having intensely debated on these issues, the group eventually decided that 
the task of this ICG should be to inform the CEP about the likely alternatives proposed 
and leave to the CEP itself to decide on the best option. 
 
 
 
Second Term of Reference (ToR d): Consider if the status of Antarctic Specially 
Protected Species should be applicable to classes of Antarctic organisms besides birds, 
mammals, and flora. 
 
 
Question 3: Given that, from the ecological point of view, most Antarctic species 
belong to the marine ecosystem, including birds and mammals;  
• should this ICG propose extending the consideration of special protection to 
other species, even if some of them are under the jurisdiction of other 
Instruments in force within the area of the Antarctic Treaty? 
 
Following is a summary of  the answers that the participants gave to this question: 
 
• From an environmental management perspective, it is reasonable that any species 
that is endangered, threatened or vulnerable in any manner can be afforded with a 
special protection status. Therefore, it should be possible, in principle, to assign the 
status of Antarctic Specially Protected Species to any taxa, regardless of what kind of 
genus it belongs to.  
• From a scientific point of view, restricting additional protection to terrestrial plants, 
birds and seals in the Antarctic cannot be justified. 
 
At this respect, the UK stated that the applicability of the category of SPS should not be 
extended to all Antarctic species, especially if they are under the jurisdiction of another 
instrument. But, concerning the particular case of “native invertebrates” (defined by 
Annex II, Article 1 as “any terrestrial or freshwater invertebrates indigenous of AT 
Area”), the UK agreed on that they should be included in the list of species that could 
potentially be designated as SPS (Article 3 (4) of Annex II of the Protocol).  
 
• Although jurisdictional/legal issues associated to this matter do exist, these should be 
addressed at the ATCM, where a common ground can be found through cooperation 
among the bodies involved. Therefore, the group considered it is important that the 
 
 
5
CEP recommends the ATCM to have early discussions with other Conventions or 
Instruments to avoid conflicts and to ensure that common goals are achieved. 
 
 
Third Term of Reference (ToR b): Identify criteria that could be used for assessing a 
species  for inclusion in this category, if additional protection is considered necessary. 
 
Question 4: Having into account the special status of protection given by the 
Madrid Protocol to the whole Antarctic continent, and that Antarctica could be 
better approach as a region instead as a global system; 
• To what extent are the IUCN criteria applicable to Antarctica? 
• Should ad hoc criteria for identification of species to be designated as SPSs be 
prepared to Antarctica (based or not on the IUCN´s criteria)? 
 
All participants have agreed to support the use of IUCN criteria as a basis for assessing 
the need for special protection in the Antarctic continent, mainly based on the following 
reasons: 
 
• IUCN criteria are scientific, have been developed in robust fora under intense 
scrutiny, have high objectivity and comparability, and can be used in many 
situations. 
• The system for documenting assessments and guidelines for the IUCN criteria 
would be essential to ensure transparency and to facilitate the exchange of 
information. 
• IUCN criteria deals with data-deficiency species in a systematic manner, 
giving a strong incentive to the Parties to increase data collection, and 
possibly research, on these species. 
• SCAR has considered their use appropriate to Antarctica. 
 
 
The group has also agreed that, if gaps existed in the IUCN criteria, specific Antarctic 
criteria may need to be developed. 
 
Finally, other aspects have been addressed within this ICG, although they still need 
further discussion. For example: 
 
• Whether or not the eight IUCN categories of “at risk species” should fit in a 
single Antarctic SPS category.   
• how CEP designations of SPSs correspond to IUCN designations of “at risk” 
species;  
• that other available criteria, such as those contained in the Convention on 
Migratory Species (CMS), should be given consideration as well;  
• aspects related to consideration of global versus regional status of a taxon, 
when designation of such a taxon as a SPS is considered, and 
• the issue of regional differences in Antarctic populations, e.g., a species might 
be showing declines in the Peninsula region, but maintaining status quo, or 
even showing growth elsewhere.    
 
 
 
 
6
 
Fourth Term of Reference (ToR c): Propose practical mechanisms that might be 
implemented to provide the appropriate level of extra protection. 
  
Question 5: Given that, the SPS´s should count on more specific mechanisms of 
protection than those established for species not so designated; 
• what other mechanisms of additional protection can be proposed? 
 
There has been general agreement in that additional protection mechanisms for species 
designated as SPS are needed. The Group is still in the process of building-up consensus 
on the nature of mechanisms that would help secure additional protection.  
 
In order to provide an appropriate level of extra protection to species designated as SPS, 
it was recognized that such mechanisms would likely fall into two complementary 
categories: general protection mechanisms applicable for all SPSs, and taxon-specific 
mechanisms, refined to the particular circumstances obtaining at the time of 
designation.  
 
Although no decision has been taken on this option yet, some related aspects have 
already been highlighted within the group. For instance, a general protection mechanism 
proposed was that any impact of a proposed activity on a population of a SPS be, in all 
cases, considered more than a minor or transitory impact, under the EIA procedures 
stated in Annex I. Among the reasons to support this initiative are that this procedure is 
already familiar to ATCPs and ensures transparency, allowing all Parties to provide 
comments. However, several participants expressed strong reservations regarding this 
alternative, recognizing that further discussions are necessary in order to appropriately 
consider procedural issues associated with such an approach.  
Other option of general mechanism proposed was that particular activities or 
methodologies would not be employed in the case of SPS.  
 
As an example of a specific mechanism of protection, use of the Protocol´s Protected 
Area Provisions, i.e. establishing ASPAs to protect a particular species, has been 
suggested. Another suggestion is to develop a conservation plan detailing appropriate 
actions that would reverse the declining trend in the designated species. The group also 
acknowledged that, when discussing specific mechanisms to protect a designated 
species, the sources of impact on such a species should be evaluated. 
 
 
 
 
