ATCM XXIV
Working Paper WP-37
Agenda Item 4

Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy,
New Zealand, Peru and Uruguay

Antarctic Treaty Secretariat: Modalities

For many years Consultative Parties have recognised the need for a Permanent Secretariat of the
Antarctic Treaty.

The XVII ATCM in Venice marked the beginning of discussions on the form, the establishment,
the composition, the functions and the question of cost sharing for the new structure.

After Venice, the subject of the Secretariat was regularly revised at every ATCM from Kyoto to
Lima, and also during the intersessional meetings devoted to the issue of liability.

The Final Report of the XXIII ATCM of Lima recorded that:

"There was consensus amongst Parties as to the need for the establishment of a
Permanent Secretariat, which is cost-effective. The meeting expressed the urgent need to reach
consensus on the issue of the Secretariat's location as well as its modalities."

Furthermore, the Report recorded that:

"A great majority of Consultative Parties reiterated their support for Buenos Aires."

The lack, so far, of substantial progress in establishing the Secretariat is due less to technical and
legal problems involved than to the political issue of its location.

It is however useful to focus on the legal issues surrounding the establishment of the Secretariat in
order to reach consensus as soon as possible on the technical and legal aspects of the new
structure and to make possible the timely adoption of the constitutive act, once the political issue
of its seat is finally resolved.

The following issues should therefore be addressed:
a) functions; b) composition; c) financing; d) constitutive instrument; e) legal status: f) privileges
and immunities.

A draft measure on establishing the Secretariat is attached for consideration and adoption at the
appropriate time.
PROPOSAL OF AGREED MEASURE ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT

The Representatives,

Recalling the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental
Protection (the Protocol):

Recognizing the need to establish a Secretariat to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting (ATCM) and the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) in performing their
functions;

Agree, pursuant to Article IX (4) of the Antarctic Treaty, that:

ARTICLE 1
Establishment of the Secretariat

The Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (hereafter "the Secretariat"), is established by this Measure
with its headquarters in...

ARTICLE 2
Functions

The Secretariat shall carry out the functions as may be established by the ATCM. The Secretariat
shall undertake, in particular, the following functions:

i) Provide support to the Consultative Parties, and especially to the host States of the ATCM, and
other meetings held under the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection,
according to the mandates for those meetings;

ii) Facilitate communications and coordinate the exchange of information to be carried out among
the Contracting Parties in accordance with the Antarctic Treaty and the CEP and other
components of the ATS;

iii) Create and maintain the records of the Antarctic Treaty System and publish information about
the ATS, including establishing and maintaining databases;

iv) Facilitate coordination between the components of the Antarctic Treaty System and those
international institutions with a relationship with the ATS;

v) Maintain the records of the ATCMs and of other meetings held within the framework of the
Antarctic Treaty System and make information about the Antarctic Treaty System available;

vi) Prepare reports about the activities of the Secretariat.

ARTICLE 3
Secretariat's Personnel
The ATCM shall appoint an Executive Secretary as Head of the Secretariat, in accordance with 
the procedures, terms and conditions agreed by the ATCM.

The Secretariat shall operate in a cost effective manner. The structure of the Secretariat shall be 
agreed by the ATCM.

The privileges and immunities of the Secretariat, of the Executive Secretary and of the permanent 
staff shall be established in the Headquarters Agreement to be concluded with the host State, with 
the prior approval of the ATCM.

The Executive Secretary shall appoint, direct and supervise the staff, in consultation with the 
Consultative Parties.

ARTICLE 4
Legal Capacity

The Secretariat shall enjoy, in the territory of the host State, such legal capacity as may be 
necessary to perform its functions. The Secretariat shall, in particular, enjoy legal capacity to:

    i)      contract;
   ii)      acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property;
  iii)      institute administrative and legal proceedings;
   iv)      conclude a Headquarters Agreement with the host State, with the prior approval of 
            the ATCM.

ARTICLE 5
Budget

1)[Option 1: The ATCM shall approve the budget of the Secretariat, which will be covered by 
each Party in proportion to the scale of contributions to the UN.]

[Option 2: The budget of the Secretariat shall be financed in equal shares by the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties.]

2) The Consultative and Non Consultative Parties may, in addition, make voluntary contributions 
to the budget of the Secretariat.

3) The ATCM shall establish financial and administrative rules of the Secretariat, including 
concerning the period for which the Secretariat's financial records require external audit.
