IV CEP 
Working Paper WP-9  
Agenda Item 4a) 
New Zealand 
Original: English 
 
 
REPORT TO CEP IV ON THE QUESTION OF  
COLLECTION OF ANTARCTIC METEORITES BY PRIVATE EXPEDITIONS 
 
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATION 
Recent collecting efforts by private expeditions are reported and the requirement that all meteorites found should be 
described and documented according to national protocols is accepted. The collection of Antarctic meteorites for reasons 
other than scientific is considered to be in violation of the protocol, and a recommendation is proposed in order to encourage 
ATCM to act on this concern. The recommendation reads: 
 
RECOMMENDATION CEP IV- 00  On the collection and disposition of Antarctic meteorites 
 
Noting the potential loss to Antarctic scientific research through the collection, inadequate characterisation and handling 
methods, and possible sequestration or sale of meteorites by private expeditions or individuals 
 
CEP recommends that 
ATCM asks Parties to review the administration of their legislation putting into effect the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection with a view to  
i) 
ensuring that their citizens are aware of their obligations to preserve the worth of collected material of 
scientific value, and freedom of access to that material, through proper curation according to nationally 
accepted protocols,  
ii) 
ensuring that there are appropriate remedies and penalties for violations of the Protocol, and 
iii) 
ensuring that their nationals refrain from actions that could be interpreted as mineral resource activity  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
At CEP III SCAR introduced Working Paper XII SATCM WP 19 on Antarctic Meteorites in which it expressed serious 
concern at the potential for the loss of meteorites to the scientific community through their collection by private (non-
governmental) expeditions. Antarctic meteorites collected through national Antarctic programmes are taken in a consistent 
and unbiased manner and curated with agreed protocols. Hence they serve as well-preserved and representative samples of 
the full spectrum of material arriving from space, and on that account have unique scientific value. This value is 
compromised when meteorites are collected without following established procedures and held in collections inaccessible to 
the scientific community. Particular concern was expressed at the risk that collecting by private expeditions would lead to 
the sale of Antarctic meteorites, creating a commercial incentive for collecting them and thus exacerbating the problem.  
 
Discussion of the issue at CEP III indicated considerable sympathy for SCAR’s concern, with members noting that the 
collection of meteorites for non-scientific purposes might constitute a violation of Article 3.2b.5 of the Protocol in so far as 
it would lead to “degradation of …areas of… scientific..significance”. It was agreed that these were issues that needed 
further consideration, and New Zealand undertook to do this. 
 
Section 1 of this report briefly outlines the current procedures for the collection and handling of Antarctic meteorites by 
national Antarctic programmes and the reasons for these. More detail can be found in SCAR Working Paper XXX to CEP 
III.  Section 2 provides a brief review of private expeditions, past and planned, and includes some new information. Section 
3 considers the protection offered by the Protocol on Environmental Protection for material of value to scientific research. 
Section 4 addresses the legal issues. The report concludes with a recommendation to CEP for addressing the problem. 
 
 
SECTION 1. PROCEDURES FOR COLLECTION AND INVESTIGATION OF ANTARCTIC METEORITES    
Meteorites are routinely collected, curated, and studied through the National Antarctic Programmes of the United States, 
Japan and several European countries. In the USA, government-supported scientists work as part of a collaborative effort 
between the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the 
Smithsonian Institution. Under this program meteorites are collected in Antarctica, and then taken to the Johnson Space 
Center where an initial description is made as a joint effort of NASA and the Smithsonian Institution. Thus NSF, NASA and 
the Smithsonian manage a process, with technical advice from experts, that provides for the long term curation as well as 
the well-informed and managed allocation of samples for bona fide research and educational purposes. 
 
Other countries have similar systems, and there is active collaboration between them. The scale of research on Antarctic 
meteorites is indicated by the scientific publication record. GEOREF, the on-line Earth Sciences bibliography, lists 2250 
publications since 1972. The US programme alone receives currently around 250 requests each year for meteoritic material 
for study. The approach of the US and other national programmes has resulted in consistent and unbiased collections with 
sustained curation of high quality from individual ice fields providing a well-preserved and representative sample of the full 
spectrum of materials arriving from space.  
 
SECTION 2. CONCERNS FOR RECENT AND PLANNED PRIVATE EXPEDITIONS 
The first private expedition with a specific goal of recovering meteorites visited the Patriot Hills in 1998. This expedition 
found nothing, but a further expedition to the nearby Thiel Mountains in January 2000, recovered 20 specimens  
(www.aad.gov.au Antarctic Tourism ANAN 18/14 29/3/2000). The expedition leaders were approached by the US 
Meteorite Working Group, representing the government science community, to catalogue their material through the 
ANSMET program. This offer was declined, though reports refer to examination in a US laboratory, and subsequent public 
display. This area had been partially collected by ANSMET in 1982/83 and 1991/92, and further collection was planned 
when time and logistics allowed. As a consequence of the private expedition about 1/3 of the meteorites known from this 
area were collected and transported with unknown controls and are not routinely available to scientists. Plans for another 
expedition in 2002 have been announced (ANAN 40/9 31/1/2001).  
 
In January 2001 members of another group spent two weeks in Dronning Maud Land to search for meteorites, but 
reportedly found none (ANAN 41/10 14/2/2001). Other adventure-oriented hunters have also indicated their interest, with 
one announcing an expedition to the Queen Fabiola Mountains of Dronning Maud Land for climbing, snow-boarding and a 
hunt for meteorites (ANAN 40/9 31/1/2001).   
 
More recently (April 18, 2001) a piece of an Antarctic meteorite was sold by electronic auction for $32. This is a tiny 
fragment of a number of pieces found in 1976-77, prior to the setting up of ANSMET, and some are known to be in private 
hands. The auctioneer’s description recognised that Antarctic goverments have agreed that “Antarctic meteorites are solely 
for the scientific community and none can be traded outside the scientific establishment”. However he goes on to say that 
when technology improves it won’t cost so much for private collectors to put together an Antarctic search trip, which might 
lead to more coming onto the market.    
 
These reports provide a sound basis for concerns expressed by Antarctic scientists and reported by SCAR at CEP III. 
 
SECTION 3. POINTS IN THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION RELEVANT TO THE 
PRIVATE COLLECTION OF METEORITES 
 
Protection for material of value to scientific research  is made clear in three sections of the Protocol: 
i) 
Article 3 (1)  “The protection of the Antarctic environment… and its value as an area for the conduct of scientific 
research… shall be fundamental considerations in the planning and conduct of all activities in the Antarctic Treaty 
area.”, 
ii) 
Article 3 (2)  “To this end.. b) activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area shall be planned and conducted so as to 
avoid….(v) degradation of, or substantial risk to, areas of…scientific….significance, and 
iii) 
Article 3 (4)  “Activities shall be planned and conducted in the Antarctic Treaty area so as to accord priority to 
scientific research and to preserve the value of Antarctica as an area for such research..”    
These three sections taken together make it quite plain that the collection and sequestration of scientifically valuable 
material in a way that makes it inaccessible to the scientific community violates the Protocol.  
 
Article 7 provides that any activity relating to mineral resources, other than scientific research, shall be prohibited”. Some 
jurisdictions may consider the collection of meteorites for sale as the exploitation of a mineral resource. In such cases the 
intention of the collector is relevant. Where scientific research is not the primary purpose of collector then the collection of 
meteorites might constitute mineral resource activity, and hence violate the Protocol. 
   
 
SECTION 4. LEGAL ISSUES 
 
The remedy for violations of the Protocol on Environmental Protection is an issue for governments, who have passed 
legislation for that purpose following their signature to become Parties to the Protocol. Protection of scientific values, like 
all other values described in the Protocol, is normally achieved through the environmental assessment process that is now 
part of all national programmes operating in the Antarctic. In terms of adherence to the Protocol, national programmes of 
Parties have the responsibility for assessing activities such as the collection of meteorites, and approving or not approving 
depending on whether the activity represents a degradation of, or substantial risk to, an area of scientific significance. Even 
where an expedition or an individual is not part of a government-sponsored programme, there is still a requirement that they 
will conform to the Protocol or face the penalties provided by their national legislation. 
 
SECTION 5. RECOMMENDATION TO CEP IV 
 
Recalling that CEP is charged with providing advice and formulating recommendations to the Parties in connection with the 
implementation of this Protocol for consideration at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (Article 12-1), the following 
draft recommendation is proposed: 
 
RECOMMENDATION CEP IV-00  
On the collection and disposition of Antarctic meteorites 
 
Noting the potential loss to Antarctic scientific research through the collection, inadequate characterisation and handling 
methods, and possible sequestration or sale of meteorites by private expeditions or individuals 
 
CEP recommends that 
ATCM asks Parties to review their legislation putting into effect the Protocol on Environmental Protection with a view to  
i) 
ensuring that their citizens are aware of their obligations to preserve the worth of collected material of 
scientific value, and freedom of access to that material, through proper curation according to nationally 
accepted protocols, 
ii) 
ensuring that there are appropriate remedies and penalties for violations of the Protocol, and 
iii) 
ensuring that their nationals refrain from actions that could be interpreted as mineral resource activity   
 
P J Barrett 
May 2001 
