





Improving interaction between CEP and ATCM








Improving interaction between CEP and ATCM

Summary
The purpose of this paper is to look at how the documentation submission procedures to the Meeting could lead to improved interaction between CEP and ATCM. At ATCM XXXVIII in Sofia, the Meeting discussed the organisation of the Meeting with great results. One of the issues that was not fully discussed was the interaction between ATCM and CEP, and how this might be improved in the future. This paper seeks to explore whether there are measures that could be taken with respect to document handling (submission, discussion, etc.) to the Meeting as one way of improving interaction between the two bodies. This paper seeks to explore the possibilities for avoiding inefficient duplication of effort, and for ensuring that discussions at the ATCM are informed by advice from the CEP where appropriate. 


Background
Over the past years, the Meeting has discussed several option for improving the organisation of the Meeting. One of the challenges we have observed is when the same working paper is submitted to both the ATCM and CEP.  This can be a challenge for several reasons. Firstly, when the same working paper is submitted to both ATCM and CEP, both meetings often end up discussing the entire paper. Moreover, when the same paper is submitted to both meetings, it is not always clear what sections should be discussed by CEP, and which should be discussed by ATCM. This is problematic as it can result in misdirected discussions and/or inefficient duplication of effort. Lastly, we have seen that the submission of one document to both meetings can result in ATCM discussions taking place before the CEP is able to discuss and deliver its advice to the ATCM on issues where this is pertinent. This is a challenge as it can result in the meeting discussing and concluding without having all the relevant information available in their decision making process.  


Discussion
Due to the problems that, to a degree, arise from the current manner of document handling to the ATCM, we would propose that the Meeting discuss whether there are measures that could be taken with respect to the way in which documents are submitted and/or discussed. We have outlined some thoughts to start this discussion. These are meant to serve as a starting point for further consideration, and do not necessarily represent firm suggestions from Norway and Australia.
  
There are several questions that could be explored to seek solutions that could serve to improve the document submission process. As a starting point for discussion, we would like to put forward the following questions for further exploration:

    • Could an agreement that documents only be submitted to either the CEP or ATCM be a way forward?
    • Could an agreement that documents that are submitted to both the ATCM and CEP clearly outline what questions are to be discussed by the ATCM and CEP respectively be a way forward? 
    • Could working to ensure that working group chairs have means to more fully discuss and coordinate their plans for the agenda in advance, when it is known that a topic is to be discussed in both ATCM and CEP be a way forward?
    • Could there be value for the CEP Chair and Working Group Chairs to review papers as they are submitted and, as appropriate, be able to invite the author(s) to redirect their paper to another part of the meeting?
    • Could updating the Secretariat’s Manual for the submission of documents to the ATCM and the CEP to include general guidance on these matters be a way forward? 
These points present some of the possible ideas that we have thought of to improve interaction between the CEP and ATCM. There could be other ways to improve the document submission process, and we would welcome discussions on this matter. 



Conclusion
The submission of documents to the Meeting is an issue that is important to discuss as it affects the effectiveness and robustness of the discussions and conclusions from the Meeting. The possible elements that we have highlighted in this paper could serve as a starting point for discussions on this issue, with the aim to streamline document submission and discussions in a manner that ensures appropriate, effective and well-informed outcomes when considering documents and the proposals contained therein.

