





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 122 - Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island









ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 2
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004), Measure 3 (2011)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987), Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000) 
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 122, Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
SCAR Recommendation XXIII-6 (1994)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Updates and changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island
    1) The Management Plan for ASPA No. 122 Arrival Heights, Hut Point Peninsula, Ross Island was last reviewed in 2011, and review thus is due in 2016. . Accordingly, a field inspection visit of ASPA No. 122 was undertaken by the United States on 16 February 2016 to verify that the values under special protection were still valid and that measures for protection of those values were sufficient.
    2) Arrival Heights was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 2 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) due to its value as an electromagnetically quiet site for the study of the upper atmosphere. The current Management Plan reaffirms the high scientific value of the Area for study of the upper atmosphere and for other scientific programs. Despite some increases in electromagnetic interference (EMI) from activities in the vicinity, research within the Area appears to operate within acceptably low levels of EMI and the aims and objectives set out in the management plan for Arrival Heights therefore remain relevant.
    3) Detailed input and comment from the scientific community working at Arrival Heights was requested and received, with a broad group of more than 40 scientists and technicians contacted. Information was received on the latest published research and changes to facilities, and suggestions were made for improvements to management policies. The inputs helped guide revision of the management plan and maps.
    4) Some concerns were raised about some activities occurring outside of the ASPA that appear to be affecting scientific research conducted within the ASPA, in particular electromagnetic emissions in the low frequency range emitted from the nearby wind turbines. This matter cannot be addressed through the ASPA management plan because the source of the interference lies outside of the boundary of the Area, and this has been raised for consideration by operators in the region.
    5) The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Updates to the introduction, including classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
        c. Section 1 Description of values to be protected: The values of Arrival Heights for its unobstructed viewing horizon and for clean air monitoring have been added. 
        d. Section 2 Aims and objectives: The two new values to be protected noted above have been added;
        e. Section 3 Management activities: More specific information on requirements relating to vehicle headlights, radio transmissions and keeping a log of visits to the Area have been included;
        f. Section 5 Maps. Maps 1 and 2 layouts were revised and content was updated to reflect facilities installed or removed from the Area;
        g. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. The description of the Area was updated to include recent scientific literature and observations;
        h. Section 7 Permit conditions. Revisions were made to the sections and text in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011);
        i. Section 7 (iv) Installation, modification or removal of structures: This section has been updated to reflect the two additions to the values to be protected;
        j. Section 7 (vi) Restrictions on materials and organisms: A new provision to minimize or avoid anthropogenic gaseous or aerosol emissions to the atmosphere from sources such as internal combustion engines within the Area has been added. Such emissions, if long-term or permanent, would jeopardize some scientific experiments being conducted within the Area;
        k. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.
    2) The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.


