





Summary of Abstracts - Symposium








Summary of Abstracts - Symposium
Summary
The purpose of this paper is to allow Parties to prepare for discussions that are to take place at the Symposium to Celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Environmental Protocol. In this document, we have attempted to extract some of the main issues and topics that are likely to be presented under each agenda item. In addition to this, the full abstracts submitted by the speakers has been attached in the appendix. 
Symposium
This document presents some of the points that are likely to be highlighted and thereby discussed at the Symposium. It is not necessarily a reflection of the topics that the speakers will choose to focus on at the meeting. It is our hope, however, that this document will allow Parties to reflect on the topics and issues that are to be presented, and that the summary helps Parties prepare for discussions at the Meeting. We have structured the document in such a way that each agenda item is presented individually. The full abstracts provided by the speakers are presented in the appendix. 
Summary of main questions and topics
Some of the main questions and topics to be presented under each section are as follows:

Agenda item 1:
    • The Protocol as a worldwide outstanding framework agreement for conservation and environmental protection.
    • The history of and vision behind, and impact of the Protocol
    • The Protocol in comparison to the global and regional environmental framework agreements

Agenda item 2
    • Examples of the Protocols effectiveness from the different perspectives of the speakers, showing that the Protocol has served as an effective mechanism for facilitating environmental protection and conservation. 
    • Discussing at the achievements and shortcomings of the Protocol. 
    • Considering how the Environmental Protocol has influenced the delivery and support of science. 
    • Discussing the role of Observer organisations in the Antarctic Treaty System. 
    • What are the future challenges of the Environmental Protocol? 

Agenda item 3 
    • How has the CEP met new challenges and developments? 
    • How the operational practices of the Committee have evolved to meet the changing demands of the CEP.
    • The CEP and domestic environmental law. 
    • Exploring different examples of how the CEP might need to evolve in the future. 
    • Data management as a future challenge for CEP

Agenda item 4
    • Discussion of what the future challenges for the CEP will be.
    • How can the Protocol meet future challenges?
    • How will climate change and the increasing diversity of activities in Antarctica impact the work of the CEP?
    • How can the CEP develop a proactive work program?

Conclusion 
The main questions to be discussed at the Symposium are broad and varied. This short summary of some of the points that are to be discussed under each agenda item aims to serve as a starting point for reflections. 
Appendix: 

Agenda item 1

Mr. Evan Bloom
The history of and vision behind, and impact of the Protocol

Ms. Therese Johansen
The Protocol in comparison to other global and regional environmental framework agreements

Agenda item 2

Dr. Jose Retamales
    • Analysis of the Protocol on Protection of the Antarctic Environment and its Annexes
    • Analysis of the policies developed over the years in the Antarctic Treaty, from new topics discussed at the CEP meetings.
    • Future challenges regarding the protection of the Antarctic environment.

SCAR: Dr. Aleks Terauds
Under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the designation of Antarctica as a ‘reserve for peace and science’, the establishment of environmental principles for the conduct of activities and the establishment of the Committee for Environmental Protection, have all had significant and long-lasting impacts in the context of protecting the Antarctic environment. 
From a scientist’s perspective, there are some striking examples of the Protocol’s effectiveness in this regard. The ban on mining provides for long lasting and overarching protection across a range of environments. The prohibition of non-native species introductions, and the priority attention this issue has received at the CEP, has not only resulted in improvements in biosecurity practices but also a reduction in the likelihood of non-native species becoming established. The provision for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPAs) has facilitated the designation of over 70 ASPAs, many of which relate directly to the protection of the Antarctic environment. Under the framework of the Protocol, the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has developed several Codes of Conduct to protect environmental and scientific values of Antarctica.
We will use these and other examples in our brief presentation to show that the Protocol has served as an exceptionally effective mechanism for facilitating environmental protection at a continental scale.

COMNAP: Dr. Yves Frenot
The Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) was established by the managers of those governmental organisations just a little over 25 years ago. The relationship between the establishment of COMNAP and the agreement by governments to the Environmental Protocol was not a coincidence. Operators were, historically, the creators of direct environmental impact in the Antarctic region, the witnesses to changes in the Antarctic from direct and indirect influences and the champions for change in the form of development and implementation of environmental protection mechanisms. Thus, national Antarctic programs, and the many personnel who are or who have been part of those programs have worn “many conservation hats” in the past 25 years.

This presentation on behalf of the 30 member programs of COMNAP, explores the impact of the Environmental Protocol from a national Antarctic program operator’s perspective, how the Environmental Protocol has influenced delivery of, and support to, science for the past 25 years.  It will also propose what impact the Environmental Protocol will have for the next 25 years and beyond from an operator’s perspective.    This includes what influence COMNAP has had as an Observer organisation to the CEP and COMNAP’s ability as an organisation to provide a “reality check” of sorts into the Antarctic Treaty System through a range of Information and Working Papers which provide practical and technical advice into that system. 


ASOC: Ms. Claire Christian
The Protocol represents an impressive achievement that helped to solidify the earlier commitment of Antarctic Treaty Parties to protecting the Antarctic environment. The Protocol also meets several of the criteria of the "World Park Antarctica" concept promoted by eNGOs in the 1970s and 1980s. Indeed, since its signing, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting has developed a strong focus on environmental issues, and the Protocol's implementation has been a key component of most Antarctic operations. Our presentation will discuss the greatest achievements of the Protocol, as well as its biggest unfulfilled promises. Additionally, we will describe how the application of the Protocol must move beyond its initial, generally successful implementation phase (the first twenty-five years) to truly achieve its vision in the next twenty-five years. This will be essential in order to meet both "traditional" as well as emerging environmental challenges, which are compounded by climate change. These include increases in human activities, encroachment upon wilderness, and non-native species. Environmental protection is a long term process, and consequently we must ensure that the Protocol is not only a set of rules on particular issues, but also a principle that guides how all ATCPs - individually and collectively - plan and manage their activities in Antarctica. 

IAATO: Dr. Kim Crosbie


Agenda item 3

Dr. M Ravichandran
In Madrid, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) was established according to Article 11, whereas the Article 12 defines the functions of the Committee. CEP recommends ATCM for approval of measures, decision and resolution or any such report accepted by the committee. It is governed by a set of Rules and Procedures which underwent revision in 2015. The Committee includes 37 parties and observers which discusses issues with translations in four treaty languages to arrive at recommendations or by forming an Inter-sessional Contact Group (ICG), to continue the discussions on submitted Working Paper by the Party. 
Although, the Committee plays a pivotal role in advising ATCM on the recommendations, it has faced certain challenges since inception in its capacity building and resources availability. However, as the environmental issues cropped up  CEP’s importance  grew stronger as the tasks undertaken were completed, which, further strengthened the Committee’s role. Developmental activities in terms of Science for peaceful purposes as well as for the benefit of mankind is the essence of Article 2, which consequently and concurrently points at conserving the pristine environmental reserve of Antarctica. It can be achieved by utilizing the latest management tools.  CEP also plays a foremost role in convincing the Parties for framing their domestic environmental laws . On recommendations of the CEP, Measures (152) and Resolutions (114) adopted by ATCM have an objective to protect the environment and accordingly frame their domestic environmental laws/acts. Committee has also faced some internal challenges due to institutional barriers which averted legitimate interpretation of roles and responsibilities.

Effective data management as well as de facto impartial decisions will be the future challenge for CEP. The Committee has proven effective in its operation and conduct which meets the expectations of Parties.

Key words: Article 12, ATCM, CEP, Environment 


Mr. Ewan McIvor
When the Parties negotiated the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, they foresaw an important role for the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) – to advise them on how best to achieve their shared objective of comprehensively protecting the Antarctic environment. The Protocol outlines the composition of the Committee, and requires that a report on each session be presented to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, but is otherwise silent on how the Committee should conduct its business. This presentation will describe the operational practices employed by the Committee, which have evolved in the face of an increasing volume and complexity of work. As the Parties reflect on the past 25 years and look ahead to the future, it is timely for them to consider ways of ensuring the CEP remains well placed to carry out its important role, such as: supporting enhanced engagement by their representatives in annual meetings and intersessional activities; developing the CEP representatives of the future; supporting the science needed to better understand and address the environmental challenges facing Antarctica; providing direction and feedback on the Committee’s priorities, and considering making available financial and other resources to support them; encouraging further accessions to the Protocol; and considering further ways to integrate the Committee’s advice into their discussions on governing and managing the Antarctic region.


Agenda item 4

Mrs. Jillian Dempster

The Environmental Protocol reinforced a strong and ambitious common vision for the future of Antarctica.  The Protocol was intended to be dynamic, with an iterative process of updating and responding to emerging environmental pressures. 25 years on from the Protocol, we face many challenges which are increasing in urgency.  How will climate change and the increasing diversity of activities in Antarctica impact on our collective goals, and what needs to be in a proactive work programme to continue to strengthen the Protocol? Can the Antarctic Treaty System work more cohesively together to take the Protocol to the next level by 2041? 


Ms. Jane Rumble
The next 25 years


Mr. Rodolfo Sanchez
The next 25 years

