





Proposal to add Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery (Dormitory No.2) at the Antarctic King Sejong Station to the Historic Sites and Monuments









Proposal to add Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery (Dormitory No.2) at the Antarctic King Sejong Station to the Historic Sites and Monuments



This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument 


    (i) Name of Proposed HSM: Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery (Dormitory No.2) at the Antarctic King Sejong Station
    (ii) Description: The Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery (Dormitory No.2) was constructed on 17 February 1988 at the Antarctic King Sejong Station which is located in the Barton Peninsula on King George Island. The structure of the dormitory is a raised and steel framed building with total floor space of 140 m². The Dormitory No.2 will be renovated and conserved as the Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery to commemorate the Antarctic history of the Republic of Korea. 
(iii)	Coordinates: 62˚ 13' S, 58˚ 47' W
(iv)	Original Proposing Party:  the Republic of Korea
(v)	Party undertaking management:  the Republic of Korea

Proposal to add Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery (Dormitory No.2) at the Antarctic King Sejong Station to the Historic Sites and Monuments


Summary

The Republic of Korea proposes, in accordance with Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, that the Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery (Dormitory No.2) at the Antarctic King Sejong station be added to the “List of Historic Sites and Monuments Approved by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting”. The Antarctic King Sejong Station is scheduled to undergo renovations during the 2016-17 and 2017-18 Antarctic summer seasons to meet the growing needs of the Korean Antarctic research program and to cater to increasing international scientific cooperation. Thus far, the Dormitory No.2 at the Antarctic King Sejong Station has been used to accommodate the summer research team. The dormitory will be renamed and conserved as the Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery to permanently commemorate the significance historical and scientific value of the Korea’s Antarctic research.


Background

The first Korean Antarctic Station to be constructed, the Antarctic King Sejong Station was inaugurated on 17 February, 1988 on the Barton Peninsula, King George Island to be a year-long research station for Korea Atlantic Research Program. Named after King Sejong the Great of Joseon dynasty, one of the greatest leaders of scientific and cultural advancement in Korean history, the Station’s very roots bear the creative and scientific spirit of Korea.       
To address the growing needs of Korean Antarctic Research activities and further enhance capacity for international collaboration, the Antarctic King Sejong Station is planned to undergo renovations during the Antarctic summer season, specifically from November 2016 to December 2017. Thus far, the Station accommodated two major expedition groups, the summer and over-winter research parties, with the summer research parties—comprised of researchers from both Korea Polar Research Institute and other research, academic institutions and universities—staying in Dormitory No.2.  
In order to exhibit the historical significance of Korean Antarctic science, Dormitory No.2 is proposed to be renovated and conserved as the “Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery.” The Hall/Dormitory is a raised and steel framed building with total floor space of 140m². Renovations will expand the current dormitory to include a lounge, souvenir shop and bedroom(s). In such kind of space, the research parties and the guests using the Station will be able to appreciate and be inspired by the history of Korean Antarctic research.  
The primary role of the Antarctic King Sejong Station is to serve as a strategic point for studying the Antarctic. With the achievements of Korean research team, the Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery will commemorate the significant historical and scientific value for the Republic of Korea.  
Position and description

Position: 62˚ 13' S, 58˚ 47' W
The Dormitory No.2 at the Antarctic King Sejong station is located on the Barton Peninsula, King George Island. The structure of the dormitory is a raised, steel framed building with total floor space of 140m². The dormitory will be renovated and conserved as the “Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery”. 


Reasons for designation

Consistent with Resolution 8 (1995) and the Appendix to Resolution 3 (2009), the Dormitory No.2 at the Antarctic King Sejong Station merits listing for the following reasons: 

    1) The Antarctic King Sejong Station was the first year-round research station. The station accommodates two major expedition groups. The Station currently is planned to undergo renovation work during the Antarctic summer season (2016/2017 and 2017/2018) to meet the growing needs of the Korean Antarctic research and to better cater to international cooperation. 

    2) The Dormitory No.2 served as the accommodation for the summer research party. The dormitory will be renovated and conserved as the “Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery”, complete with a lounge, souvenir ship and bedroom. The “Hall” will serve as a symbolic gallery of international scientific cooperation and exhibit the valuable history with other Antarctic Parties and guests from research organizations. 


Through this “Antarctic King Sejong Station History Gallery”, the great strides in Korea’s history in scientific research and discovery will be on fuller display for both the international Antarctic community and the Korean public.
