





The status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 107 Emperor Island, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula









The status of Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 107 Emperor Island, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom’s on-going monitoring work within Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 107 Emperor Island, Dion Islands, Marguerite Bay, Antarctic Peninsula, has identified no substantial recovery of the earlier emperor penguin colony within the ASPA in the past five years.  A reassessment of the Area’s suitability for ASPA status, using tools within the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, showed designation as an ASPA may not be justified.  Consequently, the United Kingdom is seeking the views of the CEP on whether the additional protection afforded by ASPA status within the Area is still appropriate. 
Background information
Emperor Island (Latitude 67°52’ S, Longitude 68°42’ W), on the western side of the central Antarctic Peninsula in north-western Marguerite Bay, was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 8 through Recommendation IV-8 in 1966 after a proposal by the United Kingdom. Values protected under the original designation were concerned entirely with the presence of the only colony of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) known at that time to exist on the western side of the Antarctic Peninsula (one other colony has been located subsequently).  A Management Plan for the Area was adopted through Recommendation XVI-6 (1990), which reaffirmed the values of the Area. The boundaries were extended to include the intervening sea between the islands to ensure protection of the emperor penguins at sea or on sea ice in the immediate vicinity. 
The status of the emperor penguin colony with ASPA No. 107
At CEP XIV the United Kingdom presented a Working Paper (ATCMXXXIV/WP18) that described a study by UK scientists that cast doubt over the continued existence of the emperor penguin colony on Emperor Island.  When discovered in 1948, the colony comprised of approximately 150 breeding pairs; these numbers were maintained until 1970, after which time the colony showed a continuous decline. By 1999 there were fewer than 20 pairs, and in 2009 high-resolution aerial photography revealed no remaining trace of the colony.  The decline of the Emperor Island colony is thought to be linked to a well-documented rise in local mean annual air temperature and a coincident decline in seasonal sea ice duration in the area. In the Working Paper, the United Kingdom proposed delaying the revision of the current ASPA Management Plan for five years to facilitate research that would enable the status of the colony to be confirmed.  After this interval, appropriate management action, including possible de-designation, would be considered.  The Committee supported the approach planned by the United Kingdom and looked forward to receiving further information on the status of the values within ASPA No. 107 (CEPXIV Final Report para 108).
Monitoring results
Five years have now elapsed since the monitoring programme, proposed in ATCMXXXIV WP18, was initiated. The monitoring used aerial photography and automatic cameras located on the island during the emperor penguin breeding season.  

No evidence of successful breeding was found within the ASPA. During the 2015 winter, four adult emperor penguins were photographed on Emperor Island (T. Hart, pers. comm.); however, it could not be determined whether any breeding attempt had been made as no copulation events, eggs or chicks were evident in the imagery.  At very low temperatures penguin huddling is essential in reducing the metabolic rate of over-wintering birds, as huddling behaviour conserves heat within colony members (Le Maho et al., 1976).  As a result, colonies with very few birds may find it difficult to ensure the survival of the adults and their eggs/chicks during the winter fast. Therefore, if any breeding attempt was made at Emperor Island, the likelihood of chick survival is in doubt.  It is plausible that the presence of the birds in 2015 was associated with the unusual extent of sea ice, which was more extensive and more persistent than in recent years and may have led to birds from neighbouring colonies visiting the island (P. N. Trathan pers. comm.).

In summary, monitoring has shown that emperor penguins are present within the ASPA only intermittently and then only in very low numbers. Based on the projected continued increase in regional temperatures, particularly during the winter (Turner et al. 2009), future successful breeding of emperor penguins on Emperor Island seems unlikely.
Reassessment of the suitability of Emperor Island as an ASPA
A systematic reassessment of the suitability of Emperor Island as an ASPA was undertaken, taking into consideration the values present in the Area since Annex V entered into force in 2002.  The tools described in the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol were employed for this purpose.  In summary, the reassessment findings were as follows:

    • Protection and use: The Area contains no clearly outstanding values or categories listed under Article 3(1) and (2), respectively, of Annex V to the Protocol.  Antarctic Important Bird Area (IBA) ANT097 is contained within the ASPA, qualifying on the basis of the imperial shag (Phalacrocorax [atricpes] bransfieldensis) colony.  There are 204 Antarctic IBAs, and ASPA status is unlikely to be appropriate for all of these sites. In the local vicinity, environmental values associated with imperial shags are protected, along with six other species of breeding bird, within ASPA No. 117 Avian Island, Marguerite Bay (located 12 km from Emperor Island).  Imperial shags are also protected as a secondary value within ASPA No. 115 Lagotellerie Island, Marguerite Bay, Graham Land (located 55 km from Emperor Island).  
    • Quality: The emperor penguin colony was the sole value contributing to the Area’s designation as an ASPA.  With very few or no emperor penguins breeding within the Area, the site adds little value to the existing Protected Area system.
    • Environmental risk:  Emperor Island is remote and under little risk from human activity, particularly during the austral winter.  Natural processes, including declining sea ice and potential fur seal impacts, may present a risk to the very small number of penguins undertaking occasional breeding attempts within the Area, but these risk cannot be easily mitigated through the use of a Management Plan.

The outcome of a systematic reassessment of the suitability of Emperor Island for special protection, based upon the values contained within the Area, revealed that the Area may no longer merit designation as an ASPA and it is likely that the level of environmental protection provided by the Antarctic Treaty system would provide adequate protection of the Area.  
Recommendation
With due regard to:
    • monitoring data that have shown that breeding emperor penguins are either absent or present in only low numbers within the ASPA;
    • the lack of any other values within the Area that clearly justify special protection; and
    • the outcome of a reassessment of the Area’s suitability for ASPA status, using tools within the Guidelines for implementation of the Framework for Protected Areas set forth in Article 3 of Annex V of the Environmental Protocol, which showed that the Area may not merit designation as an ASPA the United Kingdom is seeking the views of the CEP on whether the additional protection afforded by ASPA status is still appropriate.
References
Le Maho, Y., Delclitte, P., & Chatonnet, J. (1976). Thermoregulation in fasting emperor penguins under natural conditions. The American journal of physiology 231(3): 913-22
Trathan, P.N., Fretwell, P.T., & Stonehouse, B. (2011). First recorded loss of an emperor penguin colony in the recent period of Antarctic regional warming: implications for other colonies. PLoS ONE 6(2): e14738. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0014738
Turner, J., Bindschadler, R., Convey, P., Di Prisco, G., Fahrbach, E., Gutt, J., Hodgson, D., Mayewski, P. & Summerhayes, C. (eds.). (2009a). Antarctic Change and the Environment. Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research, Cambridge UK. 526 pp.

