





Revision of the ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments’









Revision of the ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
or Historic Sites and Monuments’

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom
Summary
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP acknowledges the benefit of the provision of addition information on how protected areas fit within existing systematic environmental-geographical framework tools, and recommends to the ATCM revisions to Template A: Cover sheet for a Working Paper on an ASPA or ASMA’ contained with the  ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments’ concerning the provision of data on Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions and Important Bird Areas within proposed protected areas.
Background
    1. At CEPX/ATCM XXX, the United Kingdom submitted WP43, entitled ‘Guidance for Working Papers on Area Protection and Management’, the aim of which was to help streamline the process for legal adoption of management plans once agreed by the CEP/ATCM.   The proposal was well received and in light of comments received, the United Kingdom presented the ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments’ for consideration at CEPXI/ATCMXXXI through WP 41 rev.1, which was subsequently adopted through Resolution 1 (2008).  

    2. At ATCMXXXI the ATCM adopted Resolution 3 (2008) concerning the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’, which was to be used consistently and in conjunction with other tools agreed within the Antarctic Treaty System as a dynamic model for the identification of areas that could be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas within the systematic environmental-geographical framework referred to in Article 3(2) of Annex V of the Protocol.  In light of this Resolution, the Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments was reviewed and a revised version adopted through Resolution 5 (2011).  This included within ‘Template A: Cover sheet for a Working Paper on an ASPA or ASMA’ the following question relating to the adoption of the Environmental Domains analysis:

(6) Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here). 
Suggested further revisions
    3. Since 2011, further tools have been developed that could be used to identify protected areas within a systematic environmental-geographical frameworks, i.e. the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (Resolution 6 (2012)) and the Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)).  

    4. Mindful of these developments, the United Kingdom suggests that ‘Template A: Cover sheet for a Working Paper on an ASPA or ASMA’, contained within the Guidelines, now be amended to include a request for information on how proposed protected areas fit within these framework tools.  Therefore, the United Kingdom suggests amending the Guidelines to include the following two questions within Template A:

(7) Have you identified the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions’ appended to Resolution 6 (2012))? Yes/No (If yes, the main Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region should be noted here). 

(8) Have you identified any Antarctic Important Bird Areas (Resolution 5 (2015)) represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Important Bird Areas in Antarctica 2015 Summary’ appended to ATCMXXXVIII IP27 and the full report available at: http://www.era.gs/resources/iba/)? Yes/No (If yes, the Important Bird Area(s) should be noted here). 
Recommendation
The United Kingdom recommends that the CEP: 

    (1) acknowledges the benefit of the provision of addition information on how proposed protected areas fit within systematic environmental-geographical framework tools; and
    (2) recommends to the ATCM that ‘Template A: Cover sheet for a Working Paper on an ASPA or ASMA’ contained within the ‘Guide to the presentation of Working Papers containing proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments’ be amended to include the additional questions (7) and (8), as set out in paragraph 4 above.


