





The concept of "outstanding values" in the Antarctic marine environment

Summary of the intersessional contact group convened by Belgium









The concept of "outstanding values" 
in the Antarctic marine environment
Working Paper submitted by Belgium

Summary
This working paper summarises the exchange of view held during the 2015/16 intersessional period and draw some conclusions to suggest practical next steps for implementation of Annex V, article 3 of the Madrid Protocol and how practically make a more frequent use of the 2000 guidelines when establishing and/or reviewing ASPAs and ASMAs.
Framework
At the eightieth meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVIII), held in Sofia in June 2015, Belgium introduced WP 20 The concept of “outstanding values" in the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol, and referred to IP 10 “The concept of “outstanding values"” in the Antarctic marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol”. These papers presented a summary of the discussions of the ICG established by CEP XVII.
The Committee1 agreed to continue discussions on these matters, and established an ICG led by Belgium to work during the 2015/16 intersessional period with the following terms of reference:
    1) Discussing next steps in the implementation of Annex V, Art. 3 of the Protocol regarding the concept of "outstanding values" applied to the marine environment, including any actual or potential threats to that environment, with respect to activities covered by Art. 3 (4) of the Protocol;
    2) Identifying further mechanisms for the CEP, within the existing framework and tools of the Treaty and the Protocol, to consider “outstanding values" of the marine environment, when establishing and/or reviewing ASPAs, and ASMAs as appropriate;
    3) Understanding the work of CCAMLR on systematic conservation planning, in order to avoid duplication of efforts, complement it and maintain separate roles, while using the appropriate tools available to the CEP's work to implement Article 3 (2) of Annex V to the Protocol;
    4) Providing a final report to CEP XIX.
The intersessional contact group was convened by Belgium and received contributions, during its various stages, by the following Parties and Observers: France, Germany, Japan, South Africa, United States of America and ASOC. 
Key outcomes of the ICG
As preliminary remarks, it should firstly be taken into account that the CEP’s efforts to advance the objectives and provisions of Annex V are independent of the on-going work by CCAMLR on MPA’s which consider the designation of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). In addition, ASPAs and ASMAs with marine components could be useful and important in order to better protect all types of ecosystems: terrestrial and marine. In fact, ASPAs and ASMAs could encompass marine areas in order to protect not only marine ecosystems themselves, but both terrestrial and marine ecosystems from human activities which could affect the interactions between these two habitats and which are not regulated by CCAMLR, like tourism2 or logistical activities.Thirdly, Annex V and its 2000 Guidelines3 are providing relevant and practical guidance for designation of marine ASPAs, there is no need for any further additional (stricter) criteria to be applied by the CEP to decide if that area should be protected according to Annex V (ASPA) of the Protocol.
Members should proceed case by case and step by step, the greatest need for spatial protection being given by the combination, in a given area, of a value (in this case, an outstanding marine value) and a situation or activity that threatens that value. This threat may be an actual threat or a potential one that could affect the value in the future. According to this, we do not necessarily have to discuss types of marine values generally and taken in isolation, but rather need to analyse particular cases where certain values are threatened or at risk in certain areas, and any and all values of the marine/coastal environment that meet the criteria of the 2000 Guidelines may merit additional protection through the ASPA mechanism. It would be important to define actual or potential threats to those existing or proposed ASPAs, however the existence or not of a threat would be only one aspect for consideration. Facilitating scientific research, including research relevant to climate change, and giving adequate protection to unique or representative areas, could also be significant criteria.
We propose the two following practical ways to progress :
    1. More frequent consistent consideration of outstanding values of the marine environment in the regular ASPA and ASMA review process. 
This would involve considering outstanding values of the marine environment in the review of current ASPAs that have a coastal/marine component (whether or not the ASPA includes a marine area or stops at the water line). The reviewers may consider, based on relevant evidences, whether in view of the outstanding values of the marine environment in the ASPA and adjacent areas there is a reason to change the boundaries of the ASPA to give adequate protection to those values. 
    2. Improve compliance with Article 3(2) of Annex V. 
This would involve expanding the ASPA & ASMA network according to a systematic environmental-geographical framework, which needs to be applied more purposefully than hitherto. The expansion of the ASPA network would need to cover the full range of values outlined in points (a) to (i) of that article as relevant to coastal and marine areas. In this regard the ATCM/CEP could benefit from understanding the work of CCAMLR on systematic conservation planning, concerning both the methodological approaches used and, as required, actual findings from CCAMLR's work. Much of CCAMLR’s work in this area is in progress so regular engagement with CCAMLR will be particularly useful to inform the work of the CEP as required while avoiding duplication with the CCAMLR’s works.  In practice, progressing on obligations of Article 3 (2) of Annex V could follow the usual approach by which one or more proponents (any Party as well as the CEP, SCAR, or CCAMLR in accordance to Annex V, Art. 5 (1)) submit a draft management plan to the ATCM. That process could include a more formal strategic conservation planning process for ASPAs, which would be important to broaden the entire ASPA and ASMA network, not just for ASPAs or ASMA’s protecting outstanding marine values. 
Evaluation and Recommendations to the CEP
Based on the views and consideration exchanged during the ICG’s, we would recommend to the CEP to note the key outcomes of the discussions and consider whether further steps should be taken along the following lines: 
    1. We encourage Parties and the CEP to consider outstanding values of the marine environment under Annex V of the Protocol when proposing new ASPAs or ASMAs or revising existing one and to make a more frequent use of the 2000 Guidelines. 
    2. We recommend that, in implementing Annex V, Art. 3 of the Protocol, Members apply the concept of outstanding values to the Antarctic marine environment, including with respect of potential threats to that environment from activities covered by Art. 3 (4) of the Protocol and any other major issue deemed pertinent by CEP, like for instance climate change.
    3. We encourage Members to already provide CEP a short-list of existing ASPAs and/or ASMAs where that concept could be “tested” at their next forthcoming review by the CEP.
    4. We encourage Parties and the CEP to increase the cooperation to the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources at the practical level in order to better understand the approaches to marine protection (including the work on systematic conservation planning), to avoid duplication of effort and to maintain separate but complementary roles while protecting marine environments.

