





Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements









Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
The 38th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) considered the report of intersessional work to review the information exchange requirements (ATCM XXXVIII/WP14 (Australia)). As a result of that work, some changes and clarifications to the information exchange requirements were agreed by the ATCM and reflected in Decision 6 (2015) Exchange of information. The meeting also identified outstanding items which required further discussion, and established an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) convened by Australia to consider these items. This paper reports on the ICG’s work to address its terms of reference, and makes recommendations for consideration by the ATCM and CEP. 
Background
The ATCM Multi-year strategic work plan includes a ‘comprehensive review of existing requirements for information exchange and the functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) and the identification of any additional requirements’ as a priority item (Decision 5 (2013)). At ATCM XXXVII, the meeting considered WP55 (Australia) and SP7 (Antarctic Treaty Secretariat) and agreed on terms of reference for intersessional work, convened by Australia, to advance this review. The meeting also requested the CEP to provide advice on the exchange of information relating to environmental matters. The ATCM and CEP considered the report of the ICG (ATCM XXXVIII, WP14 (Australia)), decided on changes to the information exchange requirements in relation to a number of items, and adopted Decision 6 (2015) Exchange of information, which contains the current requirements. Appendix 1 to the Final Report of ATCM XXXVIII – Outcomes of the intersessional contact group on information exchange requirements provides further detail on those items of information that were finalised at the meeting.  
ATCM XXXVIII also agreed to establish an ICG, convened by Australia, to progress the review of those items that had not been resolved. The CEP noted that it stood ready to provide further advice to the ATCM, as appropriate, on the exchange of information relating to environmental matters. 
As in the previous intersessional work, the focus of the ICG was on reviewing the information currently required to be exchanged. Consideration of the design and functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System is intended to occur later, after the review of information exchange requirements has been completed. 
The terms of reference agreed by ATCM XXXVIII were to:

    1. Review the items of information currently required to be exchanged, with a focus on those remaining items already identified as requiring attention (as listed in Annex 1 to WP 14 submitted to ATCM XXXVIII);
    2. Formulate recommendations on:
        a. Whether there is continued value for Parties to exchange information on these items;
        b. Whether some of them need to be modified, updated, differently described, made mandatory (where currently described as optional) or removed;
        c. The timing of information exchange for these items;
        d. How each item should best fit into the category of pre-season, annual and permanent information;
        e. Whether the information could be better exchanged through other mechanisms (for example those operated by COMNAP); and
    2. Report to ATCM XXXIX.
Method of operation
The ICG operated using the online ATCM Discussion Forum, under the topic ‘ICG on reviewing information exchange requirements’. The discussion was open to all Parties, Observers and Experts. Reference documents were provided on the forum including: 
    • ICG on review of information exchange requirements - remaining items for discussion following ATCM XXXVIII
    • ICG on reviewing information exchange requirements 2014/15 (2014/15 intersessional period - ATCM forum).
    • Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements (ATCM XXXVIII / WP14)
    • Decision 6 (2015) Exchange of information
    • Appendix 1 to the Final Report of ATCM XXXVIII – Outcomes of the intersessional contact group on information exchange requirements
    • ATCM Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan: Report of the Secretariat on Information Exchange Requirements and the Electronic Information Exchange System. (ATCM XXXVII / SP7)
The ICG began work with an opening announcement by the convener on 9 October 2015. The work was arranged in stages:
    • Stage 1: Circulation of proposed work plan and schedule
    • Stage 2: Review the remaining items of information in accordance with term of reference #1
    • Stage 3: Finalise recommendations on the remaining items of information and agree on a Working Paper report of the ICG for ATCM XXXIX and CEP XIX
To facilitate the provision of advice by the CEP on the exchange of information relating to environmental matters, as requested by the ATCM, the ICG convener encouraged participants to consult with their CEP representatives when preparing their contributions to the ICG discussions.
Summary of discussions
Comments were provided to the ICG by seven Parties (Argentina, Australia, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Norway, and the United States). 
To assist participants in providing input consistent with term of reference 1, a Convener’s paper was prepared and circulated to form the basis of stage two of the ICG discussion. This paper outlined suggested actions for each of the outstanding items, including: possible changes, clarifications or modifications based on the discussions in the previous intersessional period; inviting participants to provide further details or draft changes to the requirements (for proposals that had been raised previously); or seeking to identify where further discussion outside the ICG (for example in the ATCM, CEP, or amongst interested Parties) might be required.
Participants were invited to provide views on these suggested actions, or any alternative or further options. 
Following input from participants, the Convener summarised the discussion and provided draft ICG outcomes, consistent with term of reference 2, and a draft working paper (consistent with term of reference 3). 
With this report, the ICG has concluded its work in accordance with the terms of reference. 
Discussion of items of information to be exchanged
The ICG discussed all outstanding items and agreed recommendations for consideration by the ATCM (and in the case of the environmental items, the CEP). A summary of the outcomes of the discussion, and the recommendations of the ICG for each of the items discussed, is provided at Attachment 1. The information is grouped in the categories of environment, scientific, operational and other information.
Additional points raised by participants
Points were raised in the ICG discussion, similar in nature to some of those additional issues raised in the previous intersessional period (refer to Report of the intersessional contact group established to review information exchange requirements ATCM XXXVIII / WP14) which were beyond the scope of the ICG terms of reference. These included:
    • the desirability of determining what use is made by the Parties of the information that is exchanged; 
    • the level of detail of information exchanged, and whether this detail is necessary;
    • variations in the level of detail provided by different Parties; and
    • the different options available for exchanging information (for example through the electronic information exchange system, or via other means).

A suggestion was made that the ATCM may wish to consider these questions, possibly through scheduled work in the ATCM multi-year strategic work plan. 
Recommendations
    1. It is recommended that the CEP:
        a. considers the report of the ICG with reference to the exchange of information relating to environmental matters;
        b. formulates advice to the ATCM on any recommended changes; and
        c. identify any further work arising from the report of the ICG, and give consideration to how that work might be advanced.
    2. It is further recommended that the ATCM:
        d. considers the report of the ICG, and any advice from the CEP in relation to the exchange of information relating to environmental matters;
        e. give effect to any agreed changes to the information exchange requirements; and
        f. identify any further work arising from the report of the ICG, and give consideration to how that work might be advanced.


Attachment 1: ICG on review of information exchange requirements (second intersessional period)

Outcomes of ICG discussion

Environmental information
Item or Category
Brief summary of discussion (for further detail please refer to the ATCM forum)
ICG outcome
Contingency plans for oil spills and other emergencies 
(section 3.3.2 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)

Items of information:
    • Title
    • Link (URL) / File (PDF)
    • Contact Point 
    • Implementation Report
    • Objective / Remarks
The ICG noted that it is not clear what information is to be exchanged with respect to implementation reports. Participants also noted that reporting about implementation of plans also occurs through COMNAP (for incidents associated with national Antarctic programs). It was also noted that the description of the item should specify ‘other environmental emergencies’. 
The ICG recommends:
    • modifying the description of the item to add underlined text as follows “oil spills and other environmental emergencies”;
    • adding an optional item to describe ‘scope/coverage of the plan (eg. ship oil spill, station oil spill, station chemical incident etc)’, in case this is not indicated in the title;
    • retaining the item ‘link’, but making it ‘optional’; and
    • removing the item ‘implementation report’. 
The ICG recommends that the status of cooperation on contingency plans (as opposed to individual or program-specific plans) be considered, as appropriate by the CEP and ATCM (through means other than routine information exchange). 
The ICG further recommends that the ATCM take note of the established communication mechanism, through COMNAP, for reporting on incidents and possible implementation of contingency plans (for national Antarctic program (NAP) incidents). 
Finally, the ICG recommends that the ATCM note the option of case-by-case reporting to annual meetings where a contingency plan has been invoked in responding to a non-NAP incident as an appropriate means of exchanging information in such cases.
Procedures relating to EIAs (description of procedures for preliminary stage consideration of activities)
(section 2.4.6 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG discussed what information was needed about these procedures, and what level of detail was appropriate. 


The ICG does not recommend any changes to this requirement. 
List of IEEs and CEEs 
(section 2.4.2 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)

Items of information currently included : 
    • Type (IEE/CEE)
    • Activity
    • Year
    • Title
    • Location (Site Name, Latitude, Longitude)
    • Organization responsible
    • Decision/Comment
The ICG discussed issues including: continuous exchange of this information; whether an item specifying the level of impact that the EIA process has predicted should be required; possible changes to the descriptive field ‘activity’ and the topic list; whether information on the period of the activity/authorisation should be specified; and whether similar information should be provided for all preliminary environmental evaluations.

The ICG recommends:
    • inclusion of an additional optional item of information, for indicating ‘the period/length of the activity’; and
    • modifying the timing for information on IEEs and CEEs to encourage provision ‘as soon as domestic processes are concluded, while maintaining the existing deadline for Parties to submit the information’.
The ICG also noted that in some cases the IEE for an activity is amended, updated or otherwise modified by the competent authority. The ICG participants noted that the information exchange requirements currently do not include sharing of information about such updates. 
Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna – taking and harmful interference
(section 2.3.2 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)

Items of information currently include: Species; Location/s; Amount; Sex; Age; Purpose 
With respect to Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna – taking and harmful interference, the ICG noted that some Parties issue permits for a species across multiple locations, for multiple species at one location, and for multiple years. As a result it is not possible to extract or compare data for sites, species, or years. 

The ICG notes that the current information exchange for ‘flora and fauna: taking and harmful interference’, while meeting the Protocol requirement, will continue to result in data that cannot readily be collated across species,  location, and years, due to the domestic permit arrangements in place for some Parties that relate to single species across multiple locations and vice versa. 
Waste disposal and waste management – waste management plans
(section 2.4.4 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
There was a suggestion that this section should be expanded to include additional items of information on waste disposal, covering waste released to the environment from stations and field activities. There was also a suggestion that the ICG should consider clarifying the information to be provided regarding waste management plan implementation.
With regard to information exchange requirements for waste management plans, the ICG noted that further discussion of what information would be useful to the CEP, and what details might therefore be required, would best occur in the context of any future CEP consideration of waste management issues.
Waste disposal and waste management – inventory of past activities
(section 3.3.3 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
In previous intersessional discussion it was suggested that more clarity was required regarding about the requirement for Parties to share their inventory of locations of past activities. The ICG noted that discussion about the information to be included in those could be relatively wide ranging, and outside the scope of this ICG. 
With regard to the item ‘Waste disposal and waste management – inventory of past activities’, the ICG noted that further discussion of this requirement would best occur in the context of any future CEP discussion of inventory of past activities.

Area protection and management – Visits to Specially Protected Areas (permit information) 
(section 2.3.1 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG discussed whether ASPA post-visit reports (required under ASPA management plans) should be exchanged. 
The ICG considered whether the item ‘number of people entering an ASPA’ was a useful measure of ASPA visitation or impact, and whether an item for ‘number of person entries in the permit period (or reporting period)’ should be added. 
The ICG also discussed whether information on ‘change or damage to an ASPA, ASMA or HSM’ could be handled on a case-by-case basis rather than via information exchange. 
The ICG considered the possibility of including copies of ASPA post-visit reports in the information exchange requirements. It was noted that ASPA post-visit reports, required under management plans will not always be in an official Treaty language. The ICG noted that further discussion of this issue in the CEP may be warranted. 
With regard to the item ‘change or damage to an ASPA, ASMA or HSM’, the ICG agreed to retain the current requirement, but noted that the option exists for the CEP to give additional consideration to any reports of change or damage to an ASMA or ASPA on an as-needed basis, if a Party chose to provide information through a meeting paper. 

Scientific information

Item or Category
Discussion and Convener’s proposal
Suggested ICG outcome
Forward plans
(section 2.1.1 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG discussed information exchange on science forward plans, the relationship between this information and information on specific projects, and broader discussions in the ATCM on science priorities. The ICG noted that there is variation in the way that different countries plan scientific activities, and that distinguishing between ‘projects’ and ‘plans’ is not straightforward. 
The ICG recommends making the item ‘forward plans’ optional, and recommends adding a field for Parties to link to relevant plans as appropriate. 
Science activities in previous year
(section 2.1.2 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG discussed whether information on science activities should be shared ‘pre-season’, and considered the role of the EIA process, and of SCAR in sharing information about science activities.
 

No changes to this item were recommended by the ICG. 

Operational information – national expeditions

Item or Category
Discussion and Convener’s proposal
Suggested ICG outcome
Operational: national expeditions – Stations
(section 1.1.1a of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
A number of suggestions were provided regarding information in this category in the previous intersessional work. Some categorisations were regarded as incorrect (for example ‘field camps, refuges and other’ as types of ‘station’) and a suggestion was made to create an additional sub-category for ‘field facilities’. There were also comments regarding possible items for traverses, for port/dock facilities, and for fuel depots. 
The ICG also discussed the possible inclusion of a category for aviation facilities (runways and skiways) and noted that Resolution 1 (2013) specified that Parties should facilitate the ongoing revision of the Antarctic Flight Information Manual maintained by COMNAP. 
The ICG identified possible changes to the items of information in the Operational: national expeditions – stations’ category. The ICG recommends that NAPs, via COMNAP, be consulted regarding an appropriate set of information exchange items to meet these requirements.  
It is tentatively suggested that the information could be re-arranged under a heading ‘facilities’, with the following categories:
    • Year-round (wintering) stations (permanent or long-term facility)
    • Seasonal (occupied in summer) stations (permanent or long-term facility)
    • Refuges or huts (permanent or long-term facility)
    • Port or dock facilities (permanent or long-term facility)
    • Major field camp (temporary / short-term facility)
    • Other temporary / short-term facility or activity (eg. traverse, field science facility)
The ICG also noted that further discussion of the scope and definitions of the two final items is required if they are to be included. 
The ICG noted that there was currently no item of information for aviation facilities. The ICG did not recommend any additional items of information relating to such facilities, given that Resolution 1 (2013) specified that Parties should facilitate the ongoing revision of the Antarctic Flight Information Manual maintained by COMNAP, which includes information on ground facilities. 
Research rockets
(section 1.1.1d of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG discussed whether it remained useful to exchange detailed information on research rockets, and whether it was an obsolete requirement or whether it should be considered under ‘scientific information’. An alternative view was that this information is useful for air safety and should remain as ‘operational’ information, possibly with the addition of items on other unmanned aerial systems such as balloons and UAVs. 
The ICG participants noted ongoing discussion in the ATCM of unmanned aerial vehicles (including air safety considerations) and a continued focus through the multi-year strategic work plan on work to ‘strengthen cooperation among Parties on current Antarctic specific air and marine operations and safety practices’. The ICG therefore recommends that that any changes relating to information exchange on research rocket launches be considered in the context of broader air safety management discussions in the ATCM and COMNAP. 
Search and rescue information items – stations, vessels, and aircraft
(section 3.2a, b and c of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
Participants noted that it is not clear what information should be exchanged or what reporting format is contemplated. It was also noted that COMNAP maintains information of this nature.


The ICG noted that COMNAP may be best placed to manage information on search and rescue, and recommends that the ATCM consult with COMNAP with a view to removing these items from the information exchange requirements. The ICG recommends seeking the advice of COMNAP on whether the COMNAP-curated search and rescue information can and/or should be made available publicly (for example, by linking to it from the ATCM website). 

Operational information – non-Governmental expeditions

Item or Category
Discussion and Convener’s proposal
Suggested ICG outcome
Non-Governmental expeditions
 (section  1.1.2 of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange 

Current Requirements: Name of operator, name of vessel, Maximum crew, Maximum Passengers, country of registry of vessel, number of voyages, expedition leader, planned departure dates, ports of departure and arrival to and from Antarctica, areas of operation including the names of proposed visited sites and the planned dates at which these visits will take place, type of activity, whether these visits include landing and the number of visitors that participate in each of the specific activities.)
The ICG discussed whether this information should be exchanged continuously, and whether a deadline for submission of pre-season information should be retained.
The ICG also discussed whether details of domestic implementation of Measure 4 (2004) Insurance and contingency planning for tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area should be required in this section.

The ICG recommends that information on non-governmental expeditions be exchanged continuously, with the relevant timing description being: 
 “as soon as possible following completion of national processes, preferably by the pre-season target date of 1 October, and no later than the start of the activity’.
The ICG noted that information about the domestic implementation of Measure 4 (2004) could best be provided through the “relevant national legislation” item, using the existing items of information in that section. 
Non-Governmental expeditions – aircraft activities
(no current requirement)
The ICG noted the absence of a category for exchanging information on non-governmental aircraft activities, and discussed whether a possible new category should be created, and the items of information that might be necessary within that category. 
The ICG noted that there is no current requirement for non-governmental aircraft activities. The ICG recommends adding a new category for non-governmental aircraft activities, comprising the information items: type, number of flights, period of flights, departure date per flight, route per flight, purpose per flight, and number of passengers.
For consistency with other categories of non-Governmental expedition information, this information would be required pre-season and annually. 
A suggestion was made that this category could include information on unmanned aerial vehicles. There was insufficient time for the ICG to discuss this suggestion, which may also be informed by scheduled ATCM discussions of UAV issues. 
Vessel-based operations
(section 1.1.2a of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered whether a new item of information on ‘purpose of activity’ should be included in ‘vessel-based operations’. The ICG also discussed how to provide information on expeditions combining vessel activity along with multi-day land based activity, and a suggestion that all tourism and non-Governmental expedition post visit reports should be added to the requirements. 
No changes are recommended for this category of information.

Vessel-based operations – Location
(section 1.1.2a of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered this category of information, in particular the requirement for detailed pre-season and annual information on locations of activities (including shore landings from tourism vessels). Participants noted that in many cases the actual times and locations of shore visits varied from those planned pre-season, for valid operational reasons. As a result, the information submitted annually by Parties is likely to differ from that provided pre-season, in many cases. The ICG also considered a suggestion that information could be provided for several locations on a given day), and that the system should allow for comments to be added relating to changes to voyage plans. The ICG discussed the option of exchanging pre-season information on broader parameters, such as planned voyage dates and regions of operation, and requiring full details of landings conducted only in the annual information.  
The ICG did not reach agreement to make changes to the items of information, or the timing for each item. A number of participants noted that pre-season information (on locations of planned activities) was in many cases different to the actual activity, and questioned whether it was necessary to provide detailed information as part of the pre-season information exchange. The ICG notes that this issue may warrant further discussion among interested Parties. 
Vessel-based operations – Date
(section 1.1.2a of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered whether ‘duration of landing’ should be required, to reflect situations where an activity will spend multiple days at one site, or multiple sites visited on the same day. 
The ICG recommends the addition of an additional item of information for vessel-based operations, namely ‘duration of landing’.
Vessel-based operations – Activity
(section 1.1.2a of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered how best to record multiple activities occurring at a site simultaneously. The Secretariat has advised that this function has been implemented, following the instruction provided by the Parties in Decision 6 (2013). 
No action required
Vessel-based operations - Number of visitors (per landing site) 
(section 1.1.2a of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered whether, in addition to the number of visitors per landing, the total number of passengers on a vessel, per voyage, should be recorded. 
The ICG does not recommend any changes to this item of information. 
Land-based operations -  Locations
(section 1.1.2b of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered the issue of multiple names available for single locations, in the database that supports the electronic information exchange system. 
The ICG does not recommend any changes.
Land-based operations - Number of visitors
(section 1.1.2b of Decision 6 (2015) Annex: Information Exchange Requirements)
The ICG considered whether ‘nationality of participants’ should be exchanged.  
The ICG does not recommend any changes.



