





Enhancing Antarctic Education and Outreach Visibility









Enhancing Antarctic Education and Outreach Visibility 
Working Paper submitted by 
Spain, United Kingdom, Portugal, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile and Italy
Summary
The Antarctic Treaty System has placed special importance on education and outreach activities in recent years. The topic has become a permanent agenda item in the work of the ATCM and, in 2015, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) decided that Antarctic education and outreach was a priority issue. In this paper, Spain, United Kingdom, Portugal, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile and Italy propose the creation of a section within the Secretariat website to allow interested Parties to access education and outreach materials designed for the general public.
Background
The interest on Antarctic education and outreach activities is a topic already highlighted; many Parties invest resources into domestic and, in some cases, international education and outreach activities. The International Polar Year (IPY) 2007/08 created a significant opportunity to advance Antarctic education, outreach and communication, and scientists from many Treaty Parties carried out numerous initiatives in this sense. 
Parties have previously recognised the need for a better public and educational outreach (ATCM XXXVII – WP9 ATCM) and many Parties welcomed the initiative and highlighted the importance of promoting awareness and disseminating knowledge on the Antarctic (Final Report of the XXXVII ATCM, paragraph 325). 
During ATCM XXXVIII in Sofia, Bulgaria, 2015, a Workshop on Education and Outreach took place, during which Parties committed to increasing their efforts to stimulate the exchange of information about their respective national programmes and to look for ways to facilitate the exchange of experiences and resources. As a result of this workshop, “the Meeting agreed to add Education and Outreach as an additional priority issue for the Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan” (Final Report of the ATCM XXXVIII, paragraph 107). Furthermore, the meeting agreed to establish an ICG on education and outreach (Final Report of the ATCM XXXVIII, paragraph 374), to foster collaboration and to develop, encourage, and share results of educational and outreach by expert groups.
The topic has become a permanent agenda item in the work of the ATCM. At ATCM XXXVIII, COMNAP presented an overview of the various Antarctic national programmes that have departments focussing on education and outreach (ATCM XXXVIII – IP 9 rev. 1). Events such as the Information Officers Network (INFONET) workshops carried out in 2005, 2006 and 2008; and projects such as “Antártida Educa” (Spain), ANDRILL outreach (Germany, United States, Italy and New Zealand), and Ice Station Antarctica (Spain, United States, United Kingdom, and Republic of Korea) are demonstrations of the growing interest and increased efforts among Consultative Parties with respect to education and outreach.
Alongside these efforts to promote the exchange of experiences among experts underline an interest in providing a way for information on Antarctica to transcend the boundaries of the Antarctic community and thus overcome the tendency of this community to “speak to itself”. In this regard, the findings of the experts of COMNAP are significant: despite the fact that many countries provide Antarctic education and outreach activities aimed at the general public, it is not always easy for the general public to access those resources.
Proposal
As established in Measure 1 (2003), the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty has among its functions the provision and dissemination of information about the Antarctic Treaty System and activities carried out in Antarctica. This task is realised by means of the website of the Secretariat, which provides the possibility for any user outside the Antarctic Treaty System to find many sources of information. The website provides access to both the Treaty System’s own materials (such as the ATCM Final Reports and Working Papers) and specific information submitted by Parties, such as details on activities reported through the electronic information exchange system. The Secretariat website also offers links to external websites dedicated to Antarctic issues.
With the objective of increasing the visibility of Antarctic education and outreach resources produced by the Parties, and to facilitate access to those resources by the general public, Spain, United Kingdom, Portugal, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile and Italy wish to propose the creation of an Antarctic education and outreach section on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website. Based on voluntary participation, and with appropriate disclaimers to make clear that Parties’ contributions are solely reflective of the views of each participating Party, this section of the website would allow interested Parties to share their education and outreach activities, including links to their respective pages of existing projects and materials.


