





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 149 - Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands









ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation IV-11 (1966) SPA No. 11
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XV-7 (1989) SSSI No. 32
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2005)
Current management plan:
Measure 7 (2011)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 3 (1996), Measure 2 (2000)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics. Addition of oversnow vehicle route to emergency hut for seasonal maintenance.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for summary listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands
    1) The Management Plan for ASPA No. 149 Cape Shirreff and San Telmo Island, Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands was last reviewed in 2011, and review is therefore due in 2016. Accordingly, a field inspection visit of ASPA No. 149 was undertaken by the United States on 26 October 2015 to verify that the values under special protection were still valid and that measures for protection of those values were sufficient.
    2) Cape Sheriff and San Telmo Island was originally designated as Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 11 through Recommendation IV-11 (1966) in the light of results from the first census of Pinnipedia carried out in the South Shetland Islands (Aguayo and Torres 1966). The Area was re-designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 32 through Recommendation XV-7 (1989). The current Management Plan reaffirms the exceptional scientific and monitoring values associated with the large and diverse populations of seabirds and pinnipeds which breed within the Area, and in particular those of the Antarctic fur seal colony.
    3) Detailed input and comment from the scientific community working at Cape Shirreff was requested and received, and information on facilities and management procedures were reviewed and brought up to date. The Management Plan and maps have been revised accordingly.
    4) The principal changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. Updates to the introduction, including classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), and with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with other management plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
        c. Section 3 Management activities. In view of regular use of Guillermo Mann Station by Chilean scientists, the requirement was added that the management plan including maps shall be made available at Julio Escudero Station (Chile) and Eduardo Frei Station (Chile), Fildes Peninsula, King George Island.
        d. Section 5 Maps. Map layout and symbology were revised. Bathymetry was updated using the latest data from the International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean (IBCSO 2013). All designated small boat landing sites have been added;
        e. Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features. The description of the Area was updated to include recent scientific literature and unpublished population data on species within the Area, for example from the U.S. AMLR scientific program;
        f. Section 6(ii) Access to the Area. The coordinates for helicopter landing sites were corrected. Text on access policies that repeated policy set out in Section 7(ii) was deleted. 
        g. Section 6(iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area. The locations of seal tracking receiving stations and the status of the boundary sign were updated.
        h. Section 7 Permit conditions. Revisions were made to the sections and text in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011) Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas;
        i. Section 7(ii) Access to, and movement within or over, the Area; Subsection - Vehicle access and use. Vehicle-use restrictions were amended to allow limited vehicle use in support of annual re-supply of the bird blind / emergency hut. A route to the hut has been designated and added to Map 3. Vehicle access is restricted to when the entire route is snow covered to a depth of at least 40 cm, and access is generally to be made prior to 15 November in a given season. No more than two vehicle journeys are allowed per season. Provision is made to monitor the route when it is snow-free to verify that vehicle access is not causing damage to underlying soils and vegetation. Should any damage be observed, then vehicle access to the emergency hut shall be suspended until this policy has been reviewed.
        j. Section 8 - Supporting documentation. The reference list has been updated.
    2) The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection for recommendation for adoption by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

