





Enhancing awareness of the Antarctic Treaty Parties’ work through the earlier public release of the ATCM report








Enhancing awareness of the Antarctic Treaty Parties’ work through the earlier public release of the ATCM report
Working Paper submitted by Australia
Summary
Australia proposes that the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties agree to make a preliminary version of the report of each Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting publicly available via the Secretariat website within three months of the meeting. This would be consistent with the timing for public availability of Measures, Decisions and Resolutions, and would assist to enhance general awareness of the Parties’ important work on governing and managing the Antarctic Treaty area. The paper presents a suggested change to the Procedures for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP.
Background
The Antarctic Treaty Parties have regularly recognised the importance of ensuring broad recognition of the special qualities and global significance of the Antarctic region, and of the governance and management framework for activities within the Antarctic Treaty area. Statements to this effect were included, for example, in the 2009 Washington Ministerial Declaration on the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty and the 2011 Declaration on Antarctic Cooperation on the Occasion of the 50th Anniversary of the Entry into Force of the Antarctic Treaty. Similar sentiments were evident in discussions at ATCM XXXVIII on the outcomes of the Workshop on Education. Indeed, discussions about the value of increasing public knowledge of the achievements and operation of the Antarctic Treaty system date much further back as reflected, for example, in Recommendations XII-6 (1983), XIII-1 and XIV-1 (1987).
No substantive changes can be made to the ATCM Final Report after the meeting has concluded. Following arrangements agreed at ATCM XXX1, after each ATCM the Secretariat invites editorial comments on all language versions of any Measures, Decisions and Resolutions with a view to publishing definitive texts of these instruments on its public website within 90 days of the meeting. The Secretariat also invites editorial comments on all language versions of the ATCM Final Report. In accordance with the Procedures for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP, the definitive text of the Final Report is generally not made available until six months after the meeting2. As a consequence, the published Measures, Decisions and Resolutions cannot be read in the context of the related ATCM discussions3 until quite some time after the meeting.
Earlier release of the ATCM Final Report
The very high quality ATCM Final Reports prepared by the Secretariat represent an important and lasting public record of the meeting, and the publication process understandably involves considerable time and effort. However, to enhance general awareness of the Parties’ important work on governing and managing the Antarctic Treaty area, Australia suggests that Parties consider making a preliminary version of the ATCM Final Report publicly available on the Secretariat website within three months following the meeting, to coincide with the release of the definitive versions of any Measures, Decisions and Resolutions. Such a process would not significantly alter the Secretariat’s current process for publishing the report within six months following the meeting.
The preliminary version of the Final Report could be marked with a statement like ‘This is a preliminary version of the Final Report of the [XX] Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, and is subject to final formatting and publishing processes. The definitive version of the report will be posted to the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty by [date six months after the ATCM].’
Any change to the process for making the ATCM Final Report publicly available would need to be reflected in modifications to the Procedures for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP. The opportunity could also be taken to update the procedures to reflect the Secretariat’s new practice of arranging for Parties to receive hard copies of the Final Report directly from the publisher, rather than through diplomatic channels or otherwise4. Paragraph 11 of the procedures could be modified to read as follows:
[New] Within three months of the end of the Consultative Meeting, the Secretariat will post on the ATCM Home Page a preliminary version of the Final Report of the Meeting in the four official languages. This version of the report shall be clearly marked to indicate that it is subject to final formatting and publishing processes. 
Within six months of the end of the Consultative Meeting the Secretariat will circulate through diplomatic channels to Parties and also post on the ATCM Home Page the definitive published version of the Final Report of that Meeting in the four official languages.
Recommendation
Australia recommends that the ATCM agrees to make a preliminary version of the ATCM Final Report publicly available via the Secretariat website within three months of the end of each meeting, and instructs the Secretariat accordingly. If agreed, this would require a change to the Procedures for the Submission, Translation and Distribution of Documents for the ATCM and the CEP, such as outlined above. 

