





General Recommendations from the Joint Inspections Undertaken by Argentina and Chile under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol





General Recommendations from the Joint Inspections Undertaken by Argentina and Chile under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and Chile


Summary
Between 16 and 18 February 2016, observers from Argentina and Chile undertook inspection tasks at Antarctic facilities in the South Shetland Islands region, pursuant to the provisions of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol. A series of general recommendations are set forth herein, based on the inspection tasks, for the consideration of the meeting. The full report on the inspections will be submitted as a separate Information Paper to ATCM XXXIX.
Introduction
Argentina and Chile undertook joint inspection tasks in the Western region of the Antarctic Peninsula, in the South Shetland Islands, between 16 and 18 February 2016; for this purpose, each Party's governments designated Observers pursuant to the communication procedures set forth by Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. In accordance with Decision 7 (2013), all parties were notified regarding the designation of the Observers via Circulars 05/2016 and 06/2016 from the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. The full report on the inspections will be submitted as a separate Information Paper for distribution at the ATCM XXXIX.
Description of inspection activities
Inspection activities were carried out between 16 and 18 February 2016, from the Chilean base Prof. Julio Escudero, with the logistical support by the Chilean Antarctic Institute and the Chilean Air Force and Navy. Five research facilities and one non-governmental facility were inspected (Table 1). All inspections were done in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol. 

Table 1: Inspection of stations and facilities

Station / Facility
Party
Date
Bellingshausen
Russia
16 February 2016
Arctowski
Poland
17 February 2016
Great Wall
China
17 February 2016
Rey Sejong
South Korea
17 February 2016
Juan Carlos I
Spain
18 February 2016
Eco-Nelson (Refuge)
Non-governmental activity by the Czech Republic
18 February 2016


The approach used by the team of observers included the Checklist A: “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” set forth in Resolution 3 (2010), as a guide to perform their field tasks, supplemented by interviews with the staff and visual inspection of the stations. Prior to the inspection tasks, observers gathered information from the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) of the Antarctic Treaty, at the website of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), from previous inspections and from the database of Environmental Impact Assessments of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. 
The team of observers was kindly received by the staff of all the inspected stations.  The team had extensive access to the facilities and in most cases, to the checklist previously written by the heads of station, as well as to the required documentation and even to power point presentations or videos, all of which were very useful to illustrate certain aspects regarding the operations and procedures applied at the stations. The Eco-Nelson refuge was vacant at the time of inspection. Inspections were performed in English, except at Rey Juan Carlos I, which was done in Spanish.
Some countries whose stations were inspected submitted comments or observations that have been considered or were included in the final report for later publication.
General Recommendations 
Aside from the specific recommendations for stations and inspected refuges, which are listed in detail in the full inspection report, the inspecting team was able to identify some relevant issues related to the inspection procedure and the operation of the stations, which could be considered as prospective general recommendations for all Consultative Parties.
The ATCM and the CEP are invited to consider these general recommendations and to take the necessary steps. 

AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION
In this regard and in relation to the scientific stations, the team of observers found:
    1. That the most useful information sources for gathering information about the visited stations were previous inspection reports. The information contained on the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) regarding the inspected stations was mostly insufficient, specifically due to the fact that pre-season and annual information required had not been loaded into the system.
    2. That consequently, the National Programs evaluated the possibility of implementing and maintaining updated technical sheets of its stations in one of the official languages of the Antarctic Treaty, based on the contents of the Checklist A: “Permanent Antarctic Stations and Associated Installations” contained in Resolution 3 (2010).
    3. That such technical sheets should be downloaded from the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) through an official link of the National Antarctic Programs.
    4. That the COMNAP should include, when appropriate, the sheets in its station website, proposing a standard format for the sheets, given that the COMNAP has extensive knowledge of the operation of the Antarctic stations.
    5. That it would be very useful to have more public information on the environmental behaviour guidelines applied in the stations, particularly in highly frequented areas.
    6. That it would be advisable that all the heads of the stations completed a checklist when first assuming their obligations in order to familiarize with the provisions of the Treaty and the Protocol regarding the operation of their Antarctic stations. As mentioned above, this would be very helpful when the team of observers conducts its inspection tasks.
    7. That it is worth noting that some stations have extensive procedure and protocols related to multiple operation fields available at the premises and that this should be a standard practice at all Antarctic stations. 


INFRASTRUCTURE
Regarding the infrastructure of the inspected Antarctic stations, the inspecting team observed:
    1. That most of the inspected stations have made remarkable efforts to implement the recommendations offered on previous inspections, including the deployment of new infrastructure. This illustrates that the inspection procedure set forth in Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, is an effective tool for continuous improvement at the Antarctic stations. 
    2. That it is commendable that most of the inspected stations currently use or are in process of using -or even expanding- renewable energy resources. 
    3. That it would be of great interest that National Antarctic Programs reviewed the sites designated for helicopter landing at the stations -when applicable-, as well as the procedures associated with their operation. In this regard and given its extensive knowledge on Antarctic logistics, COMNAP's advice would be greatly appreciated.

MEDICAL
Regarding medical aspects, the inspecting team observed:
    1. That in areas with high density of stations, such as Fildes/Guardia Nacional Bay it would be advisable that efforts be made to expand the existing medical coordination, with a view to optimizing the use of resources in each of the stations, both in terms of equipment and instruments available, as well as the various specializations of medical professionals present at the premises.  

SCIENCE 
Regarding scientific activities, the inspecting team observed: 
    1. That at the stations where, according to previous inspection reports, little international scientific cooperation was found, the team saw a moderate increase in such cooperation, although there is still plenty of room for improving joint scientific work. 

TRAINING
Regarding training for prominent staff in Antarctica, the inspecting team observed: 
    1. That it is important that the staff working at the Antarctic stations inspected received training courses, as appropriate, to perform their activities in Antarctica, and it would be advisable to continuously increase training programs, both in time and content. 

ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
In this respect, the inspection team made the following general observations: 
    1. All Antarctic stations should continue to engage in efforts to improve their waste management system, including dangerous waste and past activities residues’ removal, as well as offering training on waste management. 
    2. That continuous attention should be given to minimizing risks associated to potential introduction of foreign species and diseases, including those related to Antarctic hydroponic facilities. 
In conclusion, Argentina and Chile request that the ATCM and the CEP consider the necessary steps to implement recommendations specified at items 1, 2 and 3 herein, as well as with recommendations 4 and 10, in close collaboration with the COMNAP.






