





Report of the Joint CEP / SC-CAMLR Workshop on Climate Change and Monitoring, Punta Arenas, Chile, 19-20 May 2016.








Report of the Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop on 
Climate Change and Monitoring 
 
Punta Arenas, Chile 19-20 May 2016


1. Introduction

1.1	The second Joint Workshop of the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) and the CCAMLR Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) was held at the Dreams Hotel, Punta Arenas, Chile, from 19 to 20 May 2016. The workshop was co-convened by Dr Susie Grant (United Kingdom) and Dr Polly Penhale (United States).

1.2	The co-conveners thanked Chile for hosting the workshop, and expressed their particular gratitude to Ambassador Francisco Berguño, Macarena Quezada Borel and Ángel Garcia Fernandez (Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores), the Instituto Antárctico Chileno (INACH), and the technical support team for their assistance. The Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and the CCAMLR Secretariat were also thanked for their support before and during the workshop. 

1.3	The workshop was attended by 43 participants (listed in Appendix 1).

1.4	The workshop report was prepared by the co-conveners, with assistance from Dr Ewan McIvor, Prof Eugene Murphy, Dr Marta Soffker, Dr Keith Reid, Dr Mercedes Santos, Dr Christopher Jones, Dr Andrew Constable, Ms Birgit Njåstad and Dr Aleks Terauds.


2. Background and Terms of Reference

2.1	At their respective annual meetings in 2014, CEP (CEP XVII Report, paragraph 52) and SC-CAMLR (SC-CAMLR-XXXIII Report, paragraph 10.3) endorsed the proposal to hold a second Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR Workshop in 2016. The agreed general scope of the workshop was to identify the effects of climate change that are considered most likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.

2.2	The 2016 joint workshop aimed to focus further attention on two of the five areas of common interest identified by the first joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop held in 2009. Climate change and related research and monitoring are key elements of the current agendas and work plans of the SC-CAMLR and the CEP, where the development of joint approaches and understanding is particularly pertinent.

2.3	The general scope of the workshop was to identify the effects of climate change that are considered most likely to impact the conservation of the Antarctic, and to identify existing and potential sources of research and monitoring data relevant to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.



2.4	The workshop terms of reference were to:
    i. Identify those drivers or effects for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR;
    ii. Consider existing monitoring programs to determine whether the data is sufficient to assess climate change impacts or whether new approaches are needed; and 
    iii. Define mechanisms for practical cooperation, including the sharing of data and information.

2.5	The workshop programme is provided in Appendix 2, and a complete list of workshop papers is in Appendix 3.

2.6	The workshop included a series of presentations which provided background information and set the scene for discussion of each of the Terms of Reference. Summaries of each presentation were submitted as workshop papers, and are reproduced in Appendix 4. Additional background papers relevant to the Terms of Reference were submitted to the workshop, and are referred to in the following sections. 



3. Update on CEP and SC-CAMLR activities of mutual interest 

3.1	The CEP Chair, Mr Ewan McIvor (Australia) presented the outcomes from the first joint CEP / SC-CAMLR workshop held in Baltimore in April 2009 (Workshop Paper XP003 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4). He noted that both committees had agreed that the first workshop was successful in enhancing the shared understanding of roles and responsibilities, and in identifying several opportunities for improved cooperation. 

3.2	The CEP Chair also presented an update on CEP activities on the five matters of mutual interest discussed at the first joint workshop (Workshop Paper XP002 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4). He noted that the CEP has welcomed the annual exchange of observers and reports with SC-CAMLR, and has moved its consideration of reports from other organizations to earlier in its agenda to ensure relevant developments can be considered throughout the meeting.

3.3	The former SC-CAMLR Chair, Dr Christopher Jones (United States) presented an update on SC-CAMLR activities since 2009 on the five matters of mutual interest (Workshop Paper XP006 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4). He noted that SC-CAMLR has also welcomed the continuing exchange of observers and reports with the CEP.


Discussion 

3.4	The workshop thanked Mr McIvor and Dr Jones for their presentations, which provided a valuable opportunity for the CEP and SC-CAMLR to exchange information on their activities since the 2009 joint workshop, and to consider progress made on matters of mutual interest. 


3.5	With regard to ecosystem and environmental monitoring, it was noted that the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP) focused on the krill centric ecosystem and krill predators. The question was asked whether CEMP could be broadened to toothfish dependent indicators. Dr. Jones responded that this was possible should a good rationale and solid research plan including standard methods be proposed to members. 

3.6	The workshop noted that species diversity was very important in developing a system of ecosystem indicators, but that functional diversity was another critical aspect to consider when assessing the status of the ecosystem. Knowledge on the evolution of species and phylogenetics also were seen as critical in understanding the ecosystem, including knowledge on species that spend part of their life cycle north of the Convention Area.

3.7	Research and monitoring were seen to be critical to progress an understanding of climate change impacts in both the CEP and SC-CAMLR. While Research and Monitoring Plans are required elements in the CCAMLR development of MPAs, the role of for monitoring with regard to ASPAs is less well-defined. The workshop noted that understanding the role of climate change impacts in MPAs and ASPAs would require research and monitoring, best conducted by the broader scientific community, and not left to member(s) that proposed the designation. 

3.8	The workshop recognized that considerations of climate change and related ecosystem and environmental monitoring are relevant to all of the other three topics of mutual interest (biodiversity and non-native species, specially protected species, and spatial management and protected areas). Further discussion on spatial management and protected areas in the context of climate change are reported in Section 9.

3.9	Table 1 provides a summary of progress on the five topics of mutual interest to both Committees, including recent achievements and plans for future actions. The workshop suggested that this table could be updated prior to future joint meetings, in order to provide an organized means to communicate progress, and to assist both Committees in sharing information and planning future work.

3.10	It was agreed that the identification of a ‘lead body’ for each of the topics of mutual interest had proved to be a useful mechanism for clarifying responsibilities and organizing work. 

3.11	The workshop also noted that while there is no formal geographic demarcation between the marine areas of interest to SC-CAMLR and the CEP (and there is some overlap), the separation of activities between the two bodies on a nearshore/offshore basis has generally worked well. This has been very effective for example in the management of land-based predator colonies, with SC-CAMLR considering the effects of fishing on these colonies, and the CEP considering other, land-based human activities. However, it was agreed that communication on such issues of joint interest could still be improved.


4. Existing CEP and SC-CAMLR work on climate change 

4.1	Ms Birgit Njåstad (Norway) presented an outline of the CEP Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP) and its relevance for joint CEP and SC-CAMLR efforts (Workshop Paper XP007 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4).

4.2	One of the key functions of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) is to provide advice to the Antarctic Treaty Parties on the state of the Antarctic environment as a basis for sound and relevant management and governance. Climate and climate change is one of the most important and obvious factors influencing the state of the Antarctic environment and are consequently of key concern to the CEP.  At its meeting in 2015 the CEP adopted a Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP). The objective of this CCRWP is to: 

“provide a dynamic mechanism for identifying and revising goals and specific actions by the CEP to support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty System to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica.” 

4.3	The CCRWP is focused around a number of priority issues and specifies gaps, needs and tasks related to these. It includes a large number of marine issues that are of relevance both to the CEP and SC-CAMLR, in particular issues related to: 
i) change to marine near-shore abiotic and biotic environment, 
ii) ecosystem change due to ocean acidification, 
iii) marine species at risk due to climate change, and
 iv) marine habitats at risk due to climate change. 

4.4	The workshop agreed that the CEP and SC-CAMLR need to explore and consider manners to jointly tackle challenges within these broader themes that are of interest and importance to both committees.

4.5	Dr Andrew Constable (Australia) presented an outline of SC-CAMLR work on climate change (Workshop Paper XP019 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4), noting that the effects of climate change also include the effects of ocean acidification.

4.6	Dr Constable noted that Articles II and IX of the CCAMLR Convention provide the impetus for work in the Scientific Committee on the effects of climate change, in order to provide, in a timely manner, the ‘best scientific evidence available’ on three issues:
    1. Risks of climate change threatening the conservation of species, changing the vulnerability of species and/or foodwebs to the effects of fishing, or increasing the risk of invasive marine species in the CCAMLR area;
    2. Status of Antarctic marine living resources (AMLR) and the Antarctic marine ecosystem relative to the Reference State and whether actions may be required to conserve AMLR because the Reference State had changed;
    3. Requirements for adapting harvest strategies in the future so as fishing does not increase the risk of failing to conserve AMLR in the long term.
4.7	The state of knowledge on impacts of climate change on Southern Ocean ecosystems was summarised.  Climate change has been appearing regularly in discussions in SC-CAMLR since 2002 and came on to the agenda of SC-CAMLR in 2008. A constant theme since then has been to develop a risk assessment framework for identifying when climate change impacts may need attention from the Commission, along with developing a ‘state of environment’ report.  Most work in SC-CAMLR has been within the Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM).  In this regard, WG-EMM has focussed on the effects of climate change on Antarctic krill and its habitats, along with a proposal to manage ocean areas adjacent to the Antarctica Peninsula uncovered by ice shelf collapse. SC-CAMLR does not yet have an explicit strategy and timetable of work for (i) assessing climate change impacts on AMLR or (ii) providing advice to the Commission on how to deal with climate change.  Nevertheless, many Members have engaged with developing approaches to address climate change impacts when developing strategies on at least three current issues in SC-CAMLR: (i) the design of krill feedback management strategies to accommodate the potential for changing ecosystem state in the absence of fishing, (ii) proposals for representative marine protected areas incorporate considerations of adaptation of the system to climate change as well as having reference areas for measuring climate change impacts, (iii) the development of food web and ecosystem models for evaluating management and conservation strategies.  
4.8	Dr Constable also described how the work of the IMBER-SCAR program Integrated Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics of the Southern Ocean (ICED) and the SCAR-SCOR Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) can help both CCAMLR and CEP address the effects of climate change on their interests.  They are complementary programs working on, respectively, (i) assessments and modelling of change in Southern Ocean ecosystems (an ICED conference is to be held in 2018) and (ii) the design and implementation of observing systems and the integration and facilitation of access to the observational data.  Resolution 30/XXVIII (2009) encourages Members to become engaged in these two programs.  The resolution refers to ICED and the Southern Ocean Sentinel, the latter of which has had its aims incorporated into both ICED and SOOS.  SC-CAMLR and CEP would benefit from working with these two bodies to develop the capabilities necessary to deliver the advice on the three climate change issues of importance to them.  

Discussion 

4.9	The workshop thanked Ms Njåstad and Dr Constable for their presentations, noting that considerable progress has been made by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR on work related to climate change since the previous joint workshop. Climate change is now a well-established item on the agendas of both Committees, with a wide range of activities being conducted and reported each year.

4.10	It was agreed that the CCRWP is particularly useful in setting out priorities and identifying gaps and requirements, and that it presented a well-ordered set of priorities, highlighting areas in which joint cooperation between the Committees would progress work.  The workshop noted that SC-CAMLR could benefit from undertaking a similar exercise, based initially on the overlapping priorities already identified in the CCRWP. It was suggested that this could be discussed during the SC-CAMLR Priority Setting Symposium being held in advance of its next meeting. The SC-CAMLR Chair hoped that SCAR would also attend this symposium.

4.11	The workshop discussed the issue of reference states and ecosystem baselines, noting the difficulty of addressing these topics during periods of environmental change. It agreed that it will be important to consider factors such as the potential movement of non-native species into the Antarctic, where ecosystem changes at the boundaries of the Convention Area may be viewed as an “early warning system”. The recovery of whale populations may also have a strong influence on current baselines, and the workshop agreed that ecosystem and foodweb modelling are likely to be important tools in addressing this topic. 


5. Scientific activities relevant to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR on climate change

5.1	Dr Aleks Terauds (SCAR) presented a summary of SCAR activities on climate change and monitoring (Workshop Paper XP004 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4). SCAR also presented Workshop Paper XP005 – Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment 2016 update.

5.2	SCAR undertakes a diverse range of activities on climate change and monitoring. These include the facilitation and coordination of research into the physical and biological manifestations of climate change, the dissemination of research findings at international meetings and the provision of climate related advice to a range of bodies, including the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). The mechanisms through which these activities are undertaken are diverse and include the Expert Group on Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE), SCAR Scientific Research Programs, and other Expert and Action groups under the Standing Scientific Groups. From a monitoring perspective, SCAR supports the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) and the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) groups, and is also supporting the development of the Antarctic Nearshore and Terrestrial Observing System (ANTOS).

5.3	Prof Eugene Murphy (SCAR) presented an outline of the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme (Workshop Paper XP014 – presentation summary; see Appendix 4). SCAR also presented Workshop Paper XP015 – Report on the activities of the Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean (ICED) programme.

5.3	ICED is a regional programme of the joint International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP)-SCOR Integrated Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research (IMBER) Programme and is closely linked with SCAR. ICED is undertaking an integrated circumpolar approach to improve our understanding of change and the implications for Southern Ocean ecosystems and for management of human impacts. A diverse range of multidisciplinary research is underway through core activities such as historical data rescue and synthesis, fieldwork, and modelling. Considerable progress has been made in understanding the structure and functioning of ecosystems, modelling species and food webs, and with qualitative assessments of change. These studies have also identified an urgent requirement for the systematic development of quantified understanding of the life cycles of key species and of food web processes throughout the Southern Ocean. ICED current major focus is on the further development of assessments of the impacts of change and the generation of models and scenarios for projections of future change. ICED’s research and associated activities have enabled the Southern Ocean scientific community to work more closely together to consider some of the key challenges and potential solutions. These activities are developing the basis for integrated approaches for analyses of climate-ecosystem interactions, which can inform decision making in ecosystem-based management.  

5.4	Four additional workshop papers described climate change research being undertaken by national programmes:

    • Workshop Paper XP009 (Russian Federation) – Current Russian results of studies of climate variability at present and in the past
    • Workshop Paper XP012 (Chile) – Climate Change research conducted by the Chilean Antarctic Program: I. Identifying key species, factors and processes in marine ecosystems of the Antarctic Peninsula
    • Workshop Paper XP013 (Chile) – Climate Change research conducted by the Chilean Antarctic Program: II. The terrestrial realm, steady state and horizons.
    • Workshop Paper XP016 (Chile) – Population genetic structure of Sanionia uncinata moss: A focus to support conservation and management plans in Antarctica

Discussion 

5.5	The workshop thanked Dr Terauds and Prof Murphy for their presentations, and expressed particular appreciation for this opportunity to learn more about the very wide range of relevant activities being undertaken by SCAR and its Scientific Groups and Standing Groups, as well as other associated programmes including ICED and SOOS.

5.6	It was agreed that this joint workshop had been very timely, given the maturity now being reached by programmes such as ICED and SOOS following a period of development in recent years. The representatives from SCAR, ICED and SOOS indicated their strong desire to contribute to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR wherever possible.

5.7	The workshop warmly welcomed the potential for further scientific contributions from SCAR, ICED and SOOS. It noted that the CEP and SC-CAMLR will need to articulate clear and specific questions to be addressed to scientific programmes in order for such interactions to be successful.

5.8	The workshop noted that the SCAR Horizon Scan had been an important priority setting activity, but that it did not result in much focus on marine ecosystems and applied research. Dr Terauds noted that SCAR is now undergoing a formal strategic planning exercise which involves stakeholder input, and that this is a good time to engage in the process with an aim of increasing cooperation between SCAR, CEP and SC-CAMLR. Ongoing and future targeted research programs such as ICED and SOOS provide opportunities for collaboration.  One suggestion to increase collaboration could be to include further expertise in SC-CAMLR related research in the SCAR SCATS committee, which Dr. Terauds noted could be a consideration.

5.8	SC-CAMLR participants noted that the ability to predict where changes are most likely to take place, for example via modelling components within the ICED programme, would provide good input into decision rules set up to manage harvesting under climate change. 

5.9	The workshop agreed that information on how the location of human activities might be expected to change over time (for example accessibility of fishing grounds or tourist landing sites) would also be of significant value to the development of management advice by both the CEP and SC-CAMLR.

5.10	ICED modelling work on temperature and sea ice dynamics is of particular relevance. Although ICED has focused on pelagic systems, the program realizes the need to address benthic systems, which are now viewed as more important in terms of links between benthic organisms and the carbon biogeochemistry of the shelf and deep ocean. 

5.11	While acknowledging that data will never be complete, the workshop noted that the identification of key species and key ecosystem processes is critical. Additionally, the need for representation of alternative species in the creation of realistic models for monitoring impacts of changes was acknowledged. 

5.12	In order to effectively incorporate the results of climate change research into management decisions, the workshop noted the importance of: 

i)	Making data sources more visible and accessible where possible
ii)	Engaging relevant expertise from the wider scientific community in the work of SC-CAMLR and the CEP
iii)	Articulating uncertainty to decision makers 
iv)	Identifying climate change scenarios to progress understanding of the ecosystem
v)	Using both regional and local models in programmes such as ICED 

5.13	The workshop noted that there is a strong overlap between the priorities set out by the CCRWP and by ICED. 

5.14	It was suggested that particular localities of interest (for example nearshore canyon structures) should be identified for focused joint work, including with SCAR programmes.


6. Identification of drivers or effects for which measurable responses are required to support the goals of CEP and SC-CAMLR

Discussion 

6.1	The workshop agreed that the CCRWP and the components of SC-CAMLR work (as identified in Workshop Paper XP019) provided a good starting point in identifying the drivers or effects of climate change for which measurable responses are required. While many of these are specific to one of the respective bodies, several are of joint interest.

6.2	It was agreed that the climate change scenarios provided in the Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) report provide important baseline information for identifying drivers or effects of climate change. While recent ACCE updates provide an important summary of research progress, it would also be valuable to have a regular, high level summary update on the state of knowledge regarding climate change scenarios. Such summaries would also be a useful way to communicate the major outcomes of programmes such as ICED and SOOS. However, the workshop recognized the large amount of work involved in synthesizing the current state of knowledge in this way, and noted that it would be important for CEP and SC-CAMLR to make realistic and timely requests.

6.3	Table 2 sets out a process for identifying and conveying shared climate change research and monitoring needs. The workshop agreed that this process would best be initiated within the CEP and SC-CAMLR’s Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) and could be developed further through iterative discussions between the relevant bodies and scientific programmes. The SCAR Open Science Meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (August 2016) was also highlighted as a good opportunity for scientists involved in ICED, SOOS, and national Antarctic programmes to come together for a discussion on a preliminary set of shared CEP and SC-CAMLR research and monitoring requirements.

6.4	The workshop suggested that updates on the process described in Table 2 should be delivered via communications from the SC-CAMLR and CEP chairs. The use of e-groups (or similar) could also be considered as the process develops further.

Recommendation 1
Encourage SC-CAMLR and CEP to recognize, encourage and support wherever possible the contribution that programmes such as SCAR, ICED and SOOS can make to their work on climate change and related monitoring. 
Recommendation 2
Encourage the articulation of clear questions to be addressed to scientific programmes in order to obtain the best scientific advice relevant to the goals of the CEP and SC-CAMLR. 
Recommendation 3
Identify and convey shared climate change research and monitoring needs to SCAR, ICED and SOOS, and other similar programs, using the process outlined in Table 2. 
Recommendation 4
Encourage the periodic production of high level summaries of outcomes and progress made in programmes such as ACCE, ICED, SOOS, etc. in order to aid the CEP and SC-CAMLR in the understanding of the current state of knowledge and in the formation of questions to help progress work on climate change.



7. Existing monitoring programmes

7.1	Dr Keith Reid (CCAMLR) and Dr Mercedes Santos (Argentina) presented a summary of SC-CAMLR monitoring activities (Workshop Paper 017 – presentation summary; see Appendix 2).

7.2	Monitoring undertaken by CCAMLR can be conveniently divided into two general classifications of monitoring; operational and surveillance monitoring. Operational monitoring is put in place in response to a specific management objective, for example fishery monitoring and closure forecasting.  Whereas the emphasis in surveillance monitoring is on collecting basic observation data that provides data useful for management but not necessarily linked to a specific response.  Examples of surveillance monitoring include CCAMLR’s marine debris monitoring and CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program (CEMP).  The aims of CEMP, which was established in 1985 and has a focus on the krill-based foodweb, are to detect and record significant changes in critical components of the ecosystem, and to distinguish between those changes that are due  to the harvesting of commercial species and changes due to environmental variability.  Since its inception CEMP has evolved to include new data collection sites, providing broader geographic coverage, as well as the introduction of new methodologies (i.e. remote camera networks) to collect monitoring data.   As it is a multinational programme, engagement in CEMP also provides a mechanism for collaboration to fill key information gaps that are crucial to the interpretation of the monitoring data.  For example, in 2015 the CCAMLR CEMP Special Fund awarded a grant to undertake a coordinated multinational satellite tracking study on the year-round distribution of CEMP monitored penguin species in the Antarctic Peninsula region. 

7.3	Dr Constable (Australia) presented an introduction to the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) (Workshop Paper 018 – presentation summary; see Appendix 2).

7.4	SOOS aims to facilitate the collection and delivery of essential observations on dynamics and change of Southern Ocean systems to all international stakeholders (researchers, governments, industries). SOOS will be implemented regionally through Regional Working Groups, currently one for the West Antarctic Peninsula and one for the Indian Sector.  A Ross Sea Working Group is in the process of being established.  Apart from the regional working groups, which will be of direct interest to the implementation of monitoring programs in different regions of the CCAMLR and Antarctic Treaty areas, there are 5 main topics described here that SC-CAMLR and CEP may be interested in participating and/or developing a relationship with SOOS:
    i) the development of priority variables (“ecosystem Essential Ocean Variables” – eEOVs) for observing dynamics and change in Southern Ocean ecosystems (Constable et al. 2016). These variables are intended to be defined biological or ecological quantities, which are derived from field observations, and which contributes significantly to assessments of Southern Ocean ecosystems - status and trends in ecosystem properties, attribution of trends to causes, and predicting future trajectories;
    ii) the spatial and temporal design of a sustained circumpolar marine biological observing system in SOOS, which is intended to be completed in time for consideration at the ICED 2018 International Conference on Marine Ecosystem Assessment for the Southern Ocean (www.MEASO2018.aq);
    iii) the SOOS Portal for linking metadata, accessing datasets and synthesis products, and coordinating field activities, which aims to resolve two important gaps in the Southern Ocean science community – better access to all the data relevant to the Southern Ocean, and better advance knowledge of field activities in order to facilitate better co-ordination and collaboration in research programs.
    iv) assessments of the state of Southern Ocean ecosystems will be facilitated by SOOS through linking datasets through the SOOS Portal and in facilitating the collection of observations to support assessments.
    v) circumpolar benchmarking of the state of Southern Ocean ecosystems in 2022, which will build on the work of GLOBEC, the Census of Antarctic Marine Life and the SCAR Biogeographic Atlas, to provide a comprehensive circumpolar ecological assessment that will link different long-term biological datasets from throughout the Southern Ocean and to provide the baseline for sustained circumpolar biological observations and assessments of change in the future.

Discussion 

7.5	The workshop thanked Drs Reid, Santos and Constable for their presentations, and noted the extensive range of monitoring activities now being undertaken across the Southern Ocean. Such monitoring activities have relevance to the full range of topics that are of mutual interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR.

7.6	The workshop recognized that determining whether existing monitoring programmes are sufficient to assess climate change is a difficult task. As it is impossible to collect data on all aspects of marine ecosystems, the Committees will need to find ways to use what data is available now and to make strategic plans for future research and monitoring programs.

7.7	It was noted that CEMP was established 30 years ago, with refinement to standard methods and approaches made over time. Long-term data collection allows for an understanding not achievable through short-term. Recent technical developments in monitoring, such as satellite remote sensing, sophisticated bird and animal tags, UAVs, instruments placed on fishing lines, etc. can be applied to monitoring studies. It was recognized that fully integrating these approaches into climate change research is a priority and that it is critical to articulate now the new and specific questions to be addressed.

7.8	It was also noted that CEMP data could provide useful information to CEP work in the area of ASPA management plan development or reviews, in particular for ASPAs established for the protection of predators such as seabirds and marine mammals. CEMP research may be conducted in similar areas as current or potential ASPAs. CEMP data was also seen useful for SCAR in its provision of advice to the CEP.

7.9	The workshop recognized the value of programmes such as SOOS in providing monitoring information, and encouragement was given to engage with SOOS regarding specific questions of interest and what sort of data products would be most valuable to the Committees. This would allow for the development of discovery tools and could be built into future SOOS work plans.

7.10	Ms Amanda Lynnes (IAATO) reported that IAATO collects operational monitoring data such as ship tracks, spatial and temporal distribution of visitors in terms of population size, activities, and land use in order to distinguish changes due to tourism vs. environmental variability. These data sources could be useful to the Committees in their work relating to climate change and other topics.
7.11	Dr Rodolfo Werner (ASOC) referred the workshop to the 2nd Call for Proposals by the Antarctic Wildlife Research Fund (http://www.antarcticfund.org/ ) which provides support designed to fill critical gaps in research and monitoring to improve the management of the Antarctic krill fishery. The Fund was established in 2015 by representatives for ASOC WWF-Norway and Aker BioMarine, which manages the Fund. Peer review of proposals is conducted by a Science Advisory Group.

8. Mechanisms for practical cooperation, including sharing of data and information

Discussion

8.1	The workshop agreed that interaction between the CEP and SC-CAMLR could be extended beyond the current system of observers attending CEP and SC-CAMLR meetings, to facilitate better communication between the two bodies and engagement of scientists with expertise that is relevant to specific agenda items and discussions. Work plans such as the CEP 5-year work plan, and the priorities to be developed by SC-CAMLR at its forthcoming symposium, will assist with planning appropriate engagement.

8.2	Joint forums for discussion (such as the CEP Forum or CCAMLR e-groups) may be useful for discussion of climate-related matters of joint interest. The workshop encouraged ongoing intersessional contact between the two Committees, including the exchange of expertise at relevant meetings as far as possible.

8.3	The workshop discussed the accessibility and visibility of data sources, including data and other information held by the CCAMLR Secretariat. The workshop noted that summaries describing CEMP sites and associated metadata would be particularly valuable for the CEP. SCAR also noted its interest in having access to CEMP data.

8.4	The workshop noted that while it is desirable to make metadata available to improve data discoverability, it will be important to provide information on where and how the data were collected, and to facilitate collaboration with the data originators to ensure appropriate use.

8.5	Dr Neil Gilbert introduced Workshop Paper 10 (New Zealand) which gives an outline of the aims and current content of the Antarctic Environments Portal. The workshop agreed that although it is currently aimed primarily at the CEP, the information contained in the Antarctic Environments Portal is also of significant value to SC-CAMLR. Summary articles provide an important synthesis of information that may be particularly useful in addressing topics not covered in detail by SC-CAMLR (such as marine non-native species), and in summarizing the state of scientific knowledge for policymakers.

8.6	The workshop agreed that standardized geographic information on the locations of protected and managed areas, as well as monitoring sites (including MPAs, ASPAs, ASMAs and CEMP sites) would be useful to both Committees. It suggested that such information could be made available through both the CCAMLR GIS and the Antarctic Protected Areas Database. 

8.7	Dr Gilbert informed the workshop that the Portal provides an interactive and searchable map, displaying a range of information, including topography, place names (based on the SCAR Gazetteer) and coastline as well as environmental information of relevance to the CEP including on protected and managed areas and Antarctic conservation biogeographic regions. It would be possible to add spatial data on CEMP sites, as well as sites of ASPAs and ASMAs.



Recommendation 5
Encourage flexibility in the composition of national delegations according to relevant agenda items, to allow SC-CAMLR, CEP and SCAR to engage in discussions on specific topics. 
Recommendation 6
Consider invitation of experts to CCAMLR Working Groups (particularly WG-EMM for discussions relating to climate change), including appropriate input from programmes such as SCAR, ICED and SOOS. 
Recommendation 7
Promote the development of young scientists by encouraging participation in the CCAMLR Scholarship and SCAR Fellowship programmes, with the specific aim of contributing research relevant to climate change.
Recommendation 8
Encourage improved visibility of CCAMLR metadata to facilitate discoverability and exploration of data relevant to matters of mutual interest, particularly including CEMP data.  
Recommendation 9
Recognize that data sharing is not just sharing the products of research already collected, but information is also needed on future plans to collect additional data, to facilitate combined efforts and avoid duplication of effort.
Recommendation 10
Encourage use of the Antarctic Environments Portal in providing policy-ready summaries on issues of mutual interest to members of both Committees. SC-CAMLR could be encouraged to request topics for inclusion, or to author summaries in due course.
Recommendation 11
Recognize the importance of using common baseline information, and recommend that summary information such as ACCE updates and are submitted under climate change agenda item in both Committees.


9. Spatial protection and management in the context of climate change

Discussion

9.1	The workshop recognized that considerations of climate change and monitoring have particular relevance to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR on marine spatial protection and management (one of the five topics of mutual interest).

9.2	Dr Santos introduced Workshop Paper XP011 (Argentina and Chile) on the relevance of the MPA designation process in Domain 1 in the current climate change context, particularly noting the rapid changes being observed in this region. Over 180 data layers were produced from information provided by more than eight SC-CAMLR Members, demonstrating the utility of collaboration in the planning process. The authors of this paper encouraged the involvement of all Parties in the Domain 1 MPA planning process, to i) enhance and increase joint research efforts, ii) improve analyses by filling knowledge gaps, and iii) add value to the process by including different perspectives and experiences through a multinational process. The compiled MPA dataset will have utility for broader purposes including long-term monitoring studies associated with different aspects of climate change.

9.3	The example of the Weddell Sea MPA planning process was also brought to the attention of the workshop. It was noted that both internal CCAMLR collaboration as well as external collaborations with SCAR, ICED, SOOS and other such programmes would be necessary in order to best include climate change impact into MPA planning activities in this region. 

9.4	The workshop noted that research and monitoring undertaken within MPAs will generate a significant amount of new data on ecosystems and environments. It was also agreed that research and monitoring within protected areas (including MPAs and ASPAs) should be undertaken by all Parties as far as possible, and not just the proponent.


Recommendation 12

Consider further appropriate development of scientific reference areas with the objective of understanding impacts of climate change, using existing tools available to the CEP and SC-CAMLR. 
Recommendation 13
Promote ongoing work led by Argentina, Chile, and including other Members, on the development of MPAs in planning Domain 1 (Antarctic Peninsula), acknowledging particular relevance to climate change research and the establishment of reference areas in this region of rapid change. 
Recommendation 14
Acknowledge that data from MPA planning processes will integrate and make available a significant amount of information that will improve decision-making and be relevant to the work of the CEP and SC-CAMLR on a range of other topics.
Recommendation 15
Recognize that research and monitoring within CCAMLR and ATCM protected area systems will benefit from coordinated and integrated programmes within the respective regions, including the wider community of interested scientists (SCAR, ICED, SOOS, and/or national programmes).


10. Conclusions

10.1	Throughout the workshop, both Committees recognized the benefits of communication and collaboration, particularly through periodic joint workshops. It was agreed that a 5-year period between joint workshops would fit with the existing 5-year work planning periods of the CEP.
10.2	The workshop encouraged sustained communication on high priority topics during interim periods between workshops, as appropriate. Such discussions could be facilitated through the formation of e-groups as needed.
10.3	The workshop particularly noted that the benefits of increased collaboration with SCAR, ICED, SOOS and other programmes of relevance to the goals of the Committees.

Recommendation 16
Encourage further and regular meetings between SC-CAMLR and the CEP, at least once every 5 years. Also encourage more frequent communication on topics of mutual interest in the intervening period before the next joint meeting, including via online forums as appropriate.

10.4	The co-conveners thanked the CEP and SC-CAMLR chairs and all of the workshop participants for their very positive and constructive engagement during the meeting. They encouraged the CEP and SC-CAMLR to consider the workshop report and to adopt the recommendations contained therein.



Table 1: Summary of outcomes from 2009 Joint CEP/SC-CAMLR workshop and update on activities on matters of mutual interest

Issue
Outcomes from 2009 Workshop
Activities since 2009

Areas of common interest
Mechanisms for practical cooperation
CEP
SC-CAMLR
Climate change and the Antarctic marine environment
    • need to understand the effects of climate change on the marine environment
    • advice to parent bodies on adapting or responding to such effects
    • understand how uncertainty could be incorporated into decision-making procedures
    • complementary baselines, reference areas and appropriate indicators to inform an understanding of climate change effects
    • utilising global standards for collecting relevant environmental and ecological data
    • regular exchange of information
periodic meetings to review and evaluate the risks of climate change and ancillary effects on the Antarctic marine environment
    • Considered recommendations on environmental matters arising from the 2010 Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts (ATME) on Climate Change and Implications for Antarctic Management and Governance.
    • Adopted a Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP), identifying goals and specific actions to support efforts within the Antarctic Treaty system to prepare for, and build resilience to, the environmental impacts of a changing climate and the associated implications for the governance and management of Antarctica.
    • Received annual updates from SCAR on its 2009 Antarctic Climate Change and the Environment (ACCE) report.
    • Supported a proposal (still in progress) to test the application of RACER (Rapid Assessment of Circum-Arctic Ecosystem Resilience) methodology to Antarctica, as a possible tool for identifying key features important for conferring resilience to climate change.
    • Undertook a review of the 2005 Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (EIA Guidelines), including to highlight the importance of considering how climate change may affect proposed activities and their associated environmental impacts.

    • Recognized that climate change has the potential to induce rapid change within ecosystems, and that aligning CEMP with a broader suite of parameters collected as part of multiple research programs would be beneficial to the detection of climate impacts.
    • Recognized that climate change: has implications for the development and implementation of an RSMPA within the Convention Area; may increase the vulnerability of different ecosystem components necessitating a more precautionary approach in the establishment of an RSMPA; and has potential to impact the objectives of the Commission.
    • Acknowledged that ocean warming, sea-ice decline, acidification, and ocean circulation patterns will impact on Antarctic krill and ecosystems.
    • Recognized that the effects of climate change on growth, mortality and recruitment of Antarctic krill, and endorsed work to develop decision rules for the krill fishery in light of the potential influence of climate change.
    • Recognized that increased warming and acidification are highly likely to impact marine ecosystems during the current century.
    • The Commission adopted Resolution 30/XVIII which urged increased consideration of climate change impacts in the Southern Ocean to better inform CCAMLR’s management decisions. The Scientific Committee prioritized climate change issues in their agenda.
    • Agreed that the development and progress of a feedback management strategy for the krill fishery offers the opportunity to adapt to the impacts of climate change. At WG-EMM 2015, one-third of all papers submitted to WG-EMM made reference to climate change.
Biodiversity and non-native species in the Antarctic marine environment
    • potential for non-native species to considerably alter marine biodiversity
    • CEP to keep SC-CAMLR informed of its work on this issue
use the SCAR Alien Species database to share information
    • Encouraged further collection of spatially explicit biodiversity data, and acknowledged the value of Antarctic Biodiversity Portal www.biodiversity.aq.
    • Informed the revision of Annex II to the Protocol (not yet in force), including to strengthen requirements for preventing and responding to the introduction of non-native species.
    • Adopted the CEP Non-Native Species Manual, containing key principles, practical guidance and resources for prevention, monitoring and response.
    • Will consider a recent review of the Non-Native Species manual, including recommendations to address marine risks and to cooperate closely with SC-CAMLR in this regard.
    • Undertook a review the EIA Guidelines, including to highlight the importance of considering non-native species risks. 
    • Noted that the CEP would be the lead-body on this issue, and would liaise with SC-CAMLR as appropriate. As such, little to no discussion on alien or non-native marine species has taken place explicitly on this topic.
    • Nevertheless, there is monitoring of by-catch species in fisheries though the Flag States and Scheme of International Observations, as well as some and protection of biodiversity inherent within spatial planning and MPA initiatives.
Antarctic species requiring special protection
    • maintaining / improving the conservation status of Antarctic species
    • managing human activities to maximise species’ resilience to climate change and other external pressures
    • share information about respective approaches to species assessment and protection 
    • collaborate on the development and implementation of recovery plans, possibly similar to the existing process for consultation on protected area proposals
    • make available relevant data (including limitations) for status assessments
    • share other relevant information, including standard monitoring methods
    • involve other relevant organisations and experts in the assessment and protection of Antarctic species
SC-CAMLR to develop a process to inform the CEP of species protection measures that might be taken in the CCAMLR Area
    • No new listings or de-listings of Specially Protected Species.
    • Informed the revision of Annex II to the Protocol (not yet in force), including to elaborate the processes for listing Specially Protected Species (SC-CAMLR will be able to propose a species for special protection).
    • Agreed to consider the extent which Important Bird Areas (IBAs) in Antarctica, identified by BirdLife International, are, or should be, represented within the series of ASPAs as ‘major colonies of breeding native birds’.
    • There has been continuous monitoring of incidental mortality of birds and mammals associated with fisheries. There has been considerable success reducing the incidental mortality of seabirds and marine mammals in CCAMLR fisheries: Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fisheries (WG-IMAF). 
    • Agreed that because of the substantial reductions in incidental mortality, WG-IMAF could be moved to a biennial meeting schedule.
    • There were further reductions in incidental mortality through continued mitigation measures, with such low levels that WG-IMAF was disbanded until further needed.
Spatial marine management and protected areas
    • consideration of representative areas, reference areas and resilience areas with respect to spatial protection and management in the marine environment
    • developing a harmonised approach to protection of the marine environment across the Antarctic Treaty system
    • utilising the bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean as a basis for identifying a representative system of marine protected areas
    • sharing of information, expertise and/or further joint meetings
    • development of mutual region-specific objectives, and further consideration of overlapping areas of interest for marine protection to facilitate increased cooperation
    • development of proposals for candidate sites with coordinated input from both committees 
    • development by SC-CAMLR of a process to inform the CEP of spatial management measures that might be taken in the CCAMLR Area
ATCM Decision 9 (2005) on ASPAs and ASMAs of interest to CCAMLR
    • Supported work by CCAMLR to consider marine spatial protection and management in the CAMLR Convention Area.
    • Agreed to cooperate with CCAMLR and SCAR to ensure that measures to establish effective, representative and coherent spatial protection of marine biodiversity in the Antarctic Treaty area are implemented on a scientific basis, with the aim of achieving harmonised protection across the Antarctic Treaty system.
    • Endorsed a terrestrial bioregionalisation – the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions – for use in conjunction with other tools as a dynamic model for identifying potential ASPAs within a systematic environmental-geographic framework.
    • Adopted a new partially marine ASPA (No. 173) at Cape Washington and Silverfish Bay.
    • Held a workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Antarctica Specially Managed Areas (ASMAs), and currently preparing guidance for the designation of ASMAs.
    • Will consider recommendations arising from intersessional work to consider protection of outstanding marine values in the marine environment; including: to consider such values when proposing new ASPAs and revising existing ASPA management plans; and 2) complement ongoing work by SC-CAMLR.
    • Prioritized the establishment of a representative system of MPAs by 2012. The first MPA in the Convention Area was established on the South Orkney Islands southern shelf.
    • Held the second workshop on Marine Protected Areas in Brest, France.
    • Held a special meeting of SC-CAMLR and the Commission in Bremerhaven, Germany to progress two MPA proposals: a Representative System of MPAs in the East Antarctic, and the Ross Sea Region MPA.
    • There are currently two fully mature MPA proposals that have been forwarded to the Commission for consideration. There is progress on MPA planning in the Weddell Sea and Antarctic Peninsula regions, as well as on precautionary protection for marine areas following ice shelf collapse or retreat. 
    • With respect to ASPAs and ASMAS, the SC continues to review and endorse management plans as part of the longstanding cooperation with the CEP. CCAMLR adopted Conservation Measure 91-02 (2012) on protection of the values of ASPAs and ASMAs, and any proposal for commercial harvesting within an ASMA should only be taken with the prior approval of CCAMLR, consistent with ATCM XXVIII Decision 9 (2005).
    • In relation to Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems, detection and declaration has been ongoing since 2008.  There are currently 76 VME risk areas declared from information through the fishery, 46 VMEs detected and registered through fishery independent research cruises, and the SC has requested for Members to continue detecting VMEs though their national Antarctic programs.
Ecosystem and environmental monitoring
    • importance of monitoring for providing advice to parent bodies on the need for and effectiveness of management measures
    • monitoring to assess status and trends of key species and their responses to human activity and a changing Antarctic climate, and the presence and impacts of non-native species
    • identify and utilise relevant repositories of monitoring data, noting important issues of data ownership and sharing
    • utilise the outcomes and products of earlier CEP / SCAR / COMNAP discussions on the subject of monitoring 
    • identify and utilise the findings and outcomes of monitoring being conducted by other organisations and programmes
    • improve understanding of monitoring by national programmes, and explore new and innovative ways to augment existing resources dedicated to monitoring
considering monitoring requirements at a future joint meeting
    • Acknowledged the potential for remote sensing to contribute significantly to environmental monitoring programmes, including in the context of protected area management and monitoring the impacts of climate change. 
    • Recognised the benefits of using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for research and monitoring, including the potential reduction of environmental risks as compared to other means of collecting such data, and will consider work to develop guidance on the environmental aspects of UAV use.
    • Expressed strong support for the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS), to aid understanding of the Southern Ocean, its associated ecosystems relationship with other oceans, and its role in climate change.
    • Endorsed the Antarctic Environments Portal, as a voluntary tool to help ensure it is as informed as possible on the state of Antarctic environments.
    • Agreed that the development of FBM for the krill fishery may require CEMP to change or evolve from its present form to include greater spatial coverage, monitor at different spatial and temporal scales, to include more or different parameters and revised methods for existing parameters.
    • Agreed the requirement for ecosystem monitoring is likely to increase in support of feedback management of the krill fishery and MPAs. Technology has allow for recent new initiatives for CEMP monitoring in the Convention Area.


Table 2: Suggested process for CEP & SC-CAMLR to identify and convey shared climate change research and monitoring needs to SCAR, ICED and SOOS

May 2016
CEP XIX reviews / revises Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP)
June 2016
CEP Chair conveys marine research/monitoring components of CCRWP to SC-CAMLR Chair
July 2016
SC-CAMLR Chair prepares discussion paper (in consultation with joint workshop participants) for WG-EMM
WG-EMM identifies components of CCRWP also of interest to CCAMLR
August 2016
Discussion at SCAR meeting about preliminary set of CEP/SC-CAMLR shared climate change research/monitoring needs
October 2016
SC-CAMLR XXXV considers advice from WG-EMM, including any feedback from discussions at SCAR, and agrees on shared research and monitoring interests
November 2016
SC-CAMLR Chair and CEP Chair write to SCAR / ICED / SOOS to convey shared research and monitoring interests, and seek advice regarding ability to contribute (i.e. map activities to CEP/SC-CAMLR interests)
2017
SCAR / ICED / SOOS provide advice on ability to contribute and, as appropriate, requirements for support
2017
SC-CAMLR Chair and CEP Chair convey advice from SCAR / ICED / SOOS to CEP and SC-CAMLR for consideration and action as appropriate





Appendix 1: List of participants
Appendix 2: Presentation summaries 
Appendix 3: Workshop programme
Appendix 4: List of workshop papers

