





Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica









Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Victoria Land, Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Italy
1.	Introduction	
The Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (Draft CEE) for the construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station in Antarctica has been carried out by the Antarctic Technical Unit of ENEA which is in charge for the logistics of the Italian Antarctic Program, with scientific contributions collected and supervised by the Italian National Research Council. 
The document was submitted to the Italian Ministry of Environment and Protection of Land and Sea (MATTM) and to the Institute for Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA) and allowed for submission by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MAECI).
The Draft CEE has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998) and with the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005).
The location of the proposed gravel runway, Boulder Clay (74° 44’ S, 164° 02' E, 205 m a.s.l.), was chosen in convenience the construction/operation impacts and logistical advantages, through an evaluation process that kept in consideration to minimize the overall environmental impact of the proposed activity. The site is located in the Northern Foothills, about 6 km South of the Italian Antarctic Research Station Mario Zucchelli, in the coastal area of Terra Nova Bay in Northern Victoria Land along the Ross Sea.
2.	Background		
In the past years Italy presented three subsequent Information Papers (IP41-ATCM35/CEP15, IP80-ATCM36/CEP16, IP57-ATCM37/CEP17) concerning the proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station. This proposal was the result of PNRA necessity to increase the reliability of its transportation system, allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and a more reliable multi-year programming. 
The presented IPs updated the Parties on progresses made on the proposal and on the conducted preliminary feasibility studies (from a technical and environmental point of view). In particular, in the last ATCM a Working Paper (WP30-ATCM38/CEP18) including as attachment a preliminary draft of the future Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) was presented to encourage the Parties to give a first advice on this topic. Early informal comments were incorporated in the present Draft CEE,
3. 	Circulation of Draft CEE
This draft CEE was released by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation on January 23rd, 2016 and circulated to all the members of Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP) through the CEP. 
The notification of the report was sent by Diplomatic Note to all Parties to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and e-mail notification was sent to the CEP chair.
For the discussions, a non-technical summary (Annex-A) of the document is being submitted as Working Paper to be translated into all four-treaty languages. 
Full English text of the documents may also be downloaded from http://www.enea.it/en/CEE_highres and  http://www.enea.it/en/CEE_lowres.
Italy acknowledges that an intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, to consider Italian’s draft CEE: the initial responses to the comments on the Draft CEE issued from ICG participants, along with the contributions arisen from national reviewers, will be addressed in a proper Information Paper for consideration in the CEP.
4. 	Non-technical summary
The non-technical summary of the Draft CEE is attached as Annex-A with this working paper. The following contents are outlined: purpose and description of the proposed activity; alternatives to the proposed activity; site selection and initial environmental reference state; construction, operation, maintenance and decommissioning of the proposed activity; potential environmental impacts during construction, operation, maintenance and decommissioning; monitoring programme; prevention and mitigation measures and gaps in knowledge and uncertainties.
The result of CEE suggests that the benefits that will be obtained from the permanent runway in terms of more reliable and cost effective management of the Italian scientific and logistic operations, increase of safety and cooperation with neighbouring Antarctic programs, will outweigh the “more than a minor or transitory” impact of the runway on the environment and fully justifies the activity proceeding.
5.	Further information	
Italy welcomes comments and feedback on the Draft CEE.
Recommendation and request of information should be directed to:
•	Dr. Sandro Torcini
Environmental Manager
ENEA UTA-RIA
Via Anguillarese 301
00123 – Roma, Italy
Tel. +39 06 3048 4802 – Fax +39 06 3048 6487
e-mail: draftcee@enea.pnra.it




Non-technical summary 
I	Introduction
This Draft Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE) has been prepared for the construction and operation of a new gravel runway in Terra Nova Bay (TNB) pertinent to “Mario Zucchelli” Station (MZS), Antarctica. The document has been prepared in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1998) and with the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Resolution 4, XXVIII ATCM, 2005).
This Draft CEE was prepared by ENEA-UTA, which is in charge of the implementation of the Italian Antarctic expeditions, logistics and maintenance of the stations, and CNR for the scientific contributions related to the actual state of the environment, monitoring and mitigation measures. The document was submitted to the Italian Ministry of Environment and Protection of Land and Sea (MATTM) and to the Institute for Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA) to get contributions aimed to improve the document itself, and allowed for submission by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MAECI).
The following contents are outlined:
•	Purpose and description of the proposed activity;
•	Alternatives to the proposed activity;
•	Site selection and initial environmental reference state;
•	Construction, operation, maintenance and decommissioning of the proposed activity;
•	Potential environmental impacts during construction, operation, maintenance and decommissioning;
•	Monitoring programme;
•	Prevention and mitigation measures;
•	Gaps in knowledge and uncertainties.
Considering the past studies reported in Information Papers (XXV, XXXVI, XXXVII ATCMs, respectively IP41, IP80, and IP57), the location of the gravel runway, at Boulder Clay (74°44'45''S, 164°01'17''E, 205 m a.s.l.), was chosen in convenience the construction/operation impacts and logistical advantages, through an evaluation process of two candidate sites (Boulder Clay and Campo Antenne) and after the past unsuccessful attempt of a permanent ice sheet runway (Nansen Glacier). The gravel runway will operate as a long term solution facility for personnel and materials transportation of PNRA, having in mind that it would become an important common facility for the international network of Antarctic Programs established in Ross Sea region as well.
The PNRA is trying to meet the international guidelines related to the reduction of logistical costs in favour of research activities funding. 
II	Need of Proposed Activities
In the last ATCMs, Italy presented several Information Papers (IP41- ATCM35/CEP15, IP80 ATCM36/CEP16, IP57 ATCM37/CEP17) and a Working Paper (WP 30/XXXVIII ATCM) informing the Antarctic community of the need of PNRA to find a long term solution to increase the reliability of its transportation system in terms of adequate arrival of personnel and delivery of materials, allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and a more reliable multi-year programming. This need, in particular, was driven by the climatic changes experienced in the recent past that affected logistic activities and consequently scientific activities.
The construction of a gravel runway could be this long term solution: an important permanent infrastructure to share with the other Antarctic programs favouring cooperation and lowering of logistics costs, facilitating science, allowing the air transportation of personnel at the end of the season and reducing to the minimum the need to charter a vessel from Italy. This would lower the actual human footprint of the Italian expeditions and would meet general recommendations related to the reduction of logistical costs in favour of research activities funding. 
Sharing of infrastructures results in environmental impact reduction and costs cutting as Concordia Station and the Dronning Maud Land Air Network are already testifying. Finding ways to implement co-operative air transport is also recommended at the international level ( Resolution 1 (2015) - ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII, Sofia) 
The construction of this airstrip from one side would reduce PNRA logistic naval activities and from the other side would increase safety, becoming an alternate airstrip for McMurdo air operations and an emergency way in winter for the near Korean Jang Bogo Station. 
The project for the realization of an international transport hub in the Ross Sea area has already been officially supported by German BGR, but also KOPRI, IPEV, USAP and AntNZ showed interest, opening to future agreements.
III	Site selection and alternatives
In the Southern area of the Northern Foothills with respect to MZS, inspections were conducted on many sites to assess the preliminary technical feasibility of this infrastructure, considering the length that aimed to be built, the aeronautical constraints and the orography of the terrain. 
For the proposed activity, no alternative facilities already exist: the fast ice runway realized at the beginning of the summer campaign in the Gerlache Inlet bay, does not last for the needed time as at the end of November the ice conditions are not suitable.
The “not proceeding” alternative would mean finding alternative solutions for the transportation of personnel at the end of the season: this could only mean chartering an ice class vessel every year. In effect, without the US NSF support, Italian scientific activities would be seriously affected, as the Italian National Antarctic Program is strongly dependent upon neighbouring Programs, especially when the multipurpose ice class ship is not chartered. That is why the Italian National Antarctic Program needs a long term solution to increase the reliability of its system in terms of adequate arrival of personnel and delivery of scientific materials, allowing greater effectiveness of scientific research and easier multi-year programming.
Only two locations on the land were retained as possible sites and considered adequate, for technical reasons, for the construction of the gravel runway. These were “Boulder Clay” (BC) 74° 44’45’’S, 164° 01'17’’E, 205 m a.s.l., and “Campo Antenne” (74°4219,2”S, 164°06’19,6”). Another site (Nansen Ice Sheet) had already been investigated for a permanent blue ice runway, but although used in the past a few times for landing, resulted not suitable anymore and of unpredictable availability, due to climatic conditions. 
Boulder Clay site is located in the Northern Foothills, about 6 km South of the Italian Antarctic Research Station Mario Zucchelli. The site is an ice-free area located on a very gentle slope (5°) with South-Eastern exposure. Campo Antenne site is located on a predominantly flat granitic outcrop, very close to the MZS. This site presently hosts MZS antenna farm.
Boulder Clay was finally chosen, through an evaluation process that kept in consideration to minimize the overall environmental impact of the proposed activity, especially during the construction phase (as an example: in terms of rock volume to displace and related impacts, in the Campo Antenne option they would be around three times larger), thus guaranteeing efficiency and safety in relation with wind direction. Moreover, this site, allowing the construction of a longer runway with respect to Campo Antenne, could even permit landing of aircrafts with enough fuel autonomy to avoid refuelling in Antarctica. 
The exact location of the runway in the Boulder Clay area reflected these considerations and the project was developed to minimize any impact on the existing environment (as will be discussed in the next chapters). The proposed gravel runway will be based on a subgrade corresponding to an ice core moraine that overlies a body of dead glacier or buried glacial ice.
The proposed site for the airstrip is close to the other neighbouring stations: about 13 km from Gondwana Station, 15 km from Jang Bogo Station and 16 km from the location proposed by China for its new station at Inexpressible Island. Distance from McMurdo Station and Scott Base will be around 400 km. This could favour international cooperation and sharing of logistic resources between the neighbouring National Antarctic Program, thus reducing the overall human impact on the area.
IV	Description of the Proposed Activity
The activities described in this CEE concern construction and operation of the airstrip and related terrestrial connexions and facilities, temporary facilities on site during the construction phase, installation and use of machineries, and decommissioning of the airstrip.
The gravel runway project includes the following facilities: the gravel runway itself (a gravel embankment of 2,200 m long and 60 m wide that will be constructed using materials available in the nearby area) endowed, at the end of the airstrip, with an apron (130x134 m) for 2 aircrafts; an helipad (30x30 m) for safety reasons; a service area (70x22 m) equipped with a little parking for vehicles, a reception structure (MZS terminal) assembled with 6 ISO 20 insulated containers and containing a waiting room for passengers, offices and a chemical toilet, and a shed (14x7x5 m) that will host two fire trucks and related equipment, the unloading material for the aircraft (i.e. forklift), a store and a little workshop. A small taxiway (70 m long, 25 m width) will connect the runway with the apron. On the opposite side of the apron (with respect to the service area), a double walled stainless steel tank of 44 m3 capacity will store the minimum fuel required for two operations. This tank will be refilled from MZS via appropriate tanker for fuel transportation. 
Access to this facility will be allowed prolonging the already existing road that connects MZS to Enigma Lake skyway of 3,4 km.
The choice of facilities positioning is the result of considerations aiming at the maximum reduction of the volume needed for the embankment and works, following, to the maximum possible extent, the natural orography of the moraine.
The dimensions of the service installation follow ICAO standards and the Italian legislation. 
For air operations control, a new operation room (2 ISO 20 insulated containers) will be installed at the top of the hill close to the existing weather station AWS Rita. This will allow personnel to have a clear view over all the runways used (fast ice runway, Enigma Lake skyway and the future gravel runway) and to increase safety of operations. 
All buildings are modular and will be composed of preassembled structures. Globally the total occupied area will be around 0.15 km2 with the longitudinal centreline of the entire embankment running in the direction NNE-SSW, at an elevation of about 200 m a.s.l.
Concerning electrical power and heating of the installations, the buildings will be provided with a solar photovoltaic power plant for the production of electrical energy combined with a traditional power generator of 20 kW that will act like backup system only. The use of this generator, in any case, will not be continuous but will be dependent upon the planned flight activities. For the heating and hot water production, solar thermal collectors will be installed. Both, the electrical and thermal systems should cover the energy needs of these installations. 
The runway will require, as maintenance, only an annual snow removing and small levelling adjustment. This prediction is the result of seasonal surveys of the well-known area of Boulder Clay, of the meteorological data acquired on site in the last years and of the accurate determination of the behaviour of long term moraine ice drifts by means of interferometric satellite data.
This infrastructure aims to become a permanent one and its expected life span will be therefore over 20 years, as long as it will be possible to run it and MZS will be operational. When its use will be no longer possible, decommissioning operations will take place and all buildings will be dismantled and removed from the site. To allow recovery of the landscape, depending on the state of the ecosystem that will be evaluated at the moment of dismantling, the embankment will be partially or totally removed distributing the rocks over the surface following to the maximum extent the natural orography of the moraine. Considering the volumes of rock that compose the embankment, any other solution such as complete rock removal from site and disposal, would result in a higher environmental cost. 
V	Initial Environmental Reference State 
The Boulder Clay area, interested by the construction of the runway, is a predominantly snow-free area where the Boulder Clay Glacier, an old glacier that extends from the Enigma Lake area to Adélie Cove where it degrades toward the sea, is the main orographic feature. 
The Boulder Clay moraine, where the runway will be constructed, is a late glacial ablation till that overlies the body of the glacier. Surface includes perennially ice covered ponds with icing blisters, frost mounds and debris islands. 
The Meteorological Observatory of the Italian National Antarctic Program has a long historical series of data. The climate in the area is cold and arid. The mean monthly air temperature recorded ranged between -16 and -3,5°C in the summer period, with a mean annual temperature of -14 °C. The region receives around 270 mm water equivalent precipitation per year. The prevailing winds in the area blow from western sectors (W, WNW and WSW). They are associated mainly with the katabatic flow coming from Reeves and Priestley Glacier and the wind speed can rarely reach values over 40 knots.
Vegetation in the area covers less than 5% of the surface and is entirely cryptogrammic as vascular plants are absent. Boulder Clay vegetation includes thirty-four lichens that are one of the principal components, seven mosses, one liverwort and various species of algae and cyanobacteria. In particular in the Boulder Clay site, the observed lichens are prevalently nitrophilous. 
At the bottom of the Boulder Clay glacier on the East coast there is an Adélie penguins rookery of some thousands of couples. This site is, at the sea level, 1.8 km far from the end of the proposed Boulder Clay gravel runway and 200 m below. The penguin colony is located in front of the marine protected area ASPA 161 of Terra Nova Bay. This site is not included in ASPA n°161 but close to its limits. In the penguin rockery area there are colonies of storm petrels and skuas. 
Depending on temperatures, a partial melting of some icing blisters was observed in the Boulder Clay area and the presence of biological life (bdelloidea rotifers, protists and platyhelminthes) in water sampled in these lakes was confirmed.
The presence of MZS produced inevitable impacts in the last 30 years around the area. Since the beginning of the Italian operations, a monitoring program was carried out to identify and mitigate possible impacts. Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) and heavy metals (mainly As, Cd, Pb, V, Ni, Cu) in PM10 were identified as a good indicators of human activity as these markers can be simply correlated to sources such as incomplete combustion processes. The baseline of pollutants was evaluated by placing PM10 sampling equipment in “Campo Icaro”, which is located at a distance of approximatively 2,5 km from MZS and close to the selected site for the runway construction. Results of analyses conducted over 27 years showed that concentrations of the above pollutants remained close to the detection limit. Therefore, this monitoring station will allow the measurement of the changes resulting from the infrastructure construction and operation.
Data related to MZS revealed that this scientific base had a low impact on organisms since the 1990s . The contaminant accumulation and the lipid characterization were studied in many species in the ASPA no. 161 and levels suggested that their presence in this protected marine area was due to global transport from other parts of the planet, rather than local sources.
The main research activities conducted and still present in the Boulder Clay area, consist of CALM experiment: a monitoring programme established in 1999 with a grid of 100x100 m measuring permafrost and active layer temperature, and a shallow permafrost borehole with temperature monitoring records. This monitoring network will be interested by the proposed activity and actions will be planned with the scientific community to reduce the impact.
VI	Identification and Prediction of Environmental Impact, Mitigation Measures of the Proposed Activities 
Potential impacts of the runway were evaluated considering all the life cycle of this infrastructure, including construction, operation and decommissioning. Since the design phase, the runway site and the runway facilities were chosen, positioned in such a way as to limit the volume of material to collect, transport, screen, and level. However, as long as it will be used, this infrastructure is expected to have a permanent impact on the landscape (limited by the use of local material for the construction of the embankment) and an impact on the surrounding environment, especially during the construction phase. 
Construction phase
In the construction phase, direct impacts will affect the atmosphere with the unavoidable release of exhaust gases and PM10 from the operation of trucks, vehicles and generators, and of dust produced by scraping of the surface, rock crushing and screening using heavy equipment. 
For the construction of the apron and of some ridges present on the moraine along the airstrip area (3000 m3) blasting operations will be conducted. These will release dust and generate noise and vibrations. The noise generated by all these operations may disturb birds, raise stress level and increase metabolism. However the distance between the Boulder Clay area and the Adélie penguins colony and skuas (1.8 km horizontal and 200 m vertical from the proposed site) is expected to be adequate to mitigate the disturbance. 
An estimation of the total amount of expected pollutants was done and adequate maintenance procedures will be put in place to limit these emissions. 
Other potential impacts could be generated by accidental spills of fuel or lubricants and by disposal of produced wastes and of wastewater from chemical toilets.
Operation phase
During the operational phase the source of the biggest impacts will be aircraft activity. 
A maximum amount of 20 flights per operative season and 6 per month is expected and related emissions, considering the aircraft presently used, were calculated. 
Air operations will have an impact on the atmosphere with the release of exhaust gases from engines, will generate noise and increase the potential of accidental fuel spill and related impact because of the large quantities of fuel involved. Accidents of bird strike could also occur.
Other impacts may arise from operation of vehicles during the routine annual maintenance and from fuel transfer and refuelling process, as well as accidental leakage from fuel tanks and by disposal of produced wastes and wastewater from chemical toilets.
Decommissioning phase
During the decommissioning phase, direct impacts will affect the atmosphere with the release of exhaust gases and PM10 from the operation of trucks, vehicles and generators. All buildings will be disassembled and removed from the site while, depending upon the conditions of the ecosystem, the embankment will partially levelled to better follow the natural orography of the moraine. 
Other impacts may arise from disposal of wastes and of wastewater from chemical toilets.
Two months of work are expected for this activity. 
Mitigation Measures
Particular attention will be paid to lower the probability of accidents by means of adequate procedures and equipment both in the construction, operation and decommissioning phase.
The Guidelines for the Operation of aircraft near Concentrations of Birds in Antarctica (Resolution 2, 2004) were taken in consideration since the design phase and, concerning noise and disturbance to fauna, the runway was designed as a one-way runway in the Boulder Clay project, to avoid flight at any altitude over the colony. Aircraft flight path for landing and taking-off therefore will be kept off the Adélie Cove area in addition to important limitations in height and space flight in overpasses of ASPA n°161 area. The proposed infrastructure complies with the Minimum Distances for Aircraft Operations Close to Concentration of Birds (WP 10-ATCM27)
The impact mitigation during the construction and operation of the airstrip will mainly consist of the following measures:
•	Specific environmental training for the personnel involved in the construction and operation of the runway.
•	The facilities annexed to the runway will be provided with thermal solar panels to limit to the maximum the use of fossil fuels in generators for heating and power supply.
•	Mono fuel JA1 will be used for every vehicles or machinery;
•	All vehicles and mechanical equipment will be maintained under best condition and their use will be reduced as much as possible;
•	Low noise machines, including noise-absorbing materials in power generators will be used;
•	Fuel spills will be prevented by using double-skinned fuel tanks posed on confined structures made of impermeable layer. Suitable absorbent mats, pumps and appropriate equipment will be available on site in accordance with guidelines such as the COMNAP Fuel Manual;
•	Transportation of fuel will be done in appropriate tankers and special transportation procedures will be set to ensure maximum safety
•	All wastes and wastewaters produced on the runway site will be collected and transported to MZS for appropriate treatment or recycling.
Concerning pollutant and dust monitoring, a new monitoring station will be installed in the vicinity of the runway. It will be useful to better evaluate the variations of the main environmental parameters during the phases of construction and operation of the runway so as to identify and provide early warning on adverse effects and allow for mitigation actions.
Concerning the impact of noise, minimal/medium disturbance to the local ecosystem is expected considering the distances involved (well above the minimum distances for aircraft operations close to concentration of birds). However monitoring of the birds will be conducted to identify potential excessive disturbance, thus allowing to take measures such as a review of the working schedule in terms of daily working time and planning of activities.
VII	Environmental Impact Monitoring Plan 
To allow early identification of possible unpredicted impacts, an Environmental Monitoring Plan (EMOP) has been developed to evaluate changes in the ecosystem during construction and operation.
Research projects in the Boulder Clay area, as well as research project on penguins and skuas in Adélie Cove site, will be enhanced, to analyse the life response of the birds community to any possible interference from the airstrip construction and activity.
VIII	Gaps in Knowledge and Uncertainties 
The construction of a runway over an old glacier moraine is a challenging project, as no other examples are available. The stability of the moraine, however, has been deeply investigated during the last campaigns by means of several instruments and techniques, obtaining encouraging results. 
Identified gaps in knowledge and uncertainties for the construction and operation of the new gravel airstrip include:
•	Climate conditions during the construction phase;
•	Possible human induced physiological changes on wildlife not manifesting into behavioral changes (WP 27- ATCM 38);
•	Long-term climate change, usage time as function of favourable atmospheric condition, winter snow accumulation on the pathway;
•	Long-term maintenance;
•	Uncertainties in the knowledge of long-term moraine behaviour changes;
•	Changes in future perspectives of research projects in the area.
IX	Conclusions
The runway will potentially be a logistic hub for many Antarctic Programs in the region, gaining a more flexible turnover in Antarctica for Italian and foreign scientists, so contributing to develop international and multidisciplinary research activities. 
No touristic activity will be allowed for this infrastructure.
The impact of the construction, operation and decommissioning of the gravel runway at Boulder Clay on the environmental and on the ecosystem were considered since the design phase and will be minimized applying appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures. 
The result of CEE suggests that the benefits that will be obtained from the permanent runway will grossly outweigh the “more than a minor or transitory” impacts of the runway on the environmental and on the ecosystem. 
On these basis, the establishment of the proposed facility is highly recommended.

