





Revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land 

Extension Proposal for the Existing Plan





Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land

Extension Proposal for the Existing Plan
Summary
France carried out the five-year review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land. Based on this review, it is suggested that the Management Plan be extended without any changes for a 5-year period. 
Introduction
In accordance with paragraph 3, Article 6 in Annex V of the Antarctic Treaty Protocol on environmental protection, France carried out the five-year review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land.
Due to its isolated nature and to its protected status since 1985 (an HSM, later an ASPA), the site has remained in a state of conservation that is very similar to the state in which the team left it in January 1952, following its destruction by fire. 
The purpose of the initial Management Plan that supported Port-Martin's classification as an ASPA in 2006 was to ensure that the site would be protected against all forms of anthropic deterioration, to preserve the site's major archaeological interest. Port-Martin is a remarkable example of a post-war Antarctic base. 
It has only been possible to carry out archaeological research over the period covered by the previous Management Plan, due to logistical constraints imposed by the base's isolation, and especially due to four consecutive years during which ice and sea conditions in the region prevented safe access to the site. The relevance of this research, however, remains unchanged. 
In order for future research to be possible and to define precise methods that would be the most suited to conserving artefacts, the site must be kept absolutely free of any disturbance or non-authorised sampling. Access to the site must therefore remain subject to authorization, and reserved to activities of heritage and archaeological relevance, i.e. restoration, preservation, and/or protection of ruins and associated elements.
Consequently, France considers that the Management Plan adopted by Measure 1 (2006) and renewed in 2011 should be extended for another 5-year period. 
Overview of information on the current Management Plan:
Please see the table below.
Recommendations
France recommends that the CEP approves the extension of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land, for a 5-year period, until 2021.


ASPA No. 166, Port-Martin, Adélie Land
1. Has a new ASPA been proposed?
No
2. Has a new ASMA been proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation
Historic site No. 46, Recommendation XIII-16 (Brussels, 1985)
First adoption of the Management Plan 
Measure 1 (2006)
Management Plan Revisions
N/A
Current Management Plan 
Measure 1 (2006)
Extension of Management Plan expiry dates:
Proposal to extend the 2006 Management Plan, renewed in 2011 for a 5-year period (2021)
Renamed and renumbered by decision 1 (2002)
N/A 
Other relevant measures

4. If the proposal contains a revision for an existing Management Plan, please list the changes that have been made:
i) Major or minor?
N/A
ii) Changes made to boundaries or coordinates?

iii) Changes made to maps? If the answer is yes, do the changes appear only in the captions, or also in the actual graphics?

iv) Changes made to the area's description, which contribute to identifying its location or its boundaries?

v) Changes which have a bearing on another ASPA, ASMA, or HSM in this area or near it? Please explain the fusion with an existing area or site, their incorporation, or the abolition of an existing area or site.

vi) Other – brief summary of other kinds of changes, indicating in which Management Plan paragraphs they may be found.

5. If a new ASPA or ASMA has been proposed, does it feature a maritime area?
N/A
6. If the answer is yet, must the proposal receive a prior approval from the CCAMLR, in keeping with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If the answer is yes, has the CCAMLR given its prior approval? 
N/A
If the answer is yes, please indicate the CCAMLR's final report and the paragraph number.
N/A




