





Notification of the location of historical pre-1958 remains in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio









Notification of the location of historical pre-1958 remains in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio
Working Paper submitted by Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom

Summary
The authors of this WP notify the CEP/ATCM about the recent location of historical pre-1958 remains in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio. Such remains are linked to different, well-known historic events spanning from 1893 to 1945 (the Heroic Age), involving the presence of Norwegian, Argentine, Swedish and British explorers at the site. This paper provides detailed information on such remains and the way they were discovered, and it presents, for consideration of the CEP, likely options to proceed with them. 

Introduction
Under the provisions of the article 2 and 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, and according to Resolution 5, 2001 (Guidelines for handling of pre-1958 historical remains whose existence or present location is not yet known), Argentina, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom notify the CEP/ATCM about the precise location of historical remains from the Norwegian whaling expedition led by Norwegian explorer Carl Anton Larsen in 1893 in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio. These remains were also the scene of historic events linked to the presence of Argentine Alférez José María Sobral and Swedish geologist Gunnar Andersson (members of the Swedish Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld in 1903), to two members of the Argentine rescue operation led by Capt. Julián Irizar on board Corvette Uruguay, also in 1903 (José Gorrochátegui and Felipe Fliess), and to the British Tabarin Operation, in 1945.  

Description of the historical context
The 1892/1893 Norwegian whaling expedition was the first to conduct a land exploration of the area around the location of the Argentine Station Marambio, where the first Antarctic fossil discoveries were made, setting a precedent for Antarctic paleontological research. During this expedition, in 1893, Norwegian explorer Carl Anton Larsen, commander of the Jason, installed a cairn with a wooden pole – 2m high and 5cm diameter – northeast of the Argentine Station Marambio in which the name of the ship and the year of the expedition were carved. 

Ten years later, in 1903, Argentine Alférez José María Sobral and Swedish geologist Gunnar Andersson, both part of the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld, found the cairn and carved their names and date on the wooden pole. Few days later, on November 7th, 1903, during the rescue operation led by Argentine commander Capt. Julián Irizar on board Corvette Uruguay, two Argentine Navy officers (José Gorrochátegui – Doctor, and Felipe Fliess - Lieutenant) found the cairn and they so realized that Sobral and Andersson were still alive. A note was left for the explorers indicating the presence of the Argentine rescue operation. (Figure 4).  

Forty-two years later, on August 30th, 1945, in the framework of Tabarin Operation, a British expedition re-located and photographed the cairn (Figure 1). The expedition report describes other objects found, including a wooden box and a rusty can filled with frozen sand and a piece of paper, corresponding to the note written by the two Argentinean Navy officers. The note was taken to the former British ‘Station D’ on the Trinity Peninsula and then sent to London. In 1949, it was delivered to the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) where it still remains.

Description of field work
During the last 2015-2016 Antarctic summer season, a team of Argentine researchers, located northeast of the Argentine Station Marambio the precise site where a cairn with the wooden pole was installed in 1893 by Norwegian Capt. Carl Anton Larsen (Figure 1). In July 2015, an archive research by an Argentine historian at the Scott Polar Research Institute and the British Antarctic Survey resulted in the finding of the above-mentioned note left by the Argentine Navy officers, and several photos of the site taken by British explorers.  Based on these findings, it was decided to check in the field the likely existence of such a cairn. Eventually, Argentine researchers walked systematically during two days across the whole east and north coasts of the Island until they found the cairn, which lacked the wooden pole. . The research team proceeded to photograph the site; georeferenced its precise location at 64°14’13.06"S - 56°35’7.50"W, two kilometres away from Marambio Station, 40 meters above sea level and 70 meters onshore (Figure 2); and installed a provisional fence around its perimeter (Figure 3) to avoid occasional damage, as its existence was previously unknown for people working in the island. The provisional fence is intended to preserve the site, and it is planned to be removed once the site is afforded appropriate protection, which may be achieved through  training and dissemination activities, among other management measures. 

Likely reasons for designation as a HSM 
The proposed site comprises one of the oldest sites yet discovered in Antarctica, and addresses several of the points raised in the Annex to Resolution 3 (2009) “Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments”  to nominate a particular Historic Site and Monument, namely:
    a. a particular event of importance in the history of science or exploration of Antarctica that occurred at the place: this area was first land-explored by the expedition that installed the cairn, which was also the first to collect Antarctic fossils on the island, an outstanding location for paleontological research since then ;
    b. a particular association with a person who played an important role in the history of science or exploration in Antarctica: the cairn was installed by Cap. Larsen in 1893, used by members of the Otto Nordenskjöld expedition and served as a key feature during the rescue operation by Capt. Julian Irízar in 1903. The cairn was re-discovered during British Tabarin Operation in 1945.
    c. a particular association with a notable feat of endurance or achievement: the cairn was involved in the history of the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld, which was forced to stay for two years in Antarctica. It was also a key feature of the rescue operation led by Capt. Julian Irizar. 

Recommendation

Recalling the discussions held during the last CEP about the need to put on hold new designation of HSM until some further guidance has been established in this regards (CEP XVIII , para. 177), the Parties co-sponsoring this paper understand that this does not invalidate the presentation of a proposal for a new HSM. In this sense, taking into account the historic relevance of this site as a testimonial part of the heroic era of the Antarctic history, Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom recommend the CEP to consider any of the following two options to proceed: 

    • Recognize the historical value of the site and recommend applying the interim protection afforded by Resolution 5 (2001), until it is ready to designate new HSMs; or
    • Consider its designation as a Historic and Site Monument during CEP XIX.

In case the CEP considers the possibility of listing this site as a HSM, additional information is provided below (to be incorporated under the “Description section”), which follows the guidance set out in Resolution 5 (2011) “Revised Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments” and the list of additional information that could be added to the description of HSMs, as timely suggested by the CEP  and ATCM (para. 131/132 Final Report CEP XV and para 107 Final Report ATCM XXXV).



Description of the site
Name of the proposed HSM: “Multiexpedition cairn”, in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio, Antarctic Peninsula 
Original proposing Parties: Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom 
Party undertaking Management: Argentina, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom
Type: Historic site or monument 
Location: 64°14’13.06"S - 56°35’7.50"W, northeast of the Argentine Station Marambio, Antarctic Peninsula.

Physical features & local/cultural landscape: The site consists of a rock cairn installed in 1893 by Norwegian Capt. Carl Anton Larsen during the first land-exploration of the area around the location of the Argentine Station Marambio, where the first Antarctic fossil discoveries were made. The cairn used to have attached a wooden pole (2m high and 5cm diameter) of which nothing remains. The site is located in the vicinity of the Argentine Station Marambio.  The islands comprising the James Ross Archipelago are comprised of shallow marine shelf deposits that date back to the Late Cretaceous.  

Historical/ Cultural features: This region has been considered a keystone in paleontological and geological research since its first exploration. The establishment of Marambio Station (Argentina), a year- round station since 1969, made it possible to further develop research projects that continue nowadays, even expanding to other areas of knowledge such as biology and history, in collaboration and cooperation among many Parties.

Description of the historical context
The 1892/1893 Norwegian whaling expedition was the first to conduct a land exploration, resulting in the first Antarctic fossil discoveries, setting a precedent for Antarctic paleontological research. During this expedition, in 1893, Norwegian explorer Carl Anton Larsen, commander of the Jason, installed a cairn with a wooden pole – 2m high and 5cm diameter – northeast of the location of the Argentine Station Marambio, in which the name of the ship and the year of the expedition were carved. 

Ten years later, in 1903, Argentine Alférez José María Sobral and Swedish geologist Gunnar Andersson, both part of the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Otto Nordenskjöld, found the cairn and also carved their names and date on the wooden pole. Few days later, on November 7th, 1903, during the rescue operation led by Argentine commander Capt. Julián Irizar on board Corvette Uruguay, two Argentine Navy officers (José Gorrochátegui – Doctor, and Felipe Fliess - Lieutenant) found the cairn and they so realized Sobral and Andersson were still alive. A note was left for the explorers indicating the presence of the Argentine rescue operation (Figure 4).  

Forty-two years later, on August 30th, 1945, in the framework of Tabarin Operation, a British expedition re-discovered and photographed the cairn (Figure 1). The expedition report describes other objects found including a wooden box and a rusty can filled with frozen sand and a piece of paper, corresponding to the note written by the two Argentine navy officers. The note was taken to the former British ‘Station D’ on the Trinity Peninsula and then sent to London. In 1949, it was delivered to the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) where still remains.

Photos and maps





Figure 1. Comparative photographs of the cairn and its surroundings from 1945 (British Antarctic Survey AD6/19/1/D1229/7 and AD6/19/1/D1229/8) and 2016 (Instituto Antártico Argentino – Dirección Nacional del Antártico)





Figure 2. Satellite image of the precise location of the cairn





Figure 3. Provisional fence placed around the cairn during 2015-2016 seasons. It is proposed to be removed once the site is recorded as a historic site and afforded appropriate protection. 




Figure 4. Note left by two Argentinean navy officers during rescue operation led by Capt. Julián Irizar (Scott Polar Research Institution, reference: SPRIMS730). The note reads: “Les soussignés, de l’ Expedition Argentine de Secours, commandant Capt. Julian Irizar, ont reconnu cette station le 7 Novembre, 1903 en trouvant seulement un point indiqué avec des pierres et au milieu une canne en bois avec la  signature de Andersson et Sobral; faite une enquête complete et minutieux dessous et autour de pierre ont y trouve aucun écrit.  José Gorrochátegui - Doctor ; Felipe Fliess -­ Lieutenant“. The note obverse reads: “ont prie de les laisser dans le point pour le cas que Les Expeditions Francaises on soude arrivé. Avis Important.“

