





Incorporation of a historic wooden pole to HSM No. 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn), in Seymour (Marambio) Island, Antarctic Peninsula









Proposal to add a historic wooden pole to HSM No. 60 in Seymour (Marambio) Island, Antarctic Peninsula.
This is a proposal for the revision of an existing Historic Site and Monument, aimed to add a historic wooden pole to the description of the HSM No. 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn), for which the following information is provided according to Resolution 5 (2011), “Revised Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments”. 

HSM No. 60 was designated during ATCM XVII (Venice, 1992) under Recommendation 3, which was replaced by Measure 3 in ATCM XXVI (Madrid, 2003). The following text is proposed to replace the original description of the site: 

DESCRIPTION:
Wooden pole and cairn (I), and wooden plaque and cairn (II), both located at Penguins Bay (Bahía Pingüino), southern coast of Seymour ( Marambio) Island, James Ross Archipelago. The wooden pole and a cairn were installed in 1902 during the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld. This cairn used to have attached a 4 m high wooden pole – nowadays only 44 cm high –, guy-lines and a flag, and was installed to signal the location of a well stocked deposit, composed of few wooden boxes containing food supplies, notes and letters saved inside bottles. The deposit was to be used in case the Swedish South Polar Expedition was forced to retreat on its way to the south. 
A year later, on 10 November 1903, a wooden plaque was placed at the site by the crew of the rescue mission of the Argentine Corvette Uruguay lead by Capt. Julian Irizar where they met the members of the Swedish South Polar Expedition. The text of the wooden plaque reads as follows: 
“10.XI.1903 Uruguay (Argentine Navy) in its journey to give assistance to the Swedish Antarctic expedition.” 
In January 1990, a rock cairn was erected by Argentina in memory of this event in the place where the plaque is located. 

Original proposing Party: Argentina and Sweden
Parties undertaking management: Argentina/Sweden

LOCATION:
(I): 64º17'47.2"S – 56º41'30.7"W
(II): 64°16'S, 56°39'W


Proposal to add a historic wooden pole to HSM No. 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn), in Seymour (Marambio) Island, Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by Argentina and Sweden.

Summary
According to article 2 and 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the protection and conservation of Antarctic heritage can be accomplished through the designation of Historic Sites and Monuments, including the amendment of sites or monuments already designated. In this regard, Argentina and Sweden propose the addition of a new –recently found- object to HSM No. 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn), in Seymour (Marambio) Island. 

Introduction
According to Resolution 3 (2009), Parties that nominated and/or are undertaking management of a Historic Site or Monument should keep the site or monument under review to assess whether, among other aspects, the description of the site or monument should be amended and updated when necessary. Recalling the outcome of the ICG held during 2011-2012 on HSM, the Committee noted a list of additional information that could be added to the description of HSMs (CEP XV, para 132; ATCM XXXV, para 107). This paper follows the guidance set out in Resolution 5 (2011) “Revised Guide to the Presentation of Working Papers Containing Proposals for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, Antarctic Specially Managed Areas or Historic Sites and Monuments” and incorporates additional information, as suggested by the CEP/ATCM, where relevant.  

Description of field work
During the last 2015-2016 Antarctic summer season, a team of Argentinean historian researchers located southeast of Seymour (Marambio) Island the precise site where the wooden pole and cairn were installed in 1902 by the Swedish South Polar Expedition (Figure 1).

The cairn was found with only the base of the wooden pole – 44cm high-, and the research team proceeded to photograph the site and georeferenced its precise location at 64º17'47.2"S – 56º41'30.7"W (Figure 2), twenty-seven meters above sea level, and twenty-five meters away from the wooden plaque corresponding to HSM No 60.

Description of new object
Original proposing Parties: Argentina and Sweden 
Party undertaking Management: Argentina and Sweden
Type: Historic site or monument
Location: 64º17'47.2"S – 56º41'30.7"W, southeast of Seymour (Marambio) Island
Physical features & local/cultural landscape: The new object consists of a rock cairn and wooden pole installed in 1902 by Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld during the Swedish South Polar Expedition. The cairn used to have attached a 4m high wooden pole of which only the base – 44 cm high – remains nowadays. The site is placed in Seymour ( Marambio) Island, part of the James Ross Archipelago, comprised of shallow marine shelf deposits that date back to the Late Cretaceous.  In particular, the cairn lies near the coast, at the southeast of the island, in Sobral Formation (paleocene). 

Historical/ Cultural features: Seymour (Marambio) Island has been considered a keystone in paleontological and geological research since its first exploration. The establishment of Marambio Station (Argentina), a year- round station since 1969, made it possible to further develop research projects that continue nowadays, even expanding to other areas of knowledge such as biology and history, in collaboration and cooperation among many Parties.

Description of the historical context
During the 1902 Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld, a cairn with a wooden pole – 4 m high –, guy-lines and a flag were installed southeast of Seymour (Marambio) Island, before the settlement of the wooden hut on Snow Hill Island in February 1902.

According to writings by Nordenskjöld and Andersson, this cairn and the wooden pole were installed to signal the location of a well stocked deposit, composed of few wooden boxes containing not only food supplies but notes and letters saved inside bottles, to be used in case the expedition was forced to retreat in its way to the south (source: Antarctica or two years among the ice of the south pole, The Macmillan Co., New York, 1905). 

Reasons for incorporation to HSM No. 60 
The new object comprises a key feature as a testimonial part of the heroic era of the Antarctic history. As such, it marks the exact location where a deposit was installed in 1902 and still has the remains of the original wood used to signal it.   

Current description and location of HSM No. 60
Wooden plaque and cairn located at Penguins Bay (Bahía Pingüino), southern coast of Seymour Island (Marambio), James Ross Archipelago. This plaque was placed on 10 November 1903 by the crew of a rescue mission of the Argentinian Corvette Uruguay in the site where they met the members of the Swedish expedition led by Dr Otto Nordenskjöld. The text of the wooden plaque reads as follows: 
“10.XI.1903 Uruguay (Argentine Navy) in its journey to give assistance to the Swedish Antarctic expedition.” In January 1990, a rock cairn was erected by Argentina in memory of this event in the place where the plaque is located. 
Original proposing Party: Argentina and Sweden
Parties undertaking management: Argentina/Sweden
Location: 64°16'S, 56°39'W

Proposed new description and location of HSM No. 60
Wooden pole and cairn (I), and wooden plaque and cairn (II), both located at Penguins Bay (Bahía Pingüino), southern coast of Seymour (Marambio) Island, James Ross Archipelago. The wooden pole and cairn were installed in 1902 during the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld. This cairn used to have attached a 4 m high wooden pole – nowadays only 44 cm high –, guy-lines and a flag, and was installed to signal the location of a well stocked deposit, composed of few wooden boxes containing food supplies, notes and letters saved inside bottles, to be used in case the Swedish South Polar Expedition was forced to retreat on its way to the south. 
A year later, on 10 November 1903, a wooden plaque was placed at the site by the crew of the rescue mission of the Argentine Corvette Uruguay lead by Capt. Julian Irizar where they met the members of the Swedish South Polar Expedition. The text of the wooden plaque reads as follows: 
 “10.XI.1903 Uruguay (Argentine Navy) in its journey to give assistance to the Swedish Antarctic expedition.” 
In January 1990, a rock cairn was erected by Argentina in memory of this event in the place where the plaque is located. 
Original proposing Party: Argentina and Sweden
Parties undertaking management: Argentina/Sweden
Location:
(I): 64º17'47.2"S – 56º41'30.7"W
(II): 64°16'S, 56°39'W


Recommendation

Understanding the historic relevance of the newly discovered objects as testimonial part of the heroic era of the Antarctic history, Argentina and Sweden  recommend the CEP to consider the incorporation of the wooden pole and cairn installed in 1902 by the South Polar Expedition led by Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld to the HMS No. 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn), according to the new site description provided. 



















Photos and maps


Figure 1. Comparative photographs of the cairn and the wooden pole from 1903 (source: Antarctica or two years among the ice of the south pole, The Macmillan Co., New York, 1905) and 2016 (Instituto Antártico Argentino – Dirección Nacional del Antártico)


Figure 2. Satellite image of the precise location of the cairn and the HSM No. 60.
