





Consideration for Non-governmental and Tourism Activities Involving Combined Air and Cruise Transportation to Antarctica









Consideration for Non-governmental and Tourism Activities Involving Combined Air and Cruise Transportation to Antarctica

Introduction
The International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators (IAATO) has reported an increase in non-governmental and tourism expeditions involving combined air and cruise transportation to the Antarctic.  Utilizing air transportation to and/or from the Antarctic can reduce the duration of an expedition up to five (5) days per voyage.  There is a need to consider the environmental and safety issues that may be associated with an increase in this type of transportation to the Antarctica.  Therefore, the United States believes that Parties may benefit from a proactive and focused discussion on the trends and potentially unique issues associated with an increase in non-governmental and tourism expeditions involving combined air and cruise transportation to Antarctica.

Background
Increase in Non-governmental and Tourism Expeditions Involving Air Transportation
While ship-borne tourism remains the dominant form of transportation to the Antarctic Peninsula, IAATO has reported an increase in non-governmental and tourism expeditions utilizing combined air and cruise transportation in the 2015/2016 season (ATCM XXX VIII, IP 53).  Table 1 provides information reported by IAATO for air/cruise tourism for the last five seasons (2011-2016).  This may include flying to and from King George Island to board a cruise vessel or flying one way from Punta Arenas, Chile and cruising the other way to Ushuaia, Argentina.  Utilizing this type of transportation can reduce the duration of an expedition up to five (5) days per voyage and minimize crossing the rough Drake Passage by ship.

Table 1: IAATO Members Reported for Air/Cruise Tourism – Peninsula Region 2011-2016
Season
Passengers
Vessels
Departures
Total Voyagesb
2011/2012
860
3
15
188
2012/2013
1,587
3
24
202
2013/2014
1,848
3
27
220
2014/2015
1,471
6
24
225
2015/2016a
2,294
10
47
270
a projections
b Total number of voyages including Seaborne and Air/Cruise Tourism to the Peninsula

Potential Policy, Environmental and Safety Considerations Related to Increased Expeditions Involving Air Transportation
As mentioned in other papers submitted by the United States, challenges may arise regarding communication and coordination among Competent Authorities for non-governmental and tourism expeditions when multiple parties are involved.  In some instances involving combined air and cruise tourism, the air transportation requires a Party’s authorization or comparable regulatory process different from that of the tour ship operator providing the cruise portion of the expedition in Antarctica.  Segmentation of the various activities within an expedition may lead to a limited description of the total activity and its impacts.  Therefore, implicated Parties involved in the authorization or comparable regulatory process for combined air and cruise tourism should engage in enhanced coordination to ensure that a full description of the activity and its impacts are considered in the Environmental Impact Assessment process.

Potential unique issues arise from increased combined air and cruise tourism due to both air transportation and ship-borne components of the activity that may benefit from further discussion among Competent Authorities.  For instance, an increase in combined air and cruise tourism would result in increased flight activity at King George Island given this is the destination for current combined air and cruise tourism.  Given the potential for rapid and unanticipated changes in weather in and around Antarctica, the reliance on air transportation may pose an increased risk to safety due to passengers transitioning in and out of the Antarctic.  This may result in the potential for an increased number of passengers that may become stranded on-shore waiting to board their vessel and/or board their flight during the transition between expeditions.  The potential safety issues associated with increased flight activity for combined air and cruise tourism and the potential for this type of transportation to the Antarctic to facilitate or encourage the development of additional infrastructure may benefit from additional discussion among Competent Authorities.

The reduction in time needed for each voyage may raise considerations regarding the environmental impacts and safety of increased ship traffic, the length of time spent by ships in the Antarctic between port calls, and the associated passenger landings in and around King George Island and the Antarctic Peninsula.  As more and more operators engage in combined air and cruise tourism, an increasing number and concentration of ships at King George Island and the area surrounding the Antarctic Peninsula may be perceived to increase potential environmental and safety concerns.  Additionally, Competent Authorities may want to further consider the implications on ship safety, inspection and routine maintenance of a potential increase in the length of time ships may spend in the Antarctic due to a reduction in the number of port calls each ship would have to make. 

Increasing the number of voyages also has a direct effect on the number of passenger landings in the Antarctic during a given tourism season1.  Based on numbers reported by IAATO on the top twenty most visited sites for the 2014/2015 season, at least half of the sites had one day or more where the maximum visit limitation established by site guidelines was met.   In addition, the top twenty sites received 65% of the total number of landings made for the 2014/2015 season which supports the trend of landings concentrating at a few popular sites.  Therefore, to be proactive, Competent Authorities may want to consider the potential impact that increased landings may have on already heavily visited sites.  This may include the increased potential for violating a site’s maximum visitation limit established by the site guidelines or the potential for impacts to the environment and wildlife (i.e. additional risk from invasive species, increase disturbance to wildlife during times of breeding) and site-specific cumulative impacts.

Conclusion
There is a need to consider the environmental and safety issues that may be associated with an increase in non-governmental and tourism expeditions involving combined air/cruise tourism.  Therefore, the United States believes that Parties may benefit from a proactive and focused discussion at ATCM XXXIX on the trends and potential unique issues associated with an increase in non-governmental and tourism expeditions involving combined air and cruise tourism.

