





Benefits of Communication Among Competent Authorities for Tourism and Non-governmental Activities









Benefits of Communication Among Competent Authorities for Tourism and Non-governmental Activities

Introduction
The United States has encountered non-governmental and tourism activities which have involved multiple Competent Authorities. When multiple Competent Authorities are involved, effective communication and coordination among the relevant Parties is needed to ensure the activities are subject to an appropriate Environmental Impact Assessment and to each Party’s national authorization process. In addition, early coordination can reduce duplication [of effort?]. The United States provides examples that may be used to inform the development of common approaches for communication and coordination among competent authorities when these circumstances arise.

Background
Relevant Treaty Work on Coordination and Communication
Over the years, Parties have engaged in many discussions regarding situations where tourism and non-governmental activities may involve multiple Parties. These discussions have resulted in actions designed to increase effective coordination and communication among Competent Authorities in such situations. Examples include: 
    • Resolution 3, Tourism and Non-governmental Activities: Enhanced Co-operation Amongst Parties (2004) recommended Parties nominate a contact for information regarding tourism and non-governmental activities and exchange information on activities where there are potential implications for other Parties.  
    • Special Working Group on Competent Authorities Issues (2015) relating to tourism and non-governmental activities held at ATCM XXXVIII determined that there was a need to develop principles for communication between Competent Authorities.

Examples of Expeditions Involving the United States and other Competent Authorities
A range of tourism and non-governmental activities may involve multiple Parties. This can arise, for example, where tour ships are used for transportation of scientific non-governmental organizations or in the case of smaller expedition groups requiring a Party’s authorisation or comparable regulatory process different from that of their tour ship operator. Specific examples involving the United States include: 1) Oceanities (U.S. operator) which utilized Canadian permitted tour ships for transportation to conduct non-governmental scientific activities and 2) a small expedition led by Ralph Fedor (U.S. operator) which utilized a tour ship authorized by New Zealand for transportation to conduct an amateur radio expedition. In both examples, the United States initiated early and direct communication with the Competent Authority involved in the authorisation or comparable regulatory processes of the non-U.S. authorized non-governmental activity. 

In addition, the United States has been involved in which various segments or components of a single expedition involved different Parties’ authorisation or comparable regulatory processes. Specific U.S. examples include: 1) a Canadian citizen engaged in a solo kite-skiing expedition which utilized both Antarctic Logistics & Expeditions (U.S. operator) and The Antarctic Company (TAC) (South African company) for shared search and rescue support and 2) a U.S. citizen (U.S. operator) participated in skiing and mountaineering which utilized the South African company TAC for transportation to the continent and for search and rescue support. In these examples, the implicated Parties engaged in enhanced coordination to ensure that a full description of the activity and its impacts, including appropriate search and rescue responsibilities, was included to reduce the potential effects of an incident on the Parties’ National Programs. 

The U. S. experience with multiple Parties discussed above suggests an effective approach to enhancing communication and coordination with other Parties and can inform the development of common principles among Competent Authorities when similar situations arise.

Benefits of Communication and Coordination Among Competent Authorities
The United States has identified a number of benefits of effective communication and coordination among Parties for tourism or non-governmental activities involving multiple Parties’ authorization or comparable regulatory processes. Early communication with relevant Parties results in a complete understanding of the impacts of the entire activity, rather than a fragmented understanding of the individual pieces in which  each Party is separately involved. This early communication  ensures that impacts to the environment or potential safety issues are fully understood and minimized. In addition, early communication among Parties to understand each relevant Party’s authorization or comparable regulatory processes may allow for opportunities to reduce duplication of processes through enhanced coordination.

Conclusion
When multiple Competent Authorities are involved in authorising or regulating a tourism or non-governmental activity, effective communication and coordination among the relevant Parties provides many benefits. .  We believe that the Parties should express their support for communication among Competent Authorities when tourism and non-governmental activities involve multiple Antarctic Treaty Parties. This commitment can be discussed at the ATCM and possibly reflected in report language.


