





Inspection undertaken by the People’s Republic of China in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article XIV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection









Inspection undertaken by the People’s Republic of China in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article XIV of the Protocol on Environmental Protection

Submitted by the People’s Republic of China

1. Overview 
(1) Background
According to provisions of Article VII the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environment Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (hereinafter “Environmental Protocol”), the Government of the People’s Republic of China has designated 7 observers to undertake inspections, as of 25-28 December 2015, to the stations of Russia, Republic of Korea, Uruguay and Chile on the King George Island. This was the second time for China to undertake Antarctic inspections, following the first inspection conducted 25 years ago in 1990.
(2) Overview
(i) Observers of  Inspections
    • Mr. KONG Xuanyou (Assistant Minister of Foreign Affairs)
    • Mrs. ZHANG Haiwen (Director General, Department of International Cooperation, State Oceanic Administration)
    • Mr. XU Hong (Director General,Department of Treaty and Law, Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
    • Mr. DENG Zhonghua (Director General, Central Foreign Affairs Office)
    • Mr. WU Jun (Deputy Director General,Arctic and Antarctic Administration, State Oceanic Administration )
    • Mr. YANG Huigen (Director General,Polar Research Institute of China)
    • Mr. LIU Yang (Director, Department of Treaty and Law, Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
In accompany with the Observers on inspections were some experts and interpreters.
(ii) Stations Inspected
The inspections covered six stations, sequentially, Bellingshausen Station(Russia), King Sejong Station (Republic of Korea), Artigas Station (Uruguay), Presidente Eduardo Frei Station (Chile), Fildes Chilean Maritime Station (Chile), and Professor Julio Escudero Base (Chile).   
The six stations visited are as follows.
    • 25th December	Bellingshausen Station
    • 26th December	King Sejong Station
    • 27th December	Artigas Station
    • 28th December	Presidente Eduardo Frei Station
                                       Fildes Chilean Maritime Station
                                       Professor Julio Escudero Base
(iii) Acknowledgement
The Chinese inspection team received warm hospitality from the stations and enjoyed strong support and positive collaboration throughout the inspections. Observers greatly benefitted from friendly and in-depth exchange with station leaders and personnel. China’s Great Wall Station also provided strong logistic support to the inspection team. Assistance has also been  received from the stations during the drafting of the  inspection report. The Chinese inspection team takes this opportunity to extend its sincere gratitude to all of them.
(iiii) Inspection Report
The full text of the inspection report will be submitted as a separate Information Paper to this meeting (ATCM XXXIX).
2. Summary of Inspection Report
(1) Overview
The inspections were run on the basis of the Checklist recommended by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, focusing on station construction, scientific research activities, international cooperation, emergency procedures, etc. and embraced heated topics such as Antarctic tourism and Antarctic protected areas.  
In general, activities of inspected stations were in compliance with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. Stations attached great importance to the matters provided in the Checklist and executed them pursuant to relevant provisions in strict manner. The Chinese inspection team was impressed by the positive atmosphere of active exchange and collaboration amongst inspected stations.
(2) Personnel and training
Personnel allocation in the stations was appropriate. Systematic training courses were provided to personnel prior to their deployment in the stations in accordance with provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and the Environmental Protocol. Relevant trainings and exercises were undertaken by most stations subsequent to arrival of personnel, while training to temporary personnel could be more systematic and comprehensive.
(3) Scientific research
The relatively concentrated stations and complete facilities of scientific research in the inspected region (hereinafter “the region”) give rise to the ability and activities of scientific research, focusing on oceanic and ecological programs. However, the inspection team has learnt that the number of scientific personnel remained at a relatively low level and that continuously long-term observation of glacier, ocean and atmosphere remained inadequate. 
(4) Logistics and infrastructure
The region had an established history of station construction and scientific investigations, with relatively concentrated stations and sophisticated logistics facilities, thereby represented one of the preferred regions for Antarctic research and international cooperation. The inspection team noticed that there were old buildings and associated facilities needed to be removed. 
(5) Transport and communication
The inspection team acknowledged that the route network has been developed in shape, which is frequently used during summers and provides strong support to scientific research, logistics operations and tourism. The stations have established all-round communication system with complete equipment, including telephone, fax, radio and internet.
(6) Safety, training and emergency procedures
The stations have developed strong safety awareness with emphasis on training to new arrivals. Corresponding emergency procedures have also been designed for station operation and various assignments.
(7) Environment management
All the stations are in compliance with provisions of the Environmental Protocol, highlighting environment management and providing trainings to arrivals on environment protection. Wastes are sorted and collected with obvious labeling in accordance with relevant provisions while being treated with appropriate disposal methodology.
The stations are either making efforts to reduce the frequency and amount of waste incineration, or actively improving the techniques of incineration and flue gas treatment, which has brought massive production of Dioxin under effective control. However,none of the incinerators has been equipped with online monitoring devices.
The stations attach great importance to the collection and treatment of domestic sewage. Treatment methodologies include IC/SBR+ reverse osmosis treatment and earthworm biofilter treatment. The inspection team has learnt that some stations are yet to formulate long-term plan of environmental monitoring. The inspection team did not see, in any of the stations, separated sludge disposal facility which is supposed to be installed in support of biological sewage treatment.
(8) Medical Treatment
All the stations are equipped with medical facilities and personnel, some of them with specialist physicians and surgery operation facilities. The stations have conducted active cooperation in medical assistance.
(9) Tourism and NGO activities
Currently, the impressive number of tourist arrivals in summer and various tourist activities have not yet impacted on station operation or ambient environment, yet consideration should be given to further improve corresponding management and facilities. The stations generally ensure scientific research as the first priority while holding a prudent approach towards tourism reception.
No NGO activity was recorded in any of the stations during the inspection.
3. General Recommendations
(1) Relevant trainings, particularly on safety and environmental protection, are likewise provided to personnel of a short stay at the station. Parties concerned, at the meantime, may enhance exchange and cooperation in this regard. 
(2) The stations are recommended to undertake further coordination and enhance international cooperation by elevating the proportion of scientific research personnel and establishing network of long-term research and observation of key elements of regional climate change.
(3) The buildings and associated facilities out of use in the stations may be cleared up in a planned manner by reference to Clean-up Manual complied by CEP. The ability of spillage risk prevention needs to be improved.
(4) Given busy transportation in the region, efforts should be intensified to improve route safety and vehicle management, while attention should be paid to environmental impact.
(5) Consideration should be given to enhancing environmental monitoring associated with sewage and flue gas, and discussion on the necessity to install sludge treatment devices would be encouraged.
(6) Efforts should be made to fortify regulations over tourism operators, to provide tourist arrivals with environment education and safety management, and to promote upfront communication between Antarctic tourism administrative bodies of countries concerned with stations on the tourist routes.


