





Antarctic Treaty Party nationals engaging with unauthorised non-Governmental expeditions to Antarctica
























	

Antarctic Treaty Party nationals engaging with unauthorised non-Governmental expeditions to Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom


Background

    1. During the Special Working Group on Competent Authorities, held during ATCM XXXVIII (2015), it was suggested that further consideration should be given to the issue of Antarctic Treaty Party nationals who participate in unauthorised activities in Antarctica (ATCM XXXVIII Final Report, paragraph 287). 

    2. The United Kingdom’s domestic legislation which implements the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, the Antarctic Acts of 1994 and 2013, provides for civil and criminal penalties against those who conduct unauthorised activities in Antarctica which were organised in the UK or an Overseas Territory (UKOT), or for which the final place of departure was the UK or an UKOT.  The British legislation does provide for a broad range of offences by individual nationals who may cause environmental damage in Antarctica, but it does not easily provide for the UK to take action against British nationals who simply participate in unauthorised Antarctic expeditions, where such activities were a) planned in another country; and b) conducted from vessels or aircraft not registered to the UK or a UKOT.  

    3. As a practical example of this, New Zealand had reported in ATCM XXXVII/IP48 (Final Report, paragraph 276) that two British nationals were listed among the crew of the unauthorised SV Infinity yacht and the UK undertook to consider its options for taking action against the national involved (paragraph 73).  Whilst the UK was successful in identifying both nationals, and wrote to both to seek further information about the activities of this yacht, and to ask whether they were aware that the yacht was unauthorised, there was not a sufficient legal basis to pursue the matter further when neither responded.  This case was referenced during the Special Working Group on Competent Authorities at the last ATCM.  The UK is also unaware of any other Party taking legal action against a national who was engaged on an unauthorised expedition, which they did not organise, plan or lead – either in this case, or from other previous similar examples.


Proposal

    4. Whilst noting that some Consultative Parties already have domestic legislation to require all of their nationals to individually have authorisation to visit Antarctica, irrespective of how they travel to the continent, the United Kingdom proposes that the ATCM consider whether it may be useful to develop a clearer and more consistent position on this issue.  

    5. For example, there might be some lessons to be learnt from the action taken by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources in 2009, when it adopted Conservation Measure 10-08 Scheme to promote compliance by Contracting Party nationals within CCAMLR conservation measures.  This conservation measure recognises that nationals from CCAMLR Contracting Parties may support or engage in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing activities, using vessels flagged to states which are not licensed to fish under CCAMLR.  The ATCM might consider, for example, whether and how it might be possible to encourage Consultative Parties to undertake actions to verify if their nationals are engaged in unauthorised activities or expeditions in Antarctica; and, if appropriate, to provide for appropriate measures to be taken against such individuals.

    6. The United Kingdom proposes that the ATCM discuss this matter at the forthcoming meeting.

