





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land.
The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011) and circulated for comment to scientists and environmental managers with both the United States Antarctic Programme (USAP) and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme, who conduct research in the Area and have visited the site.
All revisions are minor and outlined in the table below.

Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land.

ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 3 (1997)
Measure 1 (2006) 
Measure 6 (2011)
Current management plan: 
Measure 6 (2011)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 131: Canada Glacier, Lake Fryxell, Taylor Valley, Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
No
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Both Map A and B were revised to correct minor errors in the captions and graphics.  
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
Section 1: Updated the history of the management plan reviews.
Section 3: Identified rock cairns for use as boundary markers.
Section 5: Revised maps attached and map information updated with new map specifications.
Section 6(i): Minor updates to the areas description.
Section 6(iv): Note ASPA 172 as a nearby ASPA
Section 7(i): Provide clarification on access requirements for helicopters.
Section 7(ii): Provide provisions for the consideration of minimal sample sizes to maximise vegetation recovery.
Section 7(vi): Provide provisions for the consideration of minimal sample sizes to maximise vegetation recovery.
Section 7(vii): Provide a provision that appropriate authorities should be notified prior to removing items of human origin to protect features used to relocate past study sites.
Section 8: Updated the bibliography.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is to protect a ‘representative example of major terrestrial, include glacial and aquatic, ecosystems and marine ecosystems’. 
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
EDA: Environment S – McMurdo - South Victoria Land geologic
ACBR: Region 9 – South Victoria Land 


