





Assessment of moss communities nearby the tracks of Aitcho Island. Monitoring report





Assessment of moss communities nearby the tracks of Aitcho Island. Monitoring report
Working Paper submitted by Ecuador and Spain

Summary

At ATCM XXXV, Ecuador and Spain presented the working paper WP 059 Revised Visited Site Guidelines: Aitcho Islands. The document presented a synthesis of the main findings from the tracking of visitors in the island during the austral summer 2012. This document also included evidence on the impact of visitor trampling on moss communities, as well as new information related to the behaviour of visitor groups. 

This WP resulted in Resolution 5 (2012), which recommends restriction of access to the main area of Aitcho Island and urges cooperation between the Parties with activities in the area, as well as in the development and implementation of studies, research and adequate surveillance plans.

During austral summer 2013, a visitor tracking and assessment of the ecological condition of the vegetation layer on the tracks of Aitcho Island was conducted. The findings were presented at ATCM XXXVI WP 055 Recovery of moss communities on the tracks of Barrientos island and tourism management proposal; scientific publication of this WP is in now progress (Tejedo et al., 2016).1. 

Since 2013, the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) included in its five-year work plan a track surveillance program at Aitcho Island to assess their recovery and later report on the findings at the subsequent meetings of the Committee.

In order to continue tracking the condition and progress of Aitcho Island foothpaths, researchers from Ecuador and Spain visited the island again in 2016. This document presents the findings of the assessment of community recovery at Aitcho Island four year after closing the tracks to avoid visitor circulation. 

Status of moss recovery on the island tracks

Upper track

The upper track is usually partial o even totally covered by snow, which could protect the moss from damage by trampling along the main section of the track. While there are no complete data on its recovery due to the fact that since 2012, this track has not been completely free of snow during the research campaigns, visible areas do not show significant changes and the footprint left by visitors throughout the years remains, even though this track has not been used during the last four years (Figure 1). Better drainage on this track makes the moss layer significantly less thick and resistant to trampling. 

Lower track

Generally, improvement is seen in the soil surface, in the secondary and main tracks, showing a flatter surface and a progressive erasing of the footprints since access to tracks was blocked to visitors. Circulation footprint along the main and secondary tracks is still visible, although with less intensity than in 2012 (Figure 2).

The absence of trampling from visitors has prevented the formation of new areas of mire and loss of vegetation cover. Remarkably, the firmness of the substrate varies in different parts of the track, depending on the slope level, the direction of the track with respect to the slope and the volume of meltwater flow. Thus, the steeper sections of the track present more waterlogging in small flat areas and are more vulnerable to new trampling events compared to less steep areas. In these flat areas, the surrounding bryophytes layer -the thickest in the island- retains much of the water that fails to flow abundantly on the roads, which has allowed further stabilization of the substrate. 

Regarding the recovery of the moss cover, a general improvement is seen, particularly in the secondary tracks created by visitor trampling (Figures 3-5). This was the result of a lower slope, which reduces water erosion, and of the lower flow of water. Vegetation growth is most evident from the edges of the tread inward, although colonization is also seen in eroded and denuded areas. The layout of the main track remains visible, and although no major change is shown in terms of bryophytes recolonization, some degree of improvement is seen in the strength of the substrate. 

Moreover, the widening of the original track due to visitors attempts to dodge the most muddy sections (Figures 6-8), along with the formation of alternative tracks seems to have changed the drain lines at some points, now channelling water through these new canals. In areas where water flows abundantly, soil washing hinders the settlement of moss, so the morphology of the moss carpet has suffered specific changes that will remain until it reaches a naturally stable status. Over time, the natural appearance of this area might recover, but the change has been evident and under no circumstances should the aggression be repeated on the lower track of the island.

The confluence of the upper and lower tracks occurs at one of the highest points above sea level of the island, which is also a run off head. In this area, which is naturally unstable, tourist activities were dispersed and the extent of impact on vegetation is very substantial and evident (Figures 9-11).
Conclusions and recommendations
Recolonization of the lower track seems to be progressing well, although it is still early to analyse the flora resulting from this process. For the time being, it is impossible to predict the final vegetation community or whether there will be any major changes or species impoverishment in the recovering areas.
Given this uncertainty, it is advisable to continue monitoring the recolonization process in the long term to detect potential changes in morphology and flora due to the trampling impact.
Based on these observations, Ecuador and Spain propose the following for consideration by the CEP:
    • Do not open the lower track, since it is still vulnerable to erosion and would be greatly affected by heavy circulation of visitors and continue monitoring track recovery to support CEP’s future decisions.
    • Open the upper track to visitors, since it appears to have greater stability and resistance. Guidelines for the visited site in Aitcho Island must be considered and updated according to the new situation when opening the track. 
Recommendations for revision of guidelines for the visited site in Aitcho Island:
    • The track should be crossed by groups of 20 visitors maximum, accompanied by a guide. 
    • Meeting of different groups should be avoided to minimized potential creation of secondary tracks and crowding at specific sections. For this purpose, the guides should take the necessary steps to coordinate the visits of the different groups. 
    • Visitors should not disperse before descending to the West end but they should remain walking in line, in groups of 20 visitors maximum. 

