





ATCM Rules of Procedure relating to Intersessional Consultations









ATCM Rules of Procedure relating to Intersessional Consultations

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and the United States


Background

    1. Rules 46 and 47 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure set out the process by which the Executive Secretary may conduct intersessional consultations with Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties.  These Rules state that the Executive Secretary shall communicate to Consultative Parties through “contact persons designated by them”.  To date, however, it appears that there has not been clear guidance to the Executive Secretary about which contact persons each Consultative Party might consider it appropriate to be contacted during a formal intersessional consultation.  For example, during the 2015/16 intersessional period (on a matter relating to the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, SCAR), the Executive Secretary contacted all individuals listed on the ATS website as ATCM and scientific contact points pursuant to Recommendation XIII-1.  

    2. Recommendation XIII-1 (1985), predates the Rules of Procedure pertaining to Intersessional Consultations.  It recommends that each Consultative Party nominate contact points relating to a) the dissemination of information about the ATCM; and b) to maintain information relating to the nature and location of national collections about scientific research in Antarctica.   (At the time of drafting this paper, the number of contact points nominated by each Consultative Party in these categories varied from one to eight.)  In the view of the United Kingdom and the United States, this Recommendation does not clearly address the question as to who has decision-making powers within each Consultative Party.  During an ATCM, for example, this power is fully vested with the named Representative (i.e. the Head of Delegation, or persons acting under their delegation).  

Proposal

    3. The United Kingdom and the United States propose that the ATCM consider whether:
        a. it is appropriate for the Executive Secretary to deem contact persons nominated under Recommendation XIII-1 as those designated by the Consultative Party pursuant to Rules 46 and 47 of the ATCM Rules of Procedure (and if so, to suggest that Consultative Parties will wish to bear this in mind when nominating points of contact to be held on the ATS website); or
        b. to advise the Executive Secretary that for the purposes of Rules 46 and 47 of the Rules of Procedure, it is the Representative (i.e. Head of Delegation) and their Alternate (updated by the Consultative Party as appropriate if there are changes between ATCMs) who should be deemed the designated contact persons (and whether this should be made clear in a revision to the drafting of the Rules); or
        c. to advise the Executive Secretary to request specific advice from each Consultative Party to maintain a bespoke list of contact persons pursuant to Rules 46 and 47.

