





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 167 Hawker Island, Princess Elizabeth Land








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 167 Hawker Island, Princess Elizabeth Land
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Australia has undertaken a five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) 167 Hawker Island. The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (the Guide) appended to Resolution 2 (2011). The following sections briefly describe the Area, and describe the proposed minor amendments to the management plan. Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan.
Background
Hawker Island (68°38’S, 77°51’E) is located 7 km south-west from Davis station off the Vestfold Hills on the Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land, East Antarctica.  The island was designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 167 under Measure 1 (2006), following a proposal by Australia, primarily to protect the southernmost breeding colony of southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus).  A revised management plan for the Area was adopted under Measure 9 (2011).  The Area is one of only four known breeding locations for southern giant petrels on the coast of East Antarctica, all of which have been designated as ASPAs: ASPA 102, Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac. Robertson Land (67º36’S, 62º53’E) – near Mawson Station; ASPA 160, Frazier Islands, Wilkes Land (66°13’S, 110°11’E) – near Casey station; and ASPA 120, Pointe Géologie, Terre Adélie (66º40’S, 140º01’E) – near Dumont d’Urville.  Hawker Island also supports breeding colonies of Adélie penguins (Pygocelis adeliae), south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki), Cape petrels (Daption capense) and occasionally southern elephant seals (Mirounga leonina) haul out here.

Review of management plan
In addition to a thorough literature review, the review of the management plan involved consultation with ornithologists who are familiar with the Area, and those who have participated in associated programs to conserve and document the values of the Area.  Consistent with the primary reason for designation, the revisions to the management plan seek to afford enhanced protection to the southern giant petrel colony.  
Difficulties in the estimation of breeding populations have been noted in the revised management plan.  For example, southern giant petrels may occupy a nest site when a count is undertaken, but not breed that season. Census data from several locations is now too old for the status and trend of the global population to be accurately estimated.  Amendments to the management plan are intended to facilitate the gathering of up to date population data, through use of non-invasive methods which minimise disturbance.
Due to the increased utilisation of aircraft within Antarctica, including unmanned aerial vehicles, the management plan has been revised to ensure the appropriate management of aircraft in and near the Area.  
Guidance is provided on identifying suitable areas for small boat access to minimise disturbance to southern giant petrels when accessing the Area.  Additional conditions have been applied to restrict access to minimise disturbance the colony during the breeding period.
Summary of amendments to the management plan for ASPA 101
    • There are no changes to the Area boundary. 
    • There are no major changes to the description of the Area.     
    • Sections 1 and 6(i) have been modified to include updated population estimates for the southern giant petrel colony. Additional information has been added to include updated breeding population information and note the difficulties in estimation of same, and to provide the amended International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classification for southern giant petrels.
    • Section 2 has been modified to include additional management aims for the ASPA, in order to minimise disturbance to the Area, and allow scientific research in the Area that cannot be conducted elsewhere.  
    • Section 3 has been modified to include visits to the Area for the purpose of management and assessment to be undertaken as necessary (preferably not less than once every five years) as a management activity.  
    • Section 6(i) has been modified to identify the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region in which the Area is located, and to provide updated Adélie penguin population counts within the Area, together with updated details for southern giant petrel populations (see above).
    • Section 6(ii) has been modified to include guidance on identifying suitable areas for small boat access to the Area.  
    • Section 7(ii) has been modified to provide clarification that overflight by aircraft, including unmanned aerial vehicles, in the Area is prohibited (unless approved by a Permit).  This section has also been modified to require clothing, footwear and field equipment to be thoroughly cleaned prior to entry, and to update wildlife separation distances for consistency with national Antarctic program guidelines applies elsewhere in the surrounding region.  A requirement that persons remain at least 20m from nesting southern giant petrels under all circumstances has also been included.  
    • Section 7(iii) has been modified to provide enhanced protection for the southern giant petrel colony during the breeding period.
    • Section 7(vi) has been modified to require enhanced biosecurity measures.
    • Section 7(vii) has been modified to ensure additional protection for the southern giant petrel colony from disturbance.  
    • Section 7(x) has been modified to include additional measures intended to minimise disturbance to the southern giant petrel colony, and to provide that, where practical, a census of the colony will be undertaken at least every five years.  
    • Section 7(xii) on emergency provisions has been removed.  
    • The list of Supporting Documentation in Section 8 has been updated with several relevant, recent publications.  
    • Improved and updated maps have been incorporated. 
    • Editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide. 
Recommendation 
Australia recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised management plan for ASPA 167 Hawker Island, Princess Elizabeth Land. 

ASPA No. 167, Hawker Island, Princess Elizabeth Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 1 (2006)
First adoption of management plan:
Measure 1 (2006)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 9 (2011)
Current management plan:
Measure 9 (2011)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
N/A
Other relevant measures:
N/A
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. (Minor changes to graphics).
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.  
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
Section 1 and 6(i) – modified to include updated southern giant petrel population data, description of difficulties in population estimation and provision IUCN classification details.  
Section 2 – modified to include additional management aims to minimise disturbance to the Area.  
Section 3 - modified to include visits for the purpose of management and assessment as a management activity.  
Section 6(i) - modified to identify the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Region in which the Area is located, and to provide updated Adélie penguin population counts and details for southern giant petrel populations.
Section 6(ii) - modified to provide guidance on identifying suitable areas for small boat access to the Area.
Section 7(ii) - modified to provide clarification that overflight by aircraft, including unmanned aerial vehicles, is prohibited (unless approved by a Permit), clarification of biosecurity requirements and updated wildlife separation distances.  A requirement that persons remain at least 20m from nesting southern giant petrels under all circumstances has also been included.  
Section 7(iii) - modified to require enhanced protection for the southern giant petrel colony during the breeding period.
Section 7(vi) - modified to require enhanced biosecurity measures.
Section 7(vii) - modified to ensure additional protection for the southern giant petrel colony from disturbance.
Section 7(x) - modified to minimise disturbance to the southern giant petrel colony, and requiring census work to be undertaken in relation to the colony.  
Section 7(xii) – Emergency provisions - removed.
Section 8 - updated with several relevant, recent publications
Editorial amendments have been made throughout, including for consistency with the Guide.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)? 
Article 3.2(c) – to protect the southernmost breeding colony of southern giant petrels.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes.




