





Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica








Report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica
Working Paper submitted by Australia and the United Kingdom
Summary
The 18th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) agreed that the open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) on the review of the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (EIA Guidelines) should continue its work during the 2015/16 intersessional period. This paper presents the final report from the ICG, summarising the outcomes of discussions held during the 2014/15 and 2015/16 intersessional periods. The ICG reached general agreement on a suggested revision of the EIA Guidelines, which is presented at Attachment A, although there was insufficient time to address late comments provided by one participant. The ICG also identified broader policy or other EIA issues that arose during discussions, and that may warrant further discussion by the CEP (Attachment C). It is recommended that the Committee: considers the revised EIA Guidelines and, if agreement can be reached on a final version during CEP XIX, conveys the revised guidelines to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution (draft at Attachment D); and discusses the broader policy or other issues for the development and handling of EIAs identified by the ICG (Attachment C) with a view to identifying how best to address these issues.
Background
At the 18th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP XVIII) in 2015, Australia and the United Kingdom presented ATCM XXXVIII/WP13, which contained the initial report of the open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) established at CEP XVII (2014) to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (EIA Guidelines). The report noted that the ICG had made good progress against its terms of reference, and had:
    • reached general agreement on a number of issues that it considered should be addressed in a revision of the EIA Guidelines, and had commenced work on specific suggested modifications; and
    • also recorded broader policy or other issues that had arisen during discussion, and that may warrant further discussion by the CEP.
The Committee welcomed the report and endorsed the continuation of the ICG for a second intersessional period1, again to be jointly convened by Australia and the United Kingdom.
Terms of reference
CEP XVIII agreed the ICG would operate during the 2015/16 intersessional period in accordance with the following terms of reference (ToR):
    1) Continue revising the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica appended to Resolution 1 (2005) to address issues including those identified in ATCM XXXVII/WP29 and, as appropriate, suggest modifications to the Guidelines.
    2) Record issues raised during discussions under ToR 1, which relate to broader policy or other issues for the development and handling of EIAs, and which may warrant further discussion by the CEP with a view to strengthening the implementation of Annex I to the Protocol.
    3) Provide a final report to CEP XVIII.
Method of operation
Discussions during the 2015/16 intersessional period commenced on 14 September 2015 when the co-conveners circulated an opening announcement to all CEP contact points, proposing that the ICG undertake four rounds of discussion:
    • Round one: Agree on the ICG work plan and schedule for 2015/16.
    • Round two and round three: Continue to discuss and agree suggested modifications to the text of the EIA Guidelines, and identify broader policy or other issues that may warrant further discussion by the CEP.
    • Round four: Discuss and agree on a report to the CEP.
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum, under the topic ‘ICG on Review of the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica’. To assist the ICG’s work, the following documents were posted to the Discussion Forum together with the opening announcement:
    • ATCM XXXVIII/WP13 Initial report of the intersessional contact group established to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Australia, United Kingdom)
    • Annotated version of EIA Guidelines – Version 2
    • Examples of broader policy or other issues which may contribute to or go beyond an initial revision of the EIA Guidelines – Version 2
    • Current version of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, as appended to Resolution 4 (2005)
    • ATCM XXXVII/WP29 Review of the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (Australia)
    • ATCM XXXVII/WP24 Improvements to the Antarctic Environmental Impact Assessment process (United Kingdom)
Summary of discussions
During the 2015/16 intersessional period, comments were submitted to the ICG by 8 CEP Members (Argentina, Australia, France, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, United Kingdom and United States) and 1 Observer (ASOC). These were additional to the comments submitted during the 2014/15 intersessional period by 10 CEP Members (Argentina, Australia, France, Germany, Korea (RoK), New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States) and two Observers (ASOC and IAATO).
ToR#1: Continue revising the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica appended to Resolution 1 (2005) to address issues including those identified in ATCM XXXVII/WP29 and, as appropriate, suggest modifications to the Guidelines.
At the end of the 2014/15 intersessional period, the ICG had reached general agreement on several suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines, and had prepared well-developed text for some items. Other ideas had been raised but required further consideration within the ICG. The status of the ICG’s discussions on these matters at the end of the 2014/15 intersessional period was reflected in a working document prepared by the co-conveners, comprising an annotated version of the 2005 EIA Guidelines with consolidated participants’ comments, possible text changes, and a record of issues requiring further consideration.
During 2015/16 intersessional period the ICG continued its work to discuss and agree suggested modifications to the text of the EIA Guidelines. To recommence this work, the co-conveners circulated an updated version of the abovementioned working document, containing further conveners’ comments and suggestions on how to move forward. The working document was used as the basis for two further rounds of discussion and input from ICG participants.
By the end of the 2015/16 intersessional period, ICG participants had reached general agreement on a range of suggested modifications, which are reflected in the proposed revision to the EIA Guidelines at Attachment A. 
As the ICG conducted a comprehensive review, it is not practical to outline in detail all the suggested changes. However, a version of this document, highlighting the proposed changes to the 2005 EIA Guidelines, is available from the CEP Discussion Forum. Additionally, a summary of the main suggested changes is presented in Attachment B.
There was insufficient time for the ICG to address late comments provided by one ICG participant. The related components of the revised guidelines and summary of suggested changes are shown in square brackets in Attachment A and Attachment B, respectively.
ToR#2: Record issues raised during discussions under ToR 1, which relate to broader policy or other issues for the development and handling of EIAs, and which may warrant further discussion by the CEP with a view to strengthening the implementation of Annex I to the Protocol.
At the end of the 2014/15 intersessional period, the ICG had recorded several broader or policy issues for the development and handling of EIAs that participants considered may warrant further discussion by the CEP. The status of the ICG’s discussion on these matters at the end of the 2014/15 intersessional period was reflected in a working document prepared by the co-conveners.
During 2015/16 intersessional period the ICG continued to discuss and identify broader policy and other issues. To recommence this work, the co-conveners circulated an updated version of the abovementioned working document, containing further conveners’ comments and suggestions on how to move forward. This working document was used as the basis for two further rounds of discussion and input from ICG participants.
By the end of the 2015/16 intersessional period, ICG participants had reached general agreement on a list of issues for which further consideration by the CEP is recommended – see Attachment C. It was generally agreed that other issues raised in discussions were not a priority for further CEP consideration at this time. 
ToR#3: Provide a final report to CEP XIX.
This Working Paper represents the ICG’s final report to CEP XIX. In the view of the co-conveners, the ICG has thoroughly addressed the terms of reference agreed by the Committee at CEP XVII and CEP XVIII. This report identifies a number of matters outstanding with respect to the ICG’s work to revise the EIA Guidelines (shown in square brackets in Attachments A and B). The co-conveners hope it may be possible to address these matters during the course of CEP XIX. There are no matters outstanding with respect to the ICG’s work to identify other issues for the development and handling of EIAs. Accordingly, it remains for the CEP to consider and act as appropriate on the ICG’s report. The co-conveners extend sincere thanks to all participants for their considered contributions during the 2014/15 and 2015/16 intersessional periods.
Recommendations
It is recommended that the CEP:
    1) considers the revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica presented at Attachment A to this Working Paper and, if agreement can be reached on a final version during CEP XIX, conveys the revised Guidelines to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution. A draft Resolution on ‘Revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica is presented at Attachment D; and
    2) discusses the broader policy or other issues for the development and handling of EIAs identified by the ICG (Attachment C) with a view to identifying how best to address these issues.
Attachment B. Summary of main suggested changes to the 2005 Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica

Suggested change
Section(s)
Provide new or additional guidance to assist with addressing important elements of the EIA process, including:

    • taking an holistic approach to defining the scope of the proposed activity
3.1.1
    • clearly describing the purpose and rationale for the proposed activity, including anticipated outcomes/benefits
3.1.1, 4
    • considering a range of alternatives to the proposed activity, and describing the factors considered when assessing alternatives
3.1.2
    • considering opportunities for international cooperation, where appropriate
3.1.2
    • considering all elements of the environment when describing the initial environmental reference state
3.2, 4, Appendix 1
    • identifying gaps in knowledge and any means of addressing such gaps
3.2
    • clearly identifying the methods and criteria used to assess the significance of predicted impacts
3.3.4
    • considering potential impacts on wilderness values and opportunities to minimise ‘footprint’
1, 3.1.1, 3.1.2, [3.2,] 3.5
    • considering the decommissioning phase of a proposed activity, where appropriate
[3.1.1,] 3.1.2, [3.2]
    • considering how climate change may affect proposed activities and their associated environmental impacts
2, 3.2, 3.3.2, 3.6, 4
    • considering matters relevant to the possible introduction / transfer of non-native species
2, [3.1.1,] 3.5, 3.6
    • considering the assessment of cumulative impacts 
2, [3.2,] 3.3.3, 3.6
    • ensuring that mitigation measures consider in detail, where appropriate:

    • arrangements for fuel storage handling and spill response
3.5
    • use of renewable energy systems
3.1.2, 3.5
    • waste management arrangements
3.1.2, 3.5
    • closely reflecting the language of Article 8 when stating conclusions
4
Update Figure 1 to reflect current procedures, and to reflect suggested changes elsewhere in the guidelines.
3
Updating and consolidating information on procedures related to comprehensive environmental evaluations (CEEs).
3
[Update the terminology and concepts used in the guidelines to reflect that used in the 2012 CEP Tourism Study (i.e. environmental aspects and possible impacts of Antarctic activities).]
[3, 3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, 3.3.1, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, 3.6, 4, 6, Appendix 2]
Revise the section on ‘Writing the EIA document’ to more closely reflect the structure and wording of Annex I.
4
[Add a section dedicated to providing guidance on EIA feedback processes (i.e. monitoring, changes to the activity, review)]
[5, Figure 1]
General edits / updates as appropriate (e.g. adding a Table of Contents, updating the lists of references and acronyms).
Table of Contents, 7, 8 and throughout
Add or update references to new and revised CEP procedures and resources for EIA (e.g. Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, EIA Database etc.).
9 and throughout


Attachment C. Broader policy or other issues for the development and handling of EIAs, and which may warrant further discussion by the CEP with a view to strengthening the implementation of Annex I to the Protocol
Participants generally agreed that the following issues, raised in the ICG established to review the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica, may warrant further discussion by the CEP with a view to strengthening the implementation of Annex I to the Protocol:
    1) Establishing a central repository for practical EIA guidance and resources, additional to the EIA Guidelines. Options might include: developing an EIA Manual, possibly with the EIA Guidelines as a core component; or an annex to the EIA Guidelines that could be updated separately.
    2) Providing enhanced guidance on identifying and assessing cumulative impacts (beyond the suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines), including: consultation and collaboration between operators conducting activities in the same area, possibly including sharing of EIAs or conducting joint EIAs; availability of consolidated information / spatial data about past activities (noting that other bodies, such as COMNAP and IAATO, might have an important role to play); and developing criteria for assessing cumulative impacts. It was noted that an earlier ICG had considered the issue of cumulative impacts.
    3) Providing enhanced guidance on the circumstances under which a new or revised EIA may be required (beyond the suggested modifications to the EIA Guidelines). 
    4) Incorporating a description of mitigation measures in all scopes of EIA.
    5) Updating the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to include a standard term of reference on the appropriateness / adequacy of proposed mitigation measures.
    6) Encouraging greater transparency on conditions applied to proposed activities through national authorisation processes.
    7) Creating an appropriate and effective method within the Antarctic Treaty system of preventing an environmentally-damaging project proceeding. It was noted that this could require a request to the ATCM for advice.
    8) Sharing ‘lessons learned’ regarding application of the various levels of EIA for Antarctic activities.
    9) Developing guidance regarding standard approaches to environmental baseline mapping for EIAs, possibly including a request for advice from SCAR.
    10) Potential application for Antarctica of ‘screening and scoping’ processes commonly applied as part of the EIA process for large projects in other parts of the world.
    11) Processes for regular independent review of CEE-level activities.
    12) Enhancing the EIA database and its use by Parties, possibly including through a strengthening of Resolution 1 (2005).
    13) 
Attachment D.
Draft Resolution XX

Revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica

The Representatives,

Recalling the requirements under Article 8 and Annex I to the Environmental Protocol to prepare environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for proposed activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;
Noting that under Resolution 1 (1999) the ATCM adopted Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica;
Noting also that under Resolution 4 (2005) the ATCM adopted revised Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica;
Considering the revision of the Guidelines by the Committee for Environmental Protection;
Desiring to update the Guidelines to reflect current best practice in the environmental impact assessment of proposed activities in Antarctica;
Recommend that:
    1) the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica appended to this Resolution replace the Guidelines adopted under Resolution 4 (2005); and
    2) the Secretariat post the text of Resolution 4 (2005) on its website in a way that makes clear that it is no longer current.

