





Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island








Revision of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand has conducted a review of the Management Plan for ASPA 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island.
The review was conducted with reference to Annex V and the revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (2011) and circulated for comment to scientists and environmental managers with both the United States Antarctic Programme (USAP) and the New Zealand Antarctic Programme, who conduct research in the Area and have visited the site.
All revisions are minor and outlined in the table below.

Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island.

ASPA 116: New College Valley, Cape Bird, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
ASPA
First designation:
    • Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 10, Caughley Beach by Recommendations XIII-8 (1985)
    • Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 20, New College Valley by Recommendation XIII-12 (1985)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendations XIII-8 (1985)
Recommendation XIII-12 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2000)
Measure 1 (2006) 
Measure 1 (2011)
Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2011)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 116: New College Valley, Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
No
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
Section 1: Updated the history of the management plan reviews.
Section 6(i): Added ACBR information
Section 7(i): Included helicopter landing pad GPS coordinates
Section 8: Updated the bibliography
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The primary reason for designation is to protect an ‘area with important or an unusual assemblage of species, including major colonies of breeding native birds or mammals’.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
EDA: Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land geologic
ACBR: Region 9 – South Victoria Land


