





Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group established to consider the draft CEE for the “Proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”








Report of the intersessional open-ended contact group established to consider the draft CEE for the “Proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”
Working Paper submitted by France 
Summary
An intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to consider Italian’s draft comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) for “Proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”. ICG participants commented favourably on several aspects of the proposed activity described in the draft CEE. On the basis of comments provided by participants, the ICG advises the CEP that the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured and well presented, and generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection. The draft CEE identifies and discusses the majority of the impacts likely to be associated with the activity but additional impacts and mitigations measures have been suggested by the ICG participants. The ICG further advises that the conclusion that the impacts of the proposed activity are likely to be more than minor or transitory is adequately supported by the information contained within the draft CEE. The ICG also draws the Committee’s attention to the suggestion that, if Italy decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there are number of aspects for which additional information should be provided in the required final CEE. 
    1. Background
On 23 January 2016 Italy notified the CEP Chair of the availability of the draft CEE for “Proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”. The draft CEE was prepared by the Antarctic Technical Unit of ENEA (ENEA-UTA). The full document can be downloaded from the CEP Workspace on the website of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty: www.ats.aq/e/cep_workspace/cep_draftcee.htm1.
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report) the CEP Chair issued:
    • CEP Circular 4/CEP XIX (27 January 2016), which:
    • advised contact points of the availability of the draft CEE;
    • advised of the need to establish an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to review the draft CEE;
    • proposed that I (Yves Frenot, France) convene the ICG;
    • proposed terms of reference for the ICG; and
    • invited CEP Members to comment on the proposed convener and/or terms of reference.
    • CEP Circular 5/CEP XIX (9 February 2016), informing that a proposal from the United Kingdom has been received for an additional term of reference;
    • CEP Circular 6/CEP XIX (25 February 2016), which noted that no additional comments had been received on the proposed convener or terms of reference.
Terms of reference
Following the suggestion of the United Kingdom to add to the three standard terms of reference outlined in the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs an additional item related to the outputs of the recent ICG discussions on Environmental Impact Assessments, and considering that no objection to this proposal was received by the CEP Chair in due time, the ICG addressed the following terms of reference:
    1) the extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol;
    2)  in particular, given the recent ICG discussions on Environmental Impact Assessments, whether the CEE: i) has identified all the environmental impacts of the proposed activity; and ii) suggests appropriate methods of mitigating (reducing or avoiding) those impacts; 
    3) whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document; and
    4) the clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Method of operation
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum. The English language version of the full draft CEE were posted to the Discussion Forum, together with English, French, Spanish and Russian versions of the Non-Technical Summary and the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (2005).
ICG participants were reminded by the CEP Chair and ICG convener of the CEP’s agreement that the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs do not detract from the right of any Party to the Protocol to raise an issue on a draft CEE at meetings of the CEP or at an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM).
The ICG commenced with an initial comment period from 25 February to 18 March 2016. The convener circulated a draft ICG report for comment on 28 March and prepared a final report, addressing comments received, by the 7 April 2016. 
    2. Summary of comments received from ICG participants
Comments were submitted to the ICG by nine CEP Members (Australia, China, Republic of Korea, France, Germany, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States) and one Observer (ASOC).  
The following sections, necessarily brief, describe the points that were raised by many participants. A summary of other points raised by only one or two participants is presented at Appendix A. All comments and details are available in full from the CEP Discussion Forum. 
    1. The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol
ICG participants considered that the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol 
Participants commented favourably on several aspects of the proposed activity, including the fact that the project is in line with Resolution 1 (2015) in favour of installing cooperative air-transportation networks to facilitate scientific cooperation and reduce logistic costs in the Antarctic Treaty area, despite the fact that no formal commitment between the regional partners seems to be currently in place. 
The countries potentially involved in the Terra Nova Bay Region, namely Republic of Korea,  China, Germany and New Zealand, have expressed their appreciation about the development of beneficial collaboration and cooperation in the local logistics. 
Participants noted that Italy does not intend to use the future runway for tourism activities.
Participants noted that Italy has submitted in the past years several papers related to the proposed gravel runway to CEP and ATCM prior to the draft CEE, with the support of a great deal more work in scientific research and monitoring, on-site investigation, engineering and communication with Members, which enhances the credibility and practicality of the draft CEE.
However, participants identified a number of aspects for which additional information or clarification should be provided in a final CEE, if the proponent decides to proceed with the proposed activity. 
Description of the proposed activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
    • It was noted that a number of elements of the activity are scattered in different parts of the document. For clarity of the scope and comprehensiveness, it would assist if all parts of the activity related to both construction and operational phases were included in the description.
    • Participants suggested that further details should be provided regarding the additional staff needed for the construction phase. In particular, it was suggested that further consideration should be given to the size of the crew in each of the four phases of construction as well as to its accommodation at Mario Zucchelli Station or at a dedicated temporary camp. This information should be then discussed in terms of impacts and mitigation measures.
    • Participants identified inconsistency in the expected number of flights throughout the document (varying from 15 to 30 flights per year). It was emphasized that this estimation seems only based on the Italian Antarctic program needs. In addition, 15 flights per year is the figure used as the basis for impacts, mitigation etc. Because one of the first justifications of the construction of this new runway is its potential usefulness for other national Antarctic programs working in the Region, Participants recommended estimating the number of additional flights needs by cooperating partners in order to set potential impacts in the right frame. 
    • Participants suggested that it would be helpful to include a project schedule that shows the work that is planned each season over the duration of the construction project.
Possible alternatives to the activity (Annex I, Article 3.2(a))
    • Few comments were made by participants on this section but it was noted that only alternative locations of the proposed airstrip are considered (in addition to the not proceeding option). It was suggested to consider other alternatives involving shipping; and also to consider the alternative of a gravel runway "light" - e.g. in the location currently selected, but reduced in scale.
Description of the initial environment (Annex I, Article 3.2(b))
This section is generally well structured and written, with a useful body of information provided to characterise the area’s geology and geomorphology, meteorology, and terrestrial vegetation. The long term monitoring of the vegetation through the CALM project is very welcome and provide useful information on the area. However, participants have identified several issues which should be considered in the final CEE:
    • Several participants mentioned the lack of mention of any invertebrate microfauna across the site whereas some data exist in the literature. This component of the ecosystem should be considered in the final CEE in term of description, impact and mitigation measures.
    • The draft CEE focuses on Adélie penguins and skuas, but several other species, namely Wilson’s storm petrels and snow petrels, are likely present on the site. Additional information of these birds, as well as on the impact on the activity on these animals, would be welcome.
Consideration of cumulative impacts (Annex I, Article 3.2(f))
    • In the view of several participants, one of the most notable missing components of the draft CEE relates to cumulative impacts as required by Annex I of the Protocol. International logistic cooperation could potentially involve several national Antarctic programs both active in the general area of Terra Nova Bay, and further away locations, which might result in turn in e.g. an expansion of roads and/or a higher number of flights using the airstrip than those currently considered. The CEE should consider the impact of the construction of this new runway and its operation in the broader context of the recent increase in human presence and activities in the Terra Nova Bay Region, as well as the construction of an additional station by China.  
Identification of gap of knowledge (Annex I, Article 3.2(j))
    • The uncertainty associated with the construction of the gravel runway on a seasonally active landscape, and in the context of uncertainties about climate change effects on the glacier and moraine environment is, for many participants, the most important gap of knowledge in the present project. Stability of the permafrost, cryoturbation processes, melting and movement of ice could have major impacts on the life time of the new runway. Even if it is the first time that a gravel runway is built in such environmental conditions, it is suggested to draw lessons from the experience of the Nordic countries.
    2. In particular, given the recent ICG discussions on Environmental Impact Assessments, whether the CEE i) has identified all the environmental impacts of the proposed activity and ii) suggests appropriate methods of mitigating (reducing or avoiding) those impacts
The CEE identifies and discussed the majority of the impacts likely to be associated with the activity. Impacts related to fuel usage and air pollution are particularly well documented and Adélie penguin colony nearby receives an exemplary attention. However, participants raised several issues which should benefit from additional attention when preparing the final version of the CEE:
    • The environmental impact of the construction of the road and the quarries along that road should be part of the present CEE and more details about the direct, indirect and cumulative impacts would be welcome as well as a discussion of any alternatives. 
    • Participants welcomed the study on possible impact of noise of aircraft take off on Adélie penguin nearby colony but suggested that this modeling approach being extended to other noises produced by construction machinery and blasting.
    • Discussion of potential impacts and mitigation actions could be consolidated in Section 5 “Identification and prediction of environmental impact, assessment and mitigation measures of the proposed activities”, and table 5.7 should include all predicted impacts which is not the case in the current draft CEE (e.g. road, wilderness and aesthetic values,..). 
    • The final CEE should include more details on fuel transportation from Mario Zucchelli Station to the site of runway and handling, a summary of procedures that will be implemented to reduce the risks of oil or fuel spills, as well as details or a summary of contingency plans for any oil spill event.
    • The draft CEE briefly mentions dust production during the construction and maintenance phases but several participants suggested providing more details on this issue, given its potential impact on vegetation, snow and ice. Some preventive measures could be considered such as selecting proper techniques or explosives.
    • Impacts on scientific values should be emphasized. In particular, participants recognized the extreme value of the CALM monitoring project and identified the destruction of half of the monitoring site as a major impact after more than 10 years of data collection. Some participants suggested finding a way to not lose entirely this unique source of information.
    • Transplanting patches of vegetation (and likely associated microfauna) is proposed as a mitigation measure. It seems to be a very original and interesting approach, especially for macrolichen dominant vegetation, but no details are provided as to how this will be undertaken, or to where the vegetation will be moved. 
    • In finalising the CEE, additional attention might be paid to both the risks of introducing non-native species and the measures to be put in place to reduce those risks.  It is suggested to consider for example the risks associated with transport to the site of construction equipment, inter- and intra-continental aircraft, passenger and cargo movements. 
    • Participants suggested that training of the construction crew would be an important potential mitigation measure. Improving their knowledge and understanding of the values of Antarctica, and the context in which they are operating may be a useful means of ensuring a high level of conformity to the proposed control measures. 
    • Several participants considered that the impacts and mitigation sections are relatively brief and some lacking in details, especially as compared to the technical information provided. Mitigation plan is expected to be developed “in future seasons” but it should be included as part of the EIA process and presented in the draft CEE. 
    3. Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document
In general, participants felt that the conclusion that “the impact due to construction can be identified as “more than minor or transitory”, is adequately supported by the information contained within the draft CEE. 
It is also agreed that the scientific benefits arising from the construction and operation of this gravel runway will outweigh the likely environmental impacts. 
    4. The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE
Participants commented that the draft CEE is generally clear, well structured and well presented. 
As mentioned above, participants noted that further information and clarification would be required to facilitate a comprehensive assessment of the proposed activity. 
It was also noted that a lot of the technical information provided in the draft CEE is interesting but not all of it related to environmental issues. This information can eventually be moved into an annex of the final CEE. 
Participants emphasised that it would be valuable to have a list of acronyms used in the. It is also suggested improving the resolution of maps and figures, namely Fig. 4.1 and 4.2 which are illegible, even in the high resolution version of the document. 
Finally, it was suggested clearly indicating in Section 9 a “corresponding author” to whom any additional comments on the draft CEE can be sent. 
Additional minor comments on the clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE are presented in Attachment A.
    3. Conclusions
Having reviewed the draft CEE prepared by Italy for the “Proposed construction and operation of a gravel runway in the area of Mario Zucchelli Station, Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica”, in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, the ICG advises the CEP that:
    1) The draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.
    2) If Italy decides to proceed with the proposed activity, there are a number of aspects for which additional information or clarification should be provided in the required final CEE. In particular, the Committee’s attention is drawn to the suggestions that further details should be provided regarding:
    • the staff needed for the construction phase (number, accommodation etc..), as well as a clear schedule of work planed during the 4 years of construction;
    • some aspects of initial environmental reference state, particularly invertebrates and all bird species (not only Adélie penguins and skuas);
    • potential direct impacts to flora and fauna, the landscape and lake environments, and non-native species risks; the impacts related to the road, the quarries, dust and noise produced by construction work should be especially detailed;
    • cumulative and indirect impacts that might arise in light of existing activities and other known planned activities in the area, including logistical cooperation; and
    • mitigation measures related to fuel management, non-native species, wildlife disturbance, training of the construction crew.
    3) The information provided in the draft CEE support the conclusion that the impacts of constructing and operating the proposed station are to be more than minor or transitory. 
    4) The draft CEE is generally clear, well structured, and well presented, although improvements to the maps and figures are recommended and further information and clarification is required to facilitate a comprehensive assessment of the proposed activity. 
Appendix A. Other points raised by one or two ICG participants2

Section
Page(s)3
Comment
Non-Technical Summary
II
II
The proponent pertinently refers to Resolution 1 (2015) which recommends identifying the ways in which a co-operative air transport system might benefit several national Antarctic programmes. Several parties have previously indicated their interest or support for the construction of this gravel runway. Nevertheless, although it was stressed in comments from previous years (ATCM XXXVIII Final Report CEP XVIII Report, paragraph 105), this draft CEE rev. 0 doesn’t give more details on formal collaboration agreements with national Antarctic Programmes operating in this sector. 
III
III
It is mentioned here that Boulder Clay site “could even permit landing of aircrafts with enough fuel autonomy to avoid refuelling in Antarctica.” In the study itself, this option is not further examined although this would change a lot of impact relevant settings. It is recommended to include the assessment of bigger aircraft use if this is already in mind of the operational planning.
IV
IV
The third paragraph refers to Enigma Lake “skyway.”  It should be “skiway.”  This occurs again three paragraphs later on the same page and frequently elsewhere throughout the CEE.  Please find and replace “skyway” with “skiway” throughout, as appropriate.
V
V
We assume that the correct term is “cryptogamic” and not “cryptogrammic”.
V
VI
“Campo Icaro”, … of approximately 2,5 km from Mario Zucchelli Station may be changed to … approximately 2.5 km from…
V & VI
VI & VIII
Section V, page VI mentions that pollutant monitoring has occurred at Mario Zucchelli Station and Camp Icaro and that those monitoring stations “will allow the measurement of changes resulting from the infrastructure construction and operation.”  However, neither location would be downwind of the runway and therefore they would not be ideal monitoring stations.  Section VI, page VIII seems to address this by saying that “a new monitoring station will be installed in the vicinity of the runway” but further details about this monitoring station are needed.
VI
VIII
On bottom of page VIII and top of page IX in the Non-Technical Summary, it is stated "However monitoring of the birds will be conducted to identify potential excessive disturbance, thus allowing to take measures such as a review of the working schedule in terms of daily working time and planning of activities." This is a very good and commendable approach. 
It is encouraged elaborating the effects of a potential adjustment of the daily working time and planning of activities on the overall schedule and timing for the construction and operation of the runway within section 5 and 6 where appropriate.
1. Introduction
1.2
2-3
The proponent pertinently states that “It is unquestioned that sharing such a facility with other Antarctic programs will favor cooperation between Nations, diminishing overall logistic costs and increasing resources dedicated to science, in full accordance with the Antarctic Treaty feeling. With this aim PNRA is ready to establish fruitful cooperation with other National Antarctic programs interested in the proposed facility.”
Surprisingly, although this point has already been raised in previous discussions (“Some Members expressed a desire to receive more details regarding: formal collaboration agreements between the National Antarctic Programmes operating near Mario Zucchelli Station”, ATCM XXXVIII Final Report CEP XVIII Report, paragraph 105) it seems that this cooperation still appears as a project (except for France, particularly for co-managing Concordia station). 
2.1
6
The scope section could more clearly indicate the elements of the activity that are covered by the CEE, including any components that are not directly associated with the runway construction and ongoing aviation operations. 
2.2
7
It is easy to understand the crucial importance of physical, geological and geomorphological parameters to select the site; however environmental criteria could be mentioned here, although considered non-priority.
2.2
10
3rd paragraph, (Terra Nova Bay, Victoria Land, Antarctica) is repeated in the same sentence. 
2.2
8
Figure 2.2.: North is not correctly shown on the general map of Antarctica.
2.2
10
We note that mention is made of the potential for use of the runway by other airframes (such as the C-17, B -757, and A-319), but it is not clear if the specification of the runway design will allow for regular use of the runway by these aircraft.  Section 2.5.1 (page 48) implies that it has only been designed for C-130 aircraft.
2.2
10
2200 m is less than the requirement for C-17 aircraft and probably for the 757 as well.
2.2
10
Norway uses jet airliners 737 BBJ flying directly from Cape Town, ZA with less refuelling in the 2015/16-season. This is done to reduce the amount of fuel transported to Troll station. We will support plans to consider this option at Mario Zucchelli Station.
2.2
11
In the 2nd paragraph, by the presence of ‘Antarctic skuas’ may be replaced with ‘South Polar skuas’. The draft CEE mentioning ‘without nest evidence’ is not in accordance with figure 4.22 (page 102). The figure shows skua nest 2015 and 2009 near the Adélie Penguin colony.
2. Description of the proposed activity
2.3.3
15
Will the apron and taxiway be on grade with the runway at this location? If not, what grade with aircraft need to transit up/down?
2.3.3
15
What equipment, fuel, vehicles, etc. will be left at the runway site over the winter?  If any such things are left over winter at the site, what will the inspection plan and frequency be in order to monitor for spills?
2.3.3
16
The aircraft parking is designed for two Hercules aircraft. What is its capacity for other aircraft considered in page 10 (Boeing 757, A-319…)? 
The words “less than 10” suggest that there may be up to 10 aircraft simultaneously. This is surprising, given the number of flights per year in average reported elsewhere in the document
2.3.3
17
The impact matrix table (figure 5.7) mentions impermeable enclosed structures (bunding) for fuel storages (in addition to double skinned tanks). If planned, these should be mentioned here also. Details of any fuel handling and storage changes at the station, and additional details of fuel transport (eg. type of vehicles/tankers, volume, number of movements) would be of value.
2.3.4
18
It lacks information on soil samples collection: depth, size… Figures 2.11 and 2.12 show the state of the soil surface but do certainly no reflect the grain size distribution if the samples are collected in depth. 
In addition, this technical section is difficult to read for a non specialist: e.g. what are the “Clegg Hammer compaction tests” or “dynamic Light Weight Deflectometer (LWD) tests”? 
The conclusion of this comprehensive soil study is relatively brief: “Based on the available information it can be concluded that the material available on site can be considered a satisfactory subgrade for the embankment and a good to excellent material to be used for the construction of the embankment” (page 25). It would be welcome to develop how the data provided support this conclusion (which is probably correct).
2.3.4
18
The acronym “CBR” is used here for the first time and elsewhere in the report.  It would be useful to explain what this measurement is.
2.4.2
26
The second paragraph refers to “graded filters” – will geofabrics be used to separate the layers?
2.4.2
26
If only coarse material (gravel) is used for the embankment obtained from local material, it is supposed that sieving processes will be applied. In such a case, what happens to the finer particles (sand and silt) either at the quarries, at the sites of screening and crushing, at blasting excavation sites?
2.4.2
26
Remove “)” at the end of the second to last paragraph.
2.4.2
28
In reference to the section on environmental aspects of the embankment – please comment on the amount of water present at the runway site. How much is there? Where does it come from? Will the runway, as planned, block any existing drainage?
2.4.2
31
In the fourth paragraph on this page the sentence “…adopted in accordance with the …..” seems to be missing some text.
2.4.2
Fig. 2.22
Phase 1 slope of 0.85% may be extreme for some craft.
2.4.3
37
“As can be seen in Figure 2.25 sub-base material has been used to model the side shoulders and the base-course layers.” Earlier discussion and figure 2.23 indicate that the rockfill shoulders are going to be a different material than the sub-base. However, if the embankment is the area of concern then it seems it should be the area most realistically represented in the model.
2.4.4
40 and 41
Table 2.5 suggests that more than 520,000 m3 of fill is required for the project.  Table 2.6 suggests that the identified quarries will yield only half this amount.  It’s not entirely clear from the text where the remaining >250,000 m3 is to be found. 
The volume of material required to realize the embankment is 528,200 m3 (Table 2.5). The volume expected from the quarries is 250,000 m3 and an additional volume of 3,000 m3 is expected from sites with blasting excavation. The total calculated is significantly lower than the required volume.
2.4.4
40 - 41
Locations of rock screening and crushing activities could be shown or described.
2.4.4
Table 2.5
What is the difference between the “main platform embankment” and the embankment itself? Is that the finish surface?
2.4.5
45
This section mentions three major construction areas.  Will all of these construction areas fall within the area of the runway as seen in Figure 2.6 or will the equipment be place or dump trucks be travelling over different, and otherwise undisturbed, areas?
2.4.5
45
This page could use a table or tables with operation time and fuel consumption by each heavy machine for a summary.
2.4.5
46
Have the safety aspects of having “1 personnel on the site per shift” been adequately considered?
2.4.6
46
It would be interesting to know the volume of material required each year for maintenance, at least a high estimate and a low estimate.
Are the repair material volumes already factored in to the amounts taken from the quarries as projected in Table 2.6 or will the necessary repair material add to the amount take from those quarry areas (or will additional quarry areas be needed in the future to gather additional materials)?  If the repair materials volumes are not already accounted for in Table 2.6, are there reasonable projections for how much additional material will be needed over the expected lifetime of the runway?
2.4.6
47
In reference to the final paragraph of this section, concerning “compaction” – is what is described therein the only technique used to assure runway smoothness and grade tolerance?
2.5.1
48
“The longitudinal slopes…” I don’t see how this match up with what is shown in figure 2.22. Are you trying to describe something else?
2.5.3
50
The brevity of the text and the lack of caption for Figure 2.1 do not allow a proper understanding of this section.
2.5.3
50
Please address runway markings and navigational aids (NAVAIDS).
2.6.1
52
It is noted that in a normal operating season, after completion of the runway, the sea ice will still be used for several flights during the start of the season.  From an energy and fuel use perspective, would it not be more efficient simply to use the gravel runway for all flights each season?
The first bullet point in this section indicates “first period flights operated, as usual, on ice pack.”  Will the sea ice runway continue to be built and used during the early summer season?
2.6.1
52

The operation plan estimates the planned intercontinental flights (5-8 per season) only focusing on Italian personnel and freight needs. 
Based on the possibility to use helicopters in this area, it is unclear whether there is absolutely no need or interest for carrying out local flights for distribution of personnel or freight from the planned airstrip to the nearby stations by helicopters? If such local helicopter flights may be an option in future, possible flight routes should be considered in Chapter 5 for impacts due to noise and other disturbances.
3.2
58
The “non proceeding alternative” does not exclusively entail an increase in the use of naval means. It also includes the maintenance or development of existing relationships and partnerships with other neighbouring Antarctic programs (US-NSF for example).
3.2
58
The alternative of supporting the program using differing shipping arrangements, including for example considering use of different vessels, could be more clearly explained to demonstrate why this option is not a suitable alternative.
4. Initial Environmental Reference state on the Boulder Clay site
4.1.1
74
According to the literature cited (mainly from the 1980s and 1990s) the layer of ice (glacier relict or permafrost with very high ice content) is very thick and the unfrozen layer is only 10 cm depth. On several occasions the proponent reports recent observations (very warm summer 2001-02, partial melting of lakes during the summer 2013-14) and a slight increasing trend in some parameters linked to temperature. One can therefore wonder about any ice thickness changes over the past decades and the dynamics that seem to change recently (page 78) with possible implications on the stability of the moraine.
4.1.1
75-76
Will a significant number of these lake-ice blisters, which are mentioned as having liquid water at the bottom and therefore potentially serving as unique habitats, be filled in order to construct the runway?  If so, are there a significant number of similar lakes in the surrounding Boulder Clay area?
4.2
Fig. 4.14
Hard to read the red labels which make it difficult to follow the discussion in the text.
Fig. 4.6
80
Is the labelling of the two cross sections correct?  AA seems to be a shorter cross section than BB (as shown in Figures 4.7 and 4.8) and yet the scale bar on Figure 4.6 shows AA being a much longer distance than BB.
4.1.4
87-88
The indication of longitudes and latitudes and the location of the runway on Figure 4.11would facilitate reading. The south-western part of the runway is located on an area where displacement seems significant (between 100 and 150 mm per year).
4.2.2
95-98
These are some significant crosswinds. What are the crosswind restrictions of the aircraft you plan to operate here?
Figures 4.18 and 4.19 clearly demonstrate that wind are commonly from West. As a consequence the runway (RWY 20) will obviously be submitted to crosswind most of the time. Comments on this characteristic in relation to the aircraft landing capacities should be welcome. A discussion about the mandatory use of RWY 20 (and not its opposite RWY 02) would be welcome. In particular, are we sure that RWY 02 will be never used depending on weather, wind direction etc… and especially by large aircrafts. Such occasional use of RWY 02 for safety reason could have very strong impacts on the Adélie penguin colony
4.3
100
Here and elsewhere the document refers to ASPA 118 Mount Melbourne.  This ASPA was de-designated in 2014 and a reduced area of Mount Melbourne included in a new ASPA 175 (Measure 13 (2014)).
4.3
100
In the 3rd paragraph, Mount Melbourne (ASPA no 118) was revoked by measure 13 (2014) ‘ASPA 175 High Altitude Geothermal sites of the Ross Sea region’. 
4.3
100
End of the 4th paragraph, it would be useful to provide the reference. 
4.3.1
101
In the last sentence, ‘11.234 breeding pairs…’ may be changed as ’11,234 breeding…’
4.3.1, Fig. 4.22
101-104
The location of the Adélie Cove penguin colony could be shown (on a map) and described in relation to the proposed activity (in particular the distance to the runway location). 
Please provide additional, detailed information about the locations of populations of birds in and around the Boulder Clay site.  In particular, more information would be welcome about the presence and location of flighted birds (skua, petrels), since they would be vulnerable to bird strikes.  Information about the seasonal presence of the different bird populations as well as when chicks may be present for each species would also be helpful.
4.3.1
104
The final paragraph of Section 4.3.1 describes potential impacts and mitigation strategies, which could be located in Section 5.
4.3.1
104
It is stated that “The response resulting from sound measurements and video has been very positive, highlighting a state of apparent calm inside the penguin colony.”
Although the penguin reaction tests are valuable, there is no agreement to the above mentioned positive conclusion. The videos show clear visible reactions of the Adélies on the overflying Hercules. The fact that the penguins did not panic does not mean that there is no disturbance. During the Hercules overflights the penguins changed their natural behavior significantly by interrupting their communication, looking around nervously and some penguins even stood up from their nests.
4.3.1
104
In reference to the final paragraph of this section – a previous version of this CEE stated that “as far as possible also the recommendation on the conduct of operations, outside of the sensitive breeding seasons will be respected.” A similar statement is not present in this version of the CEE.  Is it still the intention to conduct operations outside sensitive breeding seasons or has it been determined that operations during the breeding season are necessary? If so, what measures for minimizing/mitigating potential impacts have been considered?
4.3.2
104-112
Some photographs of plant communities would be appreciated.
Table 4.11: if we are not mistaken the meaning of * after the name of some species is not specified.
4.3.2
106
There are several references in the first paragraph on this page to “the map.” To which map are you referring? 
4.3.2
105-111
Understanding the limitations to conducting an in-depth survey of vegetation over a wide area, the detailed surveys of vegetation described in this section are mainly limited to the runway track/path.  However, the true impact area of the runway extends to the apron, the remainder of the operating area, and the road leading to Mario Zucchelli Station.  It does not appear that the vegetation in those runway-associated areas was surveyed.  It is also unclear if those impacted areas might have been included in the “areas neighbour to the Runway track/pathway” (pp. 110-111). Information on the populations of vegetation in the whole runway-associated region would be welcome in the final CEE as well as some note as to whether neighbouring areas exclude the apron, road, etc. 
4.3.2
113
Given that the results of the vegetation survey indicate a significant vegetation cover at quarry area 6, it might be appropriate to further consider whether this site is an appropriate location for quarrying. 
4.3.2
Fig. 4.23, 4.24, 4.25
Given the earlier statement the Boulder Clay area has a very high level of vegetative biodiversity (including some rare species of lichen) and given the amount of work that clearly went into surveying the vegetation, it would be good to have larger, much clearer versions of these maps included in the final CEE
4.3.2
Fig. 4.26
Please provide a legend/key to the symbols used.  Also, in the first paragraph on page 113, the “)” after “Figure 4.26” is unnecessary.
4.4.1
115
ASPA 118 should be replaced with a description of ASPA 175 as noted above. 
4.4.2
115
It could be useful to briefly describe the values for which the ASPA is designated, to help demonstrate whether the proposed activity will interact with those values.
4.5.1
118
We note the comparison of (in this case) PAH concentrations in the air at Campo Icaro with Italian air quality regulations.  We note however that this is not necessarily an appropriate comparison.  The extremely low concentrations of contaminants in Antarctic air are “normal” or “standard” for the region and comparisons with air quality standards from the developed world may not be useful to make.  The same point refers also to comments made on page 120.
5. Identification and prediction of environmental impact, assessment and mitigation measures of the proposed activities
5.1.1
129
It is stated that aircraft and ship emissions “will be spread over a wide area en route to and within Antarctica. The emissions from these sources will be rapidly dispersed and will not affect ambient air quality, but will contribute to cumulative impact of operations in Antarctica”.
Those emissions do affect air quality as stated regarding the cumulative impacts. However, these are not further discussed. A more comprehensive evaluation of all air pollution emissions would upgrade this part of the assessment.
5.1.1
129
Estimation of fuel consumption for construction now reports generator and operating machines plus vehicles. 
In which calculation ship movements for construction support (bringing vehicles or materials to Mario Zucchelli Station) were considered? 
5.1.1
Table 5.2
Is there already capacity in the stations storage tanks for this additional 444 tonnes (~140,000 gal) of fuel required each season? Will the additional flights/fuel use require the Italica to come to station more frequently?
5.1.1
133
The annual emission was estimated during operation of the gravel runway in the table 5.4., however the emission from generators and vehicles (that was mentioned in table 5.2) was omitted.
5.1.2
133
The study describes a worst-case scenario for noise emissions based on noise modelling for a Hercules airplane at take-off considering the 125 Hz band as the frequency band with the highest intensities for the considered airplane model. 
To improve this technical information, a landing situation (often louder than take-off) and broadband measurements of the noise levels (as it is not known which frequency band represents the area of best hearing for birds) should be considered as more suitable for a worst-case scenario.
5.1.2
134
Table 5.5 is not referred to in the text.  We assume it relates to the modelling discussed in the paragraph above the table.
5.1.5
136
a) The reference to a low distribution density of mosses and lichens (less than 5%) may not be appropriate.  We wonder how the term “low” is being applied here given that (in this part of Antarctica) such a density is likely to be “normal” or “standard”.
b) It is not clear why air quality is thought to be a concern for the Adélie penguins and skuas (final paragraph on page 136).
5.1.5
136
The discussion of impacts on flora could be more clearly linked to the details presented in 4.3.2 on the floral biodiversity and significance of the area. In particular, Section 4.3.2 states that the Boulder Clay area has one of the highest levels of biodiversity observed in Victoria Land. Table 4.11 indicates that 2 species occur on the runway path that have not been observed in the general area. The impacts of the proposed activity on those values should be clearly articulated.  
5.1.5
136
Do the areas of potential impacts on flora given here include the area of the apron, the area of other runway operations, and the area of the road to Mario Zucchelli Station?
5.1.5
137
The first paragraph on this page notes that the Adélie penguins and skuas at Adélie cove will not be directly disturbed by the proposed activity but that “indirect impacts are expected”.  What are these indirect impacts and are they likely to be significant?
Fig. 5.2
138
This figure on planned flight routes could also be provided in section 2 (perhaps 2.5 Aeronautic characteristics) as it helps to describe the proposed activity. 
5.1.5
139
ASPA no 118 was revoked by measure 13 (2014) ‘ASPA 175 High Altitude Geothermal sites of the Ross Sea region’.
5.1.7
141
The chemical toilet mentioned in section VI Identification and prediction of … in Non-Technical Summary has been left out from section 5.1.7. The final CEE could usefully elaborate on this mitigation measure.
Table 5.7
144
We note that table 5.7 does not include an assessment on traverse or transport routes to/from Boulder Clay area. There is also no mention of potential loading place(s). Overview maps with traverse route for transport would be welcome.
5.3.3
148
a) If blasting is used, is it intended to use blasting mats when using explosives?  Blasting mats can provide a useful means of mitigating noise and dust as well as minimising the distribution of rock fragments away from the blasting site.
b) We note that this section refers to the potential use of aircraft.  What aircraft might be used during the construction phase and for what purposes?  It might be useful to include further detail.
5.3.5
149
As noted above it is possible that the reduction in wilderness and aesthetic values cannot be fully mitigated against.  We welcome the intent to “harmonise” with the local environment, and would welcome further details of how this will be achieved in finalising the CEE.


Other mitigation measures that Italy may wish to consider including in the final CEE might be:
    • Dedicated training for construction crews (this might include general awareness of the Protocol; understanding of the EIA process and the control measures to be applied for the project; the environmental management plan for the construction activity including spill response procedures and waste management practices etc).
    • Establishing daily “toolbox” meetings to review environmental protection measures in real time. 
    • Record keeping and incident reporting processes that allow for information to be gathered and adjustments made in control measures.
    • Ensuring a defined maximum corridor of activity for all construction crew and vehicles.
    • Strict cleaning protocols for all construction vehicles and equipment prior to departure for Antarctica and prior to deployment in the field.
6. Environmental monitoring plan and dismantling
6.1
152
Table 6.1. is very general and could be rewritten specifically for this activity.
6.1.1
153-154
This section mentions that components of the CALM grid will be used for ante- and post-operam monitoring and yet about 50% of that grid will be deconstructed once the runway is built.  Will the remainder be adequate to continue monitoring operations.  Also the section mentions that monitoring will occur in only one lake in the area.  Understanding that such monitoring is expensive, an ‘n’ of 1 is less than ideal. 
6.1.1 and 6.1.5

The monitoring described in these sections is focused on technical and construction issues rather than on environmental impacts.
6.1.2
155
Details regarding how monitoring results will guide management responses (for example whether any threshold levels or triggers for disturbance impacts or population trends have been identified) would be useful. What management options are envisaged in the statement ‘suggest adjustments for management or mitigation measures’? 
6.1.2
155

The “ante-operam monitoring” states that the baseline for “any future deviations from the current situation” is based on the description of penguin colony made in 2015/2016 Antarctic campaign. 
Collecting data of additional seasons is seen as valuable since the development of comparable baseline data is usually relating to datasets of at least three seasons.
6.1.2
156
The section on “Construction and operational phase monitoring (Fauna)” describes that behaviour observations will be carried out, as well as noise measurements and automated image acquisition. “... Measuring should be repeated and continue for a period of time long enough to accurately assess the potential impacts.”
More detailed information are suggested as the specifics of the schedule and measures of the monitoring plan are rather vague up to now
6.1.2
156
It is stated that “Adélie Cove penguin colony is … one of the most visited by Italian Antarctic personnel” and an increase of people is expected with the airstrip project. 
Besides the development of “Specific regulations” to manage the flow and the behaviour of visitors of the Adélie penguin colony, Germany recommends to refer to existing elements of the “General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic” (Resolution 3 (2011)). Especially the compliance of distance rules should be in focus not to increase stress levels for penguins. 
More details about the regulations to manage the flow and behaviours of visitors to Adélie Cove would be most welcome in the final CEE.  Also, if you are expecting more people to traverse the runway complex in order to access the Adélie Cove colonies, please include details on safety procedures and educations for those people in the final CEE.
6.1.2.
156
We welcome mitigation measures to avoid conflict with skuas, which are known to familiarize themselves to human activity. Access to food-sources changes the bird natural instincts and creates possible threats for bird strike.
The Norwegian Polar Institute has long experience with long-term monitoring in the Arctic using automated cameras. This technique could be adequate in monitoring the behaviour of the penguin colonies during take-off and landing.
6.1.2
157
The planned post-operam and long-term monitoring for potential faunal changes can be improved by more details (methods, time schedules etc.) about these plans. In addition, regular information on the monitoring results may be provided to the CEP (or interested Parties). In particular, unexpected cases of low altitude flights and observed impacts on the local fauna, with main focus on the Adélie Cove penguin colony, would be of interest (cp. 4.3.1 p.104 “touch and go procedure for safety reasons”; and 5.1.5 “particular emergency event is likely to happen less than once in 5 years assuming 30 flights per season”).
6.1.3
157
We welcome the initiative to annually monitor the area for alien species  
Table 6.2
164
The table makes reference to a temporary noise barrier which is not referred to in the mitigation section.
6.1.6
164 (Table 6.2)
In comparison to former draft, the current version of the CEE misses the item “ecology” in the table “Schedule for monitoring – Construction stage”.
The reintegration of monitoring schedule for ecological impacts on fauna during construction is suggested, which was stated in a former draft version with “once per two weeks”.
6.1.6
165
The draft CEE (section 2.4.6) describes that the new gravel runway surfaced with uncrushed gravel will lose thickness at an average rate of 25 mm (1 inch) per year so the repair materials will be collected in the same quarries used for the construction phase.
The amount of the repair material collected from the quarries should be monitored during the operation stage to estimate the cumulative impacts on the Antarctic ground.
6.2
165
We appreciate the inclusion of this paragraph dealing with dismantling and taking into account the recommendations contained in ATCMXXXVI-WP42 (as the resolution project proposed in this WP was not adopted, it is likely not necessary to make reference to this Resolution).
6.2.1
166
It is stated that “without any further action the restoring of the pristine landscape” will be reached due to natural movement of the moraine. 
At one hand, a very slow movement is observed with 50 mm/year, which is described stable enough to build on an air strip; on the other hand, pristine landscape cannot be restored after such interference within a few years. It is suggested rephrasing or skipping this passage.
7. Gaps in knowledge and project uncertainties
7.1
7.3
167
169
Building gravel constructions on a glacier could prove difficult if the ice below is not well insulated, due to problem of melting channels. Norway has experience from constructing dirt roads on glaciers in Spitsbergen Island, Svalbard. A programme performed by the parastatal company Store Norske Spitsbergen Kulkompani AS (SNSK.NO) revealed challenges with stability due to ice melting (Ref: Multiconsult, Tromsø, Norway). They concluded a minimum of 80-90 cm of mixed fine and medium coarse materials would stop all transport of heat through the strata (Noticeable heat transport stopped at ab. 50 cms depth). Another important aspect is controlling melting water due to accumulation of dust on the sides of the runway (Sverre Barlindhaug. Tromsø, Pers. Comm.)
7.5
170
This chapter on gaps “Managing cumulative risks” refers solely to the risk for the runway. 
The final CEE should include additional description of gaps in knowledge regarding the environmental impacts of the activity.
???

At first time, “winter operations” are mentioned, while the whole assessment of air strip use focuses only on the summer season.
Are there more detailed considerations of winter operations which should be assessed in this CEE?
7.6
171
It is not clear what gap or uncertainty relates to severe oil spill events. There is reference to a future assessment of possible measures to manage and recover from such events. The final CEE should provide information about procedures and contingency plans to mitigate against and respond to major spills.


