





Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual









Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on Revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual
ICG Report: Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom 
Summary
An Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to consider the revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual was formed during the 2015-2016 intersessional period.  The draft Manual has now been brought up to date to reflect recent policy developments (Attachment A).  The Manual is a living document, which has a number of gaps that can be filled at any time; therefore, the ICG presents a draft Non-native Species Work Plan (Attachment B) for the Committee’s consideration, which aims to support further development of the Manual. The ICG recommends that the CEP endorses the revised Manual and encourages its use and on-going development and considers the draft Work Plan for inclusion in the ‘Introduction of non-native species’ section of the 2016 CEP Five Year Work Plan.  If the Committee agrees to the Manual it is recommended that it conveys the revised Manual to the ATCM for adoption by means of a Resolution (draft at Attachment C).
Background
In 2011, following a two-year ICG convened by France and then New Zealand, the CEP agreed the 1st Edition of the CEP Non-native Species Manual through Resolution 6 (2011).  The Resolution recommended that Parties encourage the Committee for Environmental Protection to continue to develop the Non-Native Species Manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) on scientific and practical matters, respectively.  

The CEP Five Year Work Plan included an action to review the Non-native Species Manual in 2015, thereby providing an opportunity to incorporate recent scientific and practical environmental management developments regarding non-native species issues.  Therefore, in ATCMXXXVIII - WP 28 the United Kingdom, France and New Zealand recommended that the CEP considered the establishment of an ICG to revise and update the CEP Non-native Species Manual (Edition 2011).  The Committee welcomed the proposal and agreed to the establishment of an ICG, convened by the United Kingdom, with the following ToRs:

    1. Review and/or reconfirm the ‘Overall Objectives’ and ‘Key Guiding Principles’ for Parties’ actions to address non-native species, contained within the CEP Non-native Species Manual;
    2. Revise, and supplement with new information, the section of the Manual concerning ‘Guidelines and resources to support prevention of the introduction of non-native species including the transfer of species between sites in the Antarctic’;
    3. Review and revise the Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’ to identify particular aspects of Antarctic operations for which further work might be required in order to develop specific guidance. Furthermore, give consideration to issues relating to the natural introduction pathways for species; and 
    4. Report to CEP XIX on progress with the above.

Australia, France, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, ASOC and IAATO participated in the ICG. The draft revised Manual is available as Attachment A to this Working Paper.
ToR 1: Overall Objective and Key Guiding Principles
Work on the overall objective and key guiding principles for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by non-native species was undertaken.  Minor changes, including editorial amendments, were made.  More major revisions included the following:
    • A general revision of the introductory text.
    • Information was added describing the relevance of non-native species issues to the CEP’s Climate Change Response Work Programme (CCRWP).
    • Information contained within the ‘Context’ section was updated, including reference to the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (agreed through Resolution 6 (2012)).  
    • Definitions of the terms ‘eradication’, ‘containment’ and ‘control’ were added to the Glossary.
ToRs 2 and 3: Revision of the Manual sections concerning existing guidelines and resources and those requiring further development
More substantial work was done in the revision of the ‘Guidelines and resources to support prevention of the introduction of non-native species including the transfer of species between sites in the Antarctic’ and the Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’. Due to developments in the past five years, some sections within the Annex were moved to the Guidelines and Resources section. Other minor amendments were made, including editorial changes and updating of web links.
Revisions to the ‘Guidelines and resources to support prevention of the introduction of non-native species including the transfer of species between sites in the Antarctic’
    • The title of this section was altered to reflect the need to detect and respond to non-native species as well as prevent their introduction, i.e., ‘Guidelines and resources to support prevention of the introduction of non-native species, including the transfer of species between sites in the Antarctic, and the detection of and response to established non-native species’.
    • A separate section was created detailing available resources concerning education and training on non-native species issues.  
    • The issue of translocation or release of microorganisms, including from wastewater disposal, was made clearer.
    • Several guidelines were added, including the ‘General guidelines for visitors to the Antarctic’ and, should they be adopted, the SCAR ‘Code of conduct for activities within terrestrial geothermal environments in Antarctica’ and the ‘Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica’
    • Text was added detailing SCAR’s offer to identify a group of experts who could be consulted in the event that a suspected non-native species is detected. 
Revisions to the Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’
    • The Annex was generally reformatted and revised to reflect recent policy developments and new areas of work.
    • Additional text concerning ‘Preventing, detecting and responding to diseases in Antarctic wildlife resulting from human activities’ was added as a central focus for this specific issue.

Substantial additions to the ‘Supporting documentation’ section were made, including lists of recent peer-reviewed research publications and papers submitted to the ATCM relevant to non-native species issues.

Non-native Species Work Plan
Acknowledging that more work needs to be done on the development of practical guidelines and resources for all those operating in the Antarctic, the ICG has prepared a draft Non-native Species Work Plan for possible inclusion in the ‘Introduction of non-native species’ section of the 2016 CEP Five Year Work Plan, to supplement the existing Actions (see Attachment B). It is unlikely that guidelines and resources could be provide for all the topic areas where gaps have been identified within the Manual Annex in the timeframe of the Work Plan, particularly as some work areas need further scientific research to inform policy development. Therefore, several factors were taken into consideration during the development of the following draft Non-native Species Work Plan that has been prepared for the Committee’s consideration for possible inclusion in the 2016 CEP Five Year Work Plan:
    • information available in the Climate Change Response Work Programme, 
    • actions relating to the introduction of non-native species listed in the 2015 CEP Five Year Plan,
    • information contained within the Manual’s Annex ‘Guidelines and resources requiring further attention or development’
    • the perspectives of the ICG participants 
    • observations that arose in the course of the ICG’s work, e.g. that the introduction and impacts of non-native species is one of the issues of common interest to the CEP and SC-CAMLR and benefit may be derived from greater discussion and co-ordination between CEP and SC-CAMLR on the topic of non-native species (for example, appropriate dissemination of biosecurity information to fishing vessels may reduce non-native species risks). Also, earlier work by the CEP on diseases in wildlife undertaken during an ICG and reported in ATCMXXIV WP 10 and WP 11, made substantial progress on this issue.  The revision and subsequent adoption of the earlier ICG outputs may provide useful additions to the ‘Guidelines and resources’ section of the Manual.

The suggested Non-native Species Work Plan is detailed in Attachment B to this Working Paper for the Committee’s consideration.
Recommendations
The ICG recommends that the CEP:
    1. considers the revised CEP Non-native Species Manual (Attachment A) and if agreed, encourages the dissemination and use of the Manual by means of a Resolution. A draft Resolution on the ‘CEP Non-native Species Manual’ is presented at Attachment C.
    2. continues to develop the Manual with the input of SCAR and COMNAP on scientific and practical matters, respectively;
    3. requests that the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat publish the Manual on its website, as an on-line dynamic tool, to be updated as new developments occur;
    4. encourages closer work between CEP and SC-CAMLR on non-native species issues;
    5. considers the suggested draft Non-native Species Work Plan (Attachment B) for inclusion within the 2016 CEP Five Year Work Plan; and
    6. undertakes a review of the Manual and progress against the work plan in 4-5 years.


Attachment B: 

2016 CEP Five Year Work Plan. Introduction of non-native species (Priority 1)

Actions:
    1. Continue developing practical guidelines and resources for all Antarctic operators.
    2. Implement related actions identified in the Climate Change Response Work Programme.
    3. Consider the spatially explicit, activity-differentiated risk assessments to mitigate the risks posed by terrestrial non-native species.
    4. Develop a surveillance strategy for areas at high risk of non-native species establishment.
    5. Give additional attention to the risks posed by intra-Antarctic transfer of propagules.
Draft Work Plan:
CEP XIX 2016
Consider final report and recommendations of the ICG relating to the revision of the CEP Non-native Species Manual.
Intersessional period 2016/2017
    • Revised Manual posted on ATS website, with updates by the Secretariat, as necessary, when new material becomes available.
    • Initiate work to assess risks of relocation of native Antarctic species and existing non-native species between and within Antarctic biogeographic regions and identify relevant management actions.
CEP XX 2017
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the relocation of species between biogeographic regions for inclusion in the Non-native Species Manual. 
Intersessional period 2017/2018
    • Initiate work to develop a non-native species response strategy, including appropriate responses to diseases of wildlife.
    • To help the Committee in assessing the effectiveness of the Manual, request a report from COMNAP on the implementation of quarantine and biosecurity measures by its members.
CEP XXI 2018
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the development of a response strategy for inclusion in the Non-native Species Manual, and the implementation of quarantine and biosecurity measures by COMNAP members.  Review IMO report on biofouling guidelines.
Intersessional period 2018/2019
    • Ask SCAR to compile a list of available biodiversity information sources and databases to help Parties establish which native species are present at Antarctic sites and thereby assist with identifying the scale and scope of current and future introductions.
    • Develop generally applicable monitoring guidelines. More detailed or site-specific monitoring may be required for particular locations.
    • Request a report from IAATO and a report from COMNAP on the application of the biofouling guidelines by their members.
CEP XXII 2019
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the development of monitoring guidelines for inclusion in the NNS Manual.  Consider the reports from IAATO and COMNAP on the application of biofouling guidelines.
Intersessional period 2019/2020
    • Initiate work to assess the risk of marine non-native species introductions.
CEP XXIII 2020
Discuss the intersessional work concerning the risks of marine non-native species.
Intersessional period 2020/2021
    • Develop specific guidelines to reduce non-native species release with wastewater discharge.
    • Review the progress and contents of the CEP Non-native Species Manual. 




Attachment C
Draft Resolution XX
The Committee for Environmental Protection Non-native Species Manual
The Representatives,
Conscious that the increasing introduction of non-native species to the Antarctic region, including the movement of species between locations in the region, is presenting a serious risk to biodiversity and to the intrinsic values of Antarctica; 
Recognising the enhanced potential for non-native species introduction and establishment with a changing Antarctic climate;
Recalling the overall objective for Parties’ actions to address risks posed by non-native species is ‘to protect Antarctic biodiversity and intrinsic values by preventing the unintended introduction to the Antarctic region of species not native to that region, and the movement of species within Antarctica from one biogeographic zone to any other’. 
Noting that under Resolution 6 (2011) the ATCM agreed to disseminate and encourage, as appropriate, the use of the Non-native Species Manual developed by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP);
Welcoming the revision of the Manual by the CEP, as well as the CEP’s advice that it will continue to refine and develop the Manual to reflect improvements in the understanding of the risks posed by non-native species and best practice measures for prevention, surveillance and response;

Recommend that Parties:
1     encourage the dissemination of the Manual and its use by those organising, conducting and participating in Antarctic activities;
2     encourage the CEP to continue to develop the Non-native Species Manual with the input of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) on scientific and practical matters, respectively;
3     request the Secretariat to post the Manual on its website and keep it updated in response to further developments as agreed by the CEP.


