





Report of the 2015/16 Intersessional Informal Discussions on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A and the Follow-up Work








Report of the 2015/16 Intersessional Informal Discussions on the Proposal for a New Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A and the Follow-up Work
Summary 

The CEP XVIII welcomed China’s offer to lead a fourth round of intersessional informal discussion on the designation of an Antarctic Specially Managed Area at Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, Dome A (para. 166, CEP XVIII Report). China has led the informal discussion on the designation of the ASMA in the intersessional period. This report sorts out opinions and questions raised in the previous rounds of informal discussions, gives detailed responses and makes a proposal for the follow-up work.
1. Introduction

At CEP XVI in 2013, China proposed the establishment of an ASMA (WP8) in Dome A area where the Chinese Kunlun Station is located. The Meeting agreed that China would lead the intersessional informal discussions, followed which the CEP XVII and CEP XVIII considered reports on the informal discussions submitted by China (CEP XVII WP15, CEP XVIII WP48). CEP XVIII continued to support China to lead the intersessional informal discussion. Six members including France, the UK, the US, Germany, Norway and Australia participated in the informal discussions held between October 28, 2015 and January 31, 2016, expressing similar attitudes and opinions as they did in previous rounds of discussion.
2. Overview of the Informal Discussions and Issues on the Application of ASMA Mechanism

During all four rounds of the intersessional informal discussions, a total of eight members put forward their opinions and questions, largely focusing on the issues like the protected value, international cooperation, number of operators, conflict of activities, appropriateness, alternative measures, as well as the interpretation and application of Article 4, Annex V of “The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty” (hereinafter referred to as “ the Protocol”), etc. China appreciated the all the valuable resources, opinions and questions provided by members during the informal discussions, which constituted a good basis for us to further understand the concerns of members and to optimize the proposed management plan. In the meantime, we feel it is necessary to make further clarification on relevant issues, so as to move forward on this ground. 

After a careful classification of the issues raised during the discussions, we found that many of them can be attributed to the interpretation and application of the ASMA mechanism according to Paragraph 1 and Paragraph 2, Article 4, Annex V of the Protocol. Paragraph 1 states: “Any area, including any marine area, where activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted, may be designated as an ASMA to assist in the planning and co-ordination of activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve co-operation between member states or minimize environmental impacts”. Paragraph 2 states: “ASMA may include: (a) areas where activities pose risks of mutual interference or cumulative environmental impacts; and (b) sites or monuments of recognized historic value.” The “activities are being conducted or may in the future be conducted” and the objectives should be achieved by an ASMA and their relationship with each other, are mostly stressed elements by members involved in the intersessional discussions. Focusing on the two key elements, we are pleased to make some clarification as follows, in combination with the outstanding questions raised in the discussions: 

2 (i). Dome A is of significant scientific research value and environmental value that deserve protection

Dome A is located in the hinterland of East Antarctica and the middle of the main ice divide of the East Antarctic ice sheet , being the summit of the Antarctic ice sheet and also an Antarctic inland dome that is most distant from the coastline. Thanks to the unique geographical location and natural environment, the area is endowed with unique scientific research value, environmental value as well as logistical support value, due to which CEP has noted that members had generally recognized the value of having sound management arrangements in place for this scientifically important area (paragraph 165, CEP XVIII Report).

2 (ii). The record of increased operators, volume and types of human activities in the area, demonstrates that Dome A has great potential for international scientific research cooperation in the future.

Due to its important scientific and environmental value, a number of members have maintained strong scientific interests and carried out research activities in the area in the past decades. Despite the most hostile natural conditions, the area has attracted the attention and interest of the scientific community since 1950s when the scientists explored the Gamburtsev Sub-glacial Mountains. An automatic weather station was deployed at Dome A area as part of Chinese-Australian collaboration in January of 2005, which still works near the Kunlun Station and continues to send data back today. The Chinese Center for Antarctic Astronomy (CCAA) has been conducting astronomical research activites in Dome A area in collaboration with American and Australian scientists in scientific research and equipment operation & maintenance since 2007. The scientists from different countries also conducted aerial surveys in Dome A area covering the Kunlun Station to collect scientific data during the implementation of the DoCo project (Dome Connection East Antarctica) in 2007/2008 and the international AGAP project (Antarctica’s Gamburtsev Province) in 2008/2009.

Along with the construction of the Chinese Antarctic Kunlun Station, supporting a series of multi-disciplinary scientific research activities in astronomy, deep ice core and glaciology, scientists and research institutions from many countries have expressed strong interests in scientific research and international cooperation in this area. During the International Polar Year, over 60 scientists from 10 countries including the US, the UK, Japan, Germany, France, Australia, Russia, Canada, South Korea and China participated in the “International Workshop on Dome A Expedition in IPY” held in May of 2007 in Shanghai, representing a strong interest of the international community in scientific research and international cooperation in this area. In 2012, the German scientists has discussed with the Chinese side on his plan to conduct an ice core research program on the section from Dome F to Dome A, with the support of the infrastructure in Kunlun Station. The Australian and Chinese scientists communicated with each other on the future collaboration on ice core research in this area during the Meeting of IPICS (International Partnerships of Ice Core Science) in 2015.

Given the internal facilities in the Kunlun Station was unable to provide the necessary conditions required for accommodation since the kick-off of its construction, the members of previous expedition teams could only live in the cabins of the vehicle. As a result, it limited the large scale international cooperation to be conducted in the station. Currently, the capacity building project in the Kunlun Station has made great progress as planned, the rooms, and the electricity and oxygen facilities that are necessary to support accommodation in summer time in the hostile circumstances have been completed. The Station will be put into operation as a normal summer station in the next two to three years. In addition, the fixed-wing aircraft of Chinese Antarctic Expedition has been deployed to this area in the summer of 2015/2016. These infrastructures will provide strong support for the access of scientists from all countries to Dome A area for scientific research and wider international cooperation. The international cooperative program ICECAP2 (International Collaborative Exploration of the Cryosphere through Airborne Profiling program) jointly initiated by China, the US, the UK and Indian was officially launched in the season of 2015/2016, during China’s 32nd Antarctic Expedition. ICECAP2 will use China’s fixed-wing aircraft to carry out multi-year, large scale scientific investigations, exploring the areas covering the data-poor areas in Princess Elizabeth Land, and the areas of Dome A, Ridge B and Vostok, expecting to make influential progress in research on subglacial environment (rift valley, subglacial lake, and watershed characteristic), subglacial process, ice sheet stability and site selection for the oldest deep ice core. For the airborne surveys in Dome A area, ICECAP 2 set several survey lines, including the line connecting Zhongshan Station and Dome A section, the line connecting deep ice core drilling sites and the line of refreezing ice layer under the ice sheet. This year, the fixed-wing aircraft flew by the Canadian crew has flew over the Kunlun Station several times in Dome A area and obtained the expected aeronautical data, with the participation of the scientists from the US and India in the field work. More scientists from the UK, Australia and India will join in the subsequent data analysis and research.

In the CEE for the construction of the Kunlun Station submitted to CEP and ATCM in 2008, China has expressed that the Kunlun Station will, upon the completion of the construction, become an international cooperation platform for multi-disciplinary scientific research in the area within 75-85°S, 70-80°E.We believe that, in the next two or three years, the scientific and environmental value, and the potential for international cooperation in the area will be further explored, and the operators, volume and types of activities will continue to increase. China hopes to work together with interested members to promote the scientific research and international cooperation in this area, as well as to ensure that the current and future scientific activities be conducted in a way that do not conflict with each other and have the minimum impact on the unique scientific and environmental values,. To this end, we proposed the designation of the ASMA in this area, as a transparent area planning and management arrangement.
 
2 (iii). The objectives of the proposed ASMA cover all those set out in Article 4, Annex V of the Protocol, including planning and co-ordination of activities, avoiding possible conflicts, improving co-operation between member states, minimizing environmental impacts.

The relationship among the above-mentioned objectives of an ASMA set out in Paragraph 1, Article 4, Annex V of the Protocol in the English version is “or” not “and”. Several members argued that in Spanish and French version, there is an “and” instead of “or”. The ATCM XVI, in which the Annex V of the Protocol was adopted, “requested that the Depositary convene a linguistic committee in Washington to bring into accordance with the English text of the Annex the French, Russian and Spanish language texts with a view to rectification in accordance with the rules and procedures set out in the Vienna Convention on the Law of the Treaty” (para. 93, ATCM XVI Report). Thus, according to the text in English version, there should be a “or” rather than a “and” between the objectives set out in the paragraph 1 of Article 4. That means, when considering the designation of the ASMA, ATCM or CEP does not need to require the proposed ASMA to meet all objectives but one or several objectives set out in Paragraph 1, Article 4 of Annex V. 

In spite of that, the proposed ASMA has actually met all objectives set out in Article 4, Annex V of the Protocol. The proposed ASMA is aimed at planning and coordinating all kinds of research and logistical activities etc. that are being conducted or may in the future be conducted, avoiding conflict between activities so as to protect the unique scientific and logistical values of the area that are endowed by unique natural environment, as well as encouraging and promoting international scientific and logistics cooperation in the area by using the clarity and flexibility of the ASMA mechanism. 

2 (iv). The ASMA mechanism is a more appropriate management arrangement for comprehensive coordination and protection in the Dome A area. 

During the informal discussions, some members questioned about the appropriateness to apply ASMA, whether it is the best choice/practice, and whether it is the appropriate time to introduce an ASMA. 

By taking full account of legal provisions, management needs, activities being conducted or may be conducted in the future, values in this area and CEP discussions and practices, we believe that ASMA is a more appropriate management arrangement in providing comprehensive coordination and protection in this area. First, the CEP Workshop on Marine and Terrestrial Specially Managed Areas held in Montevideo, Uruguay in 2011 shared the good practice in the future use of the ASMA mechanism, and concluded that “there is a need and opportunity to promote further and more effective collaboration and cooperation between those undertaking activities in Antarctica. The ASMA mechanism represents a flexible framework for achieving such objectives. Designating an ASMA can provide clarity and visibility regarding the management arrangements for an area, and can be good means of promoting engagement by stakeholders” (ATCM XXXIV IP136). Obviously, ASMA is a good management instrument to address the circumstance of the area in question with transparency. In practice, ATCM has established several ASMAs with different situations, and accumulated different models and experiences. In fact, the management plan of the proposed ASMA in Dome A area was also formulated through drawing on the methods and experiences of relevant ASMA that have already been designated and operated. Second, the ASMA mechanism is the only area management instrument explicitly provided for in the Protocol. It is an international area management mechanism in nature. As an Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party, China highly respects the international governance status of Antarctica conferred by the “Antarctic Treaty” and believes that the legal instrument that is clearly defined by the treaty should take precedence over other options when consider an area management arrangement, and it is also a more appropriate choice for promoting international cooperation in respect of transparency/visibility. At present, scientists and logistics personnel, some of them from different countries, have collaborated together in the Dome A area, and the operators, volume and types of research activities will further increase in the future. On the above basis, we believe that ASMA is more appropriate than domestic rules of a single country. Besides, the rectified international treaties are also an important source of domestic law in China.

Another issue is whether it is appropriate time to introduce an ASMA in Dome A at current stage? The information we have provide above has shown that the operators, volume, and types of human activities in Dome A area are increasing. And particularly, with the operation of Kunlun Station and the deployment of the fixed-wing aircraft, it will be easier to access to and conduct activities in this area. The upgraded infrastructures bring both opportunities for scientific research and challenges for management and protection. On the one hand, it will provide favorable conditions and opportunities for exploring the scientific value of the Dome A area, facilitating the expansion of international cooperation and collaboration, and promoting human’s understanding of global climate change. On the other hand, it poses challenge for coordinating various activities and protecting scientific and environmental values of the area. Therefore, it is necessary to, through area planning and management, reduce the conflicts between activities and minimize the cumulative impact on the environment while exploit the potential of the scientific value. Moreover, the earlier the plan is developed, the more possible to achieve the maximum scientific and environmental values in this area at the minimum cost, and avoid adverse impact or damage. Many rules of the Antarctic Treaty System were formulated prior the risks develop into real damage. 

2 (v). Other issues.

In recent years, CEP has adopted the Revised Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for ASPAs and such guide for ASMAs is under discussion. We highly appreciate the conclusion made by CEP XVIII: “the Committee noted that the procedure for prior assessment of ASPAs or ASMAs should not apply to any areas that had already been proposed as an ASPA or an ASMA.” (Para. 206, CEP XVIII Report)

In summary, ASMA is an appropriate and better arrangement for the comprehensive area management and coordination in Dome A area, in that it provides transparency and clarity to all members that have or may have interest to conduct scientific research activities in this area. The designation of ASMA in this area will enhance the planning and coordination of activities to avoid conflict, promote the sharing of facilities and equipment, facilitate further international cooperation, and more important, protect the unique science and environmental values in the area. 
3. The Follow-up Work Plan

Cherishing the existing international cooperation in this area, and with the full respect of the scientific interests and other concerns of the members, China is willing to build the Kunlun Station into a platform for international cooperation, and is in a cooperative attitude on the designation of the ASMA in Dome A area as well. Expecting the participation of more members in scientific research in this area and an expansion of international cooperation encouraged by the transparent ASMA mechanism, China is open to incorporating other ideas into the proposed ASMA, and also welcome interested members to join in this proposal.

Based on the above consideration, China requests CEP to:

i ). note the unique scientific research value and environmental value in Dome A area, and recognize its great potential for scientific research and international cooperation in the future with the improvement of infrastructures and facilities, and further notes China’s sincere intention to promote the sharing of facilities and equipment and international cooperation in scientific research, and to minimize the impact of human activities on the environment through the designation of the ASMA. 

ii ). support China to lead the next round of intersessional informal discussion, consult with members in an open attitude, and encourage all members to participate, with a view to further optimizing the area management arrangement.



