Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the Development of a
Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid
Protocol
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group on the Development of a
Publication on the Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid
Protocol
Summary
The present document contains the report of the intersessional
contact group on the “Development of a Publication on the
Occasion of the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol”, as well
as the strategy addressed to complete the tasks regarding the
development of ToR 1 and 2. This paper also includes the resulting
draft publication, for consideration of the CEP/ATCM.
Introduction
During the XVIII meeting of the Committee on Environmental
Protection, Argentina introduced WP 47 “Report of the Informal
Discussions on the Development of a Publication on the Occasion of
the 25th Anniversary of the Madrid Protocol”.The paper presented
the outcomes of the informal discussion led by Argentina, including
a draft index of subjects for a publication, and possible ways to
move forward.
The Committee thanked Argentina for leading the informal
intersessional discussion, and supported the establishment of a
formal process with balanced authorship to prepare a publication to
reflect the achievements of the Protocol and CEP, as well as future
challenges. The Committee agreed that such a publication should be
concise, politically neutral and prepared in language accessible to a
wide audience. (paragraph 29, XVIII CEP. Final Report).
As a conclusion, the Committee decided to establish an
Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) on the development of a
publication on the 25th anniversary of the Madrid Protocol with the
following ToRs:
Establish a small Author Group to develop the writing process of
the publication, taking into account the geographical balance and
diversity of CEP Parties in terms of experience, including former
Chairs of the Committee. Also, to establish an Editing Group for the
compilation and editing of the text, once the contributions are
received;
Develop a neutral, brief, concise and web-based publication
including visual and dynamic tools, considering the objectives
already defined for the publication by the CEP;
Identify the different means of outreach for the publication; and
Submit to the XIX CEP the draft publication for Parties
consideration and approval, prior to its launch on the occasion of
the anniversary date by October 2016.
Finally, the Committee gratefully accepted Argentina’s offer to
convene the ICG and encouraged broad engagement in this work
during the upcoming intersessional period. The Committee
welcomed the offer from Patricia Ortúzar (Argentina) to act as
convener for the ICG (paragraph 34, XVIII CEP. Final Report).
Argentina began discussions in the forum CEP in September 2015.
After the Opening Announcement, two rounds of discussions were
held and the following Parties have contributed with comments:
Australia, France, Germany, Norway, Spain and the United States.
Development of discussions and preparation of the publication
(ToRs 1 and 2)
After the opening announcement, Argentina proposed to address the
ToR 1. “Establish a small Author Group to Develop the writing
process of the publication, taking into account the geographical
balance and diversity of CEP Parties in terms of experience, treats
including former Chairs of the Committee. Also, to Establish an
Editing Group for the compilation and editing of the text, eleven are
the Contributions received”.
Thus, a deadline for submission of nominations was set, in order to
integrate the groups of Authors and the Editing Group. This Group
should be geographically balanced and diverse, and it would
include the participation of former Chairs.
Upon closing of this round, only one Party had offered to
participate in the group of authors and one Party in the Editors
Group. This situation prevented the consolidation of the groups and
thus the development of ToR2. “Develop a neutral, brief, concise
and web-based publication including visual and dynamic tools,
considering the objectives already defined for the publication by the
CEP”.
Given this situation, different options were considered in order to
find an alternative to fulfill the mandate entrusted by the CEP.
Finally, and following a suggestion made by the CEP Chairmanship,
the task of drafting the publication was offered to former CEP
chairs, who were invited to collaborate, on a voluntary basis. As the
participation of former chairs had been highlighted as very
desirable during the first year of consultations within the ICG, we
felt it was the appropriate way to proceed.
Thanks to the invaluable cooperation of all the former CEP chairs,
with the support and collaboration of the CEP Chairmanship and
the commitment of Argentina as ICG Convener to carry this
through, the content of the Publication (Annex 1) is now available
as a draft publication for consideration by the Parties. We recall the
Meeting that the aim is to have a final version ready by October
2016.
Debates on Means of outreach (ToR3)
Finally, a brief debate on the ToR #3, “Identify the different means
of outreach for the publication” was opened on the CEP forum. In
order to fulfill this task, we asked for comments on a list of possible
communication channels, which included a brief preliminary
analysis of each of the proposed modalities. The list included the
following means of outreach:
Official channels - governmental and non-governmental (observers)
- of the Antarctic Treaty System
Website – Antarctic Treaty Secretariat
Websites – related organizations: COMNAP; CCAMLR; SCAR; ACAP;
others.
Websites – Antarctic Treaty Observers: ASOC; IAATO; Others
Websites – National Antarctic Programs (NAPs)
Official social networks
Providing the publication to accompany the declaration to be
developed for the ATCM special working group on the 25th
anniversary.
External means of outreach
News agencies (governmental and private)
Internal institutions of National Antarctic Programs
Ministries/ government agencies, different from those that have
specific competence in Antarctic issues (Education Ministry and
other governmental organisms; Science Ministry and other
governmental organisms)
Four Parties participated in this exchange. As a result, Parties
supported the proposed list, as a way to make the publication
available to the widest possible audience. Also, one Party added a
new possible mean, based on the fact that in some countries
National Antarctic Programs and Competent Authorities are
different institutions:
Websites – Competent authorities (or ministries that have specific
competence in Antarctic issues)
The full list can be found in Annex 2. It also contains comments
made by the Parties to the various dissemination channels proposed
therein, including the possibility of linking the publication in the
ATS website to the web pages of the organizations associated with
the Antarctic Treaty System and Observers. Also, value was
recognized inthe idea of a press release from the ministries and
competent entities in Antarctic issues coinciding with the
anniversary date of the signing of the Madrid Protocol (October 4,
1991).
Other Parties also raised proposals or additional comments, which
are valuable for consideration by the Committee, as follows.
It was noted that most of the options could be taken forward by
Parties and other organizations in a voluntary fashion, while some
would require the general agreement of the Parties (i.e. posting the
publication on the ATS website, and providing the publication to
accompany a declaration on the 25th anniversary of the Protocol).
The possibility to ‘link back’ to the publication on social networks
was also mentioned. Moreover, it was proposed that Parties could
agree on a shared hashtag, as a good way of both building emphasis
and tracking communications.
In thinking on the best approach to publishing the document it was
pointed out that it is likely to have greater impact if, for example, it
can be presented with accompanying spectacular Antarctic images.
Also, it was pointed out that the Secretariat might be well placed to
take on this role, with materials contributed by Parties, or one or
more Parties could volunteer.
Finally, a Party drew attention to the need to think about likely
ways to present this material to young people or the general public,
as this publication will probably not have a friendly format for
younger students or those with little background in Antarctic Treaty
matters.
Conclusions
Although some modifications to the original plan needed to be
made, considerable progress has been made to comply with the
Terms of Reference agreed during the last CEP. The draft
publication is now available to the Parties and it is expected that
after contributions, it will be ready for dissemination by October
2016.
Also, the debate on ToR 3, raises interesting points that merit
further consideration.
Recommendations
It is recommended that CEP:
Consider the Draft Publication and generates a consultation
mechanism between the Parties, in order to complete its drafting in
advance of the 25th anniversary of the signing of the Protocol.
Analyze the different ways of dissemination that arose from ToR 3,
As a result of the above, suggests that the Parties and related non-
governmental organizations, implement those forms of
dissemination in which voluntary action is required
To approve those forms of dissemination in which the general
agreement of the Parties is required.
Start spreading the publication at the time of the anniversary of the
signing of the Madrid Protocol, on 4 October 2016.
