





On “openness” of the gateway to the Antarctic



English version provided by the author






On “openness” of the gateway to the Antarctic
Submitted by Russian Federation

Most ship and air routes to the Antarctic pass via the southern sea ports and air ports of a number of the Southern Hemisphere States. In these ports the expedition marine vessels replenish their supplies of fuel, fresh water and food products, different ship and expedition supplies and perform necessary repair work before going to the Antarctic stations and seasonal field bases. Many participants of national Antarctic Programs embark ships in the same ports before sailing to the area of their activity and research at the sixth continent. These sea ports are widely used for the same purpose by cruise ships making tourist voyages to the Antarctic and by fishing vessels before beginning fishery in waters of the CCAMLR area. Several airports in the Southern Hemisphere are the last but one points of completing intercontinental flights to Antarctica for delivering personnel and cargo of national Antarctic expeditions and tourist groups to the places of main destination. 
These facts allowed one to widely apply the term “gateway to the Antarctic” in the international community with regard to these sea ports and airports. A number of States use this term for outreaching their activity in the development of one of the main principles of the Antarctic Treaty – international cooperation. 
International Antarctic Centers were established in Punta-Arenas (Chile), Ushuaia (Argentina), Hobart (Australia) and Christchurch (New Zealand) where different national Antarctic Programs have good facilities for organization and support of their logistical operations in the Antarctic. 
The air operator of the International Corporate Network DROMLAN has been efficiently operating in Capetown for 13 years, beginning from 2003, organizing intercontinental flights from this international airport of the RSA to ice airfields on the Queen Maud Land, adapted for receiving heavy transport wheeled airplanes and further delivery of personnel and cargo of the national Antarctic programs of Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, India, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Finland, Sweden, RSA and Japan to the Antarctic stations and field bases of these countries by means of medium-range aircraft on ski. 
Similar operations are carried out from Christchurch by aircraft of the national Antarctic Programs of the USA and New Zealand to the area of the Ross Sea coast, from Hobart by Australian airplane to the Wilkes Land and from Punta-Arenas to the region of the Antarctic Peninsula. Return of participants of national expeditions and tourist groups to South Africa, Australia, New Zealand and South America is carried out by the same routes.
Support of these transport marine and aviation operations from the ports of the aforementioned countries not only enhances their political prestige in the Antarctic community, it strengthens significantly the economy of these countries of the Southern Hemisphere. 
In spite of obvious attractiveness of using these sea and air ports by the Antarctic Treaty Parties for development of activity of their national Antarctic Programs via these centers at the route to and from the Antarctic, a serious problem appeared in some of them in recent years connected with the immigration regime issues. This problem mainly concerns participants of the wintering teams of the Antarctic expeditions, which return from the Antarctic to their countries after about a 12-month work on the sixth continent. 
The point is that the immigration rules of most countries do not allow procurement of multiple transit visas for a period of more than 90 days. Given that processing of transit visa in the consular departments of countries in the southern hemisphere takes approximately 30-45 days before the first border crossing of this country by participants of national Antarctic programs of other countries, their second visit to the port of this country of the southern hemisphere after return from the Antarctic occurs not even in 12, but in 14-15 months from the date of transit visa procurement. 
Procurement of visas in the consular departments of the last port countries accredited in the countries of the other national Antarctic programs in one’s absence is not permitted by the existing immigration rules. While such problem is solved in the airports when participant of the Antarctic expedition returning home has an air ticket for a regular flight from this international airport, this problem unfortunately cannot be solved for the expedition members departing home onboard the expedition vessel. 
For the last few years this practice was addressed by arranging sea documents of the established international standard for all participants of the national Antarctic programs of some countries of the northern hemisphere. However during the season 2015-2016, the port authorities of one of the Treaty Parties have refused from considering participants of the national Antarctic programs as the crew members giving them the passenger status. According to the adopted immigration procedures, the latter should have transit visas, which is impossible for the expedition participants returning home by ship. 
In accordance with provisions of the Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic of 1965 and 2011 (Convention), the crew members are not required to hold a transit visa.
Part E of Convention “Measures of facilitation for ships engaged in scientific services” stipulates:
P.3.18 Recommended Practice. A ship engaged in scientific services carries personnel who are necessarily engaged on the ship for such scientific purposes of the voyage. If so identified, such personnel should be granted facilities at least as favorable as those granted to the crew members of that ship.
In accordance with Appendix 1 to the Convention, only two forms of ship’s roll were developed: 
    • IMO FAL form 5 - IMO CREW LIST;
    • IMO FAL form 6 - IMO PASSENGER LIST.
In accordance with standards of the national classification societies of maritime shipping, the expedition vessels going to the Antarctic and returning from it with participants of national Antarctic programs are special purpose research vessels.
In accordance with Resolution MSC (Maritime Safety Committee) 266 (84), “special purpose ship” is a self-propelled vessel with mechanical engine onboard which in connection with the character of its operation there are more than 12 persons of special personnel. “Special personnel” means all persons who are not passengers or crew members and who are onboard the vessel in connection with special purpose of such ship or in connection with special work performed onboard such vessel.  
It is supposed that special personnel is physically healthy, sufficiently well knows ship layout and had specific training in safety provision before departing the port; special personnel includes the following categories: researchers, technical specialists and dispatchers on ships engaged in research activities, non-commercial expeditions and explorations.
From this viewpoint, personnel of wintering and seasonal national Antarctic expeditions belong to a category of special ship personnel and have the following documents: foreign passport, seafarer identity card, seaman’s book, international certificate on special training in safety, international certificate of special training for ship security and necessary medical documents.
All participants of the national Antarctic Programs provide for activity of their governments in the Antarctic region using funds of the state budgets of these countries. They are not commercial passengers, but perform the expedition objectives they are entrusted with. 
Thus, the legal basis with the use of documents adopted at the International Maritime Organization for participants of the national Antarctic programs as special personnel of the expedition vessel exists. 
It is obvious that for some Parties of the Antarctic Treaty, which have agreements on the visa-free immigration regime for their citizens with the state of the southern hemisphere, the sea- and airports of which operate as the "gateways to the Antarctic", this problem does not represent any practical interest. 
Being aware that setting the immigration regime of any state is its sovereign right and cannot be addressed by the international community, we believe that the problem encountered is inseparably connected with observance of the main principles of the Antarctic Treaty. 
Aiming at strengthening and comprehensive promotion of the Antarctic Treaty System, we call on the aforementioned countries to consider in the near future the current problem of transit travel of participants of the national Antarctic Programs to and from Antarctica and find a positive solution thereof. 
