





Revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Adélie Land






Revised Management Plan for the Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Adélie Land
Summary
In accordance with Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Antarctic Treaty Protocol on environmental protection, France carried out the five-year review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No. 120, Pointe-Géologie Archipelago, Adélie Land. Revisions were carried out in accordance with Annex V and with the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas annexed in Resolution 2 (2011). Significant editorial changes were made in order to follow the presentation advocated in the Resolution and in Resolution 5 (2011). France recommends that the CEP approves the revised Management Plan for this area, attached to this document.
Introduction
Four islands, one nunatak and the breeding site for emperor penguins were classified in 1995 (Measure 3 – ATCM XIX, Seoul) as Antarctic Specially Protected Area, based on the fact that they represented Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems biologically, geologically, and aesthetically. Consequently, this area also holds exceptional intrinsic scientific value. The Management Plan was revised in 2005 (Measure 2 – ATCM XXVIII, Stockholm) and in 2011 (Measure 2 – ATCM XXXIV, Buenos Aires). In accordance with paragraph 3, Article 6 in Annex V of the Antarctic Treaty Protocol on environmental protection, it is now subject to a new revision, in view of adopting a format that is more compliant to CEP recommendations (Resolutions 2, 2011), of clarifying certain aspects, of specifying conditions for access, and of updating data on the area's bird populations.
The following section gives a brief overview of suggested changes deriving from the Management Plan's revision.
Overview of Proposed Amendments
The attached table summarizes the current Management Plan status and the main revisions that are being considered. Essentially, the following changes have been made to provisions in the current Management Plan (purely editorial changes which do not entail a change in meaning or in the Management Plan's scope do not appear in the table):
Introduction – this is an added section. It incorporates elements presented in the section called "Description of values to be protected" from the previous Management Plan and includes new elements: general points about the Pointe Géologie Archipelago, references to Resolution 3 (2008) on Antarctic Environmental Domains and Resolution 6 (2012) on Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR).
Section 1 – Description of values to be protected
French names have been updated for three bird species.
Catharacta maccormicki: Labe de MacCormick (MacCormick's skua), previously called "skua antarctique," south polar skua)
Pygoscelis adeliae: Manchot d’Adélie (Adélie penguin, previously called "Manchot Adélie")
Oceanites oceanicus: Océanite de Wilson (previously called "Pétrel de Wilson," Wilson's petrel)
Section 2 – Aims and objectives
This section was reworded for more clarity.
Section 3 – Management activities
Two sentences were added to the Management Plan, as a reminder of requirements laid out in Annexes I and II of the Protocol, relating respectively to impact assessments on the environment and to the removal of equipment or of abandoned materials.
Section 5 – Maps
Map 1 shows the geographic location of Adélie Land on the Antarctic continent, and the location of Pointe Géologie Archipelago on Adélie Land has been modified, without changing the caption.
The caption to map 2 has been changed to include an update of bird names and provide information on the emperor penguin colony.
Section 6 (i) – Geographic coordinates, boundary markers and natural features
A section called "General description of the area" has been added, presenting its geology, terrestrial biological communities, vertebrate fauna, and population fluctuations. This information was for the most part missing in the previous version of the Management Plan.
Table 1 has been updated to integrate the most recent data (2014/2015) on populations of the various bird species that live in the ASPA and the rest of Pointe Géologie Archipelago.
Table 2 has been updated with recent data about the first egg-laying period of snow petrels and Cape petrels (December, but the previous Management Plan had said November).
Table 3 has been updated and now features trends in bird population evolution for three different periods:
    • 1952/1984, which can be seen as a "pre-classification period," and which saw a sharp decline in the emperor penguins population (mid-1970s) probably due to changes in the climate and sea ice, 
    • 1984/2000, which includes the beginning of the classification of the area (1995) by giving information on the evolution of trends after the climatic event of the mid 70s, and
    • 2000/2015, which, five years after the beginning of the classification, can give an indication on its effect on avian populations.
Section 6 (iv) – Location of other protected areas in the vicinity
This section specifies that the nearest protected area to ASPA No. 120 is ASPA No. 166 Port Martin, located 60 km East.
Section 7 – Terms and conditions for entry permits
This section was reworded for more clarity. The reference to activities for which a permit may be delivered, which appeared in the previous version, was replaced by a reference to paragraph 7 (ii), which lists these activities.
Section 7 (i) – Access to, and movement within the Area
This section has been amended to explicitly include the possible use of drones for scientific research, for demographic monitoring, or for logistics.
A paragraph has been added, which explains the procedure to follow in the exceptional case when emperor penguins move across the base on Petrel Island, located outside of the ASPA.
Section 7 (ii) – Activities which may be conducted in the Area
Addition of activities designed to preserve species. 
It is noted that activities designed for educational or science popularization purposes are possible if they cannot be carried out elsewhere.
Section 7 (iii) – Installation, modification or removal of structures
It is noted that permanent structures or installations are forbidden.
Section 7 (v) – Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area
A paragraph has been added to further develop aspects relating to introducing non-indigenous species and to propose recommendations to minimise risks.
Section 7 (vi) – Taking of, and interference with native flora and fauna, and Section 7 (viii) – Measures necessary to meet the aims of the Management Plan
References have been made to SCAR's code of conduct for scientific research on the field in Antarctica (ATCM XXXII-CEP XII IP004) and to the use of animals for scientific purposes in Antarctica (ATCM XXXIV-CEP XIV IP53).
Section 7 (x) – Visitation reports
This part has been updated in order to conform to Resolution 2 (2011) in this area.
Section 8 – Reference materials
This section is new compared to the previous Management Plan, and provides a list of the bibliographical references mentioned in the document.
Recommendations
France recommends that the CEP adopts the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 120, Pointe-Géologie archipelago, Adélie Land, for its adoption by the ATCM.


ATCM No. 120, Pointe Géologie Archipelago, Adélie Land
1. Has a new ASPA been proposed?
No
2. Has a new ASMA been proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation
Specially Protected Area (SPA No. 24) by Measure XIX-3 (Seoul 1995)
First adoption of the Management Plan 
Measure 3 (1995)
Management Plan Revisions
Measure 2 (2005)
Measure 2 (2011)
Current Management Plan 
Measure 2 (2011)
Extension of Management Plan expiry dates:
N/A
Renamed and renumbered by decision 1 (2002)
ASPA  No.120, Pointe-Géologie archipelago, Adélie Land 
Other relevant measures

4. If the proposal contains a revision for an existing Management Plan, please list the kinds of changes that have been made:
i) Major or minor?
Major in their form, minor in terms of content
ii) Changes made to boundaries or coordinates?
No
iii) Changes made to maps? If the answer is yes, do the changes appear only in the captions, or also in the actual graphics?
Yes
Map 1 shows the geographic location of Adélie Land on the Antarctic continent, and the location of Pointe Géologie Archipelago on Adélie Land has been modified, without changing the caption.
The caption to map 2 has been changed to include an update of bird names and provide information on the emperor penguin colony.
iv) Changes made to the area's description, which contribute to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No 
v) Changes which have a bearing on another ASPA, ASMA, or HSM in this area or near it? Please explain the fusion with an existing area or site, their incorporation, or the abolition of an existing area or site
No
vi) Other – brief summary of other kinds of changes, indicating in which Management Plan paragraphs they may be found.
Please refer to the main working paper for a description of the changes that have been made
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA has been proposed, does it feature a maritime area?
N/A
6. If the answer is yet, must the proposal receive a prior approval from the CCAMLR, in keeping with decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If the answer is yes, has the CCAMLR given its prior approval? 
N/A
If the answer is yes, please indicate the CCAMLR's final report and the paragraph number.
N/A



