





General Recommendations from the Joint Inspections undertaken by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol 









General Recommendations from the Joint Inspections undertaken by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain 


Summary

    1. Antarctic Treaty Inspections were conducted jointly by the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain in the Antarctic Peninsula region, during December 2012.  Observers from each Party were designated by their respective Governments in accordance with the notification procedures of Article VII (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.

    2. The inspections, undertaken between 1 and 14 December 2012, covered 12 permanent bases, 3 unoccupied bases, 3 Historic Sites, 4 cruise ships, 1 yacht and 1 wreck site (shown on the map below).  All inspections were undertaken in accordance with Article VII of the Treaty and Article 14 of the Environmental Protocol.   The full inspection report will be submitted as an Information Paper and distributed at ATCM XXXVI.


Map of the Inspected Bases, Stations, Sites & Vessels:


General Recommendations

    3. The Antarctic Treaty designated Observers from the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Spain identified a series of general recommendations arising from their Inspection Programme, which have potential relevance beyond just those bases, stations, sites and vessels inspected.  The ATCM is therefore invited to consider each of these general recommendations and take action as agreed.  (Further information on these recommendations is set out in the full inspection report, which also includes further specific recommendations relating to the bases, stations, sites and vessels inspected.)

General

    1. All bases and vessels should complete the relevant Antarctic Treaty Inspection Checklists annually and make these available to all on the Secretariat website;

    2. The Secretariat should maintain a regularly updated list of base contact details on the ATS website.  (Bases might consider using a generic rather than personal e-mail address to minimise the disruption caused by personnel changes);

    3. Future inspection teams should endeavour to include speakers of the main languages of the bases they plan to inspect;

    4. The ATCM should consider the introduction of a review process to assess whether inspection recommendations have been implemented.

Personnel and Training

    5. All temporary personnel and visitors should receive adequate training and briefing before visiting Antarctica, particularly on safety procedures and environmental protection; 

    6. Smaller bases, in particular, should take steps to review the safety risks to staff involved in marine activities, especially diving and small boat operations, and adopt the best practice followed by other (usually larger) bases. Where numbers are limited, consideration should be given to collaboration with other bases to ensure teams large enough to ensure staff safety.

Scientific Research

    7. More effort should be made by National Antarctic Programmes to ensure that the research facilities which have been established in Antarctica are actively used; 

    8. Research cooperation between National Antarctic Programmes and between scientific institutions should be pursued more actively;

    9. An assessment of current peer reviewed research should be undertaken for each individual station in the Antarctic Peninsula to be able to establish its impact and contribution to science; 

    10. National Antarctic Programmes should pursue and invest in an approach of more remote and automated measurements for monitoring. 

Logistics and Infrastructure

    11. More active consideration should be given to promoting the use of renewable energy, especially wind and solar power, in the Antarctic Peninsula;

    12. Bases in close proximity to each other should give consideration to sharing key logistics and infrastructure such as fuel storage, power generation, fresh water supplies, vehicles and accommodation; and that Parties planning new operations in Antarctica consider collocating with an established base;

    13. Stations which require upgrades of their fuel storage and management should implement these as a matter of urgency; 

    14. All new fuel tanks should be double skinned and bunded;

    15. All fuel tanks currently in use should be bunded and periodically surveyed (ultrasonically) to detect internal corrosion; and that stations consider the oil spill risk, during winter, because fuel tanks in open bunds filled with snow and ice cannot contain the fuel that might be released; 

    16. All tanks out of service and redundant should be removed out of the Antarctic Treaty Area. 

Transport and Communications

    17. Consideration should be given to the development of guidelines for the use and operation of tracked vehicles outside established  tracks; and

    18. Consideration should be given to pooling investment in bandwidth to improve internet connectivity.

Safety, Training and Emergency Procedures

    19. All bases that have not done so should urgently review, with expert assistance, their fire safety and detection equipment and procedures;

    20. Bases with no fire detection and alarm systems in accommodation areas should install them as a matter of urgency; and

    21. Bases which currently store gasoline in or near the working or living buildings on base, should urgently review and arrange to store separately away from working or living areas.

Environmental Management

    22. Stations undertaking new developments (including change of use) and new activities in Antarctica, should ensure that an EIA is carried out before the activity is authorised, that local station management  are involved in the EIA process, and that such EIAs are easily available on bases for inspection;

    23. Stations in the Maxwell Bay and Fildes Peninsula area should review the cumulative impact of their activities and examine how this might be reduced by better national and international co-operation. For example, by the stations sharing common facilities and services, such as fuel storage, power generation, water production, accommodation, and waste management;

    24. Consideration should be given to ensuring that separated waste removed from Antarctica for disposal is shipped to a destination with recycling available at port reception facilities;

    25. A review should be undertaken of the biosecurity arrangements at Frei station both for air arrivals at Marsh airfield and the use of imported worms for sewage treatment; and

    26. Consideration should be given to the installation of signs or markers, indicating the boundaries of ASPAs where appropriate to do so, especially at stations and sites which are unoccupied such as at Whalers Bay, Deception Island.

Medical

    27. Consideration should be given to producing a list of specialist facilities (e.g. recompression chambers, X-Ray facilities), together with the relevant contact details, to foster international medical cooperation and to cut down the duplication of facilities that are only needed on rare occasions.
.
Tourism

Visitors to Science Bases 

    28. Parties should consider developing clearer methodologies for determining whether structures and installations within their bases which are no longer required should be considered for Historic Site and Monument status, especially where new buildings are planned to replace them.

Tourism Operations

    29. Visitor Site Guidelines and ASMAs should be used more proactively to help manage tourism, especially in areas where the numbers of visitors are high; and

    30. Consideration should be given to determining the maximum visitor capacity for the most popular sites. 

Vessels

    31. The IAATO mechanism of managing ship movements should be commended and strengthened, to ensure that as far as possible all marine operations are coordinated to avoid vessel concentrations at key sites.

