





On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula: summary of programme and suggested amendment of eleven Guidelines









On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula: summary of programme and suggested amendment of eleven Guidelines

Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, and the United States (in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators)
1. Summary
Further to ATCM XXXVI WP 15 Policy Issues Arising from the 2013 On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula, this paper provides an overview of the work of the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, the United States and the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO) who carried out the on-site review of visitor Site Guidelines in the Antarctic Peninsula in January 2013.
 
This paper proposes the amendment of 11 Site Guidelines to ensure that they are brought up to date and can continue to be an effective tool for visitor management. The sites involved are: Yankee Harbour; Half Moon Island; Brown Bluff; Hannah Point; Cuverville Island; Danco Island; Neko Harbour; Pleneau Island; Petermann Island; Damoy Point and Jougla Point. 

The United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and the United States recommend that:
i) the CEP adopt the revisions to the 11 Site Guidelines listed at Annex A (provided as attachments) and advise the ATCM accordingly; and
ii) the Secretariat replace the versions currently on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s website with the revised versions.

A related Working Paper is provided on two new Site Guidelines ATCM XXXVI WP16 Site Guidelines for i) Orne Harbour and ii) Orne Islands.
2. Background
In 2006, on the invitation of the United Kingdom, a team comprising representatives of the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, Norway, the United States, and IAATO visited 12 sites used by visitors in the Antarctic Peninsula. The 2006 team reviewed in-situ the management provisions of Site Guidelines, and made recommendations and developed individual Site Guidelines. The team advised the CEP on the use and effectiveness of Site Guidelines in helping manage visitor activity. The recommendations resulting from this work fed into an ICG discussion and were subsequently considered by ATCM XXIX (2006) (WP1 and WP2), when new and revised Site Guidelines were adopted.

In January 2013 the United Kingdom again invited a team consisting of representatives from Argentina, Australia, the United States and IAATO to join the United Kingdom in conducting a follow-up on-site review. The composition of the team reflected in large part the 2006 review, although Norway was unable to participate for reasons of personnel availability. 

The team visited 12 sites in the Antarctic Peninsula region for which the ATCM has adopted Site Guidelines for visitors, re-visiting eight of the sites from the 2006 review. The team also visited and drafted Site Guidelines for two additional sites used by visitors.

3. Membership and itinerary
The participants in the 2013 review team were:
Henry Burgess
Polar Regions Department
United Kingdom
Patricia Ortuzar
Dirección Nacional del Antártico
Argentina
Phillip Tracey
Australian Antarctic Division
Australia
Adrian Dahood
National Science Foundation
United States
Kim Crosbie
International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO)

Using the UK’s Ice Patrol Vessel HMS Protector as a platform the team visited 14 sites used by visitors as follows. A map of the sites is provided at Annex B.

11 January 2013
Yankee Harbour (South Shetland Islands)
12 January 2013
Half Moon Island (South Shetland Islands)
13 January 2013
Barrientos Island (Aitcho Islands, South Shetland Islands)
14 January 2013
Brown Bluff (Tabarin Peninsula) 
15 January 2013
Hannah Point (Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands)
16 January 2013
Orne Harbour (Gerlache Strait)
17 January 2013
Orne Islands (Gerlache Strait)
17 January 2013
Cuverville Island (Errera Channel)
18 January 2013
Danco Island (Errera Channel)
18 January 2013
Neko Harbour (Andvord Bay)
19 January 2013
Petermann Island (Penola Strait)
20 January 2013
Pleneau Island (Lemaire Channel)
21 January 2013
Damoy Point, Dorian Bay (Wiencke Island)
21 January 2013
Jougla Point (Port Lockroy, Wiencke Island)
4. On-Site Review – process
The review team spent up to three hours ashore at each site. Where possible, the whole area covered by the existing Site Guideline was visited. The focus was on observing key areas, for example closed areas, areas where wildlife breeds or congregates, areas of vegetation, areas of particular interest to visitors such as scenic points and routes to features. The visits were informed by the existing Site Guidelines, the experiences of the tourism industry in using the Site Guidelines since 2006, information about how visitor groups use the sites, and any limitations, errors or ambiguities that had been reported by users of the Site Guidelines (via the IAATO representative on the review team). 


On-site, the team considered:
    • any changes in on-site conditions;
    • whether known impacts remained evident and whether potential impacts could be observed;
    • whether areas identified as closed areas, guided walking areas, or free roaming areas  remained appropriate; 
    • accuracy and ease of use of maps, in particular the depiction of closed areas, recommended routes, etc.;
    • whether photographs were informative and/or representative of site features;
    • site background information - topography, flora and fauna, and other features;
    • whether identified small craft landing sites remained appropriate; and
    • any particular hazards for visitors.

After each visit the team considered whether any changes to landing requirements (size of vessel, number of visits per day, etc) might be appropriate. The team also took the opportunity of the review to consider the consistency of approach across the different guidelines, and how they interacted with the General Guidelines for Visitors adopted in 2011, and make consequent recommendations. Recommendations for revisions, where appropriate, were then compiled for each site.
 
A number of visits were made while tourist landings were taking place (at Yankee Harbour, Half Moon Island, Hannah Point, Brown Bluff, Neko Harbour, and Petermann Island). The team did not formally inspect or review tour operator activities, but did observe how sites were being used by visitors in the context of the Site Guidelines. The team saw the use of overt and robust bio-security measures, and in some cases, followed routes flagged by operators. The review team members spoke to expedition leaders and guides regarding the use and effectiveness of Site Guidelines. Expedition staff were interested in the work of the team, had good knowledge of the Site Guidelines and provided practical feedback on their use. The review team also took the opportunity to talk to visitors about their expectations and experiences.
5. Revised Site Guidelines
Whilst recognising that each visit could only necessarily be a snapshot of a location at a particular time of the season and under particular weather and site conditions (for example snow cover, wildlife presence and other variable factors) the team believe that each visit, and the discussion that followed, presented an important opportunity to assess the Site Guidelines against their objectives.
 
The team believe that Site Guidelines are one of the important ways in which practical information can be provided on ensuring sustainable visitation. The team identified a limited number of changes required to keep the Site Guidelines up to date and to reflect any practical changes on the ground. These changes have been reflected in ‘tracked changes’ in the attached documents. Annotated photographs and revised maps are currently in production, and in line with Recommendation 8 of ATCM XXXVI WP15 Policy Issues Arising from the 2013 On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula it is proposed that these maps could inform discussion on future standardisation.

The United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and the United States recommend that:

i) the CEP adopt the revisions to the 11 Site Guidelines listed at Annex A (provided as attachments) and advise the ATCM accordingly; and

ii) the Secretariat replace the versions currently on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat’s website with the revised versions.


Annex A – Site Guidelines with suggested amendments

    • Yankee Harbour
    • Half Moon Island
    • Brown Bluff
    • Hannah Point
    • Cuverville Island
    • Danco Island
    • Neko Harbour
    • Pleneau Island
    • Petermann Island
    • Damoy Point
    • Jougla Point.
(11)

Annex B – locations with current or proposed Site Guidelines visited during the on-site review, January 2013



Small red dot = Proposed new Site Guidelines
Green dot with black circle = Proposed amended Site Guidelines

