





Report on the Research Project “The Impact of Human Activities on Soil Organisms of the Maritime Antarctic and the Introduction of Non-Native Species in Antarctica”









Report on the Research Project “The Impact of Human Activities on Soil Organisms of the Maritime Antarctic and the Introduction of Non-Native Species in Antarctica”

Working Paper submitted by Germany
Summary
Germany presents the results of the research project “The Impact of Human Activities on Soil Organisms of the Maritime Antarctic and the Introduction of Non-Native Species in Antarctica”. Germany invites Parties and the CEP to consider the results of this German research project and the recommendations which concern biosecurity measures against the transfer and introduction of non-native soil organisms and decide as appropriate.
Introduction
At CEP XIII, Germany introduced IP 014 Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”. Aim of this paper was to introduce the starting German research project, to inform the Treaty Parties about its purpose and methods and to request for cooperation and call for comments, especially from those Antarctic Treaty Parties having own experiences and knowledge in that field.
At CEP XIV, Germany introduced IP 026 Progress Report on the Research Project “The role of human activities in the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica and in the distribution of organisms within the Antarctic”. 
Report and Results of the Research Project
The research project “The Impact of Human Activities on Soil Organisms of the Maritime Antarctic and the Introduction of Non-Native Species in Antarctica” was commissioned by the German Federal Environment Agency and was carried out by the Senckenberg Museum of Natural History Görlitz, Germany, in close co-operation with international experts on soil invertebrates. It was supported by two cruise tour operators and their expedition leaders. The main goal of the project was to assess the potential influence on Antarctic terrestrial ecosystems by primarily ship-based tourism. The project aimed at estimating the anthropogenic influence on the distribution of organisms within as well as on the introduction of non-native species into Antarctica, both in areas frequently visited by tourists and near research stations. 
The study investigated potential anthropogenic impacts on a major portion of the species communities in Antarctic soils (with the exception of microorganisms) in a larger region strongly affected by tourism (the Antarctic Peninsula). A total of 13 sites of land excursions of touristic cruises as well as areas strongly frequented by station and research personnel along Antarctic Peninsula were considered as study sites. The majority of individuals were found among the Nematoda (> 255.000 individuals), Tardigrada (> 30.000) and Collembola (> 25.000). A total of 98 species were proven, mostly Nematoda (40 species), Actinedida (25), Tardigrada (14) and Collembola (11). In both study years, highly significant differences between the faunas of the various localities were ascertained, but significantly decreasing total densities from the northern to southern localities were evident. Eight species of the Collembola and Actinedida were identified as being non-native and potentially introduced. The highest number of non-native species was recorded from Deception Island. 
The transportation of soil organisms by the footwear of visitors could thus be proven, despite the “bootwashing” measures. The recorded soil animal communities were individual- and species-richer the denser the vegetational cover became. The vegetation as a habitat for the Antarctic soil fauna is very important, regardless of how strongly it is developed. The communities of these animal groups became species- and individual-richer the higher the quality of these soil organic-matter parameters were. The total of all results reveals important faunistic changes, which can be attributed to a human influence.
Recommendations
We invite Parties and the CEP to consider the results of the German research project (see IP 55 to CEP XVI) and the following recommendations which concern biosecurity measures against the transfer and introduction of non-native soil organisms:
    1) Improvements in the education of Antarctic visitors on the necessity and use of these measures (e.g. bootwashing) as well as in the control of the proper implementation are necessary, especially on cruise ships. This includes an intensification of their use between Subantarctic and Antarctic areas as well as after visiting sites already harboring high numbers of non-native species, such as Deception Island or Neko Harbour. In order to bring forward this matter we recommend that CEP encourage Parties to optimize the compliance with the Non-Native Species Manual as well as IAATO to optimize the compliance of its members with the IAATO-bootwashing guidelines.
    2) Specific microhabitats must be more strongly protected, for instance by an expansion of areas closed for visitors in the respective Visitor Site Guidelines to include areas with initial or sporadic vegetation as well as around the vicinity of meltstreams (= areas of soil organic-matter collection and higher soil moistures). To prevent the further dispersal of non-native species in the future, it is necessary that the areas which tourists may visit be constrained. CEP should discuss and consider the establishment of an international, long-term soil biological monitoring program. Only through such a program the understanding of the long-term human impacts on areas with strong touristic pressure as well as a monitoring of the success and improvement of biosecurity measures can be achieved. Therefore, we propose to establish an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) to discuss and further work on this proposal till CEP XVII.


