





Review of the Management Plan for ASMA No.1: Admiralty Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands









Review of the Management Plan for ASMA No 1: King George Island, South Shetland Islands 

Submitted by Brazil, Ecuador, Peru and Poland

Abstract
The Admiralty Bay Management Group (ABMG)1 has conducted its first five-yearly review of the Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 1, King George Island. Brazil, Ecuador, Peru and Poland recommend that the CEP  asks the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake an intersessional review and report back to CEP XVI.
Introduction
Admiralty Bay (latitude 62º 01’21”S, longitude 58º 15’05”W), King George Island is an area of outstanding environmental, historical, scientific, and aesthetic values. For nearly four decades, coordinated scientific research has been conducted in Admiralty Bay by the ABMG countries and many other countries. Admiralty Bay has become a site of increasingly diverse human activities, which are continuously growing, becoming more complex and creating a situation of potentially conflicting uses. The need to conserve and protect these unique and outstanding values, whilst at the same time managing the variety of competing demands placed upon them, lead to the designation of Admiralty Bay as an Antarctic Specially Managed Area under Measure 2 (2006) –   ASMA No. 1: Admiralty Bay, King George Island.
In accordance with the Article 6.3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, ABMG has conducted its five-yearly review of the Management Plan for ASMA No. 1, King George Island, South Shetland Islands.
Brazil has been the Coordinator of the ASMA since 2006 and it has conducted the review process. During the ATCM XXXV, there was a specific meeting of ABGM and CCAMLR, ASOC and IAATO members to discuss krill fishing in the Area and to define the review process. ABMG have discussed the draft Management Plan in the 2012-2013 intersessional period and contributions of scientific community have subsidized this Management Plan review.
Since harvesting of marine living resources has taken place in the Area in 2010, some guidelines for this activity have been added to this Plan. This concern was discussed during the CEP XV and ATCM XXXV. A document on this subject was submitted to the Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM/CCAMLR). Considering the relevance of this subject, it is recommended to submit this Plan to CCAMLR and to other Parties for discussion and contributions, in order to present a final version of this Management Plan in ATCM XXXVII.
The following sections briefly describe the proposed amendments arising from the review of the Management Plan.  Two new Appendix have been included: Appendix B (Macroalgae List) and Appendix D (Marine Invertebrates recorded at Admiralty Bay). The revised draft management plan is attached for consideration.

Substantial issues
1. Description of values to be protected:
Scientific values:
Insertion of four items relating to geology and geomorphology of the landscape.
2. Aims and Objectives:
 Two new aims have been added: (i)”Ensure that any marine harvesting activities are coordinated with scientific research and other activities taking place within the Area and are based on the precautionary approach; (ii) Minimize the possibility of non native species introduction through human activities.”
3. Management Activities:
Some ASMA Coordinator's duties have been described: “Duties of the ASMA Coordinator are: (i) Coordinate information exchange by Parties about the activities undertaken in the ASMA and analyze them in order to identify possible overlaps and unconformities in relation to the objectives of this Management Plan. The Coordinator shall encourage Parties to fully comply with EIES Information Exchange requirements. Parties should send to ASMA Coordinator information that was not available at EIES, like type of activity conduced in the Area, georreferenced localization, period, number of participants, type of vassel or aircraft, etc.; (ii) Report to the Parties and, as appropriate, to the CCAMLR Secretariat, any incident that may cause impact to environment or research activities in the Area”
5. Maps:
Insertion of two new figures:
- Figure 5: Permanent Environmental Monitoring Area (INCT-APA, Brazil);
- Figure 7: Main birds breeding sites.
6. Description of the Area:
Scientific information was updated and two new topics were inserted: Freshwater habitat and Human activities and impact.
The structures and facilities were described with more detail and updated.
New Zones of scientific and/or ecological interest were identified:
    • Ipanema: breeding location for Larus dominicanus, presence of vegetation banks;
    • Costal area from Refuge N° 2 and Domeyco: the most important breeding location for Larus dominicanus;
        ◦ Area between Arctowski Station and ASPA Nº 128: presence of vegetation banks;
        ◦ Machu Picchu station: breeding areas for antarctic stern and skuas.
7. General Code of Conduct:

Insertion of a new topic: Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area
The other topics were complemented:

Access to and movement within or over the Area:
Insertion of a new orientation of ships anchoring: “Anchoring should avoid areas of scientific or ecological interest, and areas of environmental monitoring.”
Activities which may be conducted in the Area, which will not jeopardize the values of the area, and which are consistent with the Code of Conduct:
Some guidelines for fishing activities have been added: “Harvesting of marine living resources, which should be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Management Plan and with due recognition of the important scientific and environmental values of the Area. Any such activities should be conducted in coordination with research and other activities taking place, and could include development of a plan and guidelines, based on the precautionary approach, that would help to ensure that harvesting activities did not pose a significant risk to the other important values of the Area.”
Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:
Insertion of two paragraphs:
        ◦ Seismic operations should be avoided, particularly with the use of explosives;
        ◦ Harvesting of marine living resources should be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Management Plan and with due recognition of the important scientific and environmental values of the Area. Harvesting conducted without close coordination with the scientific activities has the potential to impact both the environmental values of the Area and the long term research programs of Parties focused on the biodiversity of the ecosystem (eg. benthic studies, birds; and pinnipeds’ monitoring). 
The collection or removal of materials not imported into the Area:
Insertion of an additional element: “It may be permissible to remove from the site materials such as beach litter or abandoned relics and artifacts from previous activities. Dead or pathological fauna or flora should be removed only for scientific purpose, with specific permit, because they are used as food by mammals and birds.”
Recommendation
Ecuador, Brazil, Peru and Poland recommend that the CEP asks the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans to undertake an intersessional review and report back to CEP XVI, and submits this Draft to the WG-EMM/CCAMLR, in order to receive contributions to the final version, which will be presented in ATCM XXXVII.

