





Proposed Amendment for Antarctic Treaty Site Guidelines for Visitors Torgersen Island









Proposed Amendment for Antarctic Treaty Site Guidelines for Visitors Torgersen Island
Summary
Torgersen Island is the site of a long-running study on Adélie penguin population dynamics.  In 1989 the island was divided into two use areas, one open to visitation and the other closed to visitation so it could serve as a control to examine possible human impacts.  Research activities continued throughout the island.  Although both sides of the island have suffered significant population declines that are thought to be caused primarily by climate change (winter sea ice loss and changing precipitation patterns), the rate of decline of nesting groups on the open side of the island is significantly greater than the decline on the control side.  As a precautionary measure in light of these changes, we propose an amendment to the Site Guidelines for Visitors to strongly discourage visits during the early breeding season (October through mid-January)when the birds are most sensitive to brown skua predation and potential human disturbance.
Background
The Adélie penguin colony at Torgersen Island has been visited by Palmer Station personnel since the Station’s founding in the 1960s and by tourists since at least 1990 (according to IAATO Statistics).  To ensure consistency in site use and to offer a level of protection to this population, the United States put forward a Site Guideline for Visitors (SGV) for the open side of Torgersen Island in 2010 ( ATCM XXXIII WP 17 Antarctic Treaty Visitor Site Guide for Torgersen Island, Arthur Harbor, Southwest Anvers Island).  This paper proposes an amendment to the existing guidelines in response to significant declines in the Adélie penguin population on Torgersen Island.
The United States began funding studies of penguin population dynamics on Torgersen Island in 1974 and these studies continue to the present day.  In an effort to better understand the impacts of visitation (conducted by station personnel and tourists alike) on the colony, the island was divided into two use areas in 1989.  One half of the island was set aside as a control side closed to visitors, while the other half remained available for visits.  Research activities, however, continued on both sides.  The aim of this study was to examine if effects on the colonies’ population dynamics due to visitation could be separated from effects induced by environmental change.  Early results from this study suggested two conclusions, one being that environmental change (winter sea ice loss and increasing precipitation) was the primary driver of Adélie penguin population changes across Torgersen Island, the other that smaller colonies tended to be more vulnerable to additional stressors and, therefore, more likely to go extinct (Fraser and Patterson 1997, Patterson et al. 2003).  On Torgersen Island, the most conspicuous additional stressors were brown skuas, whose impacts via predation on eggs and small chicks increased disproportionately as individual colonies decreased in size.  Elsewhere in Antarctica, human activity emerges as an additional stressor as colonies decrease in size (Woehler et al. 1994; Gieze 1996).  
When the described studies were initiated in 1989, there were, respectively, 4625 and 3310 breeding pairs of Adelie penguins on the control and visitor sides of the island.  By 2011, these numbers had decreased to 1271 and 329 breeding pairs, respectively.  In the 22 years of the study, the number of birds on the control side decreased by 73% while the number of birds on the side open to visitors decreased by 90%.   Critically, the largest colony on the tourist side only numbered 76 breeding pairs in 2011 (compared to 750 pairs on the control side). Thus, the remaining breeding population of Adelie penguins on the visitor side (8 colonies total) of the island is now characterized by highly vulnerable smaller colonies.  The United States is interested in reducing potential additional stressors on these very small colonies.
The Torgersen Island Adélie penguin colony receives a wide variety of visitors.  Up to twelve IAATO vessels may land at Palmer Station each Austral Summer season.  Many of these ships also conduct landings at Torgersen. In the past 10 years, IAATO visitation has ranged from approximately 230 to 960 tourists ashore per year, with the greatest number of tourists landed during the 2009-10 season.  Tourist numbers ashore are highly variable across the 10 years and there is not an obvious pattern of decrease or increase.    Approximately ten yachts a year visit Palmer Station and Torgersen Island.  When vessels from National Antarctic Programs visit Palmer Station, they too often make landings on Torgersen.  The Island lies within Palmer’s safe boating limit, and Palmer Station personnel frequently visit the island for recreational trips.  The IAATO vessels are the only visitor groups who consistently report visitor numbers on Torgersen, so it is challenging to quantify total visitor numbers, though it is known that the colonies on the open side are visited throughout the summer season.
The early nesting season, October through mid-January, is unequivocally a period of high vulnerability to predation by skuas (Young 1990) and the small colonies are already more vulnerable than larger colonies (Fraser and Patterson 1997, Patterson et al. 2003).  Disturbance during the early part of the breeding season can result in nest abandonment, interference with incubation shifts and reduction in recruitment ; all of these impacts have been cited as possible causal factors leading to population declines (Young 1990, Davis et al. 1994, Woehler et al. 1994, Giese 1996).  How human activity may contribute as an additional, early season stressor is less clear. The United States is concerned that early season visits to these small vulnerable colonies could be having disproportionately negative effects on nesting penguins.  This concern is driving the precautionary approach outline in this document.  Disturbance in the early nesting season at Torgersen could exacerbate population declines and lead to colony extinctions.   Therefore, the United States seeks to strongly discourage early season visits when the nests are most vulnerable.
Recommendation 
The United States has suggested revisions to the text of the Torgersen Island guidelines that would strongly discourage early season visits to the island (October to Mid-January).  This would apply to all visitors to the island including those from National Programs, yachts, and tour ships.  The United States has suggested several other minor revisions to the text to reduce duplication between the Torgersen Island Site Guidelines for Visitors and the General Guidelines for Visitors to the Antarctic.  All revisions appear as track changes to the original wording in the attached document.  No revisions are suggested for the maps or photographs. We recommend that the CEP endorse the revised Site Guidelines for Torgersen Island.  

Literature Cited.
Davis, L.S., Miller, G.D., Wilson, K.-J., Barton, K., Wilson, P. & Cockrem, J.  1994.  Effect of different levels of disturbance/handling on recruitment of Adélie penguins. In: Fraser, W.R. and Trivelpiece, W.Z. (eds). Report on the Workshop on Researcher-Seabird Interactions, 15-17 July 1993, Monticello, Minnesota, USA, Joint Oceanographic Institutions, Washington, D.C., p. 40.
Fraser, W.R. & Patterson, D.L.  1997.  Human disturbance and long-term changes in Adélie Penguin populations:  A natural experiment at Palmer Station, Antarctic Peninsula.  In: Battaglia, B., Valencia, J., Walton, D.W.H. (eds). Antarctic Communities.  Proceedings of the VI SCAR Biology Symposium,  Cambridge University Press.
Giese, M.  1996.  Effects of human activity on Adélie penguin Pygoscelis adeliae breeding success.  Biological Conservation 75: 157-164. 
Patterson, D.L., Easter-Pilcher, A.L., & Fraser, W. R. 2003. The effects of human activity and environmental variability on long-term changes in Adélie Penguin populations at Palmer Station, Antarctica. In, “Antarctic Biology in a Global Context”, A.H.L. Huiskes, W.W.C. Gieskes, J. Rozema, R.M.L. Schorno, S.M. van der Vies and W.J. Wolff (eds), Proceedings VIIIth SCAR International Biology Symposium, Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, pp. 301-307.
Woehler, E.J., Penney, R.L., Creet, S.M. & Burton, R.H.  1994.   Impacts of human visitors on breeding success and long-term population trends in Adélie penguins at Casey, Antarctica.  Polar Biology 14: 269-274.
Young, E.C.  1990.  Long-term stability and human impact in Antarctic skuas and Adelie penguins.  In Kerry, K.R., Hempel, G., eds., Antarctic ecosystems.  Ecological change and conservation.  Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 231-236. 

