





SAR-WG: Resources available on Antarctic bases for land support in emergency situations: inclusion in EIES





Resources available on Antarctic bases for land support in emergency situations: inclusion in EIES
Introduction
The interest of Consultative Parties in actively cooperating with Search and Rescue Coordination Centres, established through existing agreements within the scope of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), is clearly reflected in initiatives that are put forward in Consultative Meetings and in the applications and contributions that are required from COMNAP.
In this respect, Resolution 8 (2012) was adopted, establishing a Special Working Group in this ATCM, which provides for the inclusion of SAR experts in the delegations. This is in line with agreements reached in Resolution 6 (2010) for improvements to be made in providing responses to search and rescue operations at sea, inter alia.
Land support in emergency situations
When an emergency situation requires land support, and that such action is feasible and more effective than an intervention by air or by sea, with a view to safeguarding the physical integrity of individuals in the Antarctic, prompt deployment of adequate means and resources are determining factors for the success of the emergency response.
On the ground, scientific and logistics personnel, as well as visitors, are exposed to dangerous situations such as disorientation, falling into crevices, accidents or physical ailments that might impair mobility. 
In some situations, air or sea Search and Rescue Coordination Centres establish that an overland route is a more adequate means of rescue than air or sea, or that a combined method should be used. In such situations, timely arrival of trained rescue teams stationed in bases close to the area where the incident occurred can allow for rescue in full safety or with only minor harm, and can provide first aid, pull the victim out of a crevice or move the victim to the closest boat or aircraft for evacuation. These are just some of the many different situations that can arise. Numerous examples of joint rescue missions between bases of different countries demonstrate the importance of smooth communication and preparation of personnel through training in Antarctica and in wintering centres.
Argentina has conducted numerous overland rescue operations and provides training at an advanced technical level which includes specific practice to address such situations. In Antarctica, joint activities are conducted with Chile for prevention and rapid response in situations requiring overland support.
Resources available on Antarctic bases that could provide land support in emergency situations:
Resources intended for these land support and rescue purposes are generally available in Antarctic stations: land vehicles, trained personnel, specific equipment and communications, among others. There are many cases where specialised teams intervened to perform or reinforce actions coordinated by RCCs, particularly in cases of persons who fell into a crevice, sustained injuries or went missing.
Within resources available, and based on experience, it is important that RCCs be notified immediately, as land support can be very slow in urgent situations due to isolation and distances between bases or field camps. Air and sea support are effective methods which can be complemented by support from bases that have land patrol capacities.
Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES)
The Electronic Information Exchange System, in implementation of Decision 10 (2005), has proved its efficiency and use, providing updated and systematised information, supplied by each Consultative Party. 	
Recommendation
With the purpose of providing all Consultative Parties with the most complete information on existing resources available to all of the Antarctic community for responding to emergencies, it is recommended that the ATCM encourage Consultative Parties to incorporate in the EIES a description of resources for emergency land support available in their bases. 


