





Co-chairs’ Report of the Workshop on the Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM, Brussels, Belgium, 20-21 May 2013








Co-chairs’ report of the Workshop on the Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM, Brussels, Belgium, 20-21 May 2013
Working Paper submitted by Australia and Belgium
Summary
In accordance with Decision 3 (2012), Australia and Belgium jointly hosted a Workshop on the Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM in Brussels, Belgium, from 20-21 May 2013. Australia and Belgium invite the Parties to consider the co-chairs’ report of the workshop, including the recommendations arising, and the list of priority issues incorporated in this Working Paper.
Background
At the 35th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM XXXV) held in Hobart in 2012 Parties discussed the development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan (Plan) for the ATCM. The Meeting adopted Decision 3 (2012) The Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, and decided;
    1) to develop a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan within existing resources;
    2) to adopt the principles annexed to this Decision (Annex 1) to guide the completion of the Plan; 
    3) to establish an open-ended Intersessional Contact Group, co-convened by Australia and Belgium, as the Chairs of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings XXXV and XXXVI respectively, to coordinate the further development of the Plan; and
    4) to hold a workshop immediately prior to ATCM XXXVI, with the following terms of reference:
        a. develop a draft Plan for consideration at ATCM XXXVI; and
        b. report to ATCM XXXVI on the outcomes of this workshop.
The report of the open-ended Intersessional Contact Group referred to in paragraph 3 is presented in Working Paper 31 Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on further development of a multi-year strategic work plan (Australia, Belgium). This paper reports on the workshop referred to in paragraph 4. 
The Workshop on the Development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM was held in the Egmont Palace, Brussels, Belgium, from 20-21 May 2013. It was co-chaired by Maaike Vancauwenberghe (Belgium) and Richard Rowe (Australia), and involved representatives from all 28 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and other ATCM participants. There was simultaneous interpretation of discussions in the four official Antarctic Treaty languages.
The agenda and schedule for the workshop are presented at Appendix 1. 
Conduct of the workshop
The workshop commenced with a discussion, based on Working Paper 31 Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on further development of a multi-year strategic work plan (Australia, Belgium), intended to identify and list a limited number of key work areas.
Parties considered the headings listed as 'work areas' in Working Paper 31 as possible priority work areas under which to structure a multi-year strategic work plan. These were distilled into three broad work areas which Parties agreed were a useful basis for structuring the plan, namely: 
    • ensuring a robust and effective Antarctic Treaty System; 
    • strengthening protection of the Antarctic environment; and
    • the effective management and regulation of human activities.
Participants suggested a number of priority issues which could be listed under these three work areas, to guide the development of the plan. On the basis of this discussion, the co-chairs prepared a summary paper of possible priorities (attached at Annex 1). This paper was discussed by participants, who considered it represented a useful guide to development of the plan.
Outcomes 
Participants agreed on the following priorities for inclusion in the multi-year strategic work plan:

COOPERATION IN:

Ensuring a robust and effective ATS
    • Conduct a comprehensive review of existing requirements for information exchange and of the functioning of the Electronic Information Exchange System, and the identification of any additional requirements
    • Discuss coordinated outreach to non-party states whose nationals or assets are active in Antarctica
    • Share and discuss strategic science priorities in order to identify opportunities for collaboration as well as capacity building in science, particularly in relation to climate change

Strengthening protection of the Antarctic environment
    • Consider the advice of the CEP on addressing repair and remediation of environmental damage and [consider appropriate follow up actions / agree on follow up actions with regard to responsibility and liability] (to be discussed further)
    • Assess on the basis of advice from the CEP whether the existing tools for environmental protection, including environmental impact assessment procedures, are up to date and reflect best practice

The effective management and regulation of human activities
    • Address the recommendations of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance
    • Strengthen cooperation among Parties on current Antarctic specific air and marine operations and safety practices, and identify any issues that may be brought forward to the IMO and ICAO, as appropriate
    • Review area management and permanent infrastructure related to tourism, as well as issues related to land based and adventure tourism in response to recommendations of the CEP tourism study

Further steps
The workshop agreed that the ATCM should give consideration to how these priority issues should be scheduled and presented in a work plan, and further agreed that this could occur in the context of the Legal and Institutional Working group, subject to the views of ATCM XXXVI.
Recommendations
The workshop co-chairs recommend that the Parties:
    1) endorse the list of priority issues proposed for inclusion in the plan
    2) give attention to appropriate scheduling of action on the priority issues
    3) adopt the work plan, to be used in accordance with the principles provided in Decision 3 (2012)
Annex 1: Co-Chair’s summary paper on priority issues

COOPERATION IN:

Ensuring a robust and effective ATS
Ensure effective implementation of and compliance with the Treaty and Protocol, and ATCM measures.
Improve information exchange between Parties (including in relation to tourism activities, scientific activities, legal arrangements, best practice etc).
Raise awareness of the work of the Antarctic Treaty Parties and the Antarctic Treaty system.
Ensure appropriate and effective relationships between the ATCM and other organisations and agreements.

Strengthening protection of the Antarctic environment
Support and provide guidance to the CEP to advance issues identified by the ATCM as priorities including: 
    • further development of the protected area system;
    • introduction of non-native species;
    • repair and remediation of environmental damage;
    • reducing the ecological footprint of human activities.
Identify and respond to emerging environmental issues.
Identify and cooperate on strategic Antarctic science priorities including climate science.

The effective management and regulation of human activities
Work to promote air, land and maritime safety including through SAR coordination and emergency response.
Appropriately manage and regulate tourism and non-governmental activities.
Identify, promote and support opportunities for closer cooperation among Parties.
Maintain appropriate oversight of bioprospecting issues.
Encourage the use of clean and alternative energy sources.
Monitor and respond to climate change including by addressing the recommendations of the Antarctic Treaty Meeting of Experts on Implications of Climate Change for Antarctic Management and Governance.
Appendix 1. Workshop agenda and schedule
Agenda
    1) Introduction
    2) Discussion of possible priority issues for inclusion in the draft Plan
    3) Presenting the priority issues in the plan – discussion of structure 
    4) Workshop outcomes and recommendations – reporting to ATCM XXXVI
Schedule
 Day 1 
 Monday 20 May 2013
 Morning
    • Introductory remarks by the co-chairs
    • Progress so far (brief history of discussions)
    • Role of the Workshop (ATCM XXXV Decision 3)
    • Discussion of possible priority issues for inclusion in the draft Plan
    • Brief introduction of ICG report
    • Opportunity to raise additional issues
    • Preliminary discussion of possible shared priorities

 Lunch


 Afternoon
    • Discussion of possible priority issues for inclusion in the draft Plan
    • Continued discussion of possible shared priorities
    • Recommendations to ATCM on possible priority issues for inclusion in the draft Plan
Day 2
Tuesday 21 May 2013
Morning
Presenting the priority issues in the draft Plan – discussion of structure 

Lunch


Afternoon
Workshop outcomes and recommendations – reporting to ATCM XXXVI

