





SAR-WG Proposed Agenda for Special Working Group Meeting on Search and Rescue (SAR)









SAR-WG Proposed Agenda for Special Working Group Meeting on Search and Rescue (SAR)

Working Paper submitted by the United States

Summary
At ATCM XXXV, Parties adopted Resolution 8 (2012) on Improved Coordination of Maritime, Aeronautical and Land-Based Search and Rescue and agreed to convene a special working group at ATCM XXXVI to discuss means of improving Search and Rescue coordination in Antarctica.  This resolution was based on ATCM XXXV WP51 Coordination of Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue (SAR) – Proposal for Considering Means to Improve Antarctic SAR Coordination, submitted by the United States.  In accordance with the ATCM XXXV Final Report (para 154), the United States led intersessional work to draft the proposed Special Working Group agenda and appreciates the contributions of many parties and experts.  The attached proposal was informed by that intersessional work.
Background
At ATCM XXXV, Parties adopted Resolution 8 (2012) on Improved Coordination of Maritime, Aeronautical and Land-Based Search and Rescue and agreed to convene a special working group at ATCM XXXVI to discuss means of improving Search and Rescue coordination in Antarctica. The Resolution specifically lists the following topics as means of improving Search and Rescue coordination in Antarctica that should be discussed by the Special Working Group: 

a) risk assessment and contingency planning; 
b) international coordination of maritime, aeronautical and land-based SAR; and
c) best practices or other arrangements.

The discussion at ATCM XXXV on search and rescue was driven by ATCM XXXV WP51 Coordination of Maritime and Aeronautical Search and Rescue (SAR) – Proposal for Considering Means to Improve Antarctic SAR Coordination, submitted by the United States.  That paper outlined past work conducted by Parties, the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP), and private entities to improve search and rescue coordination in Antarctica.  It also noted the growing number of SAR incidents in Antarctica in recent years and the importance of continued ATCM work to improve SAR coordination.

Following the adoption of Resolution 8 (2012), and in accordance with the ATCM XXXV Final Report (para 154), the United States led intersessional work to draft the proposed Special Working Group agenda and appreciates the contributions of many parties and experts.  In addition to contributions made via the Secretariat Forum, the United States also consulted directly with many stakeholders, including the Parties with SAR responsibilities in Antarctica.  The attached proposal is the result of that intersessional work.
Recommendation 
The United States recommends that Parties adopt this draft agenda for the May 23 Special Working Group meeting.

