





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 134 
Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 






Revised Management Plan for ASPA 134 (Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula)
Submitted by Argentina

Summary
Argentina had carried out the Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area ASPA 134, Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula, in accordance with the provisions of Article. 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Argentina requests that the CEP evaluate the need to forward this Plan to the Subsidiary Group on Management Plans for their intersessional consideration, or, if not considered necessary, to proceed to the adoption of this revised version of the Management Plan.  

Background
Antarctic Specially Protected Area 134 was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 15 according to Rec. XIII-8 (1985). Its Management Plan was adjusted to the requirements of Annex V to Measure 3 (Christchurch, 1997).  It was subsequently re-numbered according to Decision 1 (Warsaw, 2002) as ASPA #134, and, through Measure 1 (2006), a first review was approved.   
During this new revision process, which responds to the provisions of Article. 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, detailed analysis of current values in the Area was conducted and necessary measures to protect the Area were assessed, after consultation with the principal researchers who undertake research in this Area and the analysis of the corresponding Visit Reports. The principal modification proposals to the existing Management Plan are not significant, and are summarised in the following reference note. In developing the advice, the provisions of Resolution 2 (2011) "Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas" were given special consideration.

REFERENCE NOTE. COVERAGE FOR WORKING PAPER ON REVISION OF ASPA 134 Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula
1) Is designation of a new ASPA proposed? 
No 
2) Is the proposal linked with an ASPA or ASMA which exists at present? 
ASPA 134, Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 
• Original Designation: 
Designated as SSSI No. 15 in accordance with Rec. XIII-8 (1985)
• First adoption of the management plan: 
Measure 3 (1997) 
• Revision of the management plan: 
Measure 1 (2006)
• Current management plan: 
Measure 1 (2006)
• Extensions granted after the expiration date of the management plan: 
None
• New Name and number in accordance with Decision 1 (2002). 
ASPA 134, Cierva Point and offshore islands, Danco Coast, Antarctic Peninsula 

3) If the proposal contains any modification to an existing management plan, specify the characteristics of the suggested modifications: 
(I) Are they substantial or minor? 
Minor.
(II) Are changes made to the limits or coordinates? 
Minor adjustments were made to the coordinate data so as to make it more precise. 
(III) Are changes made to the maps? If so, do the changes affect only the legends or also the graphics? 
No.
(IV) Are there any changes in the description of the area that are relevant to identifying its location or its limits? 
No.
(V) Do any changes affect other ASPAs, ASMAs or HSMs within or beside this area? In particular, explain whether there is any proposal to merge, incorporate or revoke any existing area or site. 
No.
(VI) Other: brief summary of other types of changes, with indication of the paragraphs of the management plan in which the changes are indicated (this is especially useful if the plan is long).
Information concerning the reasons for designation was expanded based on the latest research conducted in the ASPA. The description of the values of the Area were updated and expanded, as was the data related to each value. Considerations relating to the prevention of introduction of non-native species were added.
Two new sections were added (1. Introduction and 8. Useful data) in response to the terms of Resolution 2 (2011) "Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas". Lastly, style and language modifications were incorporated in the wording of some paragraphs, to facilitate reading. 
