





Updated Map of Barrientos Island





Updated Map of Barrientos Island
Background
At ATCM XXXV (Hobart), Ecuador and Spain submitted working paper ATCM XXXV WP 059 “Revised Visited Site Guidelines:  Barrientos Island”. This document summarised the key findings of visitor monitoring conducted during the 2012 austral summer. 
The above resulted in the adoption of Resolution 5 (2012) which recommends that: "Parties take appropriate steps within their own legal and administrative systems to restrict access to the central part of Barrientos Island (AitchoIslands) by their nationals and operators, other than for reasons of scientific research and monitoring related to the recovery of the site" and insists that "Parties active in the area cooperate in designing and implementing appropriate surveys, research and monitoring plans that will help inform decisions on future management actions, and bring information regarding the above initiatives to the 16th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection" (Resolution 5 (2012)). 
Following the field work undertaken during austral summer 2012, Ecuador and Spain prepared WP 55 "State of the vegetation cover in Barrientos Island", which has been submitted to the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty for consideration. In addition, as part of its contribution to the management of Barrientos Island, Ecuador presents an updated map of the site for Parties and tour operators to be able to use in their activities. 
Objective
To provide to Parties and other stakeholders of the Antarctic Treaty System an updated map of Barrientos Island, thus contributing to the implementation of Resolution 5 (2012) and facilitating tourism and research activities that are carried out on this site. 
Updated graphic elements
The map attached hereto contains an update of the following graphic elements:  
    • Removal of track areas on the island. To that effect, Resolution 5 (2012) was taken into account, as it limits visitor access to the central part of the island except for monitoring and research activities. 
    • Geo-referencing and identification of areas belonging to penguin nests in the the penguin rookery area.
    • New boundaries for Closed Area C, which corresponds to the petrel nest of the Western tip of the island. The aim of the proposed area is to improve the protection zone for petrel nesting.  
    • New boundaries of the penguin rookery area and Closed Areas A and B, in relation to Resolution 5 (2012). 
    • Inclusion of the landing area on the South-East side of the island. 

Recommendation
Ecuador proposes that the Consultative Parties to the Antarctic Treaty consider incorporating this map in the current site guidelines for Barrientos Island until new resolutions are taken relating to the management of this visitor site or until completion of a general update of the site.
Annex: Map of Barrientos Island

Detail of the Eastern area of the Island

Detail of the Western area of the Island

