





Analysis of the ASPA and ASMA wildlife values









Analysis of the ASPA and ASMA wildlife values
At the XXXV ATCM the Delegation of the Russian Federation has presented the WP-35 “Proposals on preparation of revised management plans of Antarctic Specially Protected and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas”, which invited CEP to accept for consideration the Revised Management Plans of ASPAs and ASMAs where the living Antarctic nature representatives were defined as the main values only on condition of submitting the information report and materials with the results of monitoring of the state of values that were a cause for designating such area. The Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (Resolution 2 (2011) – Annex I) which reads: When undertaking Management Plan reviews, thought should be given to the need for further or continued site protection of species whose abundance or range has increased substantially. In contrast, site protection may be deemed unnecessary in an area where a protected species is no longer present and the environmental or scientific values for which the area was designated, no longer apply served as a basis for this.
The only instrument of such analysis is a long-term monitoring of the protected Antarctic living nature values carried out by the country-applicant and the method of presentation is the information report. 
Russia has indicated that the state of the numbers of living nature populations is directly dependent not only on the adverse anthropogenic influence on them, but also on the natural catastrophes, climate variability and trophic webs, different epidemics, etc. The Draft ATCM Measure proposed by Russia was not supported by some delegations whose representatives referred to complexities and a possible adverse influence of monitoring activity on the living nature values in the indicated regions of the Antarctic. Same delegations proposed new methods of remote monitoring of the state of these values. 
At the present time there are different methods of monitoring of living nature objects which can be used in the Antarctic. Their applicability to the specific observation region is a subject for discussion of scientists and specialists. It is important that as a result of using some or other methodology we had reliable evidence making it possible to assess the efficiency of the management plan of the region in force consistent with the requirement of the Guide (Resolution 2 (2011).  
Russia continues to insist on the need for a scientifically justified approach to the choice of the ASPAs and ASMAs in the Antarctic, excluding issues of politicization of this important nature protection instrument. Designation of the ASPA and ASMA not only indicates the standpoints of the states-applicants as supporters of the Antarctic nature protection, but also imposes the responsibility on them for arranging management including scientifically justified actions for protection of these areas allowing one to timely reveal and prevent the unfavorable factors in terms of the human activity impact. Obviously this mainly concerns the living nature values in the region. Russia also demonstrates such approach in the CCAMLR in discussing the issues of designating the Marine Protected Areas. In our opinion the need for conducting monitoring of the state of the natural values in the ASPAs and ASMAs is similar by its purpose to the principle of the Consultative or Non-Consultative Party to the Antarctic Treaty (Article IX, paragraph 2). It is known that only the state which actively operates its National Antarctic Program or a station can become a Consultative Party to the Treaty. Therefore organization of monitoring of natural values also confirms the consultative status of the Party that has designated such areas in the Antarctic.
Obviously, the arrangement and program of monitoring provided that this activity will be carried out with less than a minor environmental impact and minimum cumulative impact will require additional financial costs due to complexity of addressing some logistical objectives. However the true values of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty are determined by the concern about conservation of the unique Antarctic environment rather than being based on minimizing the material expenses. The country coming to work in the Antarctic on a permanent basis should be clearly aware that its actions in this region are connected with specific and sometimes significant material costs. The activity in the Antarctic is determined by the common humanitarian values of mankind and support of the interests of particular states in the region. Any aspects of nature protection activity in the Antarctic cannot be separated from this common approach. 
In this connection noting Resolution 2 (2011) Russia again recommends CEP to consider our proposals to adopt Measure on the need of conducting monitoring of the Antarctic Specially Protected and Specially Managed Areas in preparation of the revised management plans presented at XXXV ATCM in WP 35“Proposals on preparation of revised management plans of Antarctic Specially Protected and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas”.  
The draft of the given Measure is attached in the Annex.
Annex
Measure X (20XX)
Need for monitoring the Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas in preparing their revised management plans
The Representatives,
Recalling  Article 3 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty “Area Protection and Management” that any area, including any marine area, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area to protect outstanding environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned scientific research, 
Mindful that the state of the value of living Antarctic nature is significantly dependent on the change of environmental characteristics, conditions of trophical relationships, natural catastrophic phenomena and virus diseases, determined by trans-boundary transports in the atmosphere and the ocean,
Considering that organization and implementation of monitoring is most efficient for determining the state of living Antarctic nature values,
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with Article 12, Annex V “Area Protection and Management” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection and Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty.
In preparing a 5-year review of the ASMA management plan (revised plan), in which representatives of living Antarctic nature are designated as the main values, the Treaty Party, which has prepared its management plan, should submit to the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) information report and materials with the results of monitoring of the state of values of living Antarctic nature, that were the cause of designating this Specially Protected area.
Any Party to the Treaty desiring to conduct monitoring of the state of the values of living Antarctic nature in the Antarctic Specially Protected Area that were the cause of designating such area, should inform the Treaty Party that has designated such area, about its intention to conduct monitoring in compliance with the procedures adopted by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and obtain a corresponding permission for performing this activity. The results of such monitoring should be submitted to the Treaty Party that has designated this Specially Protected Area and reported at the next CEP session.
The CEP shall encourage monitoring of the state of natural values in Antarctic Specially Protected and Specially Managed Areas and set up with the help of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat the database with the results of monitoring of the state of natural values in these Areas.
The results of monitoring make it possible to revise the existing status of the Specially Protected or Specially Managed Area, the inventory of Antarctic living nature values in these Areas that are subject to protection and the geographical boundaries of the Specially Protected or Specially Managed Area.
In compliance with Paragraph 2, Article 12 “Amendment or Modification” of Annex V “Area Protection and Management” to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, any amendment or modification of Annex V shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.

