





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound










Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 18
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 18
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2002), Measure 9 (2008)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation XVI-7 (1991), Measure 3 (2001)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No. 
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A



ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound
    1. Management plans for adopted Antarctic Specially Protected Areas shall be reviewed at least every 5 years, and updated as necessary, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
    2. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 137 Northwest White Island was last reviewed in 2008, and review thus falls due in 2013. Accordingly, the United States reviewed the Management Plan and has made a number of minor revisions, both arising from consultations with scientists working in the Area, new observations of seals made using recent high resolution satellite imagery, and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    3. Northwest White Island was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 18 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) due to its value as the most southerly known pinniped population, and one which is unique as a small colony of resident Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) that has been cut off from access to the open ocean by an ice shelf, making it completely isolated. This situation offers unique and unparalleled opportunities for population dynamics and genetics research. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    4. The changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    5. A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area and the reasons for designation, including the history of designation, and the classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR) (note: as this is not a terrestrial area, it is not classified under ACBR);
    6. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011);
    7. (Section 1 – Description of values to be protected). A paragraph elaborating on the values has been added, expanding on the scientific significance of the Area and why it is vulnerable;
    8.  (Section 3 – Management Activities). A provision has been added that personnel travelling overland to Black Island need to be informed of the boundaries of the Area because the designated route passes within several kilometers of the Area;
    9. (Section 5 – Maps). Map 1 was comprehensively revised using latest accurate LINZ / USGS survey data and LiDAR elevations (OSU / USGS) in a DEM to produce a new more detailed and more accurate map of the island topography. Geographical positions and heights were refined based on these data. The new map provides a more accurate reference base for the Management Plan; 
    10. (Section 6 (i)) The description of the Area was updated by improvements to the text and to include references;
    11. (Section 6 (ii)) A new section was added to describe access to the Area, to maintain consistency with other recently adopted management plans;
    12. (Section 7) Revisions were made to the text and sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011); 
    13. (Section 7 (ii) – Access to the Area) The policy on air access was revised with a view to gaining consistency with Resolution 2 (2004) Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica. Acknowledging that Resolution 2 (2004) applies more specifically to birds in Antarctica, it was nonetheless felt that there is merit from a practical point of view (i.e. for pilots) to adopt consistent rules for overflight over wildlife generally within the McMurdo region. There is a general lack of scientific evidence to support specific flying heights over seals (see SCAR (2008) Human Disturbance to Wildlife in the Broader Antarctic Region: A Review of Findings), and since Weddell seals appear generally less prone to disturbance by aircraft than birds, the 2000 ft guideline adopted in Resolution 2 (2004) was, in the interim of new scientific evidence appearing, considered adequate and precautionary;
    14. (Section 7 (vii) – Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna) New text has been added to provide more specific guidance under this Section related to this unique population of Weddell seals: “Any proposed taking of, or harmful interference with, Weddell seals within the Area that are for purposes that could be achieved just as effectively on seals from populations outside of the Area should not be permitted.” Text has been appended to encourage adoption of stricter standards than the SCAR Code of Conduct where they are available: “where applicable, follow stricter animal care or research standards or guidelines in accordance with national procedures”;
    15. (Section 8 - Supporting documentation). A reference list has been added.

Proposal
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  Since the revisions were minor and focussed on bringing the plan formatting in line with Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), we recommend that the CEP adopt the revised Management Plan for ASPA 137 Northwest White Island, McMurdo Sound



