





Budgetary issues: proposal to ensure that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty benefits from the expertise of the "Coordination Regime"





Budgetary issues: proposal to ensure that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty benefits from the expertise of the "Coordination Regime"
Following the discussions held at ATCM XXXV on budgetary issues - in particular the review of the remuneration scale at the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (ATS) and its salary adjustment regime -, France proposes for ATS to become an “Associate” organisation to the "Coordination" regime so that it may benefit from the expertise and tools of the International Service for Remunerations and Pensions (ISRP). 
1. Purpose and scope of the "Coordination Regime"

Established in 19581, the « Coordination » – or Coordinating Committee on Remunerations (CCR) – provides a set of regulations governing the remuneration of staff members working in international organisations and institutions; those regulations are common to all the organisations which subscribe to them.

The regulations deal with:
    • A definition of a common salary scale and a method of their adjustment which is uniform and objective for all categories of staff and for all the member countries where personnel of the organisations concerned are based;
    • The nature, amount and method of adjustment of the various allowances granted to staff members;
    • The pension scheme.

At present, 6 international organisations are members of the Coordination, namely: NATO, OECD, Council of Europe, European Space Agency (ESA), EUMETSAT and the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), whereas 222 other "non coordinated" organizations apply voluntarily all or part of the regulations without joining the Coordination. There are also "Associate" organisations which benefit from the expertise and work of ISRP without having any formal relationship with the Coordination (e.g.:  Interpol).

As at 2013, some 54 States are members3 of this system which defines management regulations for salaries and pensions of nearly 11,600 staff members of full member or non-coordinated organisations as well as 5,500 pensioners.
2. Functioning of the Coordination

The Coordination is made up of 3 committees:
    • The Coordinating Committee on Remunerations (CCR): is the sole decision-making body. It is made up of representatives of Member States.
    • The Committee of the Representatives of Secretaries-General (CRSG): made up of the heads of administration of the coordinated organisations or their representatives in charge of remuneration issues.
    • The Committee of Staff Representatives (CSR): is made up of staff representatives in member organisations.

CCR receives the technical and legal support of the International Service for Remunerations and Pensions (ISRP)4, which forms administratively part of OECD.

CCR adopts recommendations on issues under its remit. The recommendations are addressed to the Councils of the coordinated organisations (above-mentioned governing bodies) which decide whether or not to implement them. Therefore, CCR recommendations are not legally binding; the extent of the obligation depends on the extent of domestication of the CCR regulation in the national body of laws of the member States.
3. Status of "Associate" organisation and its participation

"Associate" organisations may benefit directly from the ISRP expertise and, indirectly, from the work of the Coordination without being formally attached to it. 

OECD grants the organisation the status of "Associate" through a memorandum of understanding which also defines the scope of their cooperation (needs of the organisation, development of specific tools by ISRP, etc.) In that case, the organisation is not bound by CCR's recommendations as they do not apply to associate organisations. CCR is merely informed about the partnership.

In the event that ATS joins CCR in that arrangement, it will have to pay a yearly fee5 to ISRP in order to benefit from its work. ISRP will also invoice for its specific services relating to the adaptation of the salary adjustment method and salary scales. Although it is not possible to assess the amount without seeking ISRP's advice, the cost should not be hefty as ISRP charges its fees depending on the size of the organisation (number of staff in its employ), seeks to secure economies of scale by re-using the work done for other organisations (e.g.: for the Buenos Aires office of Interpol) or in the framework of the Coordination, and does not seek to make any financial gain (it only bills for the costs of work charged against its own budget).
4. Benefits to be expected from a possible adoption of the "Associate" organisation status 

Because of its legal status - a legal entity under the laws of Argentina - ATS would not be able to join CCR as a fully fledged member, as it is not an international organisation. Also, as the salary adjustment method defined under CCR is mostly based on a parallel with situations and tendencies observed in eight European national public service institutions, it would therefore not be relevant for ATS, since it is based in Buenos Aires. For the same reasons, it cannot be accepted as a non coordinated organisation either. 

However, as an "Associate" organisation, ATS would surely benefit from the experience, processes and tools developed in the context of the Coordination's Regime.

It would benefit from CCR's processes with the added advantage that it would not have to apply them automatically. It would also benefit from ISRP's expertise which would assist it in adapting the Coordination's tools to its specific circumstances, especially for determining a salary adjustment method adapted to Argentina. 

As an Associate organisation, ATS would derive the following benefits:
    • A salary scale specifically adapted to its situation but supported by the Coordination's experience.
    • A salary adjustment method adapted to ATS situation and which had been tested and proven in some 30 international organisations. As ISRP is currently developing salary re-adjustment scales pour the Buenos Aires Office of Interpol, those efforts may also be used for ATS.
    • ISRP expertise.

Membership in the Coordination offers many advantages:
    • With that Regime, ATS would benefit from an established system that has already been tested in other organisations. It would make savings in terms of human, administrative and financial costs relating to the development of an ad hoc system. It would also mean that ATCM would spare precious time in terms of man/hour for the development of remuneration standards for ATS.
    • More specifically, the Coordination would be able to assist ATCM in its needs while taking account of its constraints: it would provide a coordination system which is international in scope but without any connection with the UN system while retaining a measure of flexibility to secure some level of autonomy in decision-making relating to the determination of remunerations.

Affiliation would combine the desire to build the remuneration system on internationally-recognized standards, the need to reduce the costs of revising the existing system, while maintaining some leeway in drafting standards for remunerations.
5. Procedure for the affiliation of ATS to the Coordination's Regime

Should ATCM XXXVI decide to consider the possibility of affiliating ATS to the regime of the Coordination, as an "Associate" member, it should then invite ATS to engage with ISRP and CCR to assess the costs and savings that may result from such an affiliation.

Based on those findings, ATCM XXXVII may then decide upon the affiliation of ATS to the Coordination regime as an "Associate" organisation and, if it so decides, to proceed with the effective affiliation and engage with ISRP and CCR with the view to submitting to ATCM XXXVIII a scale of remunerations and a revised salary adjustment method, bearing in mind the peculiar situation of ATS and its constraints.

Finally, these efforts should help ATCM in amending, as per the needs identified, the Staff rules and regulations of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty that were adopted in Decision 3 (2003) so that it may adjust the salary scales to the standards suggested by CCR and ISRP and accepted by ATCM. 
6. Recommendation

In view of the above, France proposes that the Consultative Parties adopt the draft decision under Annex A so that the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (ATS) may assess the administrative advantages, the costs and savings which would result from its affiliation to the Coordination Regime as an "Associate" organisation and, more specifically, that ATS:
    • Engages with ISRP on its possible affiliation to the regime of coordinated organisations, as an "Associate" organisation, and examine the cost of an annual contribution and of the ISRP services;
    • Assess the impact, on its budget, of such an affiliation, taking into account the potential savings that may be derived from the outsourcing of such services;
    • Request from ISRP a report on remunerations standards that may be applicable to ATS and forward such report to the Consultative Parties as soon as it would have been received at the Secretariat; and
    • Report on the outcome of these efforts to ATCM XXXVII.
Annex A

Draft Decision X (2013)
Affiliation of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to the Coordination Regime as an "Associate" organisation

The Representatives,

Recalling Decision 1 (2001) and Measure 1 (2003) relating to the establishment at Buenos Aires of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;

Considering the Staff Regulations adopted by Decision 3 (2003) which set the salary scale of the staff members of the Secretariat;

Considering the Financial Regulations of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty adopted by Decision 6 (2005);

Desirous to provide the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, as an organ of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, with the necessary resources to enable it to discharge its mandate and missions fully and efficiently;

Desirous to base the standards applicable to the remunerations of the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty's staff members on internationally-recognized standards and seek to benefit, for their definition and possible future adjustments, from the expertise of international institutions where such internationally-recognized standards proved their efficiency;

Reaffirming their willingness to preserve the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting's autonomy when determining the rules applicable to the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty;

Decide:
    1. to request the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to engage with ISRP with the purpose of examining its possible affiliation to the regime of coordinated organisations, as an "Associate" organisation, and establishing the costs of an annual contribution and of ISRP services;
    2. to request the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to assess the impact, on its budget, of such an affiliation, taking into account the potential savings that may be made from the outsourcing of such services;
    3. to request the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to obtain from ISRP a report on remunerations standards that may be applicable to ATS and forward such report to the Consultative Parties as soon as it will have been received at the Secretariat;
    4. to request the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty to report on the outcome of these efforts to ATCM XXXVII.
