





Site Guidelines for i) Orne Harbour and ii) Orne Islands








Site Guidelines for i) Orne Harbour and ii) Orne Islands
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and the United States, in conjunction with the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators


1.Summary
Further to ATCM XXXVI WP15 On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula: summary of programme and suggested amendment of eleven Guidelines concerning the on-site review of visitor Site Guidelines carried out by the United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia, the United States and IAATO in January 2013, Site Guidelines have been prepared for i) Orne Harbour and ii) Orne Islands. The proponents recommend that the CEP submit both Site Guidelines for adoption by the ATCM. 

2. Background
2.At CEP XV IAATO submitted IP37 Report on IAATO operator use of Antarctic Peninsula Landing Sites and ATCM Visitor Site Guidelines, 2011-12. In response the United Kingdom indicated its intention to carry out work to propose Site Guidelines for Orne Islands, working with other Parties and Observers. During the course of the on-site review carried out in January 2013, favourable weather and sea conditions, together with information on the number of landings at nearby Orne Harbour, encouraged the team to believe that both sites would benefit from the introduction of Site Guidelines. 

The visitor site known as Orne Harbour (Latitude 64° 38’S, Longitude 62° 33’W) centres on a low saddle on the inside southern arm of the bay or Orne Harbour in the Gerlache Strait, Antarctic Peninsula. The site has a rocky shoreline below scree slopes and patches of permanent snow. From the saddle above the landing site a steep ridge rises to the rocky headland of Spigot Peak. The site has environmental value, including Chinstrap penguins are confirmed breeders, amongst other bird species. Moss and lichen species are present. In 2011-12 the site received 2144 visitors from 28 landings and was the 16th most visited location (IAATO figures).

Orne Islands (Latitude 64° 40’S, Longitude 62° 40’W) is located near to Rongé Island at the entrance to the Errera Channel. From the Islands it is possible to view the saddle above the Orne Harbour landing site. The visitor site is a moderately sloped low rocky dome with a rocky central ridge and permanent snow banks, three other small islets are not included within the proposed Site Guideline. Environmental values include Gentoo and Chinstrap penguins as confirmed breeders, amongst other bird species. Moss and lichen species are present. In 2011-12 the site received 194 visitors from 2 landings, although in 2006-07 this was 789 visitors from 12 landings (IAATO figures).
Annotated photographs and revised maps are currently in production and will be included within the new Site Guidelines prior to publication. In line with Recommendation 8 of ATCM XXXVI WP15Policy Issues Arising from the 2013 On-Site Review of Guidelines for Visitor Sites in the Antarctic Peninsula, it is proposed that these maps could inform discussion on future standardisation.

3. Recommendation
The United Kingdom, Argentina, Australia and the United States recommend that the CEP submit the attached Site Guidelines for Orne Harbour and Orne Islands for adoption by the ATCM.


