





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 156 Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island








Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
New Zealand has conducted the five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island. The management plan was revised with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998). All revisions are minor with standard wording applied where applicable. New Zealand recommends the CEP approve the revised management plan.
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 156 Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island.

The management plan was revised with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998) in order to meet the requirements of the guidelines. The intent of the management plan has not changed but standard wording has been applied where applicable.  

All revisions are minor and are outlined in the table below. 
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 156 Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island.

ASPA No. 156: Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island 
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 2 (1997)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 2 (1997)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2003)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 156 Lewis Bay, Mount Erebus, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
Recommendation XI-3 (1981) declared the site a tomb
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
No
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
The management plan was revised with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998). The intent of the management plan has not changed. Standard wording has been applied where applicable.
Main changes include:
    • The addition of an Introduction
    • The addition of Section 6(ii) Access to the Area
    • Reference to the EDA
    • Updated Figure 1 (photo)
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
The Area was designated as an ASPA primarily to ensure the Area is kept inviolate as a mark of respect in remembrance and in order to protect the site's emotional values.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Under the Environmental Domains Analysis (Resolution 3, 2008) the Area is Environment O – West Antarctic Ice Sheet (also includes inland Coats Land, Taylor Dome, Ross Island ice cap).

