





Recovery of moss communities on the tracks of Barrientos island and tourism management proposal





Introduction
During the ATCM XXXV (Hobart), Ecuador and Spain submitted working paper ATCM XXXV WP 059 Revised Visited Site Guidelines: Barrientos Island. This document summarised the key findings of the monitoring of visitors conducted during the austral summer of the 2011-2012 campaign. The report highlighted the impacts of the trampling by visitors on the moss cover surrounding the tracks and some details on behavioural aspects of visitor groups. 
The above resulted in the adoption of Resolution 5, 2012 which recommends that: "Parties take appropriate steps within their own legal and administrative systems to restrict access to the central part of Barrientos Island (Aitcho Islands) by their nationals and operators, other than for reasons of scientific research and monitoring related to the recovery of the site" and insists that "Parties active in the area cooperate in designing and implementing appropriate surveys, research and monitoring plans that will help inform decisions on future management actions, and bring information efforts to the 16th meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection" (Resolution 5, 2012). 
Thus, as part of the commitments made by both countries, during January and February of the austral summer 2013, a visitor monitoring system was developed and an assessment of the state of the vegetation cover on the tracks of Barrientos island was conducted. The results are presented below.
Trends in visits by tourist boats to Barrientos, January-February 2013

Both in 2012 and 2013, tourism dynamics on Barrientos island were monitored during the period of January 12 to February 14. The information collected specifically focused on data regarding: 
    • Number of vessels with actual arrivals.
    • Number of passengers who landed on the island.
    • Activities and duration of the above.
    • Group leadership.
    • Sites visited.

During this period in 2012, a total of 12 ships arrived at Barrientos (3 of which were not included in planned schedule of visits to Barrientos) which meant a total of 1480 passengers ashore. During this period in 2013, a total of 10 ships arrived at Barrientos (5 of which were not included in planned schedule of visits to Barrientos) which meant a total of 1047 1 passengers ashore. There were 433 fewer tourists than the previous year , which is a decrease of 29.3 %. 







With regard to the total time of use of the island, a significant decrease in tourism use of the island can be noted: 32 hours, i.e. 60.4 % less compared to the same period in the previous year. Also, a decrease in the average length of time of use of the island, from 3.08 hours in 2012 to 2.22 hours in the austral summer of 2013. It is worth noting that this trend is confirmed by the length of time spent by the boats to visit the island in the two periods, with a trend of 3 hours for the 2012 and barely an hour in 2013. This can be explained by the implementation of Resolution 5 (2012) which restricts visitors from walking on the tracks that run through the central part of the island. 

It is important to mention that during the monitoring period, all the boats strictly obeyed Resolution 5 (2012) which restricts walking to the island's tracks. Only on two occasions were visitors noted to have made their way to the western tip, which was dealt with by means of removal in zodiacs, landing on the south-eastern beach. 



Recovery condition of mosses on the tracks

The two tracks which cross through the central part of the island are very different in terms of the nature of the substrate, level of use over time, degree of damage caused and chances of recovery for the moss cover.

The central track passes through a skeletal soil, gravel and rocks, with little water retention capacity and good drainage to the south due to the slope of the land. The moss cover on this mid-slope area is discontinuous. The track is visually discernible in the sections that cross areas of vegetation - due to the elimination of plant cover - but it also crosses bare areas in which it is not visually obvious. However, it has been used for a longer period of time, and more heavily, which means that its chances of recovery are more doubtful. 

The coastal track passes through a soft soil on the lower area of the hillside, constantly saturated with water from precipitation and from melting ice that drains toward the south. The thickness of the moss layer exceeds 10 cm in many places. Trampling, even to a minimal extent, causes the removal of the vegetation cover and leaves the substrate bare, inevitably causing it to become a muddy area. The presence of mud and water also causes the creation of alternative tracks (nonexistent in the central track) to the sides of the main track. The visual mark of this track is very obvious, despite having been used much less than the central track. 

The period of closure of the tracks - just one growing season - is clearly insufficient for conclusively detecting the recovery of vegetation. With regard to the central track, we can only state that signs of change were not detected after the closure. On the coastal track, colonisation of green alga Prasiola crispa is clearly visible on the trampled and bare areas. This alga has a great ecological amplitude that allows it to colonise nearly any habitat quite rapidly. So some areas that had been less trampled are now completely covered while they were bare last year. However, there are no signs of recovery on the edges of the track, or of remnants of moss in the centre of the path, i.e. for now, it does not seem that the mark of the track will close off simply through lateral growth of moss. Colonisation by Prasiola crispa could be the beginning of an ecological succession, but this process will be slower than an overgrowth from the sides of the track and for the time being, we do not know if this succession - if it takes place - will give rise to a moss community similar to that which existed before the damage.

Proposal for monitoring evolution of recovery of the tracks for the coming years

Monitoring the width of the central track:

The central track involves less damage and its reopening could be considered, but in this case it will be important to maintain its width to as little as possible, considering that the area just before the descent to the western tip reaches an unnecessarily large width of up to 8 m. 

Monitoring the recovery of the coastal track:

The coastal track should remain closed indefinitely as the fragility of its vegetation communities makes it incompatible with human traffic.

The recovery of the moss cover on this track should continue to be monitored in the future, by periodically (every two years at least) taking measurements similar to those taken in the 2013 campaign. 



Proposals for the management of visitors to Barrientos island 

Accepting the proposal presented in the Site Guide for Barrientos and using the information processed during the 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 fieldwork campaigns as a basis, the following is proposed:

    • Maintain a disembarking maximum of 100 passengers to the island.
    • Set up the southeast and northeast beaches near the penguin rookery as primary disembarking areas. 
    • If reopening the walk through the central track is considered, implementation of measures will be important to allow for adequate guidance of groups through the area of the track.
    • Considering the sensitivity and the presence of natural aspects of outstanding interest on the Western Tip, it is recommended that measures and specific guidelines for the management and guidance of visitors be implemented, with the purpose of safeguarding the natural value of this site. The Barrientos work group has been informed of the proposals for managing visitors on the Western Tip. 


Annex:
Comparative photos of the tracks in the 2012-2013 period

