





The need to take into account the dismantling costs of stations in Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE) relating to their construction




The need to take into account the dismantling costs of stations in Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE) relating to their construction
Summary

The costs and duration that are necessary for the dismantling of Concordia Base, in continental Antarctica, have been assessed theoretically. The full removal of all the material and components of this station would require approximately 12 years, practically the time needed to construct it, and some 25 million Euro, almost 75% of its construction costs. These results probably apply, proportionately, to coastal stations. Also, having noted that CEEs relating to the construction of new stations in Antarctica rarely provide estimates on the cost of dismantling, the authors of this paper suggest that this element be taken into account in a more systematic manner.
Background

When the French ministry for scientific research and the ministry for the budget assessed the performance of the Franco-Italian Concordia Base, in 2012, they requested the Paul Emile Victor Institute for Polar Studies (IPEV), which is the national Antarctic programme, to estimate the cost of dismantling the station, in the event that such a decision were to be taken. The request was purely theoretical, with no implementation intent. The aim was to include in the operating costs of the station the expenses that would have to be incurred to dismantle it and, in accordance with the requirements under the Madrid Protocol and its Annex III, restore the site to its initial condition.
Following that study, France and Italy, as co-managers of the station, felt it would be useful to share the findings of the study with Members of the CEP and Parties to the Antarctic Treaty so that their attention may be drawn to the considerable logistical, human and financial resources needed for the dismantling and removal of materials in very isolated areas in Antarctica. 
Costings of a theoretical dismantling of Concordia Base: calculation method and main findings

The overall mass of Concordia Base (the station, the summer camp, the logistical facilities and the external laboratories) was estimated at 3,000 tons. The station was built over a period of 7 summer seasons. Sixteen persons were assigned to the task: 8 on the construction site and 8 assigned to general support services (kitchen, medical unit, communications, air support, power plant, water treatment).
Materials needed for construction were transported from Cap Prud'homme, an annex of Dumont d'Urville station in Adélie Land, to Dome C using ground convoys, in 3 trips per season. The load capacity of the convoys on the return trip is estimated at 200 tons net per convoy; that is 600 tons per season.
The table under Annex A attached details the calculation of the theoretical cost of the dismantling of Concordia station. The highlights of the study are:
    • The period needed for the dismantling of the facilities, packaging and transportation by ground convoys is estimated at 7 summer seasons. The entire operation, including the purchase and transportation of a crane needed for dismantling, and the repatriation and processing of all the waste generated, would take about 12 years.
    • The number of people to be assigned to the dismantling operations would be the same as that used for the initial construction, i.e. 16 persons, excluding the convoys. The duration of each dismantling campaign, taking into account the personnel deployed annually, would amount to 4 months, thus corresponding to 64 men-months per summer season. The staff needed at Dumont d'Urville and Mario Zucchelli coastal stations, in support for the project (transport of personnel, unloading and loading of ships, etc.) has also been accounted for.
    • Assuming that each container can take a load of 10 tons of materials and waste to be repatriated, one would have to ship 300 containers from Hobart to Dumont d'Urville, then by land all the way up to Concordia Base. Astrolabe, the ship currently used has a carrying capacity of about 16 containers (of 20"). However, to be realistic, transportation in both directions would have to be limited to 40 containers per year for the dismantling operation because Dumont d'Urville station would still have to receive supplies for its own needs during the period.
    • If we input the cost of fuel at market prices, the salaries of the 14 people needed for ground convoys during the summer season, and the cost of replacement of the fleet of trailers that shuttles between Dumont d'Urville and Concordia, the average cost of transport between the coast and Dome C is estimated at about € 3,000 per ton carried.
    • In addition to the fuel needed for transport vehicles, Concordia Base needs to be supplied with 60m3 of fuel annually to cater for the needs of the dismantling team during the summer season. 
Fate of materials and waste 
    • Some 25% of the materials repatriated may be processed in Australia, as has been the case so far for waste originating from Concordia Base. The remaining 225 containers would have to be shipped back to France or Italy so that they may be processed there. 
    • The 400 tons of steel and the empty containers could be sold in Australia and France respectively. The proceeds of such sales may be used to cover the local costs of processing other wastes. It is however very unlikely that any financial gain may be made from the other types of waste/materials.
Other cleaning operations on site
    • Save for the dismantling of the station, one would not expect costly cleaning operations of the site since the waste generated by the running of Concordia is repatriated every year as part of the routine activities of the station. Except for the drilling fluid used by EPICA programme, which cannot be evacuated in the absence of adequate technological means.
The total cost of the dismantling of the station was estimated at just over 25 million Euro.
How is the dismantling of stations integrated in the CEE?

The Guidelines for environmental impact assessment in Antarctica, which were developed in 1999 and revised by Resolution 4 (2005), do refer to the need - for all EIAs - for remediation which "consists of the steps taken after impacts have occurred to promote, as much as possible, the return of the environment to its original condition."
The Guidelines indicate that remediation should be presented in a concrete manner, "pointing out the actions proposed and their timing, as well as the benefits associated [with] each one of them". 
However, a cursory look at all the CEEs relating to the construction of new bases in Antarctica since 19931 (Annex B) shows that remediation is never taken into account in a systematic manner. As a general rule, Parties simply specify that the stations can be easily dismantled and the materials removed from Antarctica. The CEEs undertaken for Neumayer II and Haley V stations are typical counter-examples, precisely because those two evaluations were conducted in connection with the building of new bases after the removal of the older ones. It is also to be noted that many Initial Environmental Evaluations (IEE) were drawn up for the dismantling of existing facilities (source: EIES database). 
It therefore appears to us that Parties that intend to build new stations in Antarctica do not seem to grant much attention to the Guidelines for environmental impact assessment in Antarctica on the need to consider, at the early stage of planning, the constraints relating to the eventual dismantling of those stations. 
Conclusions

This study shows that the costs associated with the dismantling of a station of the Antarctic continent would be extremely high as they amount to almost 75% of their building costs. 
The second major finding relates to the very long duration of such an operation which would be due to the short working time during the summer season and the limited transportation capacities (ground convoys and shipping). The duration was estimated to about twelve years, i.e.  practically the time required to build a station if we were to include the stage of preparations in France and Italy.
It is also likely that the cost of dismantling a coastal station would amount to 3/4 of its construction costs and that the work relating to, and transportation of, materials to be removed would require almost as much time as that needed for the construction of the coastal base.
These findings should encourage Governments which intend to launch new projects for the construction of a base in Antarctica to take due account of the requirement for remediation of the sites in CEE projects and to thoroughly consider their implication on the long run in view of the cost implications. 
Recommendation

In view of this study and considering that, generally, such assessments are not taken into consideration in CEEs relating to the building of new stations in Antarctica, France and Italy are of the view that the costings supplied should encourage CEP to consider encouraging a stricter observation of the Guidelines for environmental impact assessment in Antarctica at least in so far as remediation is concerned. 
Therefore, France and Italy recommend that CEP:
    • affirm the importance of this type of study in all future CEEs; 
    • encourage the Parties concerned to better take into account, in CEE projects, the constraints relating to the dismantling of stations that have reached the end of their life.
    • agree to submit the draft resolution herein attached to the ATCM for adoption.

Annex C 
Draft Resolution X (2013)
Taking into account the dismantling of Antarctic stations in Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEE) relating to their construction

The Representatives,

Noting that through its Resolution 1 (1999), ATCM adopted Guidelines for environmental impact assessment; 

Noting that the Guidelines were revised through Resolution 4 (2005) and they spell out the need to take into account the reinstatement of the environment upon the completion of an activity by listing in a concrete manner the measures proposed and their timing;

Highlighting that in so far as the stations that reached the end of their life are concerned, reinstatement of the environment requires that a dismantling plan with costings be prepared; 

Convinced that a long-term vision on the fate of stations in Antarctica is needed in order to better anticipate their impact on the environment; 

Recommend that:
All Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation studies, relating to the construction of a new station in Antarctica, take into account the cost and duration of dismantling of a future station, when reaching the end of its life, as part of the measures to return the site to its initial condition.

