





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land









ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 19
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) SSSI No. 19
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (1996), Measure 10 (2008)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 7 (1995)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No. 
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land
    1. Management plans for adopted Antarctic Specially Protected Areas shall be reviewed at least every 5 years, and updated as necessary, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
    2. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 138 Linnaeus Terrace was last reviewed in 2008, and review thus falls due in 2013. Accordingly, the United States reviewed the Management Plan and has made a number of minor revisions, both as a result of observations made on a joint New Zealand / United States field inspection visit carried out in January 2012 and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    3. Linnaeus Terrace was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 19 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985) due to its value as one of the richest known localities for the cryptoendolithic communities that colonize the Beacon Sandstone. Rare physical and biological weathering structures and trace fossils are present, which are vulnerable to disturbance by trampling and sampling. The site is of outstanding scientific value, and is sensitive to importation of non-native species. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    4. The changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
        a. A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area and the reasons for designation, including the history of designation, and the classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
        b. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011);
        c. (Section 5 – Maps). Map 1 was revised to include the newly designated ASPA No. 172 Lower Taylor Glacier and Blood Falls and facilities and zones adopted within ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys. Map 2 was updated to include recent observations of instruments and markers installed in the Area; 
        d. (Section 6 (i) Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and features) The description of the Area was updated to include recent scientific literature and references;
        e. (Section 6 (ii) Access to the Area) A new section was added to describe access to the Area, to maintain consistency with other recently adopted management plans;
        f. (Section 6 (iii) Location of structures within and adjacent to the Area) Information is included from observations made in January 2012 during an inspection visit to the Area;
        g. (Section 7 Terms and conditions for entry permits) Revisions were made to the text and sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011);
        h. (Section 7 (ii) – Access to the Area) The provision relating to use of helicopter smoke grenades is redundant since they are no longer in use, and the reference was deleted;
        i.  (Section 8 - Supporting documentation). A reference list has been added.

Proposal
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  Since the revisions were minor and focussed on bringing the plan formatting in line with Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), we recommend that the CEP adopt the revised Management Plan for ASPA 138 Linnaeus Terrace, Asgard Range, Victoria Land.
