





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area N° 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea








Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area N° 161 Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea
Working paper for the CEP presented by Italy

Introduction

Terra Nova Bay was previously designed as Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA N. 161) through Misure 2, 2003 after a proposal by Italy. The area was designated for special protection as a small narrow strip of waters extending approximately 9.5 Km in length immediately to the South of Terra Nova Bay (TNB) Italian Station (at present Mario Zucchelli Station) and up to a maximum of 7 Km from the shore. Important scientific researches inside the ASPA have been planned and permits have been issued to control and protect the area for future comparison. The aims and objectives for setting up the ASPA are still relevant.
Italy, in accordane with Article 6(3) of annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and Resolution 1, 1998, and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998), when considering revisions to the Management Plan,  after the last five year review (ATCM XXX, Kiev 2008) has conducted a new five-year review of the management plan for the following Antarctic Specially Protected Area, Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea (ASPA 161)
Since season 2008/2009 research and monitoring were carried out at the site. Monitoring activities were conducted to ensure the reason for which the Area was designated continues to serve its purpose.  In addition, research related to new and consolitated research projets ( see attached references )  were conducted.  
There have been no substantial changes made to the provisions of existing Management Plan. The boundaries , map and descriptions of the area remain the same as in the existing Managemnent Plan.
Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
References:
In appendix 1 of the revised Management Plan additional correlated bibliography was included for consultation
Review of activities:
New projects on Ecological Activity at Terra Nova Bay approved by the Italian Antarctic Scientific Commission (CSNA) or planned in the next future in the ASPA 161 area are as follows:

    • BAMBi, Barcoding of Antarctic Marine Biodiversity
    • LTER-Terra Nova Bay ASPA marine observatory (MOA-TNB)  
    • Spatio-temporal genetic diversity of parasites in the polar regions: a study for the evaluation of the impact of global changes on marine trophic networks
    • The immune system of teleosts adapted to polar environments 
    • Relationship between spatial variability of stable isotopes (d13C and d15N) and fatty acids in marine coastal trophic networks and dynamics of sea ice at Terra Nova Bay:
    • Role of Oxygen in the evolution: genes and proteins of polar marine organisms (ROSE)


Permit issued
The National Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) has issued, on behalf of Ministry of  Foreign  Affair, permits to entry into the Protected Area and to sample principally macrobenthonic organisms, fish larvae and eggs, mollusks and fishes using different sampling systems. 
Sampling area, species sampled, amounts collected and sampling modalities for the years 2010-2012 are attached to the Management Plan (appendix 2)
Draft revised plan for this ASPA is annexed. It is proposed to the views of the Committee, that this Revised management Plan  be approved during ATCM XXXVI without intersessional review.
Recommendations
Italy recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 161: Terra Nova Bay, Ross Sea



ASPA No. 161: TERRA NOVA BAY,  ROSS SEA
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Misure 2 (2003) CEP VIII- as ASPA 161
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 2 (2003) CEP VIII- as ASPA 161
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 14 (Kyiv 2008) ASPA 161 Terra Nova Bay management plan revised
Current management plan: 
Measure 14 (2008)  
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a  
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
n/a
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
no
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
no
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
no
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
In appendix 1 of the revised Management Plan additional correlated bibliography has been included for consultation
Sampling area, species sampled, amounts collected and sampling modalities for the years 2010-2012 ahas been attached to the Management Plan by appendix 2.


5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a 
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a 
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
Yes
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
CCAMLR XXVI Hobart 22 /10 – 2 /11 2007




