





Intersessional Contact Group Report on Cooperation in Antarctica





Intersessional Contact Group Report on Cooperation in Antarctica
1.0 Overview

This report summarises the results of Intersessional Contact Group discussions on Cooperation in Antarctica. Participants included Argentina, Belgium, France, New Zealand, United States and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The report contains a summary of contributions by members mentioned above and presents the principal areas to be covered during the analysis of this topic at the ATCM.

2.0 Introduction 

The Intersessional Contact Group on Antarctic Cooperation began discussions on 25 January 2013, in compliance with ATCM XXXV Resolution 3 (2012), which mandated the Parties and other participants to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting to conduct a discussion on ways and means to promote broader Antarctic cooperation, resulting in the creation of this ICG, led by Chile. The discussion focused on different methods of cooperation on Antarctic matters that can be envisaged between Parties to the Antarctic Treaty System, as defined in document WP 64 submitted by Chile to the last ATCM held in Hobart (Australia). 

It is a fact that Antarctic cooperation is a pillar of the Antarctic Treaty System, and contributions made by this ICG have demonstrated that this goes beyond cooperation of a scientific and logistical nature. Many of the identified areas, in which progress in terms of cooperation could be made, will allow for further improvement both in terms of logistics and infrastructure for scientific research in the Antarctic Treaty area. It has also been highlighted that there is a great need for improvement of Information Exchange in various areas as well as cooperation in the fields of education and dissemination. 

Contributions by the countries mentioned above provide their views on areas of Antarctic cooperation in which Parties could make progress.

3.0 Summary of the main areas addressed during Working Group discussions 

The group's exchanges covered areas of cooperation which the participants identified as needing to be strengthened. They are the following: 

3.1 Information exchange 

In order to improve cooperation on different Antarctic matters, participants in the Group highlighted the need to improve and further Information Exchange in various areas, such as activities and interests of each State in the Antarctic; experiences on bilateral cooperation; implementation of the Antarctic Treaty System rules in national laws and local procedures; updating information regarding national authorities that regulate tourism and non-scientific activities in the Antarctic, and generally encouraging updates of Antarctic Treaty System databases. 

3.2 Cooperation in educational matters

Another area of cooperation identified by participants has to do with training and education on Antarctic issues. Among other proposals are: i) promoting interest in Antarctic matters amongst young scientists and technicians; ii) communicating knowledge of the Antarctic in a broad sense; iii) and taking advantage of the presence of leading experts at the ATCM to give conferences on specific Antarctic matters. Another suggestion is that a database be compiled of training courses offered by Antarctic programmes and that existing training needs be identified. 

3.3.	Cooperation on logistical issues 

Participants in the group maintain that there is a need for enhanced cooperation to make better use of each Party's logistical capacities, particularly in areas with multiple Antarctic facilities. With the same aim, the installation of joint scientific laboratories between Parties is encouraged. 

3.4 Joint Scientific Research 

Another potential area of cooperation would be to determine areas of scientific research which have not yet been explored, for different National Antarctic Programmes to conduct joint studies.

    4.0 Recommendations

The ICG recommends that:

(I) the Electronic Information Exchange System (EIES) be improved;

(II) cooperation in education and dissemination be enhanced;

(III) further education of scientists in Antarctic science be encouraged;

(IV) cooperation in logistical and operational matters be strengthened;

(V) better communication between different National Antarctic Programmes be facilitated; 

(VI) joint use of existing bases be promoted.

The Group's coordinator also suggests that this forum should serve to provide support for work carried out within the Intersessional Group on Jurisdiction, especially in so far as the implementation at national level of regulations issued by the Antarctic Treaty System are concerned. Also, it should serve to further collaboration between all those who handle information in the area of Search and Rescue (SAR), a matter covered by the Special Working Group on Search and Rescue, in order to facilitate the work of the five Search and Rescue Centres designated by IMO.

For the purpose of addressing the recommendations mentioned above, it is advised that the mandate of this Intersessional Contact Group be renewed. 

