





Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on further development of a multi-year strategic work plan









Report of the open-ended intersessional contact group on further development of a multi-year strategic work plan
Working Paper submitted by Australia and Belgium
Summary
In accordance with Decision 3 (2012), Australia and Belgium co-convened an open-ended intersessional contact group (ICG) to collect and compile possible priority issues for inclusion in a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM. The input received from Consultative Parties and other ATCM participants is presented as an attachment. Australia and Belgium recommend that the Parties draw on the attached document as an important reference for the further development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan. 
Background
In Decision 3 (2012) the Parties agreed to develop a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM within existing resources, and adopted principles to guide the completion of the Plan. Through Decision 3 (2012) the Parties also established an Intersessional Contact Group (ICG), co-convened by Australia and Belgium, as the Chairs of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings XXXV and XXXVI respectively, to coordinate the further development of the Plan.

Paragraph 83 of the Final Report of ATCM XXXV reflected the following agreed Terms of Reference for the ICG:
    a. To coordinate, electronically, input from Consultative Parties and other ATCM participants, on possible priority issues to be identified in the plan; and 
    b. To compile a document reflecting input to be circulated to Consultative Parties and other ATCM participants no less than 3 months prior to ATCM XXXVI.
Conduct of the ICG
The ICG was co-convened by Australia and Belgium, and was conducted using the Secretariat’s online discussion forum. This paper summarises the outcomes of the discussion; all related correspondence is accessible via the discussion forum. 
On 21 December 2012, Australia and Belgium opened the intersessional discussion, inviting contributions from Consultative Parties and other ATCM participants. Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the United States, and ASOC submitted possible priority issues to be identified in the plan. This input was compiled into a draft report, which was made available on the online discussion forum for comment. Comments received were incorporated into a final document reflecting input to the ICG, which is presented as an attachment to this paper. 
Recommendation
Australia and Belgium recommend that the Parties draw on the attached document as an important reference for the further development of a Multi-Year Strategic Work Plan for the ATCM.

