





Inspection by Germany and South Africa in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection: January 2013










Inspection by Germany and South Africa in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 14 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection:
January 2013
1. Overview 
(1) Background
Germany and South Africa conducted inspections of four stations in Dronning Maud Land from January 08 - 29th 2013, under the applicable provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol.  This was the first inspection by South Africa, while Germany has undertaken joint inspections with France in 1989 and the United Kingdom in 1999.  
(2) Overview
(i) The Inspection Team
The inspection team consisted of five observers designated by the Federal Government of Germany and six observers designated by the Government of the Republic of South Africa, as follows:
Germany
    • Ambassador Dr. Martin Ney (The Legal Advisor, Federal Foreign Office)		
    • Ms. Andrea Heyn (Unit System Earth, Federal Ministry of Education and Research)
    • Mr. Fritz Hertel (Protection of the Antarctic, Federal Environment Agency)	
    • Dr. Uwe Nixdorf (Director, Logistics and Science Platforms, Alfred Wegener Institute)
    • Dr. Hartwig Gernandt (Senior Advisor,	Logistics, Alfred Wegener Institute)	

South Africa
    • Mr. Henry Valentine (Director, Southern Oceans and Antarctic Support, Department of Environmental Affairs)
    • Mr. Andre Stemmet (Senior State Law Advisor, Department of International Relations and Cooperation)
    • Dr. Gilbert Siko (Director, Science Platforms, Department of Science and Technology)
    • Ms. Carol Jacobs (Integrated Environmental Authorisations, Department of Environmental Affairs)
    • Mr. Potlako Khati (Integrated Coastal Management, Department of Environmental Affairs)
    • Mr. Sabelo Malaza (Director, Compliance Monitoring, Department of Environmental Affairs)

 (ii) Stations Visited
The inspection team used the DROMLAN (Dronning Maud Land Air Network) to conduct the inspection over a twenty day period, flying from Cape Town to Troll runway on 08 January 2013 and back to Cape Town on 29 January 2013. A Twin Otter DHC-6 and,a Basler BT-67 fixed wing aeroplanes (DROMLAN) and two Bell 212 helicopters (South Africa) were used for intra-continental flights.
The inspection team visited the following stations:
    • Troll station on 14 January 2013
    • Halley VI station on 15 January 2013
    • Princess Elisabeth station on 18/19 January 2013
    • Maitri station on 20 January 2013
Germany and South Africa wish to extend heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to the Parties and personnel of each station inspected for their warm welcome and gracious hospitality.
The full inspection report has been submitted as a separate Information Paper to this meeting (ATCM XXXVI/IP53).

2. Summary of Inspection Results
(1) Overview
The inspection mainly focused on: (a) logistics and operations, (b) environmental protection measures, (c) scientific investigation and international cooperation, (d) use of Antarctica for peaceful purposes, (e) training and awareness, (f) reporting and (g) tourism.
The inspection team found that although no direct violations of the Antarctic Treaty or the Environmental Protocol were observed, it was noted that the inspected stations implemented the standards of the Antarctic Treaty System with varying degrees.
(2) Logistics and Operations
The team found examples of highly sophisticated solutions for alternative energy use and environmentally sound operations. Room for improvement should be considered in the upkeep and maintenance of older stations.
It was noted that during summer seasons, more operational personnel (for construction, reconstruction and maintenance) than scientists are present at the stations
(3) Environmental Protection Measures
The implementation of environmental protection measures varied from station to station, however, the inspectors were pleased to observe some improvements since the 2010 Japanese inspection.
(i) Waste Management and Disposal
The inspection team found that all stations had waste management plans of varying complexity.  
No incineration occurs at two stations. At the remaining two, improvements to the incineration system were being considered in one instance, whereas in the other no improvements appear to have been made to the fuel incinerator for food and medical waste since the last inspection in 2010.
(ii) Treatment of Sewage and Domestic Liquid Wastes 
The waste water treatment unit at one of the stations inspected is exemplary in terms of the excellent quality waste water produced. Two of the other stations’ systems are more than adequate and the installation of a new rotational biological contactor at the remaining station is commended, however, its disposal of waste water requires attention.
 (iii) Conservation of Fauna and Flora  
No non-native species were observed during the inspections, although systems to prevent these introductions could be improved at all stations, except one where the stringent biosecurity measures implemented are commendable.
(iv) Area Management  
The inspection team was concerned that the relevant permits for activities within ASPAs at two of the stations inspected were not available.
(4) Scientific Investigation and International Cooperation
The inspectors observed that all stations increasingly make available their scientific data to global data bases. Moreover, by sharing infrastructure and research results, greater synergy between Treaty Parties in scientific investigations is possible. Furthermore, due to increased international collaboration, there is an increasing ability of the international science community to tackle larger key scientific questions.
The team observed that remote data access and data transfer contribute substantially to lowering the carbon footprint of scientific research in Antarctica. 
 (5) Use of Antarctica for Peaceful Purposes
All stations inspected appeared to be in compliance with the Treaty obligation that Antarctica shall be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. No weapons, arms or activities in contravention of this obligation were observed. 
(6) Training and Awareness
All station managers exhibited an awareness of the Antarctic Treaty and Madrid Protocol, and it was noted that both pre-deployment and on-site training in Antarctica was provided by each country inspected.  There is, however, room for improvement.
(7) Reporting 
The inspection team observed that compliance levels with reporting obligations differed from station to station. Those stations embracing modern technology are better able to comply, whilst those that have not yet done so lagged behind.  Information could be more comprehensive in some instances.
(8) Tourism
The philosophy on accepting tourism differed from station to station. This raised the question of how to ensure that tourism remains small-scale, sensible and controlled in order to ensure that the Antarctic Treaty principles are upheld. The question of how to maintain a balance between respect for the Antarctic environment, on the one hand, and wider support of the Antarctic Treaty principles, on the other hand, seems to be a long term policy question for the ATCM to consider.

3. Recommendations 
(1) General Recommendations  
The inspection team identified the need for all nations operating in Antarctica to ensure the availability of icebreakers and appropriate flight operations as a principal issue for efficient supply of stations and deployment of scientific expeditions.
National programmes need to bear in mind that logistical personnel may exceed scientific personnel during the summer seasons. 
Concerning the reporting on activities within the Antarctic Treaty System on the EIES, one Party should consider improvements and stations are encouraged to employ modern technology to facilitate compliance with Treaty requirements in terms of their reporting obligations. 
As this inspection team built on previous inspection results, it encourages future teams to use prior inspection reports as reference points when undertaking inspections. It also invites Member States with stations in Antarctica to embrace inspection results as a chance to learn from other stations and to improve their facilities and operating methods.
Available technologies and best practices should be used more efficiently to ensure environmental compliance. 
As DROMLAN is exemplary in the sharing of logistical support for scientific research in Dronning Maud Land, the introduction of an equivalent logistical support network in other parts of Antarctica should be considered.
(2) Environmental Recommendations  
(i) Waste Management and Disposal
In some instances, environmental impacts are of concern, especially where aging incinerators are equipped with inadequate emission control mechanisms, and where old and non-functional items and equipment are randomly stored and have not yet been removed from Antarctica. Much improvement in the prevention of and response to existing oils spills could also be achieved and should be given priority.
(ii) Treatment of Sewage and Domestic Liquid Wastes
Although an additional waste water treatment unit was recently installed at one of the stations inspected and incinerator toilets are used for sewage waste, the quality of the treated water should be monitored and the disposal thereof into the environment requires consideration.  The remaining stations monitored water quality, and adequate to high quality treated waste water was disposed of into the environment.
This inspection team is in agreement with the 2010 Japanese recommendation for COMNAP to consider adopting practical guidelines on waste water quality in accordance with the standards "to the maximum extent practicable" (Article 2 (2) of Annex III to the Protocol) and "the only practicable option" (Article 4 (2) of Annex III to the Protocol).
(iii) Conservation of Fauna and Flora
One of the stations inspected has commendably implemented stringent measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species, and the remaining stations are strongly encouraged to adopt these practices.
(iv) Area Management
Those stations undertaking research or monitoring within ASPAs should ensure that the necessary permits are obtained.


