





Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage: Report of the CEP intersessional contact group








Repair or Remediation of Environmental Damage: Report of the CEP intersessional contact group.
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand on behalf of the CEP intersessional contact group.
Summary
In response to the request from the ATCM, in its Decision 4 (2010), CEP XV established an intersessional contact group (ICG) to consider environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage in the circumstances of Antarctica, in order to assist the ATCM in adopting an informed decision in 2015 related to the resumption of negotiations on liability.  This paper provides the report of the ICG for the consideration of CEP XVI.  If the CEP supports the outcomes to the ICG’s discussions, it is recommended that the report is forwarded to ATCM XXXVI.
Background
Decision 1 (2005) recorded the Parties decision to evaluate annually the progress towards Annex VI entering into force and, not later than five years from the adoption of the Annex, to consider the time-frame for the resumption of negotiations, in accordance with Article 16 of the Protocol, to elaborate further rules and procedures as may be necessary relating to liability for environmental damage.

Five years after that Decision was taken, the Parties agreed Decision 4 (2010) (which supersedes Decision 1 (2005)), which recorded the Parties decision to:

    • Continue to monitor progress towards Annex VI entering into force;
    • To extend the time-frame for considering the resumption of negotiations on further rules and procedures on liability to 10 years after Annex VI was adopted (i.e. to 2015), and
    • To request the Committee for Environmental Protection to consider environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage in the circumstances of Antarctica, in order to assist the ATCM in adopting an informed decision in 2015 related to the resumption of the negotiations

In addressing the request from the ATCM, as outlined in the final bullet point above, CEP XV had before it a number of relevant and well prepared papers on the issues of “clean-up” and “repair and remediation”.

Following discussion of those papers (paragraphs 290 to 301 of the report of CEP XV refer), the Committee agreed to establish an ICG with the following terms of reference:

    • Drawing on ATCM XXXV/WP26 Environmental issues related to the practicality of repair and remediation of environmental damage (Australia) and, as appropriate, other papers submitted to CEP XV on the subject of repair and remediation of environmental damage:
        ◦ prepare a draft response to Decision 4 (2010), in which the ATCM requested the CEP to ‘consider environmental issues related to the practicality of repair and remediation of environmental damage in the circumstances in Antarctica;
        ◦ where appropriate, seek to identify and present examples to help illustrate matters raised in the draft advice; and
        ◦ report to CEP XVI on the outcomes of this work.

Seven CEP Member countries and one Invited Expert participated in the discussions of this ICG.
Report of the Intersessional Contact Group
Executive summary
    • Repair and remediation of environmental damage is a relatively routine undertaking in other parts of the world.  However the environmental and geographic characteristics of Antarctica, such as its remoteness, will mean that approaches used elsewhere may need to be adapted, while taking into account the higher standards of environmental protection in Antarctica relative to many other parts of the world.

    • The terms “repair”, “remediation” and “clean-up” remain undefined, but the CEP has taken a practical view that such terms generally relate to human intervention activities that attempt to return an impacted site closer to its natural state or to reduce the risk to the environment or human health.

    • Any repair or remediation attempts in Antarctica will need to be considered on a case-by-case basis.  The variables in the type of impact and the environment that is impacted will mean that there is no single solution that will be applicable to all situations. 

    • The degree of success of repair or remediation activities will also depend upon the nature and extent of impact and the characteristics of the impacted environment.  Complete repair or remediation will not necessarily be possible in all situations.

    • Whilst recognising the obligations of Parties under the provisions of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, including its Annex VI once in force, in all situations, and as a minimum response, it is recommended that site assessment and monitoring are undertaken so as to understand and measure the impacts that have occurred.

    • Consistent with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, the CEP has identified a series of issues that will need to be taken into account when presented with repair and remediation activities.  These are:

    1. The need to avoid environmental damage is highly preferable in all cases
    2. Timely recording and reporting of environmental damage is important
    3. The environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage will need to be assessed on a case-by-case and site specific basis
    4. Standard environmental risk management processes can be applied, with due consideration to the circumstances of Antarctica
    5. Objectives for repair or remediation should reflect the objectives and provisions of the Environmental Protocol, and be appropriate to Antarctic conditions
    6. Consideration should be given to whether repair or remediation of environmental damage by any practical option will result in greater adverse environmental impact
    7. Assessment of options for repair and remediation will need to consider operational feasibility
    8. Generally applicable standards, guidelines and techniques relevant to the Antarctic context will assist
Introduction
The practice of intervening to reverse damage that has occurred to the environment has been applied in many settings around the world.  The issue has been the subject of considerable research and a wide range of technologies and techniques have been applied in a variety of terrestrial, freshwater and marine environmental settings to help support the recovery of the natural environment.

Whilst repair and remediation of environmental damage is a relatively routine undertaking in other parts of the world, due to the particular characteristics of Antarctica (e.g. climate, environment, accessibility, regulatory framework etc.), as well as the high environmental standards in Antarctica, approaches utilised elsewhere are likely to require adaptation to be effective, practical and appropriate in the circumstances of Antarctica.
Previous discussions by the ATCM and CEP are also of relevance to the ATCM’s request. In particular, ATCM XXIII adopted Resolution 5 (1999) which called on COMNAP and SCAR to provide advice on ‘the operational and scientific aspects of preventative measures and response action, with a view to aiding the ATCM in its understanding of these practical aspects in order to facilitate work on liability issues’. The advice was to address, inter alia, ‘[w]hether, and under what circumstances, would it be possible and/or practicable to take containment, mitigation or clean-up action, and whether, and under what circumstances, would it be possible to restore the environment’.
COMNAP provided its response to this query in Section D of ATCM XXIV/WP14 Response to XXIII ATCM Resolution 5 (1999). It presented definitions for the key terms and distinguished between ‘containment’ and ‘mitigation’, being the primary actions that could be taken immediately following an incident and ‘clean-up’ and ‘restoration’, being follow-up actions. COMNAP also identified relevant considerations at each stage, noting that before primary actions could be taken, there must be an appropriate risk assessment. It suggested that follow-up action should be preceded by an assessment of whether such action is feasible, cost-effective, likely to appreciably affect the natural rate of recovery, or will cause more harm than the impact of the incident. 
In ATCM XXIV/WP 14 and ATCM XXVI/WP29 “Worst Case” & “Less than Worst Case” Environmental Scenarios, COMNAP also presented several examples of scenarios involving national Antarctic program activities that might result in environmental harm / environmental incidents.

Terms – what do we mean by repair and remediation?

Whilst the terms ‘repair’ and ‘remediation’ are used in Decision 4 (2010), they do not appear in Article 16 of the Environmental Protocol.  Article 16 refers to liability for ‘damage’ arising from activities, although the term damage is also undefined.  The terms ‘cleaned up’ and ‘clean-up’ are used in Annex III (Article 1.5) and Annex VI (Article 2(f)), and are undefined in each case.

As a practical way of providing concise and considered advice to the ATCM it is noted that:

    • the terms repair and remediation are not defined in the Protocol; 
    • definitions of these and other similar terms are available from other sources (see below) though these vary and the terms are often used interchangeably; and
    • in the absence of agreed definitions, the CEP has interpreted Decision 4 (2010) somewhat generally as a request for advice on ‘environmental issues related to the practicality of reversing environmental damage in the circumstances of Antarctica’.

Environmental remediation deals particularly with the removal, in situ treatment or containment of pollution or contaminants from / within environmental media such as soil, groundwater, sediment, or surface water for the general protection of human health and the environment.


Environmental restoration is used interchangeably with “ecological restoration”.   The Society for Ecological Restoration (SER) defines restoration as an "intentional activity that initiates or accelerates the recovery of an ecosystem with respect to its health, integrity and sustainability".  The practice of ecological restoration includes wide scope of projects such as: erosion control, reforestation, the use of genetically local native species, removal of non-native species and weeds, re-vegetation of disturbed areas, re-introduction of native species, as well as habitat and range improvement for targeted species.

Clean-up is the term used in the Environmental Protocol, in Annex III and Annex VI.  Whilst it is undefined in the Protocol the references suggest a broad application to the process of returning a site to, or closer to, its natural state. The draft Clean-Up Manual under consideration by the CEP is intended to provide practical guidance and resources that Parties can apply, as appropriate, to assist with addressing the clean-up requirements of Annex III. The draft manual defines ‘clean-up’ as ‘the removal and/or on-site remediation of past waste disposal sites on land, abandoned work sites and sites contaminated by spills of fuel or other hazardous substances’.

Environmental repair is not a commonly used term, though also has a tendency to be used generically to describe the process of returning a site to a more natural and improved condition and could encompass both remediation and restoration activities.

Under what circumstances might action to reverse environmental damage be required?

Environmental damage in Antarctica might occur as the result of chemical, physical or biological processes resulting from human activities in the region.  

By way of examples:

    • chemical impacts might arise from pollution events, such as the critical failure of a fuel tank; a coastal shipping disaster, or the slow degradation of abandoned bases; leaking fuel tanks, or waste dumps;
    • physical impacts might arise from regular foot and vehicle traffic causing tracking, or damage to vegetation, as well as from the establishment and ongoing operation of Antarctic stations and bases;
    • biological impacts might arise through the introduction and establishment of non-native species.

It is noted that environmental damage might occur as a result of one-off or irregular activities, emergency situations as well as situations in which the environment has been impacted or degraded over longer periods of time.

Aspects for consideration in responding to environmental damage

The following sets out certain aspects that need to be considered in the context of environmental repair or remediation.
    1. Avoiding environmental damage is highly preferable in all cases
Decision 4 (2010) contemplates the situation where environmental damage has already occurred.  As mentioned above, there are a range of scenarios which might result in environmental damage.  Nevertheless, the continuing development and implementation of preventative measures is vitally important as the best means of avoiding environmental damage in the first place.  
In this regard the CEP notes the significant past and on-going work to develop guidance and other material aimed at preventing or avoiding environmental impacts.  Such material includes, but is not limited to:
    • The EIA procedures of Annex I to the Protocol, and advice on its implementation as per the CEP’s EIA Guidelines;
    • COMNAP’s Best Practice for Fuel System Design outlined in the COMNAP Fuel Manual, which includes a range of guidance to assist with preventing fuel spills;
    • The Non-Native Species Manual adopted under Resolution 6 (2011);
    • Site specific guidelines for tourist visited sites.

The CEP notes that full utilisation of such material by all operators in Antarctica and continuing efforts to develop other material as appropriate including providing support to the IMO in its development of the Polar Shipping Code, will reduce the likelihood of environmental damage occurring.
    2. Timely recording and reporting of environmental damage is important
The amount of time that has passed since the environmental damage occurred may have a significant bearing on the options available for, and the effectiveness of, repair or remediation action.  A better environmental outcome is likely to be achieved with prompt action, for example the rapid containment or eradication of a non-native species, or the swift removal of toxic waste inadvertently released into the environment.  Accordingly, ensuring that environmental damage is recorded and reported as quickly as possible will maximise the chances of effective repair or remediation. 
 
See case study 2 in the Attachment (Clean-up of a fuel spill near Lake Dingle, Vestfold Hills) in which prompt reporting allowed a response team to be on site within one hour of the incident occurring.
    3. The environmental issues related to the practicality of repair or remediation of environmental damage will need to be assessed on a case-by-case and site-specific basis
Similar to the process of predicting and mitigating the environmental impacts of a proposed activity, the environmental issues associated with environmental damage will depend upon the characteristics of the damage and the location in which it has occurred, including:
    • Nature of the impact: what types of change are imposed on the environment due to the damage (e.g. chemical, biological, physical)
    • Spatial extent: what area / volume has been damaged, and is this likely to increase if the environmental damage is not addressed?
    • Intensity: what is the amount / level /degree of environmental damage?
    • Duration: what is the period of time over which the environment damage is likely to occur?
    • Reversibility: what is the possibility of a return to the initial environmental conditions through natural processes and without human intervention once the damage has occurred and how long is this likely to take?
In all situations, and as a minimum response, it is recommended that site assessment and monitoring be undertaken so as to understand and measure the impacts that have occurred.
    4. Standard environmental risk management processes can be applied, with due consideration to the circumstances of Antarctica
A standard environmental risk assessment and risk management process1 can be effectively applied to any situation. It involves: establishing the context; identifying risks; analyzing risks; evaluating risks; treating risks; and monitoring and review. Effective application in the circumstances of Antarctica, requires drawing on the best available knowledge of causal relationships between stressors and their effects on the Antarctic environment (e.g. how do different types and levels of pollution affect Antarctic species; are particular introduced species likely to become established/invasive in particular environments?). Uncertainty should not be a reason to delay action, although improving understanding of these causal relationships over time will assist with identifying appropriate repair and remediation actions.
    5. Objectives for repair or remediation should reflect the objectives and provisions of the Environmental Protocol, and be appropriate to Antarctic conditions
Article 3 of the Protocol establishes environmental principles that can inform objectives for actions to repair or remediate environmental damage. Depending on the circumstances, this may range along a spectrum from doing nothing (see below) to comprehensive action to ensure near complete return to the initial environmental conditions. In many cases, identifying an appropriate intermediate target level or threshold may be sufficient (e.g. not attempting to reduce pollutant levels to zero, but instead setting a target level that will ensure there are no significant adverse effects on Antarctic flora or fauna or human health – such target levels can be identified through standard exposure-response studies widely applied in other regions).


Environmental Quality Standards

There is little information on the sensitivity of Antarctic species (either marine or terrestrial) to environmental contaminants2. Such data should be the foundation for environmental risk assessments to prioritise repair and remediation efforts and for environmental quality targets used to protect biodiversity and to ‘sign-off’ sites as no longer posing significant environmental risk.
There are established environmental quality standards for tropical and temperate regions, including soil and water quality guidelines and remediation targets (e.g. ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000). The general principles underlying these guidelines and targets are applicable to the Antarctic region, however, the actual values of these standards are unlikely to be appropriate for Antarctica due to the particular characteristics of the physical environment and the biota of the region (e.g. slow development through life stages, low metabolic rates and other factors which are likely to influence response times and sensitivities). These characteristics should be reflected in region-specific environmental quality standards and remediation targets.  
Environmental quality standards are primarily based on concentration-response data obtained from toxicity tests that are used to assess the potential effects of exposure to contaminants. These standards aim to identify concentrations of individual contaminants, or complex mixtures such as wastewater, that are likely to cause environmental harm, or conversely, are unlikely to result in significant adverse effects. Standards may be informed by data obtained through ‘ecotoxicological’ experiments, in which single species or communities are exposed under controlled laboratory conditions to a range of concentrations of contaminants, or through ‘community ecotoxicology’ studies which most commonly use gradients of contaminants in a natural setting, such as distance from a source of pollution, to determine sensitivity of the whole community. 
The CEP notes that further research is needed to establish appropriate environmental quality standards for Antarctica (see for example ATCM XXXV / BG 13 and case study 3 below).  In the absence of such standards taking a precautionary approach to repair or remediation of environmental damage would seem appropriate.
    6. Consideration should be given to whether repair or remediation of environmental damage by any practical option will result in greater adverse environmental impact
This principle is expressed in Article 1.5(a) and Article 2.1 of Annex III, in relation to the clean-up of waste disposals sites on land and abandoned works sites, and to the removal of fuel drums and other solid non-combustible wastes. It requires a comparative assessment of the likely environmental impacts if no action is taken, and the likely environmental impacts of repair and remediation options. 


    7. Assessment of options for repair and remediation will also need to consider operational feasibility
Whilst recognising the obligations of Antarctic operators under the Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty, including Annex VI once in force, some relevant considerations do not relate strictly to environmental issues, although they may have a significant bearing on the ability to undertake repair or remediation action and, consequently, on the environmental outcome. As noted previously by COMNAP, these may include: 
    • Safety: can human safety be ensured when undertaking repair or remediation actions?
    • Accessibility: can the damaged area be accessed to undertake repair or remediation actions?
    • Cost: what is the monetary cost of undertaking alternative repair or remediation actions?
    8. Generally applicable standards, guidelines and techniques relevant to the Antarctic context will assist
Although responses to environmental damage will be determined on a case-by-case basis, as mentioned above, the Parties’ ability to respond effectively and in a manner consistent with the objectives and provisions of the Protocol will be enhanced by the development over time of generally applicable standards, guidelines and techniques.

Guidance material

In summary any response to environmental damage should be fully considered and take account of a range of factors as listed in points 2 to 8 above.  Accordingly the CEP sees merit in developing some generic guidance that Antarctic operators can use in responding to environmental damage.  The CEP notes that it continues to work on similar guidance material such as the ‘response’ component of the CEP Non-Native Species Manual, and the draft CEP Clean-Up Manual.

Based on the points above, guidance material for Antarctic operators who may be involved in repair and remediation activities might cover the following aspects:

    a. Undertaking a site assessment
    b. Undertaking an assessment of the risks of remediation activity
        a. Safety
        b. Environmental 
        c. Financial
    b. Setting environmental quality targets / objectives for repair or remediation
    c. Considering repair / remediation options
    d. Identifying techniques to be used
    e. Undertaking a feasibility assessment
    f. Determining monitoring to be undertaken before, during and after remediation efforts
Additional guidance material might include mapping resources to record areas of environmental damage, and identify areas of priority for attention.  An example of such a resource developed by the Arctic Council’s Working Group on Emergency Prevention, Preparedness and Response can be found at http://eppr.akvaplan.com/intro/Intro.htm
Attachment.  Three case studies providing examples of repair or remediation activities in Antarctica.
As noted above, environmental damage in Antarctica might occur as the result of chemical, physical or biological processes. The following three case studies relate to chemical pollution, and provide some recent practical examples of clean-up, repair and remediation efforts that have taken place in Antarctica that illustrate a range from relatively straightforward, small-scale clean-up, through to larger-scale, more complex remediation. Further examples have been reported to previous ATCMs as summarised in XXXV ATCM / WP62 (COMNAP) and XXXV ATCM / IP6 (Australia). 

Case study 1.
Monitoring and Remediation of Hydrocarbon Contamination at the Former Site of Greenpeace’s World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island.

Roura (2004) describes the results of a program for the monitoring and remediation of hydrocarbon contamination at the former Greenpeace base site, located at Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica (77°38′S, 166°24′E).  

World Park Base operated year-round between 1987 and 1991.  A private expedition kept a year-round base camp at that same site between 1984 and 1986.  World Park Base was entirely removed in 1991–92.  About 110 m2 of hydrocarbon-contaminated ground were found in nine different sites. The total volume of fuel spilt during Greenpeace operations was estimated at less than 200 litres.  Ground contamination resulted from some minor individual spills and from minor cumulative leaks. In some sites hydrocarbon contamination is likely to have predated Greenpeace activities. Hydrocarbon contamination was highly localised and largely contained in the active layer.  However, in one site hydrocarbons were detected to a depth of 70 cm into the permafrost.  Low impact, low technology remedial action was applied at some sites and removed a significant percentage of fuel in the active layer, thus reducing the potential for secondary effects.  Contaminated ground was removed to a depth of up to 20 cm in the most contaminated sites (n=6). The sediments in less contaminated sites (n=3) were left undisturbed.  In all, approximately five tonnes of contaminated sediments were removed.  All excavations were filled back and levelled to prevent permafrost degradation.  Most of the sediments used as backfill were extracted from the present beach, where the potential for further degradation was comparatively minor.  The fuel that remains in the subsurface post-remediation, estimated in the order of some tens of litres, is contained in ‘lenses’ of contaminated sediment at the bottom of the active layer.  These subsurface hydrocarbons may mobilise into the backfill cover above or in the upper part of the permafrost.  Hydrocarbons were detected in previously uncontaminated backfill, which may have resulted from upward migration and re-deposition of hydrocarbons.  During the monitoring period during and after the removal of the base (1991to1996) the interaction of contaminated sites with meltwater and aeolian processes did not significantly change the hydrocarbon distribution at spill sites, although limited mobilisation of hydrocarbons is likely to occur by these or other mechanisms.  

Overall, approximately 75% of the fuel estimated to be present on the active layer to a depth of 20 cm was removed along with contaminated sediments. Mean hydrocarbon concentrations on the surface of contaminated sites decreased by two orders of magnitude after remediation, reducing the risk of wildlife exposure to hydrocarbon contamination on the ground surface.  No evidence of permafrost degradation was apparent during the monitoring period.

Roura (2004) notes that the difficulty of removing hydrocarbons from permafrost terrain underscores the legal (under the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty) and ethical responsibility of all operators to avoid their release into the Antarctic wilderness, including the areas that have been subject to earlier impacts.  
 
Case Study 2.
Clean-up of a fuel spill near Lake Dingle, Vestfold Hills (XXXV ATCM / BP12)
Background
Accidental fuel spills are the most common pollution incident in Antarctica (COMNAP, 1999). The most common type of spills are those associated with the storage or distribution of fuels in tanks, drums, bladders or pipelines and most frequently occur in close proximity to research stations or other operational centres. This case study covers Australia’s experience from a recent fuel spill in the Vestfold Hills and illustrates how environmental risk assessment, following a simple risk-based decision tree, was instrumental in choosing the most appropriate remediation plan.
Incident and site characteristics
On 15 January 2010 a helicopter was carrying a cargo net containing three 200 litre drums of Special Antarctic Blend (SAB) diesel fuel from Davis station in the Vestfold Hills to a nearby skiway. The load became unstable and was released from a height of approximately 200 feet to preserve the stability of the aircraft. The drums landed approximately 250 m north of Lake Dingle. All three drums ruptured on impact and the spilt fuel seeped into the sandy soil, initially affecting an area of approximately 50 x 35 metres. The spill site was located in and around a seasonally-active melt stream that flows from a snow bank uphill of the spill towards Lake Dingle. 
Lake Dingle is a hyper-saline lake located about five kilometres from Davis station. The lake is of scientific interest and is also frequented by wildlife. Adélie penguins were observed in the lake at the time of the spill. 
Initial response
The initial response was conducted in accordance with the Davis Station Fuel Spill Contingency Plan 2008, involving the members of the Fuel Spill Response Team at Davis. The Station Leader and Deputy Station Leader managed the incident and clean-up operations, using plant operators, the station doctor, scientists and the station environment officer. Substantial station resources were directed to the clean-up operation.
The response team and spill equipment were at the site within one hour. Over the following days further equipment was deployed and steps were taken to contain and recover fuel. Absorbent pads were used to capture fuel, small dams were constructed and booms were deployed to minimise migration of fuel towards the lake. 
Environmental risk assessment
While the initial response to contain and remove the source of contamination was underway, information on the site was compiled, including:
    • any threat to human health and the environment;
    • time until the ground would become frozen; 
    • geology and geomorphology of the site;
    • type of fuel, including chemical state, and how it was likely to change over time;
    • where the spilt fuel was located and how it was likely to migrate over time; 
    • predictions on how the fuel would behave under future conditions; and
    • environmental values of the site.

A simple decision-making process, involving three principal lines of evidence: physical and chemical (preliminary and detailed site assessment), ecotoxicological assessment, and community level ecological assessment was used as the basis for environmental risk assessment to integrate information on the characteristics of the site, the characteristics of the contaminants and the sensitivities of the environmental values. This process is represented in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Decision tree using three lines of evidence to determine appropriate clean up response: chemical/physical observations, ecotoxicology, and community ecological assessment.
Clean-up targets
Identifying the desired clean-up targets i.e. the concentration that may remain without posing a threat to human health or the environment, was critical to determining the overall approach to clean-up, recognising that it would not be practical to remove all traces of contaminants.
Objective environmental quality targets for guiding clean-up after fuel spills in Antarctica have not yet been determined. In the absence of agreed targets, results from studies of the sensitivity of Antarctic soil processes to fuel contamination were considered, together with existing environmental quality targets developed for use in the Arctic as presented in XXXV ATCM / BP13 Development of environmental quality standards for the management of contaminated sites in Antarctica.
In selecting a clean-up target for the Lake Dingle fuel spill, priority was given to studies using fresh SAB diesel in low carbon content soils. A concentration of 100 mg fuel/kg was agreed to be the most appropriate target at which remediation would be considered complete. This relatively conservative target took into account the previously uncontaminated nature of the site. 
Clean-up options
Clean-up options were assessed on the basis of their expected net benefit to the environment, likely effectiveness and the availability of required resources. Response time was identified as a critical factor because melt water from the snow bank on the uphill side of the spill was likely to cause the fuel to migrate quickly towards the lake. Generally, once SAB diesel is more than 2 cm into the soil it no longer evaporates but dilutes and spreads, changing what is initially a high concentration of fuel in a relatively small volume of soil into a low concentration of fuel dispersed in a large volume of soil. 
It was predicted that the hydraulics of the soil would change dramatically over the first three to four weeks after the spill as the thaw progressed and then the site would freeze for winter. With no intervention, the next summer melt and subsequent melts would result in an increase in the volume of contaminated soil and continuing contamination of the lake. 
A number of strategies were considered for clean-up beyond the initial incident response. These strategies were based on the clean-up options outlined in XXXV ATCM / BP11 Clean-up techniques for Antarctica. In choosing among these strategies, the priority was to minimise dispersal of the fuel, contain it and prevent it from migrating into the lake. It was expected that a rapid, concerted effort to remove the most contaminated soil would prevent long term environmental impacts.
Strategy 1: Short term, small-scale containment and removal of contaminated soil for treatment at Davis (a combination of XXXV ATCM / BP 11 Options 2 and 4).
This was the preferred strategy as it would remove most of the source of the contamination. It was noted that quick action would save years of remediation work, reduce the amount of contaminated soil, and reduce environmental harm to the lake and wildlife. The resource requirements included the use of helicopters, plant and personnel for three to five days if the weather was suitable, which could be accommodated with minimal impact on planned field programs.
In summary, it was considered that this strategy would minimise the long term environmental impacts of the fuel spill, while having little impact on scientific and operational programs. 
Strategy 2: No further containment or clean-up activities after the initial emergency response except ongoing monitoring for impacts on land, water, wildlife, scientific and aesthetic values (XXXV ATCM BP / 11 Option 1). 
Although the initial response, carried out in accordance with the Davis Fuel Spill Contingency Plan 2008, was considered to have significantly reduced the environmental consequences of the fuel spill it was acknowledged that subsequent monitoring might identify the need for further clean-up, by which time the total volume of contaminated soil would have increased significantly with a consequent increase in clean-up effort and cost. 
Strategy 3: Large-scale containment and removal of contaminated soil (a combination of XXXV ATCM BP / 11 Options 2 and 4 or 5).
A third strategy was to use a large excavator to remove all the contaminated soil from the site, and to return it to Davis station where it could be remediated and later either used as fill on site or returned to Australia. This strategy would have involved grading an existing roadway and creating an additional one kilometre of road to the site to allow the excavator to gain access to the spill site.
This strategy was rejected because it was considered that the road works would likely result in greater adverse environmental impacts. Also, given the resources required, this option could not have been undertaken immediately, and the subsequent delay in work at the site would have meant that the fuel would spread to contaminate a much larger area.
Site clean-up and secondary response
Site clean-up beyond the initial incident response was pursued in accordance with Strategy 1. Approximately 130 tonnes of the top 100 mm of fuel-contaminated soil was removed from the site over 5 days using a small excavator relocated to the site using a helicopter. The soil was flown by helicopter to Davis station where it was held in a temporary bunded stockpile lined with HDPE plastic.  Mopping up of surface diesel fuel continued at the spill site over the following two days. Fuel recovery materials were cleaned and trenches backfilled. Verification sampling of the impact site done after excavation finished indicated some ‘hot spots’ of soil with fuel concentrations >100mg/kg.
The following season (2010-11) a further 38 tonnes of soil were removed from the impact site using a portable suction unit driven with compressed air (Elastec MiniVac II) and returned to Davis station. The stockpile was transferred to an improved containment cell designed for ‘landfarming’ to speed up the microbial breakdown of hydrocarbon contaminants. The improved cell was constructed with three layers of material. The bottom layer next to the ground was a puncture resistant geosynthetic clay liner, on top of that was laid an impermeable HDPE plastic liner and the top layer was a permeable geofabric to protect the plastic.
Management of the landfarm included removal of excess water to prevent the risk of water spilling over the bund or if the liner was punctured. Landfarming techniques included turning the soil to increase aeration and the addition of a mixture of nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium as fertiliser. Details of subsequent treatment and monitoring of the stockpile will be reported in a later paper. 
Lessons learnt
    1. Fuel spill response training is essential
Fuel spill response training had been undertaken by the personnel involved in the spill and the clean-up operations prior to deployment in Antarctica and on site at Davis station. This training was based on the Davis Station Fuel Spill Contingency Plan 2008 and resulted in a quick response and use of the correct equipment for the job.
    2. Benefits of international cooperation
Australia did not have aircraft capable of transporting the required equipment to and from the spill site. The assistance provided by the Chinese and Russian National Antarctic Programs, in the form of heavy-lift helicopters, was critical to the timeliness and overall success of the response.
    3. Choosing the optimal response requires input from science, operations and policy experts
Achieving an optimal response outcome involved a multi-disciplinary team with knowledge of the sensitivities of the environmental values of the area, a thorough understanding of relevant environmental requirements, and a thorough understanding of available operational resources and their capabilities.
    4. Importance of continued sampling and monitoring to ensure success
Environmental sampling and monitoring were critical to the success of the operation as they were the basis for determining whether sufficient contaminated material had been removed to achieve environmental objectives. Without this information it is highly likely that either the sites would have remained subject to unacceptable levels of contamination or, alternatively, too much soil would have been removed leading to unnecessary site disturbance and operational effort.
Conclusion
The ready availability of cost-effective remediation techniques, suitable equipment, and personnel with appropriate environmental risk assessment skills enabled the rapid development and effective implementation of a response plan following this small to medium size fuel spill. 

Case study 3.
Assessment, monitoring and remediation of old Antarctic waste disposal sites: the Thala Valley example at Casey station (XXXV ATCM / BP14)
Background
The Thala Valley waste disposal site at Casey station on the foreshore of Brown Bay was operated between 1965 and 1986. During that period all station waste was dumped and/or burned at this site, or bulldozed on to the sea ice. Waste materials included ash, gravel, vehicle parts, batteries, metal, glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, wood, rope, clothing, construction materials, asbestos, cement, rubber, and drums of waste chemicals and oils. This is considered to be a typical waste disposal site in Antarctica (Tin et al., 2009).
Further background information on the remediation of Thala Valley is provided in Information Papers submitted by Australia to previous CEP meetings: ATCM XXXIV IP48, ATCM XXX IP34, ATCM XXIX IP 77, ATCM XXVII IP 54, and ATCM XXVI IP 36. 
This case study describes the approach to impact assessment and monitoring that was developed as an integral part of the clean-up project to test environmental performance and ensure that all obligations under the Environmental Protocol were satisfied.
Site clean-up
In the summer of 1995/96 approximately 150 tonnes of rubbish were removed from the disposal site. The clean-up was primarily aimed at removing large metal scraps and drums with the intention of tidying the site i.e. addressing the aesthetic impacts with little regard for other impacts. At that time, no measures were put in place to monitor the environmental consequences of contaminant mobilisation or other disturbance associated with the operation. At the end of the operation remaining surface material, consisting mainly of fragments of rubbish and sediment, was pushed into a stockpile for future attention. 
Subsequent investigation found levels of metals and hydrocarbon contamination in surrounding soils were higher than the results of a survey conducted in 1993 (Deprez et al., 1999; Snape et al., 1998; Snape et al., 2001) and that contamination was being transported off the site and into the adjacent marine bay in large quantities. A melt stream that drained a large catchment behind Casey station flowed through the site eroding 4-8 m3 of highly contaminated material each year. Portions of the site were also subject to tidal inundation and there was potential for further spread of rubbish by the very strong winds that are characteristic of the area. The site was frequently visited by wildlife, including Adélie penguins and south polar skua, creating opportunities for direct exposure to toxic contaminants. Comparison of the seabed communities in Brown Bay adjacent to Thala Valley and those at reference sites indicated that Brown Bay was less diverse and very likely to be suffering detrimental impacts caused by contaminant run-off (Stark et al., 2003). As a result the Thala Valley waste disposal site was assessed as a high environmental risk and a priority for clean-up.
A plan was developed for Thala Valley which aimed to: 1) develop remediation techniques that would result in no greater adverse impact on the environment than the “do nothing” option (for a list of remediation options see ATCM XXXV / BP11 Clean-up techniques for Antarctica); 2) remediate the site and reduce the overall environmental impact; and 3) develop monitoring techniques that could detect impacts and also be suitable for monitoring future recovery of the seabed communities in Brown Bay. A holistic, integrated approach was used which included:
    • environmental risk analysis;
    • assessment of the impacts on the site prior to clean-up;
    • assessment of remediation options and costs;
    • assessment of the impacts of remediation operations;
    • measurement of contaminants in the site to delineate remediation boundaries and in excavated material to determine treatment options upon return to Australia; and
    • monitoring of ecological recovery of local marine assemblages post-remediation. 
Other important aspects of the plan included safety of personnel, the logistics of working at the site and the cost of the project, particularly the high cost elements of shipping and disposal of contaminated waste in Australia. 
A removal approach was used with strategies to divert clean melt-water around the site, contain and treat contaminated water on the site, and prevent contaminants from entering the marine environment. 
A notable success for the project was the partnership with the waste management company Collex (now Veolia Environmental Services), which donated special leak-proof shipping containers (designed by the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and Collex) for the storage and transport of contaminated waste. Between November 2003 and February 2004 all of the waste and contaminated soil was excavated and approximately half was transported back to Australia. In Australia Collex worked with AAD personnel to assess the waste, chemically fix highly contaminated material and bury the waste in a managed landfill in Hobart. 
The remainder of the waste was stockpiled at Casey station and transported to Australia in 2011 on the vessel Xue Long chartered from the Chinese National Antarctic Research Expedition (CHINARE). The waste was disposed of in accordance with Australia’s procedures for handling contaminated material, at an authorised secure landfill site. The delay in returning all waste to Australia was primarily due to quarantine permit requirements within Australia and logistic capability for transporting the waste.
Monitoring of Thala Valley and surrounding areas
The most complex component of this project was not the excavation and disposal of the waste in Australia, but the monitoring program designed to evaluate the remediation operation and test environmental performance. The monitoring program consisted of a series of ecological field experiments designed to provide information at different time-scales and was focussed on detecting impacts in the marine benthic environment in Brown Bay, adjacent to the site. Approximately 40 peer reviewed papers have been published since 1999 on different aspects of monitoring at Thala Valley and surrounding areas with other papers in development.
    1. Short-term
Short-term monitoring was conducted to provide real-time feedback on the immediate and short-term effects of the operation, including the effectiveness of the water diversion and treatment, with the intention of providing information that would trigger changes to practices if required. 
Water quality in Brown Bay was monitored using a combination of biomonitoring and chemical methods. The common circum-Antarctic, near-shore, amphipod crustacean, Paramoera walkeri, was deployed in field mesocosms suspended in the water column adjacent to the site and at two reference sites for periods of 14 days, repeated three times during the remediation period (Stark et al., 2006). Results indicated that the strategy to control and treat melt-water and runoff was successful in preventing acute toxic effects in the adjacent marine environment. However, water quality was reduced in Brown Bay and increased metal bioavailability may have been high enough to induce chronic/sublethal effects in some biota.
    2.  Medium-term
Medium-term monitoring was conducted over several years pre- and post-remediation to determine whether disturbance from the remediation caused additional environmental impact in Brown Bay. Two methods were used: sediment traps and an ecological sediment recruitment experiment. 

Sediment traps
Sediment traps deployed at Brown Bay and at reference sites were used to measure sediment and contaminant release into the sea before, during and after the clean-up operation. The traps were deployed over five years, including during the clean-up, for periods ranging from one week to one year. The contents will be analysed to determine whether the input of sediment and contaminated particles to Brown Bay has changed.
Sediment recolonisation field experiments
The soft sediments in Brown Bay were contaminated many years prior to the clean-up operation and the benthic assemblages in Brown Bay were significantly different from control sites. Consequently, trying to determine if the remediation operation caused additional ecological impacts is difficult. It is relatively easy to determine if Brown Bay becomes more contaminated by examining sediment cores, but difficult to determine whether biological communities become more different from controls as they are highly variable. Instead field experiments were deployed adjacent to the disposal site and at control sites to determine whether colonisation of infaunal communities at Brown Bay changed as a result of the clean-up operation. The recolonisation experiments used clean, defaunated sediment (from a reference site) to provide habitat for colonisation by infauna, thus any impacts measured in the new sediments would be a result of current activities and not past contamination. A beyond-BACI design (Before/After/ Control/Impact – multiple controls, (Underwood, 1991; Underwood, 1992)) was used in which effects of the remediation process would be detected as a change in communities recruiting to sediment at Brown Bay over the period of the clean-up in comparison to those at control locations. Twenty trays of sediment were deployed at each site in summer 2001/02. They were sampled one year before the clean-up, one month before the clean-up, one month post clean-up and finally in 2005/06, 2 years post clean-up. At each time four trays were sampled from each site for analysis of soft sediment communities and metals in the sediments. 
Results indicated that there was a significant increase in metals in sediments in the trays in Brown Bay (and not at controls) following the clean-up at Thala Valley. The clean-up operation was found to have released some contaminated water during the remediation process (see short-term monitoring) but not at concentrations thought to induce acute effects. The medium-term monitoring confirmed this additional release of contaminants through evidence of higher metal concentrations in sediment trays post-remediation. However, there was little evidence of a significant biological impact from increased metals. The Time by Location interaction did not indicate that communities in trays at Brown Bay changed any more following the clean-up than control locations did at the same time. Biological communities change through time so some change was expected at all sites. It was also expected that communities recruiting to trays at Brown Bay would be different for the duration of the experiment, and both these hypotheses were supported. But there was no clear evidence of greater change, or change in a different trajectory, at the Brown Bay sites post-remediation in comparison to controls.
In conclusion, the medium-term ecological monitoring indicates that the remediation operation was successful in preventing a mass release of contaminants while excavation of the waste disposal site took place. The massive disturbance that is inevitable when large tracked machinery is used to excavate a contaminated site such as Thala Valley site was successfully contained and the mitigation measures, such as retention and treatment of contaminated water and diversion of melt-water around the site, were successful. 
    3. Long-term
Long-term monitoring is continuing with the aim of confirming when clean-up efforts are complete, ensuring clean-up actions have not resulted in a greater adverse environmental impact and verifying when full ecological recovery at the impacted sites has been achieved. Specifically:
    • determine if the levels of contaminants in the marine environment are lower after clean-up;
    • determine if the ecosystem is recovering from the removal of waste;
    • predict how long recovery of the ecosystem may take;
    • understand the processes involved in the recovery of the site and the ecology of the adjacent bay to aid in the clean-up of other sites in Antarctica.
Changes in sediment chemistry and biological communities near the disposal site and at several control locations are being monitored. Sampling of marine benthic communities began in 1997 and is planned to continue to detect long-term post-clean-up changes. It is predicted that over time the benthic assemblages in Brown Bay will come to resemble those at control locations. Sampling for post-clean-up ecological monitoring was done in 2005/06, 2006/07, and is planned for 2014/15, ten years after the clean-up.
Critical assessment of the ecological monitoring of the remediation
A major success of the remediation effort has been the use of science in the planning and execution of the clean-up operation to confirm that all requirements of the Environmental Protocol are satisfied. In particular the monitoring was designed to assess and verify the impacts of the activity and to confirm that removal did not result in greater adverse environmental impact than leaving the waste material in its existing location (Annex III, Article 1).
The assessment and monitoring involved a combination of complementary multidisciplinary research such as chemistry and ecology with mensurative sampling and ecological field experiments. The identification of causal relationships between pollutants and their effects, rather than simple correlative approaches, is of particular importance. Manipulative field experiments – not often included in monitoring activities – are the only way this can be achieved (Underwood & Peterson, 1988). Such experiments were used in all stages of the monitoring and assessment work at Casey, demonstrating their practical applicability even in extreme environments such as Antarctica.
Recolonisation experiments, whether of sediment or hard substrata, are a practical method of testing the effects of current activities and offer great potential as a monitoring tool. Advantages over simple mensurative experiments include the use of a non-destructive, standardised sampling unit (e.g. tray of sediment or tile), and comparability at different temporal and spatial scales and between different types of impact. These approaches facilitate more effective management and evaluation of expensive remediation programs.
The disadvantages of field experiments as monitoring tools are those that relate to most Antarctic endeavours: difficult access to the continent; a harsh and challenging environment to conduct field experiments in; the logistic and planning challenges of organising medium or long-term access to stations in the face of competing demands and limited infrastructure. In addition there are environmental and ecological aspects which pose unique problems including a high degree of spatial variation in marine benthic communities (necessitating multiple control sites, more than may be required in temperate regions) and a high degree of spatial variation in environmental variables such as melt water runoff, sedimentation, ice cover, water depth, snow precipitation and coastal aspect in respect to prevailing winds. Although the significance of many of these factors is untested in an ecological context, their influence cannot be dismissed.
Several approaches are recommended as worthwhile for pursuing in similar contexts in other parts of Antarctica and several are cautioned against. Of those which appear to be successful monitoring tools, the use of recolonisation experiments (whether into sediments or onto hard substrata such as tiles) appears to have many benefits and has been successfully applied multiple times at Casey. The use of local organisms contained in field mesocosms also appears to be successful, providing the appropriate pilot studies and background work is done to aid interpretation of results from field experiments. 
The use of sediment traps to measure contaminant input is not recommended because such monitoring experiments are difficult, and subject to extreme variation on small spatial scales which is likely to obscure any larger spatial effects which may be of main interest. 
Sophisticated ecological monitoring in Antarctica, beyond simple sampling programs, is possible and yields valuable information, provided the necessary support can be obtained to finish as planned. In addition, long time scales are required when undertaking any monitoring work in Antarctica, for both ecological reasons and operational constraints. Ecological processes are generally slower in Antarctica than temperate and tropical regions, for example colonization processes on hard substrata are an order of magnitude slower, resulting in long times (minimum one year) to obtain enough recruitment to measure. Operational constraints, such as field seasons generally only being conducted over summer, mean that access to Antarctic marine environments is limited, for example, monthly monitoring of an experiment is extremely difficult to organise, requiring groups of scientists to winter in Antarctica, usually at great expense. It is also difficult to maintain the continuity of long-term (10+ years) monitoring programs, given the likelihood that key personnel may leave, organisational strategic directions may change and funding run out. 
The Thala Valley marine monitoring project is ongoing and the success of the clean-up is yet to be fully evaluated from an ecological perspective. From an operational perspective the remediation was highly successful, managing to prevent most of the contamination from entering the marine environment, under difficult and challenging circumstances. 
These efforts illustrate Australia’s current approach to waste management in Antarctica, which recognises the environmental risk posed by contaminated sites and the need to address the present environmental issues resulting from past practices. This project also provides a practical example of how to consider whether a remediation activity will have a greater environmental impact than leaving the material in-situ, and of methods utilised to assess the short-, medium-, and long-term environmental effects of a clean-up operation.
Lessons learnt
Environmental performance is the key indicator of success of a project like this. Reporting only on the quantity of material removed gives no indication of environmental performance. Monitoring must target those parts of the ecosystem most likely to be impacted by the operation and, although monitoring is resource intensive, it is essential for assessing environmental performance. The less effort directed towards monitoring, the less likely it is that an environmental impact would be detected. 
Excavation was the simplest and least resource intensive aspect of the whole project. The clean-up posed many unique problems including tidal inundation, the meltwater stream, the hard frozen ground and rubbish contained therein, access to the site for heavy machinery, storage and transport of the waste, and, quarantine and disposal of the waste on its return to Australia. All these factors must be planned for and managed to achieve a successful outcome. 
A project of this scale requires commitment over several years and careful coordination of major resources such as shipping and specialist expertise. This project required the development of new techniques for clean-up in Antarctica and new ways to monitor the environmental impact. Sharing of resources between nations including logistics capability and expertise is highly beneficial. The robust methodology developed by Australia through careful planning and experience will be applicable to the clean-up of similar sites elsewhere in Antarctica. Shared resources accessed from other Parties were essential and timely, reducing the time to project completion significantly. 

References
ANZECC/ARMCANZ, 2000. Australian and New Zealand guidelines for fresh and marine water quality. Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council/ Agriculture and Resource Management Council of Australia and New Zealand, Canberra, ACT.
COMNAP. 1999. An assessment of environmental emergencies arising from activities in Antarctica. Lima, Peru: Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXIII.
Deprez, P.P., Arens, M., & Locher, H. 1999. Identification and assessment of contaminated sites at Casey Station, Wilkes Land, Antarctica. Polar Record, 35, 299-316.
Poland et al (2003): Contaminants in the Arctic and the Antarctic: A comparison of sources, impacts and remediation options.  Polar Record 211: 369-383
Roura, RM (2004): Monitoring and remediation of hydrocarbon contamination at the former site of Greenpeace’s World Park Base, Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctica. Polar Record 40 (212) 51-67.Snape, I., Cole, C.M., Gore, D.B., Riddle, M.J., & Yarnall, M. 1998. A preliminary assessment of contaminants at the abandoned Wilkes Station, East Antarctica, with recommendations for establishing an environmental management strategy. Internal Report 1-69. Australian Antarctic Division, Hobart, Australia, 69 pp.
Snape, I., Riddle, M.J., Stark, J.S., Cole, C.M., King, C.K., Duquesne, S., & Gore, D.B. 2001. Management and remediation of contaminated sites at Casey Station, Antarctica. Polar Record, 37, 199-214.
Stark, J.S., Riddle, M.J., & Simpson, R.D. 2003. Human impacts in soft-sediment assemblages at Casey Station, East Antarctica: Spatial variation, taxonomic resolution and data transformation. Austral Ecology, 28, 287-304.
Stark, J.S., Johnstone, G.J., Palmer, A.S., Snape, I., Larner, B.L., & Riddle, M.J. 2006. Monitoring the remediation of a near shore waste disposal site in Antarctica using the amphipod Paramoera walkeri and diffusive gradients in thin films (DGTs). Marine Pollution Bulletin, 52, 1595-1610.
Tin, T., Fleming, Z.L., Hughes, K.A., Ainley, D.G., Convey, P., Moreno, C.A., Pfeiffer, S., Scott, J., & Snape, I. 2009. Impacts of local human activities on the Antarctic environment. Antarctic Science, 21, 3-33.
Underwood, A.J., & Peterson, C.H. 1988. Towards an ecological framework for investigating pollution. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 46, 227-234.
Underwood, A.J. 1991. Beyond BACI: Experimental designs for detecting human environmental impacts on temporal variations in natural populations. Australian Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, 42, 569-587.
Underwood, A.J. 1992. Beyond BACI: the detection of environmental impacts on populations in the real but variable world. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 161, 145-178.



