





SAR-WG Lessons Learned from Search and Rescue Incidents in the Ross Sea Region









Lessons Learned from Search and Rescue Incidents in the Ross Sea Region


1.0 	Introduction

This Working Paper has been drafted in conjunction with New Zealand’s Information Paper: Search and Rescue Incidents in the Ross Sea Region: 2004 - 2013, which reports on search and rescue (SAR) responses which occurred in the Ross Sea region between 2004 and 2013.  

This Working Paper outlines key lessons learned regarding: types of incidents; observations; SAR response preparation and planning; and communication between Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) and operators.  It also draws conclusions from New Zealand’s experience coordinating SAR in the region.  The aim of this paper is to provoke discussion and improve dialogue between Parties with search and rescue coordination responsibility in the Antarctic Treaty area, and other Parties responsible for activities in the area.   

2.0 	Types of SAR Incidents

As detailed in New Zealand’s Information Paper, there are a variety of activities which have required SAR coordination responses in the Ross Sea region since 2004.  Of the 18 SAR incidents,   17 were marine and one was aviation. Of these, one required assistance to national programme activities; five to fishing vessels; seven to whaling or whaling protest vessels and five to other non-governmental activities.

The most common SAR response was for medical evacuations of injured/sick crew or other personnel.  Other marine SAR incidents included vessels on fire, sinking, crew lost overboard, structural damage and collisions.  The only aviation SAR incident was an aircraft crash in the Trans Antarctic Mountain Range.

    3.0 Observations from SAR Incidents

        3.1 Distance

The region for which New Zealand has Search and Rescue coordination responsibility in Antarctica (NZSRR) largely aligns with the Ross Sea Region and covers 5000 000 square kilometres; approximately 1000 000 square kilometres of this is ice shelf or continent.  The most distant point in the area for which New Zealand has Search and Rescue coordination responsibility is over 5,000 km from Wellington New Zealand.  The sailing time between Christchurch and McMurdo Sound, over 3700 kilometres, is 10 days in open water.  The flight time is five hours by C-17 and eight hours by C-130.

        3.2 Duration

SAR incidents in the Antarctic typically take longer to resolve than those in the lower latitudes of the NZSRR.  On average many days pass before all survivors are landed ashore; in some cases more than three weeks.

        3.3 Proximity of Assistance

Statistically, in the marine environment the quickest SAR response has been provided by vessels of opportunity, both from the casualty vessel’s own fleet and others nearby.  The key is alerting these vessels in time to be in a position to save lives.

Fishing, tourism, research and national programme logistics vessels operate in the Ross Sea from December until late February.  While these vessels are a risk to plan for, they are also a resource to harness during SAR operations.


        3.4 Capability of Assistance

Sometimes the closest vessels cannot respond.  In attempting to reach the stricken fishing vessel Sparta, Ice Class vessels (1C), one less than 40 kilometres from the casualty, were unable to make any progress due to heavy sea ice conditions.  The Korean National Programme ship Araon, with ice-breaking capability was the only ship able to render assistance; sailing 14 days from its port in New Zealand.

If survivors are injured, a vessel with hospital/medical facilities may be able to sustain the injured crew until transfer to a more adequate medical facility.

Ships with helicopters aboard can significantly increase the probability of a successful short-range search.

        3.5 Crew Safety

During the two SAR operations conducted for crew lost overboard, the crewmen were never recovered.  Neither was wearing a life jacket or thermal protection, which could have sustained them long enough for searching ships to rescue them.  In addition, if they had carried some form of location device this could have significantly reduced the search time.

        3.6 Communications

Communicating via High Frequency radio in the Ross Sea has a poor success rate.  While recognising the limitations imposed upon satellite communications in the Polar Regions, this means of communication has still proven to be the most successful in the Ross Sea.  

As noted above, vessels of opportunity have provided the most efficient SAR response in the marine environment, and the most successful means of alerting these vessels to a SAR incident has been via the Inmarsat SafetyNET system.

4.0 	SAR Response Preparation and Planning

Prior to 2008, coordination of SAR operations involving RCCNZ, the United States Antarctic Program (USAP) and Antarctica NZ occurred on an ad-hoc basis.  While USAP and Antarctica NZ had a well-developed relationship, their roles and responsibilities during SAR operations involving RCCNZ were not well defined.  Following a table-top SAR exercise in September 2007, involving participants from national and international agencies, RCCNZ undertook to develop a response plan specific to the Antarctic and the first edition of the RCCNZ Antarctic SAR Response Plan was released the following season.  A key section of this plan was developed between Antarctica New Zealand and the National Science Foundation, and underpins the SAR relationship between RCCNZ and these two National Antarctic Programmes.

Noting that SAR response in the Antarctic is always a collaborative effort, the plan defines the roles, the contribution and provides 24 hour contact details for agencies (both government and non-government) that may be asked to assist in a SAR operation.  Guidance on response options is provided to assist SAR Coordinators.  Lessons identified and learned from debriefs and reviews of SAR operations have influenced this guidance, and will continue to do so.

Key relationships for RCCNZ include:

    • The United States Antarctic Program (in Christchurch and at McMurdo Station)
    • Antarctica New Zealand (in Christchurch and at Scott Base)
    • The New Zealand Defence Force
    • IAATO, and their tourist vessels which operate in the Ross Sea every year
    • The fishing fleets
    • Adjacent RCCs
    • The National Antarctic Programmes of Italy and Korea

While the RCCNZ Antarctic SAR Response Plan is shared with Italy and Korea, RCCNZ would like to improve our communications with these Programmes.

Preparation and planning requires good communication, and for agencies to be able to communicate they must first know how to contact each other.  RCCNZ maintains up-to-date contact details in our Response Plan for those agencies typically called upon to provide SAR assistance in the NZSRR, however on occasion it is necessary to communicate with other agencies.  For this purpose RCCNZ finds the COMNAP Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) particularly useful.  ATOM includes contact information for National Programmes, bases and resources, and Search and Rescue authorities. This document is maintained and updated by COMNAP, and is available via the COMNAP web site.

The Antarctic SAR Response Plan is circulated to all participating and interested agencies in New Zealand, to national programmes active in the Ross Sea region, and other RCCs on request.

Since implementation of the Antarctic SAR Response Plan, RCCNZ has observed improved coordination and relationships between all contributing national and international, government and non-government agencies.

5.0 Communication between Rescue Coordination Centres and Operators

Numerous incidents in the Ross Sea have highlighted the importance of vessels:

    • Providing their contact details, and other relevant information relating to their operations in the Antarctic, to the RCC responsible for SAR coordination of the area in which the vessel is operating, in advance of entering the Antarctic area.
    • Understand which Search and Rescue Region they are operating within (as depicted in the IMO Global Search and Rescue Plan and Admiralty List of Radio Signals Volume 5), and in the event of an emergency situation communicate with the responsible RCC so that assistance can be rendered as quickly as possible.  Given the extreme conditions in the Antarctic region, where survival in the water is measured in minutes, it is imperative that ATCM Parties request their operators to communicate with the responsible RCC, not only the vessel’s national RCC, in the event of an emergency situation.
    • Understanding the Master Plan of Shore-Based Facilities for the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS), and in the event of an emergency situation, making best use of their GMDSS equipment.  The concept of the GMDSS is that SAR authorities ashore, as well as shipping in the immediate vicinity of the ship or persons in distress, will be rapidly alerted so that they can assist in a coordinated SAR operation with the minimum of delay.


6.0 	Conclusions

New Zealand has experienced a wide variety of SAR incidents in Antarctica.  Circumstances can vary between incidents that initially appear quite similar, requiring SAR responses tailored to suit.  Recognising this, RCCNZ has found that providing guidance on SAR response options and considerations is preferable to trying to design check lists to fit every situation.

Critical to successful SAR responses has been maintaining a close relationship between RCCNZ and the Antarctic Programmes of the US and New Zealand, and each understanding their role during a SAR operation.  As each SAR incident is unique, pre-plans for typical SAR responses may need to be modified.  Key to achieving this is early communication between agencies during a SAR incident, to ensure agreement and understanding of the intended SAR response.  In other words, the plan should be driven by the SAR incident, not vice versa.

It is not New Zealand’s intention to promote our Antarctic SAR Response Plan as a template for all RCCs and National Programmes.  Rather we would simply encourage the development of clear principles and procedures between RCCs and National Programmes within each SRR, and sharing of these principles/procedures across SRRs for comparison and learning.

