





Approaches to study of the water layer of subglacial lakes in the Antarctic









Approaches to study of the water layer of subglacial lakes in the Antarctic
Subglacial lakes of the sixth continent are among the most important natural bodies of Antarctica being in the focus of attention of the international scientific community from the beginning of the 21st century. 
Organization and implementation of their studies required to use different space, airborne and ground-based methods of radio-echo sounding of the glacier surface, underlying mountain rocks and water bodies. It was necessary to develop techniques and set up unique engineering facilities of deep ice cover drilling including design and subsequent creation of an original park of measuring scientific instruments to investigate characteristics of the water layer of subglacial lakes and their bottom sediments with water and sediment sampling. In many aspects all these advance research facilities and technologies have a pioneer character and can be comparable with similar equipment for extraterrestrial studies. Likewise, researchers, designers and engineers have to rely on the theoretical assumptions rather than on the specific evidence of the environmental parameters under which the new instruments will have to operate. 
The most advanced in this direction of Antarctic studies appear to be the activities of Russian, US and British scientists, who have achieved the much known results in recent years in different regions of Antarctica. These activities are carried out on very different natural subglacial water bodies that had been probably formed under the varying conditions in different epochs of the geological development of this continent having an incomparable magnitude and other external indications. These facts do not make it possible in many aspects to use the quasi-universal technologies and engineering means of studies of the same type. Although the US and British approaches in arranging such activities differ little, it is noted that deep drilling of the glacier by the “hot water” method in the opinion of its authors is not acceptable for the conditions of the Russian Antarctic Vostok station beneath which the largest in the world subglacial lake of the same name is located. The fact is that the ultimate permissible temperature of the glacier surface chosen for drilling is -35ºС, and the glacial surface temperature under Vostok station is – 57ºС. Besides, the glacier thickness under Vostok station is more than 600 m as large as the glacier thickness above Lake Ellsworth and almost 6 times as large as the glacier thickness above the Whillans water body. 
As is known, the Russian specialists have unsealed the subglacial Lake Vostok on 5 February 2012 at the “ice-water” interface at a depth of 3769.3 m by the ice core length. According to the developed technology of this process, water from the surface lake layer being under a higher pressure due to artificially created pressure of the drilling fluid in the deep ice borehole, went up the borehole replacing the lighter drilling fluid consisting of a mixture of kerosene and Freon. Drilling the ice core formed of “fresh frozen” water from the lake surface layer began in the next Antarctic season (December 2012 – beginning of 2013). Specimens of this ice core will be delivered to St. Petersburg for subsequent laboratory analyses onboard the Russian expedition vessel “Akademik Fedorov” in the middle of May 2013. During the next Antarctic season 2013-14 it is planned to drill the remaining 236 m of the lower surface of the glacier. 
At the present time the Russian specialists have not yet adopted the main concept about the need of repeated unsealing of the subglacial Lake Vostok in the season 2013-14 or leaving an ice cork near the bottom glacier surface several dozens of meters thick. In the latter case the second unsealing will be done at the beginning of the season 2014-15 with subsequent testing of specially developed sounding and sampling technical tools to investigate the lake water layer.
The lake water column and bottom sediments are obviously the main study targets of the subglacial environment of Antarctica. The lower part of the glacier formed of frozen water evidently yields preliminary information on the physical, chemical and hydrobiological characteristics of surface water but it is incomplete and not correct in some cases. At water freezing some information becomes inaccessible or not quite correct. In this connection further study of the liquid water phase by means of direct contact methods is the most high-quality and informative technique for investigating such subglacial natural environments, the characteristics of which are practically unknown to the scientific community. Only using these methods one can establish the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water, reveal regular features of its vertical structure, presence of lamination – water masses of different origin, determine parameters of the turbulent and diffusion exchange between the layers, attempt to measure the presence of horizontal motions of the water masses, regularities of melting and freezing processes at the lower surface of the glacier and determine the character of the lake bottom non-uniformity. Many chemical characteristics of water, its ion composition and the concentration of dissolved gases can be measured only by means of direct contact methods. 
Same approach is also obvious for the need of studying the microbial biodiversity of living organisms inhabiting the water layer. The results of recent studies of Russian microbiologists of the surface water specimens lifted by the drill bit by the methods of molecular biology after penetration to Lake Vostok have shown that bacteria of the unknown up to present sub-kingdom of these most widespread on Earth living organisms can inhabit these waters. This discovery testifies that the conditions of the gradual freeze-on of the glacier at this lake point are not a proven fact, as the DNA molecules of this type of bacteria were so far not detected in the Vostok ice core. Thus, water as a life target of microorganisms can have quite different microbiological characteristics than its solid phase – ice. All aforementioned facts demonstrate that investigation of the water column of subglacial lakes by direct contact methods becomes the main objective of current studies of this type of the Antarctic environment.
The use of borehole 5G, drilled at Vostok station, which is filled with the non-freezing drilling fluid, consisting of a mixture of kerosene and Freon, causes on the one hand, a negative reaction of supporters of the Antarctic environment protection, and on the other hand, creates the unique preconditions for conducting multiyear scientific studies with application of different tools, which can be improved with modern advances in the area of microelectronics, optics and experimental physics, chemistry and biology. For this purpose Russia has developed a technology of further study of the water layer of Lake Vostok using this deep borehole and the main facilities of ground drilling equipment. This technology differs from the principles chosen in the USA and the United Kingdom for carrying out their studies on the other subglacial water bodies. This is connected in many aspects with a short-term character of the possibility of using ice boreholes drilled by the “hot water” method, because as soon as heating stops the water in the borehole will quickly freeze due to low temperatures at its lateral sides. Moreover, the authors of the methodology of studying the subglacial lakes through the ice holes filled with hot water do not take into account the influence of the heat flux on the change of hydrophysical characteristics of the water strata and quite approximately estimate the time of relaxation of metal submergence units with multiple sensors and sampling devices for the time of their passing through hot water. 
The work of the Russian specialists to penetrate the subglacial Lake Vostok at the beginning of February 2012 has proved the validity of proposed measures, ensuring the impossibility of the kerosene-Freon mixture of the drilling fluid penetrating the lake relict water. It is proposed to use this principle in the future studies of the lake water layer. Knowing the true thickness of the glacier one can ensure that the next water rise from the lake will not be as high as during the initial process on 5 February 2012, but will comprise not more than 30-40 m. This result will be provided by more accurate monitoring of the pressure and density of the drilling fluid over the whole borehole depth and by transfer to a thinner research winch cable, which will be used to deliver the measuring units to the “ice-water” interface and not for drilling the glacier. 
The Russian technology for investigating the water layer of the subglacial Lake Vostok was presented in WP-34 at XXXV ATCM in 2012 in Hobart, Australia. 

