





“SAR-WG” Update on actions resulting from the two COMNAP SAR workshops, “Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic”









“SAR-WG” Update on actions resulting from the two COMNAP SAR workshops, “Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic”
(Valparaiso, 2008 and Buenos Aires, 2009)

Background
Under international maritime and aeronautical agreements, Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) of five countries (Argentina, Australia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa) share responsibility for the coordination of Search and Rescue (SAR) over the Antarctic region.  Information on arrangements and systems were presented to XXXI ATCM (2008) in COMNAP IP 099. 
COMNAP convened two SAR operational workshops, one in August 2008 (Valparaiso/Viña del Mar, Chile) hosted by the Chilean Directorate General of the Maritime Territory and Merchant Marine (DIRECTEMAR) and the second in November 2009 (Buenos Aires, Argentina) hosted by Argentina's Direccion Nacional del Antarctico (DNA). Reports from both these workshops were made by COMNAP to the XXXII ATCM in WP047 and to the XXXIII ATCM in IP076, respectively.
This paper presents updates since those workshops.
General Update
SAR areas of responsibility in Antarctica
COMNAP considered that the best approach to SAR from a practical and technical perspective was the air and maritime SAR areas of responsibility in Antarctica approach. There are five countries with responsibility for Antarctic SAR coordination which are coincident with the air and vessels gateways: South Africa, Australia, Chile, Argentina and New Zealand. The following is an update on the SAR-related activities and procedures that are in place within those SAR areas of responsibility.
South Africa SAR area 
    • There is a formal MOU between the South African Department of Transport (MRCC and ARCC parent body) and the South African Department of Environmental Affairs (South Africa National Antarctic Program (SANAP) parent body) which designates SANAE IV station a formal Regional RCC-with the base commander receiving formal training from the South African MRCC annually
    • South African RCC and National Antarctic Programs operating in this area has a comprehensive contact list which includes all stations, vessels, aircraft and field facilities (including medical) in the region and which is shared amongst all the National Antarctic Programs operating in the region
    • South African RCC has an inventory on ship movements and other resources (air and ground) present in the area over the season, that could play a role in SAR 
    • Operators have an inventory of aviation fuel with locations
    • South African RCC and National Antarctic Programs operating in the area take joint steps to coordinate medical, medivac, weather forecasting information, general communications and SAR communications plans
    • SANAP and ALCI1 hold a meeting annually at the start of each season with the South African RCC, other National Antarctic Programs operating in this region attend this meeting when able
    • The SANAP Director is on the South African SAR Executive Committee and SANAP is a member of the National SAR Co-ordination Committee.
Australian SAR area
    • Have an MOU (through the Australian National Antarctic Program) with the Australian RCC (MOU successfully enacted a number of times for real SAR events)
    • Australian RCC has a comprehensive contact list which includes all stations, vessels, aircraft and field facilities (including medical) in the region and which is shared amongst all the National Antarctic Programs operating in the region
    • Australian RCC and National Antarctic Programs operating in this area shares schedules on vessel and aircraft movement present in the area over the season
    • Australian RCC holds joint annual SAR exercises and annual exchange of information
    • Australian RCC exchanges plans with the New Zealand RCC.

Chile and Argentina SAR area (air and maritime coordination)
    • Both RCCs have no formal SAR agreement, but there is a combined Argentina and Chile Navy Antarctic Patrol which has been in place for many years with both countries sharing the same area of responsibility in Antarctic waters in the IMO and with both countries sharing the SAR coordination responsibilities of the area for air SAR
    • RCCs which operate in this region have a comprehensive communications list which they share with each other
    • There is daily communications between the Chilean MRCC (DIRECTEMAR) and the Chilean National Antarctic Program especially since the Chilean MRCC operates a maritime station in the Peninsula and has personnel at various Chilean stations as part of the National Antarctic Program
    • Chilean National Antarctic Program attends regular meetings with the Chilean RCCs and often members of the Chilean RCCs are on IMO, ATCM and COMNAP delegations
    • Argentina has two helicopters (MI 17) ready to deploy to Antarctica, configured for SAR
    • Facing a SAR incident, the Argentine MRCC Ushuaia communicates with the Argentine National Antarctic Program to coordinate SAR response, through constant communication with its stations
    • Argentine National Agency for SAR Maritime often integrates delegations to ATCM and COMNAP meetings and permanently to the IMO
    • Argentine MRCC exchanges plans with the MRCC South Africa and holds annual SAR communication exercise and monthly test exchange.

New Zealand SAR area
    • There is a set of general operating principles between the New Zealand RCC, the US National Antarctic Program and the New Zealand National Antarctic Program, which is shared with the Italian and (since 2010) with the Korean Programs
    • The New Zealand National Antarctic Program and the US Antarctic Program operate a Joint Antarctic Search and Rescue Team (JASART) which provides SAR coverage for US and New Zealand operations in the Ross Island region and the Antarctic interior
    • New Zealand RCC and the National Antarctic Programs which operate in this area utilise the ATOM as their comprehensive contact list for all stations and vessels
    • The National Antarctic Programs which operate in this area share with the New Zealand RCC seasonal aircraft schedules for all Antarctic departures/arrivals from Christchurch
    • The National Antarctic Programs which operate in this area and the New Zealand RCC exchange information on National Antarctic Program ship positions
    • US McMurdo Station acts as Emergency Operations Centre in SAR situations and provides weather forecasting information to the New Zealand RCC for SAR situations in the region
    • The New Zealand National Antarctic Program attends regular meetings with the New Zealand RCC and the RCC hosts periodic SAR exercises which include the participation of the National Antarctic Programs in the area.
Discussions on safety within COMNAP
Meetings
COMNAP Annual General Meetings (AGM) provide an opportunity for National Antarctic Programs to discuss a range of issues related to safety, including SAR. Safety is a standing AGM agenda item and the regional break-out group sessions regularly devote time to SAR issues and events in order to share information and discuss lessons learned from incidents that have occurred during the Antarctic season. COMNAP has a Safety Expert Group which provides a forum for topical discussion at any time. 
Products
COMNAP has developed, maintains and regularly updates a range of products in support of exchange of operational information and which can be of assistance in a SAR situation.  These include:
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM)
    • Originally begun at the request of ATCM (Recommendation X-3)
    • Updated regularly, but formally twice each year 
    • Provided electronically via the COMNAP website at any time (COMNAP members, IAATO and 5 RCCs have access) and via request
    • Contains contact information (phone, radio, email, fax) for stations, vessels, managers/deputy managers of 28 National Antarctic Programs and the 5 RCCs.

Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM)
    • Originally begun at the request of ATCM (Recommendation XV-20)
    • Updated regularly, but formally once each year
    • Currently in paper format, electronic availability expected in 2014, to all AFIM subscribers 
    • Contains information, inter alia, on where aircraft operate, on Primary and Secondary Air Information Stations (AIS), ships carrying helicopters, ground facilities including medical, cargo and fuel facilities, (types or grades) and rescue equipment.

Ship Position Reporting System (SPRS)
    • Originally proposed at COMNAP AGM 1999, becoming active in 2001
    • Updated during the Antarctic summer season on a 24/7 basis
    • Made available to all ships submitting positions to the system and to all 5 MRCCs via direct email (including kml) and via COMNAP website password access 24/7 
    • Contains contact information on National Antarctic Program vessels operating below 60oS in the Antarctic summer season and displays positioning and other optional information such as heading, observations, number of persons, doctors and helicopters on board.

Accident, Incident and Near-Miss Reporting System (AINMR)
    • Originally begun in 2004, electronically since 2011
    • Updated by all 28 National Antarctic Programs when a significant incident occurs to share information that might assist others to prevent re-occurrence
    • Electronic format via password on the COMNAP website, an email alert is sent out when a new event is entered.
Recommendations
Recognising that National Antarctic Programs have made significant advances since the two COMNAP workshops to improve SAR response in order to protect the lives of those working in Antarctica, COMNAP should continue to lead discussion on SAR response in consultation with all the National Antarctic Programs and with the RCCs under the standing COMNAP AGM agenda item on safety and should endeavour to convene regular joint workshops perhaps on an every 3 year basis.
 
Attachment 1: List of Actions and Recommendations from both SAR workshops convened by COMNAP and known status or progress against those actions.



Action
Progress / Status 
Links between Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs)
1
5 countries to continue pursuing bilateral SAR agreements for both maritime and aviation
In progress. A number of bilateral agreements are in place: Chile/NZ; Aust/NZ; Argentina/Chile; South Africa/Argentina.
2
5 countries to consider establishing a single regional SAR agreement (Maritime and Aeronautical) , which could for example, at least initially, be a simple agreement restricted to exchange of information, communication protocols and aviation coordination arrangements – noting that a number of maritime and aeronautical bilateral agreements are already in place   
Considered, however, no single Antarctic SAR agreement in place-existing arrangements work well.
Links between RCCs and National Antarctic Programs
3
COMNAP to draft a paper and recommendations for increased collaboration in SAR between National Antarctic Programs and relevant RCCs, using the draft Arctic SAR Memorandum of Understanding as a guide
After consideration of the SAR Arctic MOU within COMNAP, the National Antarctic Programs (NAP) preferred regional SAR agreements over an overarching Antarctic SAR MOU. Many RCC and NAP agreements are in place and work well.
4
Each of the 5 NAPs to consult with their RCCs and the other NAPs operating in their area to discuss potential communication and collaboration between each other for SAR purposes
Done regularly. There is good communication and collaboration between NAPs and between 5 NAPs and their RCCs. 
Contact list 
5
COMNAP and RCC Australia to develop, maintain and make available a list of relevant contacts, by 15 October 2008 
Done. List is incorporated and regularly updated and made available in the COMNAP ATOM.
Information on potential rescue assets
6
IAATO to make its current information about its members' ships available to the MRCCs of the 5 countries
Now done on a routine basis.
7
COMNAP to work with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to develop and coordinate their relevant information systems and resources (including EIES, InfoX, AFIM and ATOM) so as to best maintain information on stations, ships and aircraft and make the information available to the RCCs of the 5 countries
InfoX was not taken beyond testing stage.  AFIM, ATOM, and SPRS all contain information on stations, ships, aircraft facilities. All are regularly updated and made available to all 5 RCCs. NAPs also exchange regional information with each other.
Ship Position Reporting
8
COMNAP to feed information from their ship position reporting system to the MRCCs of the 5 countries
Now done on a routine basis.
9
IAATO to take steps to ensure that the MRCCs of the 5 countries have a reliable access route to the IAATO vessel positions
Now done on a routine basis. Note ATCM Resolution 6 (2008).
10
COMNAP, IAATO and AMVER to explore ways in which their respective position reporting systems could communicate with, and support, each other
IAATO vessel positions from the IAATO vessel tracker are now made available to AMVER routinely. COMNAP SPRS positions are automatically sent to all 5 MRCCs on a daily basis and kml file can be displayed in Google Earth.
Advance Schedules
11
IAATO to provide its members' pre-season ship schedules to the MRCCs of the 5 countries
Now done on a routine basis.
12
COMNAP to work with the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to develop and coordinate their relevant information systems and resources (including EIES, InfoX, SPRS) so as it can feed information on advance schedules of participating National Antarctic Program vessels to the RCCs of the 5 countries
Advance shipping schedules provided by NAP vessels are shared via the COMNAP website.  The RCCs have password access to the site and information at all times.
Library of information
13
COMNAP to integrate such a library in its new system – target implementation date: 01 Jan 2009
Info section publicly available at www.comnap.aq/sar. 
14
RCCs, NAPs and IAATO to forward to the COMNAP Secretariat any material they consider worth incorporating in this library.
Ongoing.
Automatic Identification System (AIS)
15
Uruguayan National Antarctic Program, in collaboration with others to continue working on AIS options for SAR purposes, and report back on progress to COMNAP, the RCCs of the 5 countries and the ATCM
Ongoing.  



Recommendation
Outcomes
Links between Rescue Coordination Centres (RCCs) and National Antarctic Programs
1
That each National Antarctic Program establishes and maintains a liaison/relationship with the RCCs of its areas of operation, preferably in association with the National Antarctic Program of the RCC country
These are established. This relationship exists and is maintained via regular communications and meetings.
Links between RCCs and their national Antarctic agencies
2
That the SAR authorities of each of the 5 countries be included in some way in Antarctic discussions/committees at national level
Done.  
3
That the 5 NAPs and 5 national Treaty delegations of the 5 countries consider including their SAR authority in discussions and meetings of COMNAP and the ATCM, whenever relevant
Done. Many NAPs consult with their RCCs prior to and immediately following ATCMs and COMNAP meetings and invite RCCs representatives to join delegations when applicable.
Information on potential rescue assets
4
That the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties recognise the importance for SAR of maintaining up to date 'permanent' information on all stations, other ground facilities (camps, refuges, airfields...), ships and aircraft   
Note Resolution 6 (2001) and Resolution 6 (2010). COMNAP maintains and regularly updates products in support of this including the AFIM, ATOM and the Antarctic facilities list.
5
Inform National Antarctic Programmes and countries that the success of a land SAR mission often depends on rapid reaction which requires resources to be in close proximity
The National Antarctic Programs share information on resource availability and location for SAR purposes.
Ship position reporting
6
That National Antarctic Programs are encouraged to use the COMNAP SPRS to its fullest possible extent for all their ships and making use of optional parameters
Done. COMNAP has been actively encouraging use of the SPRS and reminds members on a regular basis.  An example is the SPRS presentation most recently made at COMNAP AGM 2012 (July, Portland, Oregon USA). Note ATCM Resolution 6 (2010). 
7
That the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties:
    • recognise the importance for SAR of all Antarctic Ships ensuring that  their positions are available to at least the MRCC of the region they are navigating in; 
    • encourage ships to liaise with vessels they encounter in the Antarctic Treaty area to promote the use of position reporting systems; and
    • resolve that all ships flying their flag or used as part of their National Antarctic Program should while in the Antarctic Treaty Area, as far as possible,  report their position to at least one of the MRCCs of the 5 countries, recognising that official MRCCs have systems in place to ensure confidentiality of this information
Note ATCM Resolution 6 (2010). NAP ships using the SPRS have their positions automatically reported to all 5 of the MRCCs on a daily basis.
8
That National Antarctic Programmes ask their countries to stress the importance to their Antarctic vessel operators of reporting their positions on a regular basis through the COMNAP SPRS or the IAATO vessel tracking scheme or direct to the relevant SAR authority. This applies equally to government operated vessels and non-governmental organisation-operated vessels
Note ATCM Resolution 6 (2010).
Advance schedules
9
That the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties recognise the importance for SAR of providing advance information on ship and aircraft schedules     
Note ATCM Resolution 6 (2010).
Land SAR
10
That the next workshop (should there be one) review progress with Land SAR and consider future steps
Done (November 2009).
11
That National Antarctic Programmes and IAATO encourage their members to carry COSPAS-SARSAT beacons in the field and that countries encourage all land-based expeditions to carry these beacons and to ensure that all beacons are registered and preferably have a GPS chip	
Most NAP field-based projects carry location devices and/or have a regular communication schedule. Their locations and status are well known.  Some NAPs use a risk analysis approach to determine need for such devices and therefore do not require carrying of such devices with every field project.  Other NAPs do require every field party to carry such a device. All IAATO logistic supported expeditions have extensive communications plans which mean that the expeditions are tracked with positions reported regularly.
Future work
12
That COMNAP reconvene such a workshop in one year time, in particular to expand on Land SAR, then review the requirements for future workshops
Done (November 2009).


Misc

13
Request that National Antarctic Programmes ask their countries to include in their national papers to IMO, information on Antarctic SAR issues from workshops such as this one
Many NAPS actioned this request to their IMO delegations. 
14
Request National Antarctic Programmes to ask their countries to remind operators of vessels of the importance of training that is specific to the Antarctic environment they are working in. In support of this, countries should be made aware that there are courses on offer to train people in Antarctic water navigation and that the IMO is making an effort in the area of training requirements and minimum level of experience for the maritime polar regions
NAPs were reminded of this training specifically at the Workshops, at AGM 2009 and 2010 and via the COMNAP Training Expert Group Discussion forum (which covers a whole range of training topics-not exclusively SAR). SANAP sent two of its officers on the Chilean Ice navigation course. Annually the Argentine School of Marine Sciences dictates the course of Antarctic shipping with participation of officers from several countries.
15
Encourage countries with National Antarctic Programmes to use their influence at the IMO, to incorporate in the Polar Code the following:
o Specific elements on training deck officers and captains sailing in Antarctic waters;
o Consideration of the special characteristics of the SAR operation in Antarctic waters
Ongoing. Many IMO delegations include NAP personnel and there are sections in the current draft Polar Code on training and qualifications and SAR issues.
16
National Antarctic Programmes to encourage their countries to give a higher priority to Antarctic charting
National Antarctic Programs can only make this recommendation, it is up to their countries charting organisations to prioritise and implement. Note ATCM Resolution 5 (2008). COMNAP attends as observer to HCA meetings, SANAP enhanced its relationship with the SANHO after the SAR workshops; HCA gave an invited presentation at COMNAP AGM XXI. 
17
Recognising that even though a captain of a ship is not necessarily obligated to request SAR assistance, given the special circumstances in the Antarctic, captains should provide early notification to SAR authorities of a developing situation with ship operations to improve any rescue response
Noted.
18
Request that National Antarctic Programmes express to their countries the need for SAR contingency planning to be outlined in all permit or authorisation applications or advance notifications before they are considered
Note ATCM XXVII Measure 4 (2004) (not yet in effect). 

Attachment 2: Map – Antarctic Search and Rescue Regions and Regional Coordination Centres (ver. D8552_27 13/08/2008).


