





Proposal to add the site commemorating the location of the former German Antarctic Research Station “Georg Forster” to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments








Proposal to add the site commemorating the location of the former German Antarctic Research Station “Georg Forster” to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments
This is a proposal for a new Historic Site or Monument (not previously designated as an HSM by the ATCM).

(i)	Name of the proposed HSM: Location of the first permanently occupied German Antarctic research station “Georg Forster” at the Schirmacher Oasis, Dronning Maud Land. 

(ii)	Description: The original site is situated by the Schirmacher Oasis and marked by a commemorative bronze plaque with the label in German language: 
Antarktisstation
Georg Forster
70° 46’ 39’’ S
11° 51’ 03’’ E
von 1976 bis 1996
	
	The plaque is well preserved and affixed to a rock wall at the southern edge of the location. This Antarctic Research Station was opened on 21 April 1976 and closed down in 1993. The entire site has been completely cleaned up after the dismantling of the station was successfully terminated on 12 February 1996. The site is located about 1.5 km east of the current Russian Antarctic research station Novolazarevskaya. 

(iii)	Co-ordinates: 70 degrees 46’ 39’’S, 11 degrees 51’ 03’’E, 
	Elevation: 141 meters above sea level

(iv)	Original proposing Party: Germany

(v)	Party undertaking management: Germany.


Proposal to add the site commemorating the location of the former German Antarctic Research Station “Georg Forster” to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments
Working Paper submitted by Germany

Summary
In accordance with article 2 and 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, Germany proposes that the historic site of the German Georg Forster Station at the Schirmacher Oasis in Dronning Maud Land to be added to the list of Historic Sites and Monuments approved by the ATCM. The site commemorates the first permanently used German research base in Antarctica. Scientists from former East Germany performed long-term monitoring programs and a great number of various scientific projects. The station became known to the international scientific community when the vertical extension of the ozone hole in the southern polar stratosphere was recorded for the first time by regular balloon-borne ozone observations in 1985. 
Introduction
This paper follows the guidance set out in Resolution 5 (2011). 
The entire location was cleaned and groomed after the station had been completely dismantled in 1996 and removed from Antarctica. The cleanup and return to pristine condition was carried out in a joint Russian–German operation, which at the same time performed a clean-up of the neighbouring Novolazarevskaya area. The site of the former Georg-Forster-Station marked by a commemorative plaque was last visited and examined by Germany on 15 January 2013. The site has been found in excellent condition.
Position and Description
The site of the former Georg Forster Station is located at the Schirmacher Oasis in Dronning Maud Land. The geodetic point of the site is 70 degrees 46’ 39’’S, 11 degrees 51’ 03’’E. It is marked by a small tripod fixed in the bedrock. 
The site has been transformed to pristine condition. The commemorative plaque on the rock wall at the southern edge of the site is made of bronze with a size of about 0.8 m by 0.5m. The inscription in German language reads:
Antarktisstation
Georg Forster
70° 46’ 39’’ S
11° 51’ 03’’ E
von 1976 bis 1996
Only this commemorative plaque of the first German permanent research base in Antarctica remains at the original location in Antarctica.

Reason for designation
Consistent with resolution 8 (1995) and the Appendix to resolution 3 (2009), this site merits listing for the following reasons:

    • The site is associated with the beginning of permanent scientific engagement of Germany in Antarctica under the Treaty

    • The site is associated with the long-term monitoring of the stratospheric ozone layer

    • The site commemorates the engagement of Germany to completely remove scientific stations after decommissioning under the Environment Protocol

After signature of the Antarctic Treaty in 1974 by East Germany, the Georg Forster Station was erected in February/March and commissioned on 21 April 1976. The station was permanently used and logistically operated in cooperation with the Russian Antarctic Expedition from 1976 to 1993.
Long-term studies of magnetospheric-ionospheric processes, extended geophysical investigations, biological and geological studies as well as sea ice observations using satellite images were performed. The station became known to the international science community when the vertical extension of the ozone hole in the southern polar stratosphere was recorded for the first time by regular balloon-borne ozone observations in 1985. These data were the only ones available in Antarctica from May to December for the year 1985. After the reunification of Germany, the ozone soundings were continued from 1992 at the German Neumayer stations; they now constitute the longest uninterrupted record of the vertical distribution of ozone in Antarctica.

Photographs:


Close up view of the site and plaque























View of the former Georg Forster station at 70 degrees 46’ 39’’S, 11 degrees 51’ 03’’E 
after first winter in November 1976. The site has been transformed to pristine condition.

