





Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No.154 Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land








Revision of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Summary
New Zealand has conducted the five-yearly review of the management plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land. The management plan was revised with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998). All revisions are minor with standard wording applied where applicable. New Zealand recommends the CEP approve the revised management plan.
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA No. 154 Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land. 

In the 2011/2012 season, a site visit was conducted to ensure the reason for which the Area was designated continues to serve its purpose. 

The management plan was revised with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998) in order to meet the requirements of the guidelines. The intent of the management plan has not changed but standard wording has been applied where applicable.  

The revised draft Management Plan was circulated for comment to scientists who have visited the Area. 

All revisions are minor and are outlined in the table below. 
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA No. 154 Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land.

ASPA No. 154: Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 3 (1997)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 3 (1997)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2003)
Measure 11 (2008)
Current management plan: 
Measure 11 (2008)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 154 Botany Bay, Cape Geology, Victoria Land.
Other relevant measures:
This area contains HSM 67 (Rock Shelter "Granite House"), listed in Measure 4 (1995).
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
Two missing GPS coordinates were added (M2 and M5) and the 'Managed Zone' was relabelled 'Access Zone'.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes, Map A-C labels and graphics:
    • The 'Managed Zone' was relabelled 'Access Zone' 
    • Granite Harbour label relabelled Botany Bay
    • Cape Geology label added
    • Designated camp site symbol added
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
The 'Managed Zone' was relabelled 'Access Zone' in order to help achieve greater consistency in the application of the zoning tool in Antarctica. The Managed Zone, now Access Zone, was originally designated for access to HSM 67 Granite House.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
The management plan was revised with reference to Annex V and the Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas appended to Resolution 2 (1998). The intent of the management plan has not changed. Standard wording has been applied where applicable.
Main changes include:
    • The addition of an Introduction
    • The addition of Section 6(ii) Access to the Area
    • Reference to the EDA
    • Updated Section 1 and Section 6(i) with up to date scientific information on floral diversity.
    • Renamed the Managed Zone as Access Zone
    • Updated Section 8 
    • Added Annex 1 (from Seppelt et al., 2010)
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
No
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
8. If the proposal relates to an ASPA, what is the primary reason for designation (i.e. which part under Article 3.2 of Annex V)?
Botany Bay, Cape Geology was originally designated in Measure 3 (1997) as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 37, after a proposal by New Zealand, on the grounds that the Area is an extremely rich botanical refuge for such a high latitude location, with a lichen and moss species diversity and abundance that is unique for Southern Victoria Land.
The primary reason for the designation of Botany Bay, Cape Geology as an Antarctic Specially Protected Area is to protect the Area's unusual ecological features and its exceptional scientific and historic values.
9. Have you identified the main Environmental Domain represented by the ASPA/ASMA (refer to the ‘Environmental Domains Analysis for the Antarctic Continent’ appended to Resolution 3 (2008))? 
Yes
If Yes, the main Environmental Domain should be noted here.
Under the Environmental Domains Analysis (Resolution 3, 2008) the Area is Environment S – McMurdo – South Victoria Land geologic. Environment Domain S includes known sites of markedly diverse and abundant mosses and lichens at Cape Bird, Ross Island (ASPA 116), Beaufort Island (ASPA 105) and Canada Glacier in the Taylor Valley (ASPA 131).

