





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 123 
Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land









ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 3
First adoption of management plan:
Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) SSSI No. 3
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 1 (2002), Measure 6 (2008)
Current management plan:
ASPA No. 123, Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Recommendation X-6 (1979), Recommendation XII-5 (1983), Recommendation XIII-7 (1985), Recommendation XIV-4 (1987), Resolution 7 (1995), Measure 2 (2000) 
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land
Other relevant measures:
Resolution 2 (2011)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor.
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
Yes. The boundaries have been adjusted to reflect the catchment in improved map data available for the Area. Coordinates and elevations have been updated. 
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to captions and graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. Minor corrections to ensure consistency between maps and text.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A

Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 123
Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land

    1. Management plans for adopted Antarctic Specially Protected Areas shall be reviewed at least every 5 years, and updated as necessary, as required under Article 6.3 of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
    2. The Management Plan for ASPA No. 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys was last reviewed in 2008, and review thus falls due in 2013. Accordingly, the United States reviewed the Management Plan and has made a number of revisions, both as a result of new data and in light of agreements reached by the Antarctic Treaty Parties since the last plan was adopted.
    3. Barwick Valley was originally designated as Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 3 through Recommendation VIII-4 (1975) due to its value as “one of the least disturbed and contaminated of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land” and its important as a reference base against which to measure changes in comparable ecosystems of the other Dry Valleys. The current Management Plan reaffirms the values of the Area.
    4. A number of minor revisions to the boundaries of the Area are made in the current Management Plan. These have resulted from improvements in mapping of the Area, which allowed for a more accurate definition of the catchment boundary on which the Area is based. As a result of the boundary changes made in the current Management Plan, the overall area has increased slightly from 418 km2 to 423 km2 (an increase of ~1%).
    5. The changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    6. A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area and the reasons for designation, including the history of designation and important changes in previous reviews, and the classification under the Antarctic Environmental Domains Analysis and the Antarctic Conservation Biogeographic Regions (ACBR);
    7. Revisions throughout the plan to achieve consistency with new agreements and guidance reached by the ATCM since the previous Management Plan was adopted, and with the Committee for Environmental Protection Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011);
    8. (Section 5 – Maps). Map 1 was comprehensively revised. New topographic data were added, including contours from Convoy Range mapping undertaken by LINZ / USGS. Ice-free areas were digitised from recent orthorectified WorldView imagery (2012 / 2013) (supplied by Polar Geospatial Center (PGC), Minneapolis). LiDAR elevations (OSU / USGS) were processed to produce detailed contours in the valley floor regions of the Barwick and Balham valleys, which enabled a cross-check of the accuracy of the orthorectified imagery, and geographical positions and heights to be refined (e.g. lakes). Additional geographical names have been added to the map. Cartographic design of the map has been revised to maintain consistency with other maps in current use within ASMA No. 2 McMurdo Dry Valleys;
    9. The boundary of the Area in the current Management Plan was refined based on the new topographic data and imagery. Boundary coordinates in the Management Plan have been updated to reflect the new positions in the improved map;
    10. While carrying out the work improving the mapping for ASPA No.123, an error was identified in the Management Plan adopted in Measure 1 (2002) where it stated that the area of Site of Special Scientific Interest  No.3 was 480 km2, an error that persisted in the Management Plan adopted in Measure 6 (2008). The total area within the boundary defined in these Measures was, in fact, 418 km2. This error has been corrected in this Management Plan;
    11. (Section 6 (i)) The description of the Area was updated to include references and information from a report of a recent visit made to the Area;
    12. (Section 6 (ii)) A new section was added to describe access to the Area, to maintain consistency with other recently adopted management plans;
    13. (Section 7) Revisions were made to the text and sections in order to maintain consistency with Resolution 2 (2011);
    14. (Section 7 (ii) – Access to the Area) The policy on air access was revised to achieve consistency with Resolution 2 (2004) Guidelines for the operation of aircraft near concentrations of birds in Antarctica. The overflight ceiling in the previous version of the plan was 2500 ft. The current version proposes 2000 ft, which is the height adopted in Resolution 2 (2004). Acknowledging that Resolution 2 (2004) applies more specifically to birds, which are generally absent from the Area, it was nonetheless felt there are practical advantages (i.e. for pilots) to adopt consistent rules for overflight limits, where needed, throughout the region. The provision relating to use of helicopter smoke grenades was considered redundant since they are no longer in use, and the reference was deleted;
    15. (Section 7 (v) – Location of field camps) A previously used camp site has been added as a designated camp site. The site was used in a recent visit made in January 2012, and GPS coordinated are given.
    16.  (Section 8 - Supporting documentation). A reference list has been added.

Proposal
The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.  Since the revisions were minor and focussed on bringing the plan formatting in line with Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas adopted in Resolution 2 (2011), we recommend that the CEP adopt the revised Management Plan for ASPA 123 Barwick and Balham Valleys, Southern Victoria Land.

