





International cooperation in cultural projects in Antarctica




International cooperation in cultural projects in Antarctica
Summary
The aim of this Working Paper is to highlight the importance of promoting the stimulation for art and culture projects in Antarctica, especially those in which artists from different Member countries of the Antarctic Treaty take part, just like in exhibitions in galleries and exhibition centres around the world. It is of interest to Argentina to encourage participation in these projects, which promote the value of scientific research and the protection of the Antarctic environment through different forms of artistic expression, as well as to provide incentives for international participation in the projects.
Also, these cultural initiatives coincide with the topic "Education and Promotion of Antarctic Matters for Public Knowledge", to develop a more comprehensive system of Antarctic cooperation, coordinated by Chile.
Objectives
The Argentine National Directorate of Antarctica encourages and promotes the exploration of aesthetic proposals to develop specific art projects in the Antarctic continent.
The programme is part of the Antarctic Summer Campaign, which takes place from November to March every year, with a view to subsequently present the works in national and international temporary and itinerant exhibitions, talks, seminars, and exchanges.  
The proposal aims to reflect and to raise awareness amongst the general public on the importance of scientific research and on caring for the Antarctic environments, through different artistic forms, with international cooperation as a core concept.
Specific Objectives
    • Incorporate the Antarctic in national and international cultural projects.
    • Establish contact links with populations who do not have access to the Antarctic, through integrating art to exhibitions of a historic, environmental or scientific nature.
    • Promote the development of contemporary art and theoretical reflection on the Antarctic continent.
    • Encourage the connections between arts and sciences, by promoting the interaction of different disciplines.
    • Develop interest in the Antarctic and responsibility for polar scientific activity and environment.
    • Strengthen links with different cultural entities, universities and educational institutions to build bonds of cooperation.
Introduction to the Art and Culture Programme
In May 2004, the Art and Culture Project was drafted by the Argentine National Directorate of the Antarctic with the support of the National Arts Fund of Argentina and the Guggenheim Foundation in New York, USA. The project was initiated with Argentine artists and was included in the International Cooperation Programme in 2006 with artists from Spain and Canada, furthering "The Polar Dialogues" artistic exploration, investigating aesthetic possibilities of contemporary art associated with current environmental matters and displaying the artworks at national and international levels. 
Research carried out by scientists from the Argentine Antarctic Institute (IAA), such as "Appearance of Methane Hydrochloride on the Surface of Glacier Ice" by Dr. Rodolfo del Valle and "Evidence of Global Warming in the Antarctic Peninsula and Disappearance of Larsen B Ice Shelf" by engineer Pedro Skvarca, were the starting points for the basis of the project, which analyses effects produced by climate change in the Antarctic Peninsula.  Other artists have joined the Antarctic Art Programme, working on aesthetic research in different disciplines, combining art and science to produce a reflective awareness for displaying works related to the White Continent. 
In the summer campaigns 2009 to 2013, artists joined from Australia, the United Kingdom, Austria, Spain, Russia, Mexico, the United States, Italy and Germany, developing visual and sound artistic research projects. 
In order to be able to select the best proposals for art and culture projects in the Antarctic, a selection mechanism was established, conducted by recognised external evaluators and with a medical and psychological assessment equal to that which is conducted for scientific staff who take part in Antarctic campaigns.
This programme has allowed for an increase in awareness and understanding of the research and efforts to protect the Antarctic continent as a pristine area, reaching a public that had had little contact with the reality of Antarctica. This is why the Programme has remained over time, including artists from various artistic disciplines and prioritising international cooperation, either to work in Antarctica or to take part in the exhibitions.
The listing and description of exhibitions and activities are in the Annex to this WP.
The "Artists' Residency in Antarctica", for Argentine artists, and the "International Cooperation Programme for Residency in Antarctic Stations", for foreign artists, are currently being developed. 
Recommendation
Recognising the importance of disseminating Antarctic values through the development of art projects based on international cooperation, in particular those that reflect scientific activities and the preservation of the Antarctic environment, the following draft Resolution is proposed:






















Resolution XXX (2013)
International cooperation in cultural projects in Antarctica

The Representatives

Convinced that international cooperation is one of the fundamental principles of the Antarctic Treaty System;
Recognizing the merit of promoting Antarctic values through art projects; 
Recalling Resolution 2 (1996) promoting scientific, aesthetic and wildlife values in Antarctica, through stimulation of young people and contributions by writers, artists and musicians;

Recommend that:
Parties be encouraged to promote the dissemination of Antarctic values through the development of art projects in Antarctica on the basis of international cooperation, to reflect, in particular, scientific activity and the importance of the preservation of the Antarctic environment.

