





Contributions to discussions on access to environment-related information and its management within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System





Contributions to discussions on access to environment-related information and its management within the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System
Summary
Argentina maintains that any information that is communicated in relation to or linked with the Committee for Environmental Protection or the Antarctic Treaty, or the manner in which it is communicated, must preserve the spirit of consensus in which these fora are handled, especially if the ultimate purpose of the information is to assist in decision-making processes. 
With a view to ensuring consensual management of and access to information, Argentina proposes that any initiative, for instance this one currently being discussed regarding the creation of the "Antarctic Environments Portal", just like any other initiative that might arise in the future, concerning information management, should initially be submitted for analysis and will need to comply with certain requirements. Argentina stands ready to continue with the discussions in the manner that is deemed convenient if the Committee considers that the issues raised in this document require further analysis, with the purpose of reaching a consensus in defining the organisational issues for the development of initiatives related to the management and communication of information on the environment.
Introduction
The Committee for Environmental Protection advises the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting on matters of interest to them, after a consensus has been reached. The mechanism for obtaining such a consensus is based on the debates and discussions that are conducted in person, with simultaneous translation to the four languages in the annual meetings and then through the CEP forum, located on the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat website. Finally, the definitive position of the Committee for Environmental Protection is reflected in their final reports. 
However, bearing in mind that the Parties must be able to depend on access to basic information, such as scientific research, results of monitoring programmes or other information which may be of interest to them at the moment of the decision-making process, we should reflect on the mechanisms for accessing this  information. 
New Zealand, in conjunction with Australia and SCAR, presented the concept of an "Antarctic Environments Portal" in Working Paper 57, at ATCM XXXV, to be developed within the framework of the CEP, as a manner of centralising this information and making it accessible to decision-makers, mainly those of the Committee for Environmental Protection. 
In this case, although the origin of the information to be uploaded would come from sources outside the CEP, such as SCAR, the information would be edited and managed by members of the Committee, for use by its Members. 
Toward an agreement on use and management of information
The case of the proposed "Antarctic Environments Portal" is an example of a valuable initiative, but which raises some questions that must be resolved beforehand in order to avoid potential confusion regarding this initiative or any other initiative relating to information management.
Argentina maintains that any information that is communicated in relation to or linked with the Committee for Environmental Protection or the Antarctic Treaty, or the manner in which it is communicated, must preserve the spirit of consensus in which these fora are handled, especially if the ultimate purpose of the information is to assist in decision-making processes. 

Each Party has various sources of information, whether they are national, foreign, from NGOs or SCAR, etc. which it uses for its own purposes and the manner of interpreting and "appropriating" this information may vary amongst Parties. In this sense, decision-making and arriving at a consensus is a complex process which requires analysis and discussions, both within each Party and during discussions between the Parties in the framework of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
That is why Argentina believes that any information management tool that is supported by this same System must respect the same consensus criteria as that which is used within this System. 
Proposal of requirements for the assessment of projects related to the management of information on environments 

With a view to ensuring consensual management of and access to information, Argentina proposes that any initiative, for instance this one currently being discussed regarding the creation of the "Antarctic Environments Portal", just like any other initiative concerning information management that might arise in the future, should initially be submitted for analysis and will need to comply with certain requirements of which Argentina wishes to highlight the following:

    • On the contents to be communicated: Any summary or informative material must be strictly endorsed by consensus of  the ATCM/CEP.
    • Languages: materials to be communicated must be available in the four official languages of the Antarctic Treaty.
    • On the persons responsible for management of the information: Any person who is given this responsibility or designated as editor, and any Committee for revision or advice should be elected through an agreed mechanism during the CEP/ATCM meetings, in the same way as the election of officers of the ATCM/CEP. The possibility of using a method of contact points and/or of ensuring geographical balance should also be evaluated. The person/s mentioned above shall first communicate to the Parties all information or material to be made available to the community. 
    • On sources of funding: The method of funding for initiatives which involve management and communication of information must be previously agreed upon by the Parties, in order to ensure independent management of the information before any source of financing that is external to the Antarctic Treaty System.
    • Use of place names: Special attention and care should be given with respect to the use of place names, with the aim of avoiding any potential conflicts.
If the Committee considers these or other associated matters require further analysis or if it is deemed necessary that organisational matters be defined for the development of this type of initiative, Argentina is willing to continue these discussions in the manner that is deemed convenient. 

