 
 
 
PRINCIPLES FOR AN ANTARCTIC LIABILITY REGIME 
 
 
The Madrid Protocol commits Parties to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment 
and obliges Parties to plan and conduct activities in Antarctica so as to limit adverse impacts on the 
Antarctic environment.  A liability regime established under the Protocol should therefore seek to 
enforce this overall obligation of comprehensive environmental protection by enforcing the 
functional obligation to plan and conduct activities so as to limit adverse impacts. 
 
Australia believes that if we are to make timely progress on this matter, there must be a greater 
commitment by Parties to resolve the issues and develop a new approach.  One approach that seems 
to Australia to be promising would be for Parties to give priority to settling the principles of a 
liability regime that can apply in the unique circumstances of Antarctica.  Once the principles are 
settled, the matter can be passed to legal experts to develop suitable text for an Annex to the Madrid 
Protocol. 
 
To assist Parties’ consideration, Australia has drafted the attached “statement of principles” for an 
Antarctic environmental liability regime with a view to providing a possible basis for Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Parties to move towards consensus.  The draft aims to be helpful by reflecting 
what Australia sees as the aspects of a liability regime that most Parties have been able to accept, 
although it does not necessarily reflect the views of any particular country.   
 
The principles describe a comprehensive environmental liability regime in which liability would be 
incurred for all damage that is substantial and lasting.  In assigning liability no distinction is made 
between types of activity or types of operators.  Parties would be obliged to require operators to 
take all reasonable measures to prevent harmful impacts and to contain, mitigate and repair any 
damage caused.   
 
An audit, review and monitoring process of operators’ programs would provide for transparency in 
cases of environmental damage.  These processes would be structured to act as a sufficient 
disincentive to poor environmental performance. 
 
Timetable for completion 
 
Australia also believes that if we are to conclude this matter in a timely way Parties need to adopt a 
target date for concluding our negotiations.  Specifically, it is suggested that the Parties aim to settle 
the liability annex in 2001 — the fortieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Antarctic Treaty, 
and the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Madrid Protocol.   
1 
 
 
 
Draft statement of principles 
 
 
1. Only harmful impacts that are substantial and lasting shall be covered by the Annex and attract 
liability, whether or not such “damage” was an impact foreseen in an environmental evaluation 
under the Madrid Protocol or subject to, or exempt from, the procedural requirements of another 
Annex or Protocol. 
 
2. The only defences to liability shall be where it can be established that the damage was caused 
by: 
∑ a third party; 
∑ an armed attack or terrorist attack; or 
∑ an unforeseeable event that transcends the scope of reasonable precautionary measures, such 
as a natural disaster of an exceptional nature. 
 
3. A single Annex shall be developed to cover activities causing such harmful impacts. 
 
4. The Annex shall oblige Parties to require all operators conducting activities in Antarctica to take 
all reasonable steps to prevent such harmful impacts. 
 
5. The Annex shall oblige Parties to require all operators who cause damage, where feasible, to: 
∑ respond rapidly when damage occurs; 
∑ contain and mitigate the damage caused; and 
∑ repair any damage. 
 
6. The Annex shall oblige Parties to require all operators to take out insurance or demonstrate 
financial means to allow the costs of any third party who undertakes any of the activities outline 
in (5) above to be reimbursed: 
∑ when the operator requests assistance to undertake the activities outlined in (5) above; or 
∑ when the operator has not undertaken the activities outlined in (5). 
 
7. The Annex shall oblige Parties, on behalf of operators who come under their national jurisdiction 
(within the meaning of Article 8(2) of the Madrid Protocol and Article VII(5) of the Treaty), to: 
∑ notify promptly the Chairperson of the Committee on Environmental Protection and all 
Consultative Parties of any event that gives rise to harmful impacts covered by the Annex; 
∑ provide promptly a comprehensive report, including detail of the activity and the 
circumstances which led to the harmful impact(s), the nature and extent of the damage, any 
measures taken to respond, contain, mitigate or repair the damage, planned future action to 
address and monitor the damage; 
∑ monitor the impacts for a period of five years, or for a period as decided by the ATCM on 
the recommendation of the Committee on Environmental Protection; 
∑ provide logistic support for representatives / inspectors / observers of a Party or Parties and / 
or the Committee on Environmental Protection to inspect and / or monitor the damage; 
∑ provide a comprehensive annual report to the Committee on Environmental Protection for 
five years (or a period to be decided by an ATCM), of action undertaken and planned to be 
undertaken to monitor and / or repair the damage and the results of all monitoring, repair 
and associated activities; and 
∑ undertake any activities agreed to by the ATCM or by external arbitration. 
 
2 
 
3 
8. The Annex shall require all Parties to cooperate and provide appropriate assistance to respond 
rapidly to contain and mitigate damage and, where feasible, to repair damage caused by 
unidentified operators or for which no liability arises. 
 
9. The Protocol’s dispute settlement procedures shall apply to disputes concerning the Annex. 
