 
 
Protected Areas: 
Revision of Management Plan for Clark Peninsula, 
Site of Special Scientific Interest 17 
 
 
 
 
 
Consistent with Resolution 1 (1998) of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXII, 
Australia has revised the Management Plan for Clark Peninsula, Site of Special Scientific 
Interest 17. 
 
 
The Plan has been reformatted to accord with The Guide to the Preparation of Management 
Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, appended to Resolution 2 (1998) of 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting XXII. 
 
 
There have been no substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan, 
although the new format has required some sections of the Plan to be enhanced and it is 
timely to reconsider the expiry date for designation of the Site. The ongoing protection of 
the Site is warranted and the revised Plan proposes to change the expiry date from 31 
December 2000 to an indefinite period. 
 
 
Parties will note that the opportunity has also been taken to make a minor correction to the 
boundary. This amendment to the boundary, which has no effect upon the values for which 
the Site was originally nominated, is to allow safe access to abandoned Wilkes Station 
without encroaching into the Site. 
 
 
It is recommended that Parties adopt the revised Management Plan. A draft Measure to this 
effect is attached. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
DRAFT MEASURE 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas System:  
Revised Description and Management Plan for Site of Special Scientific Interest  
 
SSSI 17 
Clark Peninsula 
 
 
 
 
The Representatives, 
 
 
Recalling Resolution 1 (1998) that Consultative Parties revise Management Plans for those 
sites for which they have principal responsibility, and Resolution 2 (1998) recommending 
that The Guide to the Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected 
Areas be used in the revision of Management Plans; 
 
 
Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with 
paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty: 
 
 
That the revised Management Plan for the Clark Peninsula, Site of Special Scientific 
Interest No. 17, annexed to this Measure be inserted in the Annex to Recommendation 
XIII-8 to replace the plan previously annexed to this Recommendation. 
 
 
That the Consultative Parties ensure that their Nationals comply with the mandatory 
provisions of the revised Management Plan. 
 
2 
 
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST 17 
 
CLARK PENINSULA, BUDD COAST, WILKES LAND 
 
 
Management Plan 
 
 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
Clark Peninsula has been a designated Site of Special Scientific Interest since 1985 (ATCM 
Recommendation XIII-8). The Site is approximately 25 hectares in area and is adjacent to 
the Windmill Islands Group on the Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, Eastern Antarctica. (Maps A 
and B.) Scientific research within the Site has focused on the plant communities but has 
also included studies of the Site’s penguin colonies. The Site has served as a valuable 
comparative site for similar plant communities and penguin colonies closer to Casey 
Station which are subject to greater disturbance.  
 
 
2. 
Description of Values to be Protected 
 
Excluding the Antarctic Peninsula, the largely undisturbed terrestrial ecosystem of Clark 
Peninsula supports one of the most extensive and best-developed plant communities on 
continental Antarctica. The Site has rich associations of macrolichens and bryophytes that 
occupy very specific ecological niches. Within the relatively complex plant communities, 
33 species of bryophytes and macrolichens have been found with 11 cryptogamic 
sociations being identified. This vegetation forms a continuum of ecological variation along 
environmental gradients of soil moisture, soil chemistry, and microclimate. As such, the 
Site has intrinsic ecological value and scientific importance, particularly to botanists, 
microbiologists, soil scientists and glacial geomorphologists. 
 
Within the Site, moss and lichen communities are used as control plots to monitor the 
environmental impacts of nearby Casey Station. The Site provides baseline data with which 
to compare changes in similar plant communities in the immediate surroundings of Casey 
Station. The cryptogamic plant communities are also being monitored in relation to short-
term microclimate fluctuation and long-term climate change in the region since 
deglaciation 8000-5000 years BP. 
 
Significant and relatively undisturbed breeding populations of Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis 
adeliae) are established at Whitney and Blakeney Points within the Site. These populations 
provide valuable comparative data for assessing and measuring impacts of human 
disturbance on penguin colonies on nearby Shirley Island close to Casey Station. 
 
The Site supports an exceptional vegetation cover for continental Antarctic ice free 
localities, with a wide range of vegetation communities. The Site requires protection 
because of its ecological importance, its significant scientific value, and the limited 
geographical extent of the ecosystem. The site is vulnerable to disturbance through  
 
3 
trampling, sampling, pollution or alien introductions, while being sufficiently distant from 
Casey Station to avoid immediate impacts and disturbances from activities carried out 
there. It is because of the scientific and ecological values, and the values of the Site for 
long term monitoring, that it should continue to be protected. 
 
 
3. 
Aims and Objectives 
 
Management at Clark Peninsula aims to: 
 
• 
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Site by preventing 
undue human disturbance; 
 
• 
conserve a part of the natural ecosystem as a reference area for the purpose of 
comparative studies and to assess direct and indirect effects of Casey Station; 
 
• 
allow scientific research on the ecosystem and elements of the ecosystem, both 
geological and biological, while ensuring protection from over-sampling and 
disturbances; 
 
• 
minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes to 
the Site; 
 
• 
allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims of the Management 
Plan. 
 
 
4. 
Management Activities 
 
The following management activities will be undertaken to protect the values of the Site: 
 
• 
signs illustrating the location and boundaries, with clear statements of entry 
restrictions, shall be placed at appropriate locations at the boundaries of the Site to 
help avoid inadvertent entry; 
 
• 
information on the location of the Site (stating special restrictions that apply) shall 
be displayed prominently, and a copy of this Management Plan shall be kept 
available, at the adjacent abandoned Wilkes Station, the “Wilkes Hilton” 
(unofficial name) Refuge Hut on Stonehocker Point, “Jack’s Donga” (unofficial 
name) Refuge Hut, and at Casey Station and will be provided to all visiting ships; 
 
• 
markers, signs or structures erected within the Site for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition and removed when no 
longer required; 
 
• 
the Management Plan shall be reviewed at least every five years and updated as 
required. 
 
 
5. 
Period of Designation 
4 
 
Designated for an indefinite period.  
 
6. 
Description of the Site 
 
6(i) Geographical co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
 
Clark Peninsula, an area of rock exposures and permanent ice and snow fields, is situated 
on the north side of Newcomb Bay at the east end of Vincennes Bay, opposite Windmill 
Islands region, on Budd Coast, Wilkes Land, in latitude 66°15’S and longitude 110°36’E. 
The Site is approximately 25 hectares in area. (Map C.) 
 
The Site comprises all the land on Clark Peninsula within the southern boundary line 
connecting the east side of Powell Cove at a point which originates at latitude 66.254424° 
South, longitude 110.53330° East, to trigonometrical station G7 at latitude 66.55664° 
South, longitude 110.55664° East thence to a point to the east-south-east on Løken 
Moraine. The eastern boundary is the westernmost limit of Løken Moraines as far north as 
a point due east of Blakeney Point, and thence to the coast, returning along the coast to the 
point of origin. The boundary of the Site will be indicated by prominent markers, and is 
shown on Map C. 
 
Topographically, the Clark Peninsula comprises low lying, rounded ice-free rocky outcrops 
(maximum altitude approximately 40 metres), rising in the east to the Løken Moraines 
(altitude approximately 130 metres). Intervening valleys are filled with permanent snow or 
ice, or glacial moraine and exfoliated debris and contain water catchment areas. 
 
The rocks of Clark Peninsula consist of a layered sequence of schists, gneisses and 
migmatites, known as the Windmill Metamorphics. The rock beds lie in a south-west north-
east orientation. Gravels and soils appear to be derived from marine sediments deposited in 
the Pleistocene with a thin cover of weathered rock. Subfossil penguin colonies are 
common along the central ridge running south-west to north-east on Clark Peninsula. In the 
vicinity of abandoned penguin colonies, the soils, derived from penguin guano, are fine and 
silty with relatively high percentage of organic matter. Melt streams and pools are 
prevalent in summer.  
 
Conditions on Clark Peninsula, in comparison with many other continental Antarctic areas, 
are favourable enough to have induced relatively stable, complex, well developed, and 
species rich vegetation. The ice-free rocks support an extensive cover of lichen and in 
lower lying areas mosses predominate. Principle factors responsible for the distribution of 
vegetation on Clark Peninsula are exposure to wind, availability of water and the presence 
of abandoned penguin colonies which have a marked influence on the distribution and 
abundance of species. 
 
To the north-east of the peninsula, well-developed Umbilicaria decussata, Pseudephebe 
minuscula, Usnea sphacelata communities dominate. Further from the coast, U. sphacelata 
is dominant and forms extensive carpets over the metamorphic rocks and gravel beds in 
association with P. minuscula and U. decussata, together with scattered bryophytes. The  
 
bryophytes comprise, Bryum pseudotriquetrum, Grimmia antarctici and Ceratodon 
purpureus. Within these communities, well-developed bryophyte patches dominate in 
5 
moist, sheltered sites and locally form closed stands comprising a moss turf up to almost 30 
cm depth.  
 
In the north-western and western coastal areas where penguin colonies are present, 
Xanthoria mawsonii, Candelariella flava and Buellia frigida are more common. On the 
abandoned penguin colonies in the southern coastal areas, this community type contains a 
higher proportion of U. decussata and U. sphacelata. 
 
In the centre of Clark Peninsula the vegetation is dominated by U. decussata, P. minuscula, 
B. soredians and B. frigida, with scattered occurrences of Pleopsidium chlorophanum. 
 
The vegetation map of Clark Peninsula is shown at Map D. 
 
The microflora comprises algae, with Botrydiopsis constricta and Chlorella conglomerata 
dominating, together with bacteria, yeasts and filamentous fungi. 
 
Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) are abundant within the Site, with colonies present at 
Whitney and Blakeney Points. Approximately 5,500 breeding pairs were counted in 1999 at 
Whitney Point, and 4,600 breeding pairs were present at Blakeney Point in 1991. The 
penguin population has shown a long-term increase since studies commenced in 1959/60. 
This is in contrast to nearby Shirley Island, opposite Casey Station, where the breeding 
population of Adélie penguins has remained stable.  
 
Wilson’s storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus), Antarctic skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) 
and Snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) breed within the Site. 
 
Terrestrial invertebrate microfauna consists of protozoa, nematodes, mites, rotifers and 
tardigrades. The invertebrates are mainly confined to the moss beds, lichen stands and 
moist soils. 
 
The climate of the Windmill Islands area is frigid-Antarctic. Meteorological data from 
Casey Station on nearby Bailey Peninsula show mean temperatures for the warmest and 
coldest months 0.3 and –14.9°C, respectively, with extreme temperatures ranging from 9.2 
to –41°C. The climate is dry with a mean annual snowfall of 195mm year-1 (rainfall 
equivalent). There is an annual average of 96 days with gale-force winds, which are 
predominantly easterly in direction, off the polar ice cap. Snowfall is common during the 
winter, but the extremely strong winds scour the exposed areas of the peninsula of snow. 
On most hill crests on Clark Peninsula snow gathers in the lee of rock outcrops and in 
depressions in the substratum. Further down the slopes snow forms deeper drifts. 
 
6(ii) Access to the Site 
 
Access into the Site should preferably be from “Wilkes Hilton” Refuge Hut in the south-
west, “Jack’s Donga” Refuge Hut in the north-east, or from the over snow route between 
Casey Station and “Jack’s Donga” by descending the western slope of Løken Moraines in 
the vicinity east of Stevenson Cove, see Map C. 
 
Access from Casey to abandoned Wilkes Station is via a well-defined marked cane route 
outside the southern boundary of the Site. As the Casey-Wilkes route is very close to the 
6 
boundary, pedestrian and vehicular traffic should take care not to stray northward of it. See 
Map C. 
 
All vehicles are prohibited within the Site (except for emergency) and access should be by 
foot. Helicopters (except in emergencies or for essential management activities) are 
prohibited from landing within the Site. Visitors should avoid walking on visible 
vegetation. Care should be exercised walking in areas of moist ground, where foot traffic 
can easily damage sensitive soils, plant or algae communities, and degrade water quality. 
Visitors should walk around such areas, on ice or rocky ground. Pedestrian traffic should be 
kept to the minimum necessary consistent with the objectives of any permitted activities 
and every reasonable effort should be made to minimise effects. 
 
Visitors should avoid unnecessary disturbance of penguin populations, and not approach 
penguins within 40 metres during the breeding season, October to April unless this is an 
integral part of the permitted research activity. 
 
6(iii) Location of Structures within and adjacent to the Site 
 
The only structures known to exist in the Site are a severely deteriorated wood and canvas 
hide located on “Lower Snow Slope” (unofficial name) on the eastern portion of Whitney 
Point. This hide was constructed in 1959 for behavioural studies of penguins. There are a 
number of boundary markers along the southern boundary, and survey markers within the 
site. 
 
The “Wilkes Hilton” Refuge Hut is located approximately 200 metres south of the southern 
boundary. Approximately one kilometre to the south-west is the abandoned Wilkes Station 
on Stonehocker Point. Another Refuge Hut, “Jack’s Donga” is located approximately 1.5 
kilometres north of the northern boundary of the Site. 
 
6(iv) Location of other Protected Areas in the vicinity 
 
Nearby protected areas to Clark Peninsula are: North-east Bailey Peninsula, Site of Special 
Scientific Interest No. 16, 66°17’S, 110°33”E, 2.5 km, south-west of Clark Peninsula, 
across Newcomb Bay, adjacent to Casey Station; and Specially Protected Area, No. 3, 
Ardery Island, 66°22’S, 110°27’E, and Odbert Island, 66°22’S, 110°33’E, Budd Coast 
lying in Vincennes Bay, 13 km south of the former Wilkes Station. 
 
 
7.  
Special Zones within the Site 
 
There are no special zones within the site. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.  
Maps 
 
7 
Map A: East Antarctica, showing location of Clark Peninsula.  
Map specifications: 
Projection: Polar Stereographic 
Horizontal Datum: WGS84. 
 
Map B: Windmill Islands, showing location of Clark Peninsula SSSI.  
Map specifications: 
Projection: UTM Zone 49 
Horizontal Datum: WGS84. 
 
Map C: Site of Special Scientific Interest No., 17, protected site topographic map. Map 
specifications: 
Projection: UTM Zone 49 
Horizontal Datum: WGS84. 
Contour Interval: 10 m. 
 
Map D: Site of Special Scientific Interest No., 17, protected site vegetation map. Map 
specifications: 
Projection: UTM Zone 49 
Horizontal Datum: WGS84. 
 
9.  
Supporting Documentation 
 
Adamson, E., and Seppelt, R. D., 1990. A Comparison of Airborne Alkaline Pollution 
Damage in Selected Lichens and Mosses at Casey Station, Wilkes Land, Antarctica. In: 
Kerry, K. R., and Hempel, G. (Eds.), Antarctic Ecosystems: Ecological Change and 
Conservation, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 347-353. 
 
Azmi, O. R., and Seppelt, R. D., 1997. Fungi in the Windmill Islands, continental 
Antarctica. Effect of temperature, pH and culture media on the growth of selected 
microfungi. Polar Bio. 18: 128-134. 
 
Azmi, O. R., and Seppelt, R. D., 1998. The broad scale distribution of microfungi in the 
Windmill islands region, continental Antarctica. Polar Bio. 19: 92-100. 
 
Beyer, L., Pingpank, K., Bolter, M. and Seppelt, R. D., 1998. Small-distance variation of 
carbon and nitrogen storage in mineral Antarctic Cryosols near Casey Station (Wilkes 
Land). In: (Ed.). Zeitschrift fur Pflanzenahrung Bodendunde 161, 211-220. 
 
Blight, D. F., 1975. The Metamorphic Geology of the Windmill Islands Antarctica, Volume 
1 and 2, PhD thesis, University of Adelaide. 
 
Blight, D. F. and Oliver, R. L., 1997. The metamorphic geology of the Windmill Islands 
Antarctica: a preliminary account, Journal of the Geological Society of Australia, 24 (5): 
239-262. 
 
Blight, D. F. and Oliver, R. L.,1982. Aspects of the Geological history of the Windmill 
Islands, Antarctica. In: Craddock, C. (Ed.), Antarctic Geoscience, University of Wisconsin 
Press, pup place? 
 
8 
Cowan, A. N., 1979. Giant Petrels at Casey, Antarctica. Australian Bird Watcher 8 (2) 66-
67. 
 
Cowan, A. N., 1981. Size variation in the Snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea). Notornis 28: 
169-188. 
 
Giese, M., 1998. Guidelines for people approaching breeding groups of Adélie penguins 
(Pygoscelis adeliae), Polar record 34 (191): 287-292. 
 
Goodwin, I. D., 19893, Holocene deglaciation, sea-level change, and the emergence of the 
Windmill Islands, Budd Coast, Antarctica, Quaternary Research, 40: 70-80. 
 
Heatwole, H., Saenger, P., Spain, A., Kerry, E. and Donelan, J., 1989. Biotic and chemical 
characteristics of some soils from Wilkes Land Antarctica, Antarctic Science 1(3): 225-
234, Pub, Place. 
 
Hovenden, M. J., and Seppelt, R. D., 1995. Exposure and nutrients as delimeters of lichen 
communities in continental Antarctica, Lichenologist 27(6): 505-516. 
 
Melick, D. R., Hovenden, M. J., & Seppelt, R. D., 1994. Phytogeography of bryophyte and 
lichen vegetation in the Windmill Islands, Wilkes land, Continental Antarctica, Vegetatio 
111: 71-87, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Brussels. 
 
Melick, D. R., and Seppelt, R. D., 1990. Vegetation patterns in Relation to climatic and 
endogenous changes in Wilkes Land, continental Antarctica, Journal of Ecology, 85: 43-56. 
 
Murray, M. D., and Luders, D. J., 1990. Faunistic studies at the Windmill Islands, Wilkes 
Land, east Antarctica, 1959-80. ANARE Research Notes 73, Antarctic Division, Kingston. 
 
Orton, M. N., 1963. A Brief Survey of the fauna of the Windmill Islands, Wilkes Land, 
Antarctica. The Emu 63 (1) 14-22. 
 
Roser, D. J., Melick, D. R. and Seppelt, R. D., 1992. Reductions in the polyhydric alcohol 
content of lichens as an indicator of environmental pollution. Antarctic Science 4 (4): 185-
189. 
 
Roser, D. J., Melick, D. R., Ling, H. U. and Seppelt, R. D. 1992Polygol and sugar content 
of terrestrial plants from continental Antarctica. Antarctic Science 4 (4): 413-420. 
 
Roser, D. J., Seppelt, R. D. and Nordstrom, 1994. Soluble carbohydrate and organic 
content of soils and associated microbiota from the Windmill Islands, Budd Coast, 
Antarctica. Antarctic Science 6 (1): 53-59. 
 
 
 
Smith, R. I. L., 1980. Plant community dynamics in Wilkes Land, Antarctica, Proceedings 
NIPR Symposium of polar biology, 3: 229-224. 
 
Smith, R. I. L., 1986. Plant ecological studies in the fellfield ecosystem near Casey Station, 
Australian Antarctic Territory, 1985-86. British Antarctic Survey Bulletin, 72, 81-91. 
9 
 
Woehler, E. J., Slip, D. J., Robertson, L. M., Fullagar, P. J. and Burton, H. R., 1991. The 
distribution, abundance and status of Adelie penguins Pygoscelis adeliae at the Windmill 
Islands, Wilkes Land, Antarctica, Marine Ornithology 19(1): 1-18. 
 
Woehler, E. J., Penney, S. M., Creet, S. M. and Burton, H. R., 1994. Impacts of human 
visitors on breeding success and long-term population trends in Adelie Penguins at Casey, 
Antarctica, Polar Biology 14 269-274. 
 
 
10.  
Permit Conditions 
 
Entry into the Site is prohibited except in accordance with a permit issued by the 
appropriate National Authority. 
 
A permit to enter the Site may only be issued for scientific research, or for essential 
management purposes consistent with the Management Plan’s objectives and provisions, 
and providing that the actions permitted will not jeopardise the ecological or scientific 
values of the site or interfere with existing scientific studies. 
 
Conditions that must be included in the permit are provisos that the permit or an authorised 
copy shall be carried within the Site, and that the permit specify the period for specific 
activities. Additional conditions, consistent with the Management Plan’s objectives and 
provisions, may be included by the issuing Authority. 
 
10(i) Access to and Movement within or over the Site 
 
See section 6(ii) for information concerning access and movement within or over the Site. 
 
10(ii) Activities which are or may be conducted within the Site, including restrictions on 
time and place 
 
• 
scientific research programs consistent with the Management Plan for the Site, 
including the values for which the Site has been designated, and which will not 
jeopardise the ecosystem of the Site; 
 
• 
essential management activities, including monitoring; 
 
• 
sampling, which should be the minimum required for the approved research 
programs. 
 
 
 
 
10(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
 
No structures are to be erected within the Site, except as specified in a permit. All scientific 
equipment installed in the Site must be authorised by permit and clearly identified by 
country, name of principal investigator, year of installation and expected date of 
completion of the study. Details are to be included in the permit holder’s report. All such 
10 
items should be made of materials that pose minimum risk of contamination of the Site and 
must be removed at the completion of the study. 
 
10(iv) Location of field camps 
 
Parties are prohibited from camping within the Site and should camp at either “Wilkes 
Hilton” Refuge Hut or “Jack’s Donga” Refuge Hut (see Map C). Field huts, if necessary for 
facilitation of approved activities, should be placed with care to avoid any potential 
contamination of the environment, or interference with plant or animal life. 
 
10(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms that may be brought into the Site 
 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Site and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions. 
 
No poultry products shall be taken into the Site. 
 
No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Site. Any other chemicals, including 
radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be introduced for scientific or management 
purposes specified in the permit, shall be removed from the Site at or before the conclusion 
of the activity for which the permit was granted. 
 
Fuel is not to be stored in the Site unless required for essential purposes connected with the 
activity for which the permit has been granted. Permanent depots are not permitted. 
 
All material introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or before the 
conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk of their 
introduction to the environment is minimised. 
 
10(vi) Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna 
 
Taking of, or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in 
accordance with a permit. Where authorised, the activity should, as a minimum standard, be 
in accordance with the requirements of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty, 1991, Annex II, Article 3. 
 
10(vii) Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Site by the permit holder  
 
Material may only be collected or removed from the Site in accordance with a permit and 
should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management needs. 
 
 
Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Site, which was not 
brought into the Site by the permit holder or otherwise authorised, may be removed unless 
the impact of the removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ. If material 
is to be removed the appropriate Authority must be notified and approval obtained. 
 
10(viii) Disposal of waste 
 
11 
12 
All wastes generated by visitors, including human faeces and urine, shall be removed from 
the Site, and none deposited within the Site. 
 
10(ix) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan can continue to be met 
 
• 
permits may be granted to enter the Site to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for analysis 
or review, to erect or maintain scientific equipment and structures, and signposts, or 
for other protective measures. 
 
• 
any specific sites of long-term monitoring shall be appropriately marked and a GPS 
position obtained for lodgement with the Antarctic Data Directory System through 
the appropriate National Authority. 
 
• 
to help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the plant communities found 
at the Site visitors shall take special precautions against introductions. Of particular 
concern are microbial or vegetation introductions sourced from soils at other 
Antarctic sites, including Stations, or from regions outside Antarctica. To minimise 
the risk of introductions, before entering the Site, visitors shall thoroughly clean 
footwear and any equipment, particularly sampling equipment and markers to be 
used in the Site.  
 
10(x) Requirements for reports 
 
The principal permit holder for each permit issued should submit to the appropriate 
National Authority a report describing the activities undertaken. Such reports should be 
submitted as soon as possible and include the types of information contained in the SCAR 
Visit Report form or as required by national laws. The Authority should maintain a record 
of such activities and make this accessible to interested Parties. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
NOTE.- Maps A, B, C and D will be handle to the delegations during the Consultative 
Meeting and will also be incorporated on the XXIII ATCM Final Report 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- 
 
