REPORT OF A JOINT INSPECTION
UNDER ARTICLE VII OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
ANTARCTIC TREATY INSPECTION PROGRAMME: JANUARY, 1999

Introduction

A joint Inspection programme was conducted by the United Kingdom and Germany in the Antarctic Peninsula area during January, 1999.

The Inspection Team operated from the UK's Royal Naval ice patrol vessel HMS Endurance and conducted Inspections mainly with the assistance of the ship's two Lynx helicopters, though some landings were made by ship's boat.  

Twenty-three Inspections were made in the period 12-28 January.  These consisted of Inspections of 
11 permanent stations, 6 summer-only stations (2 of which are scientific annexes to permanent stations), 4 Historic Sites and Monuments (all abandoned former stations), and 2 tourist vessels.  The stations and facilities of 12 Treaty Parties (11 Consultative and 1 non-Consultative) were inspected.  One of the tourist vessels Inspected, the Marco Polo, was  flagged with a non-Treaty Party (the Bahamas), and was Inspected with the permission of the Master.

All Inspections were carried out under the terms of Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.  Accordingly, both the UK and Germany provided Treaty Parties in advance with the names and affinities of their designated Observers.  These were:

-  for the United Kingdom:  

   Dr M G Richardson (MR), Head, Polar Regions Section,  
   Foreign and Commonwealth Office, London;

   Mr I Collinge (IC), Head of Purchasing and Shipping (Logistics), 
   British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge;
                                           
   and from HMS Endurance the following Officers:   Lt Cmd M Clegg (MC),  
   Lt A Stevenson (AS), Lt Cmd A Jenks (AJ), Lt D Bishop (DB).

- for Germany:   
  Dr H Gernandt (HG), Head of Logistics 
  Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, 
  Bremerhaven.      

The core Inspection Team consisted of Richardson, Gernandt and Collinge.  Designated Observers from HMS Endurance were drawn on a rotational fashion, depending on the station or facility to be inspected.  The Observers involved in any particular Inspection are indicated by the initials shown at the end of each Inspection Report.

In planning for, and conducting, Inspections particular attention was paid to the Inspection Checklists adopted by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, eg Checklist 'A' for permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations agreed in 1994 (ATCM XVIII), and Checklist 'B' (vessels within the Antarctic Treaty area) and Checklist 'C' (abandoned Antarctic stations and associated installations) adopted through Resolution 5 (1995) at ATCM XIX.  These Checklists have a strong focus on environmental considerations.  They are designed to check on compliance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes.

The Checklists were not used as exhaustive questionnaires during the course of Inspections, but rather as aide memoires to ensure that relevant information was collected in a consistent manner. 

To remove the possibility of national bias the Inspection Reports of the UK's Rothera Station and Port Lockroy were prepared by the German Observer (Dr Gernandt).  Similarly, the Report on the German Receiving Station at O'Higgins, was prepared by UK Observers.  

With one exception, the Inspection Team remained onboard HMS Endurance from the time that she departed the Falkland Islands on 10 January to her return on 31 January.  The German Observer left the vessel on 26 January for Rothera Station where he undertook an Inspection, before transiting subsequently to the German station Neumayer to the east of the Weddell Sea. 

The task of the Observers was assisted greatly by those stations which provided extensive background material on their facilities.  This included the Argentine stations of  Esperanza and Teniente Jubany, and Rothera Station (UK) which had provided information corresponding to the format of Checklist 'A', and to Palmer Station (US) which provided numerous supplementary reports and papers.  The vessel Marco Polo also provided the Observers with a detailed Environmental Impact Assessment of the vessel's operations. 

The Observers would like to acknowledge the hospitality and assistance they received from all stations and vessels inspected.  In some instances the Inspections unfortunately coincided with other major events taking place at stations. In this respect particular thanks are extended to the Base Leaders of Chile's General Bernardo O'Higgins Station which was in the middle of its annual re-supply and a VIP visit, and Palmer Station (US) which was hosting visits from 2 tourist vessels on the day of the Inspection.


Unfortunately, due to difficulties of communication and annual re-supply at the time, the Argentine station Vice Comodoro Marambio on Seymor Island was not able to be inspected, despite HMS Endurance remaining in the area for four days.  This was regrettable.  It did not allow Inspection of the previously reported extensive waste management problems at this base, or indeed allow verification of subsequent clean-up which the Observers understand has been initiated.  
The itinerary for the Inspection Programme was as follows: 

Table I
Date (1999)                     Station/Vessel                                             Country          
12 January		  Gabriel de Castilla			    Spain                                  (SO)
13 January		   Esperanza				    Argentina                           (P)
14 January		   Marco Polo			                 Bahamas *                          (V)
14 January		   Port Lockroy (A)	                              UK                                      (HSM)       15 January		   Academic Vernadsky			    Ukraine+                             (P)
15 January		   Argentine Islands  (Base F)	 	    UK	                                  (HSM)  16 January		    St Kliment Ochridski			    Bulgaria		        (SO)
16 January		    Juan Carlos Primero		                 Spain                                  (SO)
16 January		    Academic Ioffe			    Russia	                     (V)
17 January		    Bellingshausen			    Russia		        (P)
17 January	                 Presidente Arturo Frei		    Chile			        (P)
17 January		   Professor Julio Escudeoro (INACH)      Chile			        (SO)
18 January		    Artigas				    Uruguay		        (P)
18 January		    Arctowski				    Poland		        (P)
19 January		    Great Wall			                 China		        (P)
19 January		    Teniente Jubany		                 Argentina		        (P)
21 January		     General Bernardo O'Higgins                   Chile			        (P)
21 January		     Receiving Station, O'Higgins                  Germany		        (SO)
22 January		     T/N Ruperto Elichiribehety		    Uruguay	                     (SO)
23 January                          Swedish Hut                                             Sweden/ Argentina            (HSM)  
25 January                           Palmer Station                                         US                                       (P) 
27 January                           Rothera Station                                        UK                                      (P)
27 January                           Whalers Bay, Deception                          Chile/Norway/UK             (HSM)




*  vessel registered with a non-Treaty Party
+  station operated by a non-Consultative Party
P (Permanent Station);   SO (summer-only station); 
HSM (Historic Site and Monument); V (vessel)

The location of stations and Historic Sites and Monuments inspected is shown in Fig.1.



General Remarks and Conclusions

The Inspection Team inspected 15 occupied stations in the Antarctic Peninsula area (Fig 1);  11 permanent stations and 4 summer-only stations plus two summer-only facilities which are scientific annexes to permanent stations.  In addition, 4 Historic Sites and Monuments were inspected along with 2 tourist vessels.  This was only the second time that such vessels had been inspected under Article VII(3) of the Antarctic Treaty.

Advanced notification of the designation of Observers, and the forthcoming Inspection programme had been made by the United Kingdom and Germany through diplomatic channels as required by Article VII(1) of the Treaty.  

The Inspection Team was welcomed at all stations inspected, and Base Leaders and their personnel were helpful and constructive in providing information.  The Inspection Team was however hampered in planning Inspections by lack of up to date information on stations, their facilities, personnel and activities.  Of the 12 Treaty Parties whose facilities were inspected very few had submitted within the deadline their Exchanges of Information as required by Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty and Recommendation VIII-6, and its Annex.  In some cases the only prior information available to the Observers was that from previous Inspection Reports or from out of date Exchanges of Information, up to 4 years old.  

Despite using the most up to date COMNAP list of contact details for Antarctic stations, the Inspection Team experienced considerable difficulties in contacting stations via HF, VHF, or other means, and notifying them in advance of intended Inspections.  In consequence at a number of stations the Inspection Team arrived unannounced, or was only able to give minimal advance notice.

Few communication difficulties were encountered actually during Inspections.  Russian was used during two Inspections.  The Inspection Team recognised that the lack of a fluent Spanish speaker was however a disadvantage.  

The Checklists adopted by the ATCM were used during all Inspections, viz: 

Checklist 'A' for permanent Antarctic stations and associated installations;
Checklist 'B' for vessels within the Antarctic Treaty Area; and
Checklist 'C' for abandoned Antarctic Stations and associated installations.

Checklists were used as no more than aide memoires to ensure both consistency between Inspections,
and that all crucial information was collected.  

The Observers were assisted greatly during some Inspections by the provision of written, supplementary information on base infrastructure or activities.  The various reports and papers provided by Palmer Station (US) proved invaluable.  A detailed Environmental Impact Assessment was provided to the Inspection Team by the Captain of the tourist vessel Marco Polo.  Of particular note were the dossiers that had been prepared by the Argentine stations Esperanza and Teniente Jubany and by Rothera  Station (UK).  These contained very detailed information on the respective bases, set out in the precise format of Checklist 'A'.

Compliance     

Antarctic Treaty

No infringements of the Antarctic Treaty were witnessed at any of the stations, facilities or vessels inspected, with the exception of Vice Comodoro Marambio (Argentina), which the Inspection Team
was unable to visit. 

Environmental Protocol

The most striking finding to emerge from the Inspection Programme was the degree of understanding, and implementation of the Environmental Protocol.  Strenuous efforts were being made at all stations to comply with elements of the Protocol though operational practices were variable, and gaps in implementation were evident.  Considerable efforts had been made by most Parties to train their personnel in operating procedures that met the standards of the Protocol.  High levels of awareness were most apparent in the areas of waste management and the conservation of flora and fauna. Conversely, the Protocol's requirements for environmental impact assessment appeared less well understood.  This, and other elements where compliance fell short of the Protocol's requirements, are indicated in the sections below.

Specific Issues

i) Station Infrastructure and Maintenance

The complement at some stations inspected was far less than their maximum, or operational, design capacity.  Over-wintering numbers in some instances were predicted to fall to very low levels, amounting to no more than a minimal skeleton crew.

Where existing maintenance requirements are already high, as at medium to large-scale facilities,  such reductions may well have implications for the integrity and future management of  these stations

ii)  Scientific Research

A wide range of scientific research was being undertaken at the stations inspected.  However, considerable duplication of effort also seemed to be evident, with some stations within close proximity undertaking very similar work often of a mechanistic (rather than innovative)
scientific nature, ie requiring the use of scientific technicians, rather than scientists, to conduct  routine measurements.

Under utilisation of science facilities was evident at some stations. However, other Parties stated their intention to enhance their science programmes, increase the complement of scientists and provide new scientific facilities (eg laboratories) and corresponding logistic support.  This was commendable, particularly in relation to those stations where at present science has a low profile.

iii) Fuel Management

Transport and storage of bulk diesel fuel for generators presents one of the most serious risks to the environment in Antarctica.  Oil spillage is either the result of loss of integrity of a tank, pipeline or valve, or due to human error.  Risk of spillage is increased by the number of times fuel is transferred from one container to another, and the potential severity of impact to the environment increases if such transfer involves ship to shore operations. 

-   fuel transport and storage methods are highly variable between stations. Ship to shore re-
    supply via floating hose is common place.  Argentina employs successful fuel re-supply at     
    its Peninsula bases by means of helicopter under-slung, 2,000 litre 'rolling tanks' (but this 
    is an expensive option).  Chile's Frei Station is unusual in having a fixed submarine     
    pipeline for re-supply.  Few stations are able to re-supply directly ashore to fixed pipelines  
    connected to bulk tanks (examples being Palmer Station (US) and Rothera Station (UK)).
 At least two stations transfer diesel fuel five times from re-supply vessel to generator (viz 
    from ship to barge, barge to bulk tank via floating hose, and then from bulk tank to header 
    tank by multiple journeys of a motorised oil bowser).  The risk of oil spillage is increased  
    by each oil transfer;

    • tankage can be double or single-skinned.  Many examples of the latter remain evident;

    • bunding around tankage is not commonplace though that around the tank farm at Rothera (UK) is a good example.  But problems can arise from snow-filled open bunds which create substantial quantities of oily-water then requiring separation.  Sloping bund covers are installed at General Bernardo O'Higgins (Chile) to prevent such ingress of snow.  Only at small stations (eg the German Receiving Station at O'Higgins) can bulk tanks be both bunded, and installed inside a building so eliminating such problems;

    • unsatisfactory fuel management practices were evident at one station where chronic contamination was occurring.  However, acute spillages had occurred at other stations despite apparently stringent precautions.  Further attention should be paid to alarm systems and fail-safe shut-off mechanisms;

    • bulk tanks are now invariably of metal construction.  Of the stations inspected, few examples of pillow or bladder tanks remain.  They appear to have been largely phased out over the past 5 years;

    • few stations carry significant quantities of oil spill contingency equipment, none carrying enough to cope with a large spill.  (Spill equipment requires major investments in capital, training of personnel, maintenance, and inevitably has a high redundancy rate).  Spill containment equipment is deployed during re-supply at some stations eg Arctowski (Poland) and Palmer Station (US).

iv) Power Generation

Power production is invariably by means of diesel generators at all stations.  None of the inspected stations were using alternative power production either as a substitute for diesel generation or to reduce dependence on diesel eg through the use of solar panels for domestic heating.

    • alternative power production is limited to solar panels powering remote, small scale automatic instrumentation.  Only Juan Carlos Primero (Spain) had applied more extensively alternative energy generation with a large solar panel array and wind generator to enable the station's instrumentation to function year round.  Bellingshausen (Russia) also employed a small-scale wind generator;

    • little attention is given to exhaust filtration or monitoring.  T/N Ruperto Elichiribehety (Uruguay) was installing a generator with both soundproof housing and exhaust filtration.  Arctowski (Poland) also filtered generator exhausts.  Monitoring programmes to determine the biological effects of exhaust emissions were being conducted at Arctowski (Poland), Rothera (UK) and Juan Carlos Primero (Spain).

   v)  Waste Management   

Waste management procedures in line with Annexes III and IV of the Protocol were being practised at all stations, though to variable degrees:

-  wastes in all cases were being separated at source into metals, glass,
    plastics and organics.  The majority of wastes, including all
    non-combustibles were being retrograded;

-   the practices of storing waste for retrograding were variable.  Sometimes wastes were   
    unmarked, or containers secured inadequately.  Exemplary methods were being employed   
     at Teniente Jubany (Argentina).  In general it was felt that the standard of waste recording                               
     (waste logs) could be improved, though clear details were for example being kept at
      Esperazana (Argentina), Palmer Station (US) and Rothera Station (UK).       

  -  some stations had decommissioned their incinerators.  However, some incinerators were      
     still in operation with either too low a burn temperature or for some other reason were not  
     operating efficiently. With one possible exception, no open burning was being practised;

               -  storage and disposal of organics, especially wet organics, is a problem at stations, in    
                  particular those with infrequent re-supply;

               -  sewage treatment is variable and not necessarily related to the size of a station.  Some
                  small stations operate efficient treatment plants. Conversely,  some large stations rely only                               
                  on maceration and discharge direct to sea, or indeed even only the latter.  A highly          
                  effective treatment plant had been installed at Teniente Jubany (Argentina) with assistance      
                  from Germany and the Netherlands; 

              -  large quantities of scrap or waste metals had either been removed from some stations                       
                  eg Frei station (Chile) or brought together for intended removal  eg Bellingshausen               
                 (Russia).  In other cases considerable efforts had been made, or were being  made, to               
                 extract and retrograde former waste dumps eg General Bernardo O'Higgins (Chile) and                 
                 Palmer Station (US).  Often such work was difficult, costly and requires excavating            
                 materials in permafrost.

The approach to waste management was far from uniform.  In some instances directly contrasting methods were employed at closely adjacent stations. The result of this might well be self-cancelling. For example, station 'A' might be storing and retrograding all organics and plastics but discharging sewage untreated direct to the sea; whereas close by station 'B' was doing the opposite - by incinerating plastics and organics yet treating sewage efficiently and even retrograding its solid residues.  Greater consistency in waste management procedures is needed.

 Adequate attention has yet to be paid to the numerous abandoned former stations present in the Peninsula area, and whether such stations should be transferred, or cleaned up or removed, as required by Article V of  Annex III of the Protocol, and if so, within what timescale.

 vi)  Emergency Procedures and Health and Safety

Generally, high levels of Health and Safety were evident.  Nearly all stations had resident doctors and medical facilities.  Arrangements were in place for medivacs, relying if necessary on the infrastructure of other Parties, for example the dependants of some of the stations in Maxwell Bay, King George Island on the Presidente Arturo Frei (Chile) airlink.

Well established emergency response capability (eg fire-fighting) was in place at most stations.  The ability to respond to SAR (either terrestrial, marine or aerial) was highly variable and depended on vehicle, boat or aircraft support.  Those stations with aircraft, and particularly helicopters, have the greatest capability and flexibility to respond to SAR.

    • emergency provisions (power, food, clothing, fuel, and communications etc) were available at all stations.  Notable however were the duplicate facilities provided at Palmer Station (US) where the principle utilities (accommodation, power generation, food, and RO water production) had been installed in the two, well separated major building complexes on the base.  Complete loss of any one would not be catastrophic to the station's survival;

    • SCUBA diving operations were reported to be taking place at four of the stations inspected.  But only one had a fully serviced and certificated decompression chamber.  Given the remoteness of Antarctic diving, consideration should be given by each of those stations to install chambers, which are large enough to allow treatment, and maintain them within certification.

vii)   Wildlife (flora and fauna) and Protected Areas

Rules relating to the conservation of flora and fauna and to the protection of protected areas were generally understood, adhered to, and indeed appreciated.  At some stations eg Esperanza and Teniente Jubany (Argentina) prominent pictorial boards were displayed setting out guidelines and rules on wildlife.  

Some problem areas however remain.  For example:   

    • Introduction of non-Native Species.  At least two permanent stations had non-native species present in the form of house plants.  One of these stations was also growing vegetables, the other breeding tropical fish;  
     
    • Artificial Feeding.  At one station the Observers saw Brown Skuas being fed raw meat from the base kitchen; 

    • Disturbance.  Reports of disturbance to penguin colonies from helicopter overflights of Ardley Island (SSSI No.33) were received by the Observers.  The problem appeared to stem from 'non-local' aircraft using the nearby Frei Station facility.  

It was also apparent to the Observers that disturbance of penguins and seals by helicopters could be appreciable even when aircraft were at some considerable height, and lateral distance from wildlife.
This issue needs further investigation with a view to setting recommended flying heights. 

Conversely, disturbance had been reduced at some sites, eg at Esperanza (Argentina) penguin colonies had been roped off to prevent human access, and the station's helipad had been re-located away from wildlife sites.

    • Protected Areas.  Inappropriate entry into protected areas was occurring and was witnessed by footprints at Deception Island (SSSI No.21).  The reason appears to be largely a product of ignorance of the site's existence, coupled with the lack of adequate sign-posting of boundaries.  There are few instances of signs marking protected areas.  One such example is that at Rakusa Point, Arctowski (Poland) marking the NE corner of SSSI No.8 (western shore of  Admiralty Bay).

    • Conversely, inappropriate signs were also evident.  For example at Whalers Bay, Deception Island (Historic Sites and Monuments Nos. 31 and 71) where a number of signs had been erected.  These appeared to contain misleading information and could be construed as visually obtrusive.

viii) Tourism 

Tourism, particularly ship-borne tourism, continues to rise.  Around 10,000 tourists visited the Antarctic Peninsula in the 1998/99 austral season.  Tourist vessels were encountered frequently at sea, or embarking/disembarking tourists at landing places.  Thirteen tourist vessels were operating in the Antarctic Peninsula area, and seven of these were actually seen, during the course of  the Inspection Programme.   

    • Stations:  tourists, in variable numbers, visited a number of the stations inspected.  None reported any impact from tourists on either station activities (but see below), or the local environment.  Some, particularly summer-only stations, received no tourists.  Five permanent stations and one Historic Site and Monument were providing commercial facilities (shops) for tourists.  Postal services were also a focus of interest.  Three stations (Palmer (US), Arctowski (Poland) and Esperanza (Argentina) had developed tourist management policies for station visits in an attempt to minimise impacts on station activities.  Esperanza had a defined tourism route, and had roped-off penguin colonies to prevent human access.   Arctowski had constructed a Visitor Information Centre (from recycled timber) and a nature trail.  The largest number of tourists visit the Historic Sites of Whalers Bay, Deception Island (un-manned), and Port Lockroy (UK) (manned).  The latter on a very small site (0.24 ha Goudier Island) received 5,800 visitors during the 1998/99 season.  Monitoring indicates no discernible impact on the resident breeding penguins.

    • Yachts: The number of yachts visiting Antarctica continues to increase.  Eight yachts en route to Antarctic, some under commercial charter, were seen in Port Stanley, Falkland Islands between 6-9 January. Yachts were seen by the Inspection Team at Deception Island, Port Lockroy (NZ yacht) and Vernadsky (Norwegian yacht).  Five yachts were at anchor south of the Lemaire Channel on 26 January.  Thirty yachts visited Port Lockroy during the season.

    • Tourist Vessels:  Two tourist vessels were inspected; one large (Marco Polo), one much smaller (Akademik Ioffe).  This was the second only Inspection of vessels within the Antarctic Treaty Area under Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.  One vessel, the Marco Polo, flagged with a non-Treaty Party, was  inspected with permission of her Captain. Both vessels were operating to high standards, in terms of vessel operations and the management of their tourists.

The advantages and disadvantages of large ship versus small ship were evident.  The former are relatively inflexible in relation to the numbers of sites that can be visited. Guaranteed easy and safe access for landing is imperative.  In consequence few landings are made a few sites, although large numbers of tourists are put ashore, albeit in relatively small groups (not more than 50 persons) under strictly controlled management. Conversely, smaller ships, though carrying fewer tourists, are more flexible in operation and can land a numerous sites so widening potential impacts.

Concerns relating to large vessels (up to 1,000 persons on board) are the large quantities of  heavy fuel oil carried (Bunker C as opposed to diesel), and implications for SAR in the event of a major accident.

ix) Concentrations of facilities: King George Island    
 
The South Shetland Islands, because of their proximity to South America, relative ease of access, and largely ice-free seas, have the greatest concentration of stations in the Antarctic Peninsula area.  In consequence, the impact on the environment is greater here than elsewhere on the Peninsula.  

The majority of stations are located in Maxwell Bay and Admiralty Bay.  The latter contains stations and refuges of five Parties (the bases of  Arctowski (Poland), Comandante Ferraz (Brazil) and Machu Pichu (Peru) and refuges belonging to Ecuador and the US.

Maxwell Bay has an even more developed infrastructure with 6 moderate to large permanent stations located around its shores from east to west being: Teniente Jubany (Argentina), King Sejong (Republic of Korea), Artigas (Uruguay), Bellingshausen (Russia), Presidente Arturo Frei and its major runway facility and Great Wall Station (China).  In addition, numerous other facilities are present including refuges (eg in the vicinity of Teniente Jubany, and on Ardley Island, and the large bulk fuel tanks associated with Bellingshausen and used partly by Artigas).  This aggregation of facilities, along with the very considerable logistic support in terms of aircraft and shipping movements, is unique in Antarctica.

The effect of these developments  has been an impact on the environment of the Maxwell Bay area far greater than the combined sum of the actual areas of the stations themselves.  For example, the 4 westernmost bases are interconnected by well defined tracks.  Combined, these amount to over 16.5  km.  In addition, huge swaths of ground have been severely impacted by heavy ground vehicles.  Power generation, fuel farms, pipelines and sewage input, all combine to add to the scale of impact.  Overall figures relating to the infrastructural development of Maxwell Bay are set out in Table II below, and the relationship of the stations in western Maxwell Bay shown in Fig.2.
  
Table II Maxwell Bay: Developmental pressure

Number of stations*
6
Number of refuges/field huts
9
Area covered by stations
200 ha
Length of track
18km
Maximum capacity of stations
480 persons
Operational complement:   Winter
140      "
                                             Summer
275      "
Number of buildings
125
Number of fuel-farms
13
Quantities of bulk fuel  (diesel)
2,882,000 litres
Annual consumption of fuel
1,687,000 litres

* includes details taken from the 1993 Inspection Report for King Sejong (Korea) which was not inspected during the present Inspection programme.

Other important information was unfortunately not available eg for the tonnages of materials being imported and retrograded, the frequency of aircraft and vessel movements etc.

The cumulative effect has clearly been a derogation on the quality of the local environment.  Quantified changes, eg of the numbers of breeding birds within Maxwell Bay, attributed directly to the impacts of the stations and their logistics, have occurred.  Considerable impacts have occurred to protected areas, and the Fildes Peninsula protected area (now SSSI No.5) has in this respect been a casualty of this pressure.  In the process now underway to revise Management Plans for protected areas consideration will need to be given as to whether this SSSI warrants retention as a special site, and if so, which area should be designated, given the considerable amount of damage that has occurred since the late 1960s.

Co-location of stations offers considerable advantages in terms of mutual support eg co-operative logistics, the possibility of shared facilities, inter-dependence for emergencies including SAR, and a number of these elements are clearly put into practice in the Maxwell Bay area.  Overall, however, duplication rather than integration of facilities appears more evident.

In this respect consideration could be given towards further enhancing co-operation for example in logistic support, consistency in waste management procedures and a critical examination of scientific programmes to optimise productivity and minimise duplication.  


Acknowledgements

The thanks of the Inspection Team are extended to the Base Leaders and personnel of those stations inspected, where without exception the Observers received a welcome, help and hospitality.

Particular thanks go to the Captain, officers and crew of the Ice Patrol vessel HMS Endurance which provided the logistic support for the Inspection Programme.  The use of HMS Endurance's two Lynx helicopters were invaluable in this respect, providing flexibility, and ease of access to stations.


Recommendations (not ascribed any particular priority)  
    
1.  That those Parties, with stations and active programmes in the Antarctic, which have not already acceded to the Environmental Protocol should do so without delay, and if appropriate seek Consultative Status.

2.  That Parties, in association with SCAR, review co-operatively their science programmes against scientific priorities, particularly for those stations in close proximity, to ensure optimum productivity and minimum duplication.

3.  That further attention is given by operators to fuel transfer and storage with a view to reducing the potential for spillage.  Critical issues include minimising the number of fuel transfers, and upgrading bulk storage (such as tank bunds, double-skinned walls, further phasing out of bladder/pillow tanks).

4. That increased consideration be given both to maximising energy efficiency, and to alternative energy production with further experimentation using wind and solar energy under Antarctic conditions.

5. That greater efforts be directed towards former work places (abandoned stations) with a view to their clean-up, removal, conversion to refuges or designation as Historic Sites and Monuments.  Transfer of redundant stations to other Parties for continuing use should also receive greater consideration.

6.  That the ATCM should identify boundaries for Historic Sites and Monuments, as appropriate.  This is particularly relevant for those sites which contain buildings and artefacts distributed over a wide yet undetermined area.

7.  That greater consistency of waste management procedures for Annex III of the Protocol should be developed.

8.   That moderate or large-scale stations lacking sewage treatment (other than maceration) should give consideration to upgrading their facilities.



                                                                                                                  Annex 1


Some Examples of Best Practice seen during the course of the Inspection Programme


               Issue                                                                         Station

 Waste Management                             

      Sewage Treatment                                                          Teniente Jubany                                  

      Waste handling for retrograding                                     Teniente Jubany                        
                                                                                               Rothera Station
                                                        
       Public Notices of Waste                                                  Artigas Station                 
       Management Procedures

        Recyling/minimisation of wastes

                Re-usable packaging                                              Artigas Station 

               Recycling                                                                Palmer Station
                                                                                               Rothera Station

                 Removal of:  past wastes                                      Palmer Station      
                                      contaminated wastes                        Rothera Station 

  Fuel Management                             
         
         Transfer (ship to shore)                                                 Palmer Station
                                                                                                Rothera Station  
     Tank Bunding                   

         (open bunds)                                                                      Rothera Station
                        
        (covered bunds)                                                                 General Bernardo O'Higgins                           

         (fully enclosed)                                                                 Receiving Station, O'Higgins               

      Power Generation 

         Alternative Energy Generation                                          Juan Carlos Primero                        

      Emergency Provisions

          Duplication of Utilities                                                      Palmer  Station                                          

          SAR capabilities                                                                Frei Station                                               
                                                                                                     Rothera Station




 
     Tourism Policy/Procedures (including monitoring)
         (i)   Permanent Stations                                                        Arctowski  
                                                                                                       Palmer Station
                                                                                                       Esperanza

         (ii)   Historic Site and Monuments                                        Port Lockroy

      Provision of documentation

Environmental Impact Assessment
                Permanent Station                                                         Palmer Station                                            
                                                                                                      Rothera Station
         
                Summer-only Station                                                    Juan Carlos Primero                                
                                                                                                      INACH (Frei Station)                                   
    
                Tourist                                                                           Marco Polo

                Inspection Checklist documentation                             Esperanza
                                                                                                      Teniente Jubany
                                                                                                      Rothera Station







