 
XXIII ATCM/ WP30 
 
May 1999 
 
English 
 
Original: Spanish 
 
 
Agenda Item 15 
 
CEP II Agenda Item 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Group on  
 
Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
 
Peru 
WORKING GROUP ON ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
Introduction 
 
In view of the importance of conserving the Antarctic ecosystem, environmental 
monitoring programs are presently carried out on Antarctic bases and stations to assess 
the impact of human activities in situ. Environmental monitoring programs involve 
sampling and processing a large number of environmental variables. This task requires a 
financial investment. 
 
The use of bioindicators in environmental control studies receives worldwide 
recognition. Studies have shown that lichens are excellent biomonitors because of their 
homogeneous geographical distribution, slow growth, large capacity to accumulate 
elements and easy sampling compared with other environmental matrices. Its continued 
study also helps understand the trend in environmental changes arising from human 
activities in situ and international anthropogenic activities. 
 
The study of Antarctic lichens as environmental biomonitors will show the 
environmental status of different areas in the region. It will also help assess the trend in 
global environmental changes. 
 
Background 
 
Environmental protection, an underpinning of the Madrid Protocol, leads to a 
coordinated development among all member countries of methods to assess, predict and 
minimize impacts of human activities on natural and vulnerable environments such as 
Antarctica. 
 
The concern for the conservation of the Antarctic ecosystem requires the 
implementation of coordinated environmental biomonitoring programs to perform 
measurements with an established environmental variable which, in turn, will allow us to 
produce technical forecasts of the status of the Antarctic environment. 
 
 
2
DRAFT 
 
 
Considering: 
 
1. 
The importance of continuously monitoring changes in the Antarctic 
environment due to human activities in situ and international 
anthropogenic activities. 
 
2. 
The need for an efficient use of the Parties’ resources for applied research 
on the Antarctic environment. 
 
3. 
The 
advantages 
of 
standardizing 
environmental 
biomonitoring 
methodologies for the efficient exchange of technical and scientific data 
and information. 
 
The following is recommended: 
 
1. 
To name contacts in the Parties’ respective national agencies to exchange 
scientific experiences on environmental biomonitors. 
 
2. 
To establish a Working Group on Environmental Biomonitoring, to be 
coordinated by Peru, using Antarctic lichens to standardize environmental 
monitoring methodologies and to exchange technical and scientific 
information on Antarctica. 
 
