Personal Report of the Chairman of the Liability Discussion in WG1 
 
As indicated in the Report of Working Group I on Item lO, this paper is circulated, on a personal basis, in 
an endeavour to identify a way forward. It should be viewed purely in that light. 
 
As is also evident from the Report of Working Group 1 on Item lO, there was useful progress in a number 
of respects in this first round of negotiations in the Working Group. The Report identifies various areas of 
convergence, and it is fair to say that other prospective areas of progress can also be seen at this stage. 
Ultimately, however, what we are talking about is a package, or several packages, and convergence is not 
likely to develop in some key areas until the overall shape of the package (or packages) is rather dearer. 
 
Some valuable work was also done in the informal contact groups, which were set up to facilitate 
discussion on a range of subjects. The coordinators of some of these groups were able to produce texts 
reflecting the stage reached in their discussions, and as I foreshadowed in Working Group I, these are 
attached as a matter of record so that this work is not lost. It must be clear, however, that these texts do not 
reflect agreed positions, either on the part of those participating in the informal contact groups or the 
meeting as a whole. They are simply to aid further discussion. Indeed, some delegations specifically 
entered reservations in respect of some of these texts, and on others there was not time for discussion. 
 
on the basis of comments made in the meeting, and to me informally, I think it will be useful in future 
meetings to continue using informal contact groups to help clarify differences between delegations on 
particular issues - and hopefully identify solutions as this is sometimes dif~lcult across the conference 
floor. It needs to be emphasised that such groups are open ended (that is to say, open to all delegations 
with an interest in the issue in question), although this of course creates a practical limitation on the 
number of groups which can be established at any one time, given the pressure on small delegations. 
 
Another very useful development at this meeting, was a much more integrated approach involving SCAR 
and CoMNAP. This helped inform the discussion, even though both organisations were not able to be 
present for all of the time, and points the way towards an even more integrated approach in the future, 
including outside of formal meetings. For example, future informal contact groups on some issues are 
likely to benefit from being multi-disciplined, and having in them scientists and operators as well as 
lawyers and policy experts. It may also be appropriate to include other representative organisations on 
occasion, such as IAATo on behalf of tourism operators. 
 
Notwithstanding these positive and encouraging developments, however, the future elaboration of a 
liability regime remains bedevilled by a fundamental difference of approach between delegations. This is 
over the basic question of whether we should be seeking to elaborate a so-called "comprehensive" (or 
single) annex, or a so-called 
"limited" annex (which could be the first in a series of annexes focussing on particular aspects of the 
liability problem). Until this fundamental issue is resolved there will inevitably be limits as to the further 
progress that will be possible. 
 
This issue has been extensively debated in the past, without resolution, and it is fair to say that further 
debate between these two options per se is unlikely to resolve the matter. on the one hand, it is clear that 
many delegations are not willing to negotiate on the basis of a so-called "limited" annex, which would 
involve a fundamental departure from their position. other delegations, however, are unwilling to 
negotiate on the basis of the sort of "comprehensive" approach that would follow the approach of the 
eighth offering, as this would depart from their fundamental position. This in no way derogates from the 
hugely useful work done in the Group of Legal Experts, and the Chairman's offerings, as acknowledged at 
the Tromso ATCM. It is entirely due to that work that we are able to identify the issues involved in 
putting together an Antarctic liability regime, together with a range of possible solutions (it is also worth 
noting that other bodies outside of the Antarctic Treaty System have found liability issues extraordinarily 
complex and difficult to solve). We are, however, now in a new phase of our work, that of negotiation in 
Working Group I as mandated by the Tromso ATCM. 
 
That new phase, and the fundamental differences that I have referred to, suggest that we should now be 
looking for a new approach which bridges the two positions or takes yet another road. Ideally, it should 
also be designed to make our work more manageable. As the discussion of Antarctic Liability has 
developed, there has been an increase in the magnitude and number of issues needing to be negotiated, 
which adds to the complexity of pulling together a package as such. And as the potential time span for 
producing a concrete outcome has grown commensurately, there is inevitably a danger that the negotiating 
process will flag. Moreover, what we shall have to produce is an outcome which can be adopted by 
consensus, and which can then be ratified by all Parties within a reasonable time. Size and complexity is 
unlikely to assist such an outcome. 
 
Attached to this document is one possible new approach, which would bridge the fundamental differences 
I have referred to. There may be others which occur to delegations, but it is in terms of a new approach 
that I believe we should now be thinking. 
 
The approach attached is a framework for a liability regime as follows: 
 
a sin~le annex providing for a comprehensive regime, thus meeting the objectives of many delegations. 
The annex itself would include all the ~eneric items which would be common to a liability regime of 
whatever nature, and in respect of which there is already agreement or agreement is foreseeable. It would 
utilise a great deal of work already done and (without wishing to minimise unduly the complexity of the 
issues remaining) could, hopefully, be developed reasonably quickly. 
it would contain a binding commitment to subsequently develop~ detailed schedules, by way of 
measures, on (1) Preventative Measures, (2) Damage from Environmental Emergencies, (3) Response 
Action and Remedial Action, and (4) Unrepaired and Irreparable damage. (Using measures to build on 
the Annex would not be an entirely novel concept; all of the other Annexes to the Protocol can of course 
be amended or modified by way of measures, which are adopted by consensus). 
 
This approach would also have the advantage of reducing our work to reasonably digestible bites. It would 
enable a step by step approach while meeting the positions of delegations wanting a single annex and 
comprehensive coverage. It would require a decision as to which schedules should be developed first, but 
this might be guided by CoMNAP's identification of the most pressing area of concern - damage from 
environmental emergencies - on which we already have a substantial proposal before us. Another 
possibility might be to consider parallel work on the Prevention of damage, which would require closely 
integrated input from a range of disciplines including scientists and operators. Care would obviously need 
to be taken to ensure that the schedules did not overlap unduly, and also that the sequential entry into 
force of the schedules did not create problems for one schedule vis-a-vis another. 
 
I would commend this to colleagues as a possible way forward. If not, we need to find some other 
approach to bridge these fundamental differences. 
 
Don MacKay 
Chair of Working Group I on Item lO at ATCM XXII 
[Possible Framework] 
 
Annex VI 
 
LL~BILITY FoR DAMAGE To THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRoNMENT 
 
Purpose 
 
Scope of Application 
 
Relationship with other International Agreements 
 
Definitions For the purposes of this Annex (including the Schedules hereto as appropriate): 
 
"Fund" means... 
"operator?' means... 
"Person" means... 
"Protocol" means... 
...[other terms which may be common to the Annex and the Schedules...] 
 
obligations of Parties 
 
Establishment of Jurisdiction 
 
Schedules 
 
To enable the effective implementation of this Annex, the Parties undertake to adopt measures, in 
accordance with Article IX(I) of the Antarctic Treaty, comprising the following Schedules to this Annex: 
 
Schedule 1: Preventative Measures 
Schedule 2: Damage from Environmental Emergencies 
Schedule 3: Response Action and Remedial Action 
Schedule 4: Unrepaired and Irreparable Damage 
 
Standard of Liability 
 
Joint and Several Liability 
 
State Liability and Responsibility 
Financial Limits 
 
Liability under this Annex shall not exceed the amounts set out in the relevant Schedule. 
 
Time Limits of Liability 
 
Liability under this Annex shall be subject to any limitation periods set out in the relevant Schedule. 
 
Antarctic Environment Protection Fund 
 
Dispute Settlement 
 
Amendment or Modification 
 
Schedules to Annex VI 
 
Schedule 1: Preventative Measures 
 
Schedule 2: Damage from Environmental Emergencies 
 
Schedule 3: Response Action and Remedial Action 
 
Schedule 4: Unrepaired and Irreparable Damage 
List of attached texts produced by coordinators of informal contact groups 
 
Definition of Damage 
 
Precautionary Measures 
 
Principle on Requirement of Prior Administrative Procedure of Response and Restoration Measures taken 
by Third Parties 
 
Definition of operator 
 
Liability of States Parties 
 
Explanatory Note to Article 9 (State Liability and Responsibility) 
WG I 
28 May 1999 
 
Item 10: Contact Group Text 
 
DEFlNlTloN oF DAMAGE ' 
 
''Damage'' means a harmful effect on the environment of Antarctica 2 which is [significant 
and lasting] [significant given its nature or scale and its duration], unless 
(a) the harmful effect was identified specifically in a CEE3 as a necessary consequence of 
the proposed activity,4 and 
(b) the activity is not prohibited specifically by the Protocol.5 
 
I This definilion would probably be sui~able only for irreparable damage. For matters such as the duty of 
operators to take response action, a difrerent formulation will probably bc ncedcd which docs not include 
a detcrmination as to the duration of the harmrul efrcct. 
 
2 Although dependent and associated ecosystems are mcntioned in Articlcs 3 and 16 of the Protocol, it is 
doubtful if liability for damage to them should be includcd since such ecosystems are, by definition, 
outside the area of application of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol, and are of indeterminate extent. 
 
3 Paragraph (a) refers only to CEEs since, under Article 2 of Annex 1, an assessment can be limited to an 
IEE only if the proposed activity will have 'no more than a minor or transitory' impact; and in such a case 
no question of significant and lasting damage would arise. 
 
4 Thus if an operator is authorised to drill for ice cores (which requires the use of large amounts of 
ethylene glycol), the seepage of the chemical into the ground or ice will t~ot attract liability. But, if the 
container storing the chemical in bulk at the site ruptures, there will be liability if the harmful effect is 
significant and lasting. 
 
5 It could also be a defence to a claim of liability that the harmful effect which actually occurred could not 
have been reasonably foreseen during the assessment process. 
WG I 
Item lO 
Contact Group Text 
28 May 1999 
 
Precautionary Measures 
 
Article 1 
Definition 
 
[...] 
(c) "Incident" means any sudden or continuous occurrence or any series of occurrences 
having the same origin, which causes an [impact] or creates a grave and imminent threat of 
causing such an [impact]; 
 
[...] 
 
Article 4 
Measures 
 
1. An operator shall take reasonable measures, including the adoption of contingency 
plans, before an incident occurs, in order to prevent, or minimise the impact of, incidents in 
the [Antarctic], taking into account the best practices of operators in the [Antarctic], 
available and proven cold-weather technology, and other practical considerations. 
 
[...] 
WG I, Item 10                                             28 May 1999 
 
Informal Contact Group 
 
Principle on Requirement of Prior Administrative Procedure of Response 
and Restoration Measures Taken by Third Parties 
 
Without prejudice to the question whether an explicit obligation to take response or restoration measures 
should be imposed on the operator the following principles should guide the reimbursement of costs of 
response and restoration measures: 
 
The operator (who caused the damage) shall only be liable if the restoration measure is undertaken in 
accordance with a prior decision of the State of the third party planning to take these measures where such 
a decision is required by the Protocol and its Annex 1. The decision shall be co-ordinated with the State of 
the operator. 
 
The operator (who caused the damage) shall only be liable if the emergency response measure is 
undertaken after notifying the State of the third party planning to take these measures. The State of the 
operator shall be informed by the State of the third party. Further conditions under which the third party is 
entitled to take the response measures are still to be discussed. 
"operator" means 
 
i. A State Party v~ho undertakes an activity in the Antartic'treaty area. 
 
ii. Any natural or juridical person who organizes in the territory of a Party an activity to be 
undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
iii. Provided that such person is or may be brought under the effective jurisdiction of a Party. 
 
(1 ) A national of a Party v~ho organizes outside the territory of that Party an activity to be 
undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
(2) Any person who undertakes an activity in the Antarctic Treaty area v~/ith the logistic support 
and having as final place of departure for that activity the territory of that Party. 
Germany 
 
Draft 
 
Article... 
 
Liability of States Parties 
 
(1) A State Party shall not be liable merely for the reason that damage has been caused by 
an operator falling within its jurisdiction. The State Party shall be liable for damage 
defined in Article ... according to the rules of international law. Its liability shall not exceed 
the limits defined in this Annex. 
 
(2) Darnage which has occurred or continued as an immediate result of a neglect of duty by 
the State Party under the Protocol and its Annexes shall, in accordance with international 
law, entail liability of that State Party. Such liability shall be limited to that portion of 
liability not satisfied by the operator under its jurisdiction. 
 
(3) Nothing in para. 2 shall affect the application of existing rules of international law 
concerning State responsibility and the development, in accordance with international law, 
of further such rules. 
WG I Item 10 Crp 5 (Netherlands) 28 May 1999 
 
Explanatory Note to Article 9 (State Liability and Responsibility) 
 
1. Pursuant to the general international law of State responsibility, a State is liable for its 
internationally wrongful acts. other forms of State liability, such as liability for the 
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law, are 
controvcrsial and therefore not envisaged in Article 9. 
 
2. As for acts of its nationals or persons within its territory or control, including operators 
under its jurisdiction, a State only incurs State responsibility if it has not exercised 
sufficient due diligence (fault liability). Pursuant to the general rules of State 
responsibility, claims can only be brought by States against the responsible State through 
diplomatic channels, or before an international tribunal or an international court (interstate 
settlement of claims). 
 
3. Article 9(2) only provides that the State responsibility under general international law as 
described above remains unaffected. The liability of a State Party that may arise by 
application of rules of the international law of State responsibility, as provided for in 
Article 9(2), is unlimited. If such liability would be limited, it would change the 
international law of State responsibility. 
 
4. Article 9(1), however, provides for a special type of settlement of claims. Pursuant to 
this paragraph, a State Party is residually liable if: 
a. it has not fulfilled the obligations under the Protocol with respect to operators under its 
jurisdiction; and 
b. the damage caused by these operators would not have occurred if the State would have 
fulfilled its obligations under the Protocol. 
The State will then be liable to the extent that liability has not been satisfied by thc 
operator under its jurisdiction. 
 
5. Article 9(1) facilitates the settlement of claims by allowing natural and legal persons -- 
and also State Parties if they so wish -- to bring a claim against the State Party that has not 
exercised sufficient due diligence with respect to operators under its jurisdiction before a 
municipal court in accordance with Article 14 of the Netherlands Draft (transnational 
settlement of claims). 
 
6. In sum, Article 9 does not increase State responsibility under international law. It only 
facilitates the settlement of claims by allowing natural and legal persons -- and also State 
Parties if they so wish -- to bring a claim against the State Party that has not fulfilled its 
obligations under the Protocol before a municipal court in accordance with Article 14 of 
the Netherlands Draft, and this to the extent that such liability has not been satisfied by the 
operator under its jurisdiction. 
