 
XXIII ATCM/ WP29 
 
May 1999 
 
English 
 
Original: Spanish 
 
 
Agenda Item 15 
 
CEP II Agenda Item 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Group on  
 
Radiological Monitoring in Antarctica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
 
Peru
WORKING GROUP ON RADIOLOGICAL MONITORING IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Over the last three decades, our planet has received a large amount of artificial 
radionuclides, which have been dispersed as tropospheric and stratospheric fallout and 
have settled on the ocean floor. 
 
Worldwide, radioactivity level increases have been ascertained as a result of 
atmospheric nuclear tests. Most of the radioactive waste generated by underground 
nuclear tests carried out by France is located in the subsoil of Mururoa Atoll. This waste 
might migrate and be released into the marine ecosystem. It should be stressed that the 
Antarctic Peninsula region is recognized as one of the major sources of deep and 
intermediate water in the Pacific. As these bodies of water move North, the South Pacific 
environment has special characteristics. 
 
In 1996, as a result of the United Nations’ efforts through the Conference on 
Disarmament, negotiations were concluded on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban 
Treaty. There is, however, a continued international concern about the implementation of 
effective technical and legal measures to prevent the radioactive contamination of 
ecosystems. 
 
Preliminary studies on environmental radioactivity conducted by Peru at its 
Machu Picchu Station show the presence of artificial radioactivity in Antarctic 
environmental components. 
 
Background 
 
There is a continued international concern about the implementation of effective 
technical and legal measures to prevent the radioactive contamination of ecosystems. 
 
Levels of radioactivity in our planet have increased as a result of the atmospheric 
nuclear tests conducted in the 60’s. 
 
Preliminary studies on environmental radioactivity conducted by Peru at its 
Machu Picchu Station show the presence of artificial radioactivity in Antarctic 
environmental components. 
 
 
 
2
DRAFT 
 
 
Considering: 
 
1. 
The importance of implementing technical measures to prevent the 
radioactive contamination of Antarctic ecosystems. 
 
2. 
The need for a radiological assessment of environmental variables in 
order to conduct a baseline study on natural and artificial radioactivity 
levels in the Antarctic environment. 
 
3. 
The need for an efficient use of the Parties’ resources for applied research 
in this field. 
 
4. 
That the Parties have national laboratories that could perform 
measurements of environmental radioactivity. 
 
The following is recommended: 
 
1. 
To name contacts in the national agencies of the respective Parties to 
exchange 
scientific 
experiences 
on 
environmental 
radiological 
monitoring. 
 
2. 
To establish a Working Group on Environmental Radiological 
Monitoring, to be coordinated by Peru, in order to establish a database on 
radioactivity levels in the Antarctic region. 
 
