 
II CEP/WP?? 
 
March 1999 
 
Original: English 
 
 
 
Agenda item ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report on the Work 
of the Intersessional 
Contact Group on 
SAER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
 
Sweden 
 
 
 
 
2
REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE INTERSESSIONAL CONTACT GROUP 
ON A 
STATE OF THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT REPORT (SAER) 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by Sweden 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
1. At ATCM XXI two tabled papers advocated preparation of a State of the Antarctic 
Environment Report (SAER) – WP32: On the Need for a State of the Antarctic 
Environment Report submitted by New Zealand and WP19: State of the Antarctic 
Environment Report submitted by SCAR. These papers argued the value at both 
regional and global levels of a ”benchmark” document on the Antarctic environ-
ment, the value of such a document for Parties in meeting their obligations under 
the Protocol and its Annexes, and for the Committee for Environmental Protection 
(CEP) in meeting its mandated advisory function on the state of the Antarctic en-
vironment under Article 12 of the Protocol. Most parties seem to interpret Article 
l2 of the Protocol as requiring the CEP to develop and maintain a SAER, while 
others interpret it to simply require that the CEP provide advice on the state of the 
Antarctic environment. 
 
2. The meeting (ATCM XXI) discussed concerns about the potential scope, focus, 
cost and production of a SAER, noted that a report could be done in several ways, 
and agreed that its objectives needed clarification to take into account different 
audiences and foci. The uses to which the Report might be put were seen to in-
clude: 
i) as an archival benchmark/baseline document of global relevance; 
ii) as a basis for the provision of policy guidance; and 
iii) as a basis for the provision of trend analysis in environmental monitoring. 
 
3. ATCM XXI agreed to establish an open-ended contact group facilitated by New 
Zealand, which would consider intersessionally how uncertainties about the focus 
of a SAER and the methodology of production might be resolved. Paragraphs 139-
150 of the Final Report of ATCM XXI, relating to the discussion of SAER and es-
tablishment of the intersessional contact group, are attached as Appendix 1. 
 
4. A selected summary of the discussions in the intersessional contact group was 
presented in a working paper at ATCM XXII, tabled by New Zealand – WP11: 
Report on the Work of the Intersessional Contact Group… (SAER). New Zealand 
was thanked for its intersessional work, but some parties remained concerned that 
key questions had not been adequately answered. These included who the audi-
ence target should be, the nature of the report and the resource implications. 
SCAR noted that it had established an ad hoc group to maintain a watching brief 
on this issue and remained prepared to provide advice and assistance if required. 
 
 
3
5. Most members at ATCM XXII felt that the conclusions and the recommendations 
for further action given in the New Zealand Working Paper should be strength-
ened in order to give guidance for further work on SAER. Some members, how-
ever, were particularly concerned about resource implications despite New Zea-
land’s offer to contribute towards the cost. It was therefore agreed that further 
work was required to identify the case for a SAER. 
 
6. CEP I decided to establish an open-ended intersessional contact group to:  
(i) further clarify the Report framework conditions as identified in the report 
from XXI ATCM, paras. 143-150, and in Working Paper XXII 
ATCM/WP11 as further elaborated during the debate of the CEP, 
 
(ii) consider questions of financial and human resource implications and com-
mitments, 
 
(iii) consider the possible role of SCAR and experts, and 
 
(iv) report back to the CEP. 
 
7. This Working Paper constitutes the report to ATCM XXIII on the work of the in-
tersessional contact group prepared by the facilitator, Sweden. 
 
 
MODUS OPERANDI OF THE CONTACT GROUP 
 
8. Interested Parties, observers and experts were invited to notify Sweden at ATCM 
XXII of their interest in participation in the intersessional contact group. Further-
more, the Final Report of ATCM XXII/CEP I identified an e-mail address for cor-
respondence on SAER. 
 
9. On 27 July 1998 the first circular was distributed, with the aim to check e-mail 
addresses to the contact points. 
 
10. On 15 September 1998 Discussion Paper I was distributed via e-mail. The paper 
addressed different issues that were a development fromWP11 (ATCM XXII). 
Responses to this paper were requested by 30 September 1998. 
 
11. On the basis of received comments a further Discussion Paper was circulated on 5 
November 1997. Comments received on Discussion Paper 1 showed disagree-
ments on some main topics. Therefore, Discussion Paper 2 suggested a somewhat 
different approach compared with Discussion Paper 1 with the aim to find the 
”lowest common denominator”. Responses to this paper were requested by 20 
November 1998. 
 
12. Discussion Paper 3 was circulated on 28 January 1999 based on comments re-
ceived on Discussion Paper 2. This paper addressed some issues more in detail 
and tried to find a possible way forward, since there were still disagreements on 
some important issues (if ATCM/CEP should at all put resources into the produc-
tion of SAER). Responses to this paper were requested by 12 February 1999. 
 
 
4
13. Based on received comments on Discussion Paper 3, a draft Working Paper was 
circulated on 3 March 1999. Responses were requested by 8 March 1999. This 
Working Paper draws upon the comments received. 
 
14. Altogether seven parties/organisations have participated in the discussions: Brazil, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, UNEP, and USA. 
 
15. Sweden expresses its gratitude to the participants in the contact group for their 
fruitful contributions to the intersessional work. 
 
 
 
MATTERS ADDRESSED BY THE CONTACT GROUP 
 
16. The remit of the contact group was to ”further clarify the Report framework con-
ditions as identified in the report from XXI ATCM, paras. 143-150, and in Work-
ing Paper XXII ATCM/WP11 as further elaborated during the debate of the CEP, 
consider questions of financial and human resource implications and commit-
ments, consider the possible role of SCAR and experts, and report back to the 
CEP”. This Working Paper presents the outcome of the discussions concerning the 
different parts of a production of a SAER. It is then the task for ATCM/CEP to 
discuss and decide about the process and, among others based on this Working 
Paper, decide if a SAER will be produced or not. 
 
17. The discussion has focused on the possibilities to reach consensus on a single 
suggestion how to proceed with a SAER and what a SAER could look like, rather 
than presenting a working paper with a number of alternatives. This direction was 
chosen in order to make an as efficient use as possible of WP11 at ATCM 
XXII/CEP I, and was by the chair of the group considered fulfilling the remit of 
the intersessional contact group. However, the opinion of the U.S. was that the 
contact group was tasked with identifying the range of possibilities and the rela-
tive costs and benefits of each. 
 
18. In this regard, the U.S. noted in its comments on the last draft Working Paper 
(paras. 19-25 below) that there may not be a common understanding of what is 
meant by the term "further clarify the Report framework". Most of those who have 
been involved in the discussions seem to be of the opinion that there is agreement 
that the task of the group was to recommend a framework for a SAER, while oth-
ers are not. 
 
19. From discussions during and since ATCM XXI, it is clear that there is no agree-
ment on what if any kind of SAER would justify its production. In this regard it is 
useful to look at paras. 143-150 in the report from ATCM XXI in the context of 
paras. 140 and 141 that state: 
 
“Parties acknowledge that a SAER could provide a valuable benchmark against 
which environmental change might be monitored and impacts measured, and 
that it might provide a valuable synthesis of the large and diverse amount of sci-
entific information available. The discussions noted that such a report could be 
done in several ways, each with a differing focus and level of detail. 
Deleted: o
 
5
 
The Meeting raised concerns about the potential scope, focus, cost and produc-
tion of an SAER....” 
 
20. When viewed in this context, it is clear that the reference to options and possible 
financial commitments in para. 148 was intended by the ATCM to instruct the 
contact group to identify and assess the relative costs and benefits of the various 
types of SAER’s that conceivably could be done. It also is clear that there are sev-
eral relatively discrete options with a range of sub-options. The possibilities in-
clude 
 
(i) having each of the countries operating stations and the non-governmental or-
ganizations conducting activities in Antarctica develop and periodically re-
port the results of environmental monitoring programs designed to determine 
the environmental impacts of their operations; 
 
(ii) conducting a survey of the Treaty Parties, members of SCAR, and the Ant-
arctic science community to determine what is known and what the various 
entities think needs to be learned about the various components and threats to 
the various components of the Antarctic marine, terrestrial, and atmospheric 
environments; 
 
(iii) constituting a working group, as was done by the Arctic countries, to prepare 
a report on the sources, fates and effects of anthropogenic contaminants on 
the Antarctic environment; and 
 
(iv) preparing and periodically updating a more comprehensive status report 
along the lines outlined in Appendix 2 of the draft working group report. 
 
21. The first of these possibilities could be undertaken by allowing each of the coun-
tries operating stations and the non-governmental organisations carrying out ac-
tivities in the Antarctic to decide what they will monitor, taking into account the 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations in the 1996 SCAR/COMNAP report 
"Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operation in Antarc-
tica." Alternatively, the Treaty Parties and non-governmental organisations could 
ask the CEP and/or SCAR and COMNAP for advice on what should be moni-
tored, quality assurance, reporting requirements, analytical techniques, etc. and 
undertake monitoring programs, individually or collectively, based on the advice 
provided. With respect to collective monitoring, countries with stations in the 
same general areas might coordinate their efforts. Cost would be determined by 
what is done and would be borne by or apportioned among the individual coun-
tries conducting or supporting the programs. 
 
22. The second of the possibilities could be undertaken in a variety of ways, e.g., by 
having the CEP (a) develop and, following endorsement by an ATCM, forward a 
questionnaire to relevant entities seeking input; and then (b) task a member or 
constitute a working group to prepare a report summarising the information pro-
vided. Alternatively, the ATCM could ask the COMNAP or request that SCAR 
undertake and report the results of the survey. Any Treaty Party or group of par-
ties also could conduct the survey. The cost would be borne by those doing the 
work. 
 
6
 
23. The third possibility presumably would require an effort similar to that devoted by 
the AMAP Working Group to preparing the State of the Arctic Environment Re-
port. If this is considered a viable option, the contact group's report should de-
scribe how this report was prepared, what it contains, how long it took to com-
plete, what it cost, and the difficulties that were encountered in compiling infor-
mation and agreeing what would be included in the report. 
 
24. The fourth possibility likely would require the same level of effort that went into 
preparing the report on the state of the Arctic environment. At least one or two 
people with backgrounds in Antarctic science and environmental assessment 
would have to work full time on the project if a report is to be completed in three 
years or less. One or more Treaty Parties or organisations could detail people to do 
this work themselves or through SCAR, COMNAP, or the CEP. Alternatively, 
one or more Treaty Parties, SCAR, COMNAP, etc. could contract individuals or 
an organisation to do the work. A draft of the report would have to be provided to 
the contracting or parent organisation(s) for review and comment before it is sub-
mitted in final form. 
 
25. The target audience, content, and procedures for reviewing, finalising, and distrib-
uting the report would be determined by whoever produces it. The real costs 
would be at least several hundreds of thousands of dollar (U.S.) per year. 
 
 
 
GENERAL 
 
26. General issues that were up to discussion in the contact group were whether a po-
tential SAER would be of comprehensive or summary nature, if it would be based 
on available data, and if it would be presented on the Internet. 
 
27. The first issue was discussed only briefly, since the topic was discussed in deeper 
context in WP 11, ATCM XXII/CEP I, and most parties/organisations involved in 
the contact group agreed that a SAER should be of summary nature. However, one 
remark was that, without fully exploring what the objectives for a summary 
document versus a comprehensive document might be, it is not appropriate to en-
dorse a particular approach. 
 
28. Concerning the second issue, it was expressed that a potential SAER should be 
based on available data. One concern was that there is no general agreements on 
this issue either. The usefulness of a SAER must be clarified first. 
 
29. There was, however, a general agreement on the third issue, and all responses 
agreed that a SAER should be available on the Internet. 
 
 
 
GOALS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
30. Goals and objectives were discussed in the contact group. The following sugges-
tion is based on this discussion. However, there was no general agreement on 
 
7
goals and objectives in the contact group. It was argued that it is not right that a 
SAER should be identifying possible action, which may include international 
agreements, since this is well beyond the scope of a scientific work. 
 
Discussed goals for a Summary SAER 
31. To provide decision- and policy-makers, including governments and the CEP, 
with an overview of the status of, pressures on, and trends in the Antarctic envi-
ronment, in order to aid management of the Antarctic environment, and in relation 
to global processes, particularly pressures originating beyond Antarctica, which 
affect the Antarctic environment. However, it was expressed that the Environ-
mental Protocol (a) applies explicitly to the effects of activities in Antarctica on 
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystem; and (b) di-
rects the CEP to provide advice on measures needed to implement the Protocol 
"and to perform such other functions as may be referred to it by the ATCMs." 
Thus, the CEP arguably would require a directive from an ATCM before consider-
ing pressures on the Antarctic environment originating from activities outside 
Antarctica. Further, before providing such a directive, the Treaty Parties presuma-
bly would consider whether such activities would be addressed more appropriately 
in other fora, such as GLOBEC (Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics Research) 
and the Montreal Protocol. 
 
Discussed objectives for a Summary SAER 
32. The following objectives have been discussed: 
(a) Provide a current status of the Antarctic environment; summarise current scientific 
knowledge of the environment, identifying major areas of uncertainty and gaps in 
knowledge, draw on reviews/audits and monitoring programmes 
(b) Identify and document the principal pressures and their consequences (past, pre-
sent and possible future) on the Antarctic environment including threats from 
local, regional and global activities 
(c) Provide the basis for identifying a core set of key environmental indicators for the 
Antarctic (cf. SCAR/COMNAP workshops in 1995 and 1996) 
(d) Identify significant trends in the Antarctic environment reflected in the informa-
tion and key data sets compiled in (a) and (b). (It was suggested that indications of 
what trends would be considered significant presumably is needed, and that it is 
necessary to be able to distinguish changes due to natural causes from those due to 
different types of anthropogenic activities both in and outside Antarctica) 
(e) Provide recommendations for actions to address any significant environmental 
issues identified in the report, including monitoring programmes, scientific 
research, guidelines and international agreements 
 
 
 
AREA 
 
33. Possible area for a SAER is the area south of the Antarctic Convergence (SCAR 
ATCM XXI). This is an environmental boundary that includes all of the Antarctic 
Treaty area, and most of the areas subject to CCAMLR and the Southern Ocean 
Whale Sanctuary. It was also suggested that consideration presumably should be 
given to the possibility that the area of interest should include dependent and asso-
ciated ecosystems. 
 
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
 
8
34. It was expressed that there may be some problems with explicitly defining the area 
of study as being that bounded by the Antarctic convergence. The convergence 
has no particular standing in Antarctic Treaty System instruments, and it would 
therefore be better to refer to the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
 
AUDIENCE 
 
35. The discussion resulted in some thoughts, and circled mostly around that the pri-
mary audience would be national managers and decision-makers, and that a SAER 
would be aimed at an audience with a serious interest in the Antarctic environ-
ment. This includes environmental managers on all levels, decision- and policy-
makers and the CEP. 
 
36. Furthermore, it was suggested that the report also would be of considerable value 
to the scientific community as well as for wider public education. 
 
 
 
PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
37. It was suggested that a possible stepwise approach could be to develop a frame-
work for a review of existing information as a first step (State of Knowledge Re-
port for the Antarctic). The aim with the State of Knowledge Report would be to 
get a broad picture of existing information and gaps in knowledge on the Antarctic 
environment. With the result from the State of Knowledge Report in hand, it could 
than be decided if it is worth continuing the work and produce a SAER. This ap-
proach has a twofold advantage: 1) A SAER can be produced as a continuation, 2) 
the State of Knowledge Report is needed for a SAER, but at the same time useful 
even if ATCM/CEP will decide not to produce a SAER.  
 
38. However, concerns about this were expressed, and there was no general agreement 
that the ATCM/CEP should endorse a review of existing information as a first 
step. According to this position SCAR should not be asked to take on this work, 
which has been discussed in the contact group (see below). Individual parties may 
wish to do this, and could present their work to SCAR and/or the ATCM/CEP for 
information or review. 
 
39. Suggested goals and objectives of a “State of Knowledge Report for the Antarc-
tic”: 
1) To review existing scientific knowledge about the Antarctic environment as a 
basis for reviewing the state of the Antarctic environment, providing a sum-
mary of key information and identifying major gaps in the knowledge about 
Antarctica. 
2) To give the CEP a basis on which to base its advice on the state of the Ant-
arctic environment to the ATCM 
3) To give the CEP a basis on which to assess whether a SAER should/could be 
developed 
 
 
 
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Deleted: ”
Deleted: ”
 
9
ISSUES 
 
40. Two possible issues for a SAER are presented in Appendix 2. The first is issue-
based and the second is sort of area-based (scientific and/or geographic area). It 
was expressed that aligning the focus of a SAER with the AMAP Assessment re-
port could facilitate the assessment of the impacts of global changes in both polar 
regions. It was also pointed out that aligning the focus of a SAER with the second 
suggestion for issues (Scar’s suggestion) would be appropriate. It should be noted 
that the contact group was not asked to and did not provide explicit comments on 
these possibilities. 
 
41. Possible issues for the State of Knowledge Report is presented in Appendix 3. 
 
 
 
THE ROLE OF SCAR AND EXPERTS 
 
42. It was expressed that the participation of expert groups, like SCAR, is essential in 
order to produce a respectable State of Knowledge Report/SAER. However, an-
other position was that SCAR should not be asked to take on this work, but should 
certainly be invited to review and comment on any product. The ATCM/CEP 
should not be overburdening SCAR with this work, particularly in view of the fact 
that it has not been clearly established that such work will be of scientific value or 
done on a scientific basis. 
 
43. A number of organisations could be invited to provide specialist input to the 
document. For a list on this matter, see WP 19 submitted by SCAR to ATCM 
XXI. This topic was discussed only briefly in the contact group. 
 
 
 
FUNDING AND RESOURCES 
 
44. The implications of resources for a potential Summary SAER were discussed. It 
was concluded that the resources have to be based on voluntary contributions. One 
remark was that parties should not be asked for voluntary contributions, since 
countries know that they are always welcome to provide voluntary contributions. 
Furthermore, it was expressed that seeking funding from international organisa-
tions was not agreeable, since this could threaten the very basis on which the Ant-
arctic Treaty System is built. 
 
45. It was suggested that one and a half man-year for the production per se of a poten-
tial Summary SAER seem reasonable. This includes a preparation phase, collec-
tion phase, writing up phase and a rounding up phase (including the work with 
presenting SAER on Internet). Based on a cost for one man-month being US$       
6 000, this gives an approximate cost of US$ 108 000. Including costs for mate-
rial, production of figures, and printing, a total budget of US$ 200 000 seems rea-
sonable. 
 
 
 
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Deleted: breafly 
Deleted: was 
 
10
Suggested costs for a potential State of Knowledge Report: 
46. It was expressed that the production of a potential State of Knowledge Report as 
an interim step should be based on in-kind contributions and therefore implies no 
costs. However, it was pointed out that it is not clear that SCAR’s members would 
be able to provide the in-kind contributions, and that SCAR presumably would 
have to constitute a specialists group to collate and summarise information pro-
vided by members or task its Executive Secretary with responsibility for doing so. 
 
 
 
TIME SCHEDULE 
 
47. It was expressed that completion of a potential State of Knowledge Report could 
be in year 2001. A first version of a potential SAER depends of the outcome of the 
State of Knowledge Report and the decisions of ATCM/CEP, but could possibly 
be completed around year 2003-2004. 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
48. The intersessional contact group on SAER attempted to find a possible way for-
ward in further clarifying the framework conditions for a SAER. The range of 
possibilities and the relative costs and benefits of each alternative have not been 
discussed of reasons described in para. 17 above. The discussion at ATCM 
XXII/CEP I indicated that different points of view exist regarding the production 
of a SAER. Therefore, the contact group first concentrated on finding the “lowest 
common denominator” among the wide spectrum of opinions. Hence, a discussion 
paper was introduced with a proposal for a feasible way forward (including the 
State of Knowledge Report-suggestion). In the process, however, it become clear 
that there is no common ground or general agreement on several fundamental is-
sues pertaining to the development of a SAER. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
49. Since the intersessional contact group on SAER did not reach consensus on the 
various framework issues, it is not possible to present a recommendation that in-
cludes a detailed suggestion as to whether or how to proceed with a SAER. There-
fore, the intersessional contact group recommends CEP to: 
 
- discuss how and if CEP should continue to discuss matters of SAER or a 
State of Knowledge Report1. The discussion should take the results from the 
work of the contact group into consideration. 
 
- 
further examine the ideas that were suggested during the discussions in the con-
tact group and now contained in this working paper. 
                                                 
1Appendix 3 provides suggestions for how the production process could be continued. These 
suggestions are based on thoughts that have been expressed in the intersessional contact group on 
SAER. 
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Deleted: tried 
Deleted: ”
Deleted: ”
Deleted: However, it did not succeed, 
and the conclusion must therefore be that 
the contact group has not succeeded in 
reaching concensus in how to proceed 
with a SAER
Deleted: in the different matters dis-
cussed
Deleted: this Wp
Deleted: 1)
Deleted: if 
Deleted: among others based on the 
result of the discussions presented in this 
WP, since there is no consensus on the 
question of whether or not a SAER 
should be prepared, whether by the 
ATCM/CEP or some other group or 
groups
Deleted: ¶
In Appendix 3 to this WP recom-
mendations for a continuation of the 
production process are presented. 
These recommendations are based on 
thoughts expressed in the intersessional 
contact group on SAER.¶
 
11
Appendix 1 
From Final Report ATCM XXI 
139-150 
 
Item 14: Environmental Monitoring and State of the Antarctic Environment 
 
(139) New Zealand and SCAR presented Working Papers (XXI ATCM/WP 32 and 19 
respectively) on the need for, and suggested structure of, a State of the Antarctic Envi-
ronment Report (SAER). Discussion then focused on the potential benefits and con-
cerns facing Parties in the production of such a report, and ways in which it might be 
taken forward.  
 
(140) Parties acknowledged that a SAER could provide a valuable benchmark against 
which environmental change might be monitored and impacts measured, and that it 
might provide a valuable synthesis of the large and diverse amount of scientific in-
formation available. The discussions noted that such a report could be done in several 
ways, each with a differing focus and level of detail. 
 
(141) The Meeting raised concerns about the potential scope, focus, cost and produc-
tion of an SAER, noting that while there are numerous models for State of the Envi-
ronment reporting elsewhere, an Antarctic report was likely to be a comprehensive 
undertaking. Existing world experience of SOE reporting suggests that the more com-
prehensive a report, the greater the time and financial resources required. 
 
(142) Parties noted New Zealand's intention to prepare a framework for a Ross Sea 
Region State of the Environment Report (SOE-RSR) by the year 2000 in consultation 
with other Parties active in the region. While it was acknowledged that this regional-
ised report could be used as a pilot for a larger, continent-wide report, it was felt that 
commencement of work on the SAER should not be tied to the timing or the comple-
tion of the SOE-RSR. 
 
(143) The Parties agreed that the objectives for the SAER needed clarification to take 
into account different audiences and, consequently, foci for the Report. Uses to which 
the Report might be put include:  
 
i) 
as an archival benchmark/baseline document of global relevance;  
 
ii) as a basis for the provision of policy guidance; and  
 
iii) as a basis for the provision of trend analysis in environmental monitoring. 
 
(144) The Meeting agreed that any one, or combination, of these uses might be appro-
priate and the approach should be clearly established by the ATCM before work on 
the SAER began. 
 
(145) It was suggested that it could be useful for the SAER to distinguish the process 
of data collection, validation, and compilation, in which SCAR would play a major 
role, from the process of providing advice and formulating recommendations, which 
would have to be done by the TEWG/CEP. 
 
(146) The Meeting noted that the Antarctic scientific community could be expected to 
play a major role in the preparation of the report. It expressed its appreciation for the 
 
12
work that SCAR had already done in preparing draft guidelines and a schema for the 
Report. SCAR had identified a number of organisations with the relevant specialist 
capabilities, which might usefully be consulted in the development of the SAER. 
 
(147) The Meeting agreed to form an open-ended contact group facilitated by New 
Zealand to consider intersessionally how uncertainties about the focus of a SAER and 
the methodology of production might be resolved, and report back to ATCM XXII. 
The contact group would be tasked with:  
 
i) developing clear objectives for the Report; 
 
ii) recommending whether the Report should be comprehensive or summary in 
nature; 
 
iii) proposing a time-frame for the Report; 
 
iv) considering the financial and human resources required to meet the pro-
posed time-frame and scope of the Report; and 
 
v) considering what progress might be made on the Report framework. 
 
(148) The Meeting noted that there was likely to be a range of options involving pos-
sible financial commitment from Parties. The contact group should consider preparing 
indicative cost estimates based on different options, investigate possible sources of 
funding and potential outlets for publication. 
 
(149) New Zealand's offer to coordinate the work of the contact group prior to ATCM 
XXII was gratefully accepted by the Meeting. New Zealand was asked to facilitate the 
intersessional work of the contact group by correspondence, including email, and to 
report back to ATCM XXII. The Meeting noted that such intersessional work should 
take account of the financial, technical and other resource implications for participants 
in the production of a SAER. 
 
(150) The Meeting agreed that the project should be open to the widest participation 
by Parties, observers and experts, and that interested Parties, observers and experts 
should notify the New Zealand national contact point by the end of June 1997 of their 
interest in participating in the intersessional work to be carried out by the contact 
group. 
 
 
 
13
Appendix 2 
Issues for a SAER 
 
One focus is presented in AMAP Assessment Report: Arctic Pollution Issues/A state 
of the Arctic Environment Report (both comprehensive and summary version). Fol-
lowing suggestion is based on that report. (See Information Paper 40, ATCM XXII, 
Development of “State of the Environment” Reports in the North – Experiences with 
the EEA and AMAP processes, for further details). 
 
1. Preface 
2. Executive summary 
3. Introduction 
4. The Antarctic 
5. Physical pathways 
6. Polar ecology 
7. Persistent Organic Pollutants 
8. Petroleum hydrocarbons 
9. Heavy metals 
10. The ozone problem 
11. Radioactivity 
12. Current state of flora and fauna 
13. Climate change (including ice sheet balance) 
14. Pressures on the environment 
- Science and support activities 
- Fishing 
- Tourism 
- Long range pollutants 
- Cumulative pressures 
- Other potential threats (minerals?) 
15. Conclusions, outlook and responses 
- Key environmental pressures and impacts 
- Status of scientific values 
- Status of aesthetic and wilderness 
- (Future research and monitoring, identification of key indicators) 
- (Policy implications and recommendations) 
16. Pollution and human health 
17. Appendices 
- Text of the Antarctic Treaty 
- Text of Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
- Text of Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Re-
sources 
- Text of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its 
annexes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
SCAR have suggested the following structure of a SAER (ATCM XXI/WP19): 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Development of SAER 
1.2 Goals 
1.3 Institutional framework 
1.4 Current research, monitoring and management activities 
 
2. Status and trends 
2.1 Terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems 
2.1.1 Ice sheets and ice shelves 
2.1.2 Ice-free areas 
2.1.3 Lakes and streams 
2.2 Marine 
2.2.1 Physical oceanography 
2.2.2 Sea ice 
2.2.3 Marine chemistry 
2.2.4 Marine ecosystem and biology 
2.3 Atmosphere 
2.3.1 Atmosphere dynamics – features and circulation 
2.3.2 Chemistry – trace gases 
2.3.3 Radiation and effects on the biosphere 
 
3. Pressures on the environment 
3.1 Science and support activities 
3.2 Fishing 
3.3 Tourism 
3.4 Long range pollutants 
3.5 Cumulative pressures 
3.6 Other potential threats (minerals?) 
 
4. Conclusions, outlook and responses 
4.1 Key environmental pressures and impacts 
4.2 Status of scientific values 
4.3 Status of aesthetic and wilderness 
4.4 (Future research and monitoring, identification of key indicators) 
4.5 (Policy implications and recommendations) 
 
5. Appendices 
5.1 Text of the Antarctic Treaty 
5.2 Text of Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals 
5.3 Text of Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Re-
sources 
5.4 Text of Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its 
annexes 
 
 
 
15
Appendix 3 is included in order to illustrate possible future actions and not as a pro-
posal for how to proceed. 
 
Appendix 3 
 
One possible way of conducting a State of Knowledge Report is as follows: 
1) that the Treaty Parties request SCAR, through their National Committees, to 
coordinate the development of a State of Knowledge Report on the Antarctic 
environment, that could serve as the basis for an Antarctic wide state of the 
environment report; 
 
2) that an open ended contact group is established to liase with SCAR through 
the development of the State of Knowledge Report, reporting to CEP III 
jointly with SCAR, on progress with the State of Knowledge Report; 
 
3) that the State of Knowledge Report be based on the following terms of refer-
ence: 
 
Suggested Terms of Reference for the work with the State of Knowledge Report: 
- 
SCAR will be asked to use their permanent network, i.e. working groups, 
groups of specialists, etc.; 
 
- 
all Parties/organisations interested in participating in the contact group, and 
contribution to the State of Knowledge Report of existing information, in-
form the Chair of the contact group at ATCM XXIII/CEP II; 
 
- 
SCAR/the contact group will work in a close co-operation with expert groups 
(see WP 19, submitted by SCAR, ATCM XXI); 
 
- 
all contribution to the process will be in-kind contributions; 
 
- 
the State of Knowledge Report should state how good the information is (an 
indication of quality, is it comprehensive, incomplete etc); 
 
- 
the State of Knowledge Report should identify where information is inade-
quate or lacking and comment on the importance of it; 
 
- 
the State of Knowledge Report should make judgements about what is key 
information, identify where there are critical information/knowledge gaps 
and saying why they are critical; 
- 
issues: Focus on existing information and pinpointing gaps in knowledge re-
lating to state, trends and effects of the following areas of concern: 
 
 
 
 
 
16
1. Terrestrial and aquatic 
1.1 Ice sheets and ice shelves 
1.2 Ice-free areas 
1.3 Lakes and streams 
 
2. Marine 
2.1 Physical oceanography 
2.2 Sea ice 
2.3 Marine chemistry 
2.4 Marine ecosystem and biology 
 
3. Atmosphere 
3.1 Atmosphere dynamics – features and circulation 
3.2 Chemistry – trace gases 
3.3 Radiation and effects on the biosphere 
 
4. Others (partly covered by 1-3 above) 
4.1 Local pollution  
4.2 Long Range Pollutants  
4.3 Climate change  
4.4 Ozone depletion  
4.5 Harvesting of resources  
4.6 Introduction of alien species 
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
