 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
 
 
 
 
-
____________________________________________________________________________________
___ 
 
 
 
 
The Rationalisation of Information Exchanged Through the 
Antarctic Treaty System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
1. 
The last two decades has seen considerable growth in the scope and complexity of the 
Antarctic Treaty system.  The tasks of collecting data, preparing reports and exchanging 
information have increased in line with the growth of ATCM Recommendations and 
Resolutions, and the implementation of the Environmental Protocol.  During the same period 
the scope and sophistication of science and operations has accelerated in keeping with rapid 
advances in technology.  Many national Antarctic Programs are today conducting substantially 
more science over vast areas of the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean.  International 
cooperation in both science and logistics has increased and, during the last ten years, there has 
been major growth in Antarctic tourism. 
 
2. 
The parallel development of international science programs through SCAR, science and 
operational support through COMNAP, and the Antarctic Treaty and associated international 
conventions through the ATCM process has resulted in the development of separate, and 
sometimes duplicated, information reporting requirements.  In the case of COMNAP, the need 
to introduce an information exchange process on operational activities was brought about by the 
requirement to have such information available to national operators before the Antarctic 
summer season commenced.  Operational information provided through the formal Antarctic 
Treaty exchange of information process arrives too late in the season to be of value. 
 
3. 
At ATCM XXII the United States tabled an Information Paper on “Improving Annual 
Exchange of Antarctic Information” (XXII ATCM/IP28) noting that the current processes 
generally: 
 
• 
results in overlapping and duplicated data; 
• 
uses outdated methods for the preparation and distribution of information; and  
• 
causes delays in the timely availability information. 
 
4. 
ATCM XXII noted the need to rationalise the information exchange systems and 
consider what information is exchanged, and why, and how the processes could be improved.  
The Meeting acknowledged that the World Wide Web presents a valuable tool which can 
facilitate the rapid and efficient exchange of Antarctic information that is currently circulated by 
traditional means.  SCAR and COMNAP advised that they were intending to review their 
information formats.  The Meeting agreed that “exchange of information” would be a priority 
agenda item ATCM XXIII. 
 
5. This paper discusses: 
 
• 
the duplication that occurs between the formal exchange of information under the Antarctic 
Treaty and the information exchanged by national Antarctic operators through COMNAP; 
• 
the reasons why such duplication has arisen;  
• 
recent changes to the way COMNAP exchanges operational information; and 
• 
current and future developments that can reduce duplication and improve the timely 
availability of information. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Formal Exchange of Information under the Antarctic Treaty 
 
6. Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty requires Contracting Parties to provide information 
on its expeditions and nominate all stations occupied by their respective nationals.  Subsequent 
ATCM Recommendations have expanded the information required and called for it to be made 
available by 30 November each year.  Until recently, all Parties have circulated the information 
in printed reports through diplomatic channels.  During the last year a number of Parties have 
begun to provide this information through the INTERNET on the home page of their national 
Antarctic agencies (e.g. Australia, Belgium and USA).  Annex A outlines the fields of 
information exchanged under the formal Antarctic Treaty information exchange process. 
 
COMNAP Exchange of Information 
 
7. While the Antarctic Treaty exchange of information process provides data that is valuable 
to Antarctic operators (e.g. shipping and aircraft schedules, facilities for rendering assistance, 
communications frequencies, etc) these reports do not reach the national programs until 
December (which is typically half way through the operating season) or later.  Because of this 
delay, in June 1996, COMNAP issued Guidelines for Advance Exchange of Operational 
Information on Antarctic Activities which requires specific operational information to be 
exchanged between national operators by 1 September each year (that is two or more months 
earlier than information provided through the formal exchange process).  Annex B gives a list of 
the information required under the COMNAP advance exchange of information process. 
 
8. Prior to 1998, each COMNAP member agency forwarded its “COMNAP Advance 
Exchange of Operational Information” by airmail to the COMNAP Secretariat.  Duplicate 
copies were distributed to each COMNAP member by airmail during early September.  
However, by 1998, virtually all COMNAP member countries (28 out of 29)  had access to 
electronic mail through the INTERNET.  As a result, at the COMNAP X meeting held in 
Concepcion, Chile in July 1998, it was agreed to begin using COMNAP’s “Antarctic Manager’s 
Electronic Network (AMEN¹) system for the advance exchange of operational of information 
for the 1998/99 season and until further notice”.  National operators now therefore provide the 
information as an attachment to an e-mail.   
 
9. 
Under the COMNAP information exchange process, National operators were 
encouraged to provide URLs (that is, “Uniform Resource Locators” or Home Page addresses) 
for fields of operational information that are available on their national INTERNET Home 
Pages (e.g. shipping schedules, etc).  This has the benefit that other national operators are able 
to access up-to-date information rather than relying on information provided at the beginning of 
the season that is frequently superceded.  While none of the national operators provided URLs 
 
 
COMNAP Home Page 
 
10. 
During the last six months COMNAP has been redeveloping its Home Page to provide 
information that will provide a valuable reference resource for national operators and others.  
Much of the information on the Home page will be accessible to the general public although 
some data will be “password protected” for COMNAP members and related agencies (e.g. 
communication frequencies).   
 
11. 
The Home page will provide a complete list of summer and winter stations/bases with 
information on the geographic location, station infrastructure, science activities, and medical 
facilities etcetara.  In the “password protected” areas members will be able to access (and edit) 
the Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Manual (ATOM) and MINIATOM (which is a 
reduced version of ATOM that also includes communications information on tourist vessels and 
yachts).  Both the ATOM and MINIATOM documents will be available on the COMNAP 
Home Page in “PDF format²” that will enable pages to be printed which are identical to the 
original format of the manuals/documents. 
 
 
Comparison of Information Exchanged 
 
12. 
Annex C presents a comparison between the information provided under the formal 
Antarctic Treaty Exchange of Information, operational information that is circulated by national 
operators through COMNAP prior to the commencement of an Antarctic summer season, and 
information that will be available on the COMNAP Home Page by 30 June 1999.  As would be 
expected, all of the data exchanged through COMNAP is operationally significant and 
especially valuable in the event of an emergency.  As previously noted, while the COMNAP 
exchange of information provides a forecast of what is expected to happen, the information can 
rapidly become redundant as a result of unforeseen events (e.g. ship besetment, equipment 
failure, accidents, etc).   
 
13. 
The INTERNET has provided the technology to enable correct information to be 
available to national operators throughout the Antarctic season. Paragraph 9 (above) describes 
the use of e-mails to circulate COMNAP exchange of information commencing this last season 
(1998/99).  It was also pointed out that a few Antarctic operating agencies are moving to place 
key operating information on their Home Page (such as shipping and aircraft schedules) which 
will allow the URLs to be provided within the COMNAP exchange of information document.  
If all national Antarctic operating agencies were able to provide this information through the 
INTERNET there would no longer be a need for the COMNAP advance exchange of 
information process.  Hopefully this will be achieved within the next five to ten years. 
 
14. 
The redeveloped COMNAP Home Page is being designed to allow national operators to 
access specific types of operational data that are best centralised and are not generally available 
in a consolidated form on any national Antarctic Home Page.  The Antarctic 
Telecommunications Manual (ATOM) and MINIATOM will be the first examples of this 
approach.  National operators will be able to directly edit data on ATOM and MINIATOM, 
which relates to their own ships and stations.  This will vastly improve the accuracy and 
currency of the information and eliminate the time and cost of distributing hard copies.  
_____________________________ 
¹AMEN is a List server maintained by the COMNAP Secretariat that enables any COMNAP/SCALOP 
member to distribute electronic mail messages to all COMNAP/SCALOP members. 
² “PDF” or  “Portable Document Format” is produced using Adobe Acrobat software and enables the 
layout of documents to be maintained and viewed on any type of computer.  
 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
15. 
It is concluded that: 
 
• 
there is some duplication between the information circulated under the formal Antarctic 
Treaty process and that provided through the COMNAP advance exchange of operational 
information procedure; 
 
• 
this duplication arose because of the need by national operators to obtain operational 
information at, or preferably prior to, the commencement of the Antarctic summer season; 
 
• 
the use by COMNAP of e-mails to circulate the advance exchange of information 
(commencing in the 1998/99 season) has vastly improved the efficiency of the process; 
 
• 
the introduction, by a few national Antarctic agencies, of operational information on their 
Home Pages has enabled up to date operational information to be accessed at any time and, 
if  this method was implemented by all national operators, has the potential to entirely 
eliminate the need for the COMNAP advance exchange of information; and 
 
• 
the new COMNAP Home Page will provide a central resource of information on wintering 
and summer stations and will also provide reference data that is best held at a central 
location. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
16. 
It is recommended that the ATCM: 
 
• 
note the development of COMNAP’s exchange of information process though the use of  
electronic mail and its redeveloped Home Page; 
 
• 
consider the potential of using the facilities of the COMNAP Home Page to store 
operational information that is best held in a central location (e.g. communications 
information, location of refuges, etcetera) thereby eliminating the need to provide this 
information through the formal Antarctic Treaty information exchange process; 
 
• 
encourage national agencies to make available up-to-date operational information on the 
home pages of their national Antarctic agencies; and 
 
• 
encourage Contracting Parties to use the INTERNET for the formal exchange of 
information under the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX A 
 
Exchange of Information under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic 
Treaty and as required by related ATCM Recommendations and 
requirements under the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection 
 
(Treaty Requirements) 
 
Item 
Requirement 
I 
Logistics Support and Military Equipment 
The names, types, numbers and descriptions of ships, aircraft and other vehicles, 
introduced, or to be introduced, into the Antarctic Treaty Area, and information on 
military equipment, if any, and its location in the Area. 
 
II 
Expedition Schedules 
Dates of expeditions leaving for, and arriving in the Antarctic Treaty Area, duration of 
stay, itinerary to and from the Area and routes followed within the Area. 
 
III 
Summer and Winter Stations 
The names. locations and dates of opening of the Party’s stations and subsidiary stations 
established or planned to be established in the Antarctic Treaty Area, listed according to 
whether they are for summer and/or winter operations. 
 
IV 
Names of Expedition Personnel 
The names of the officers-in-charge of each of the stations, subsidiary stations, ships and 
aircraft; the number, occupations and specialisations of personnel (including any 
designated by other Governments), who are or will be stationed at each of these stations 
including the number of personnel who are members of the military services, together with 
the rank of any officers and the names and professional affiliations of personnel engaged 
in scientific activities. 
 
V 
Armaments 
The number and types of armaments possessed by personnel. 
 
VI 
Science Projects 
Science projects including investigations underway and those planned for each station or 
on board ships and aircraft. 
 
VII 
Scientific Equipment 
Principal scientific equipment according to program or location. 
 
VIII 
Transportation and Communication Equipment 
Transportation facilities and communications equipment for use within the Antarctic 
treaty Area  
 
IX 
Facilities for rendering Assistance 
Details of facilities for rendering assistance for winter and summer operations. 
 
X 
Non-Government Expeditions 
Notice of any expedition to Antarctica not organised by the Party but organised in, calling 
at, or proceeding from the Party’s territory (including tourism in accordance with Article 
VII (5)(a). 
 
XI 
Unoccupied Refuges 
Description of unoccupied refuges in accordance with Recommendation III-II, including 
 
name, position, description of location, date established, date last examined and estimate 
of available accommodation, facilities, food, fuel, and supplies of other kinds. 
 
XII 
Permits Issued 
Annual return of details of number and nature of permits issued, and the numbers or 
quantities of each species of native mammal, bird or plant taken annually in the Treaty 
Area in accordance with Article 6 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty and Article XII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic fauna and flora. 
 
XIII 
Use of Radio-Isotopes 
Details of projects proposing to use radio-isotopes. 
 
XIV 
Use of Rockets 
Notice of intended use of scientific research rockets in the Antarctic Treaty Area in 
accordance with Recommendation VI-12 including, inter alia, geographical coordinates of 
the place of launching or, alternatively, the approximate period of time during which it is 
planned to carry out the launchings; the3 direction of launching; the planned maximum 
altitude; the planned impact area, the type and other specification of the rocket to be 
launched, including possible residual hazards; the purpose and research program of the 
rocket. 
 
XV 
Oceanographic Research 
Notice of ships which are carrying out substantial oceanography research programs in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area, in accordance with recommendations VI-13, including information 
required under categories I, II, VI and VII. 
 
XVI 
Tourist and NGO Expeditions 
Reports of tourist and non-governmental expedition groups visiting stations as referred to 
in paragraph 3 of Recommendation VIII-9. 
 
XVII 
Waste Disposal Practices 
Waste disposal practices, in partial fulfillment of paragraph 4 of Recommendation XV-3. 
 
XVIII 
Activities in Special Protected Areas 
Advice of activities authorised to be conducted in Specially Protected Areas, in fulfillment 
of Recommendation XV-9. 
 
XIX 
List of IEEs 
Annual list of any Initial Environmental Evaluations prepared, and procedures put in place 
in accordance with Articles (2)(2) and 5, in fulfillment of Article 6 of Annex 1 to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
XX 
Implementation  of Environmental Protocol 
Advice of steps taken to implement the Protocol, including notification made in 
accordance with Article 15, in fulfillment of Article 17 of the Protocol on environmental 
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B 
 
COMNAP Guidelines for  
Advance Exchange of Operational Information on Antarctic Activities 
 
Recommended Format 
 
To be forwarded to the COMNAP Secretariat by 1 September annually. 
 
 
Country: 
 
For the period: 1 September 19 to 31 August 19 
 
SECTION 1 
CONTACT INFORMATION (OF ORIGINATOR) 
(a) 
Name 
(b) 
Position 
(c) 
Address 
(d) 
Phone 
(e) 
Facsimile 
(f) 
Telex 
(g) 
E-mail 
 
SECTION 2 
SHIP OPERATIONS 
(a) 
Ships to be operating in the Antarctic 
(b) 
Brief details of proposed itineraries 
Shipping schedule attached: 
YES/NO 
 
SECTION 3 
AIR OPERATIONS 
(a) 
Information on planned air operations (see attached sheets) 
(b) 
Antarctic Flight Information Manual (AFIM) updates 
attached: 
 
 
YES/NO 
 
SECTION 4 
STATIONS 
(a) 
New stations or refuges not previously notified 
(b) 
Stations closed or refuges abandoned and not previously notified 
 
SECTION 5 
COMMUNICATIONS 
(a) 
Communications facilities not previously notified 
(b) 
Antarctic Telecommunications Operators Handbook (ATOM) 
updates attached  
 
YES/NO 
 
SECTION 6 
LOGISTICS ACTIVITIES AFFECTING OTHER NATIONS 
(a) 
Logistics activities affecting other nations 
 
SECTION 7 
MAJOR FIELD ACTIVITIES 
(a) 
Major inland traverses and temporary field camps 
 
SECTION 8 
OTHER ANTARCTIC ACTIVITIES 
(a) 
Governmental 
(b) 
Non-governmental 
 
SECTION 9 
EMERGENCY CONTACTS 
(a) 
Emergency contacts telephone updates 
attached: 
 
 
YES/NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachments to be appended: 
 
• 
Shipping itineraries (if applicable) 
 
• 
Aircraft operations (Sheets 1 to 6 as applicable) 
 
• 
AFIM updates (attach any amendments to the Antarctic Flight Information Manual that 
have not yet been advised to the COMNAP Secretariat) 
 
• 
ATOM updates (attach any amendments to the Antarctic Telecommunications Operators 
Manual not yet advised to the COMNAP Secretariat) 
 
• 
Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers (attach updated list of contacts) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX C 
Comparison between Information Exchanged under the Antarctic Treaty, 
Exchanged through COMNAP  
and available on the COMNAP Home Page ³ 
 
Process of Information Exchange … 
 
…formally under the Treaty ¹ 
…through COMNAP ² 
…via COMNAP’s Home Page ³ 
Comments 
Item I 
    Logistics Support and  
 
   Military Equipment 
• 
Shipping and aircraft schedules 
only 
 
• 
URL’s to national Home Pages are to be 
provided with COMNAP Advance 
Exchange 
Item II     Expedition Schedules 
 
• 
As above 
 
• 
URL’s to national Home Pages are to be 
provided with COMNAP Advance 
Exchange 
Item III     Summer and Winter  
 
    Stations 
 
• 
List of summer and/or winter 
stations and subsidiary bases 
 
Item IV     Names of Expedition 
 
    Personnel 
 
 
 
Item V     Armaments 
 
 
 
 
Item VI     Science Projects 
 
 
• 
Types of science conducted at 
stations (in general) 
 
Item VII     Scientific Equipment 
 
 
 
 
Item VIII   Transportation and  
 
   Communication Equipment 
• 
Revisions of ATOM entries 
• 
Revision of AFIM entries 
• 
List of surface transport 
equipment at stations 
• 
Copy of ATOM manual giving 
details of communications 
equipment and frequencies for all 
stations and ships 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Process of information Exchange … 
…formally under the Treaty ¹ 
…through COMNAP ² 
…via COMNAP’s Home Page ³ 
 
 
Comments 
Item IX     Facilities for  
 
    rendering Assistance 
• 
New refuges established 
• 
Refuges abandoned 
• 
Medical facilities available at 
stations 
• 
List of refuges to be included on 
COMNAP Home Page at next stage of  
development 
Item X     Non-Government  
 
    Expeditions 
• 
Other government and non-
government activities 
 
 
Item XII     Unoccupied Refuges 
 
• 
New refuges opened 
• 
Refuges closed 
 
• 
See comments against Item IX above 
Item XII     Permits Issued 
 
 
 
 
Item XIII   Use of Radio-Isotopes 
 
 
 
 
Item XIV   Use of Rockets 
 
 
 
 
Item XV     Oceanographic Research 
 
 
 
 
Item XVI   Tourist and NGO  
 
    Expeditions 
• 
Non-governmental activities 
 
 
Item XVII  Waste Disposal Practices 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: 
¹ 
Information exchanged under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, related ATCM Recommendations  
and the requirements of the Environmental Protocol 
² 
Information exchanged in accordance with COMNAP’s Guidelines for Advance Exchange of Operational 
 
Information on Antarctic Activities (June 1995) 
 
³ 
Information that will be available on COMNAP’s redeveloped Home Page by 30 June 1999.  It should be  
noted that COMNAP’s Home Page is being developed on an ongoing basis and will be expanded to include 
more information that is valuable located in a single reference resource (e.g. communications information,  
operating regions for vessels during specific periods, refuges, etcetera) 
 
 
 
