XXIII ATCM/ WP38 
May, 1999 
 
  
 
CEP II Agenda Item 4 
 
Submitted by   
United Kingdom
CEEs and the CEP 
 
 
CEEs AND THE CEP - A PAPER BY THE UK 
 
 
 
Introduction. 
 
Working Paper (XXIII ATCM/WP2) submitted by New Zealand,addresses the 
issue of how Comprehensive Environmental Evaluations (CEEs) might be 
considered by the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP). 
 
The New Zealand paper is a welcome initiative.  It addresses an 
important issue and one that is fundamental not only to the CEP, but 
also to the Consultative Meeting itself, for it is the procedures for 
CEEs which govern the timing and frequency of ATCMs. 
 
It is therefore appropriate to clarify the mechanism by which the CEP 
handles CEEs, so removing the chance of inconsistency of approach and 
ensuring the effective operation of the Committee. 
 
This paper is an attempt to modify and build on the proposals put 
forward in XXIII ATCM/WP2. 
 
 
 
Requirements of the Protocol. 
 
The basic provisions by which the CEP is tasked with handling CEEs are 
set out in Article 3(3) and 3(4) of Annex 1 of the Protocol.  There is 
no ambiguity in those texts. 
 
Article 3(4) states that: 
 
"...the draft CEE shall be forwarded to the Committee...for 
consideration as appropriate."; 
 
whilst Article 3(5) indicates: 
 
"..no final decision shall be taken....unless there has been an 
opportunity for consideration of the draft CEE..." 
 
In other words whilst an opportunity to consider a CEE must have been 
made available, there is not necessarily an automatic need for the 
Committee to consider every CEE.  CEEs need only be considered as 
appropriate. 
 
It therefore follows that a mechanism needs to be found: 
 
i) to determine whether it is appropriate to consider any particular CEE 
and if so; 
 
ii) to provide an opportunity for its consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
Consideration of CEEs by the CEP. 
 
The question of who decides whether it is appropriate to consider a CEE 
is not stated in Annex I.  Under ATCM and CEP rules the options are: 
 
i)    that all CEEs must be considered unless there is a consensus that 
decides otherwise; alternatively; 
 
ii)   that a consensus is needed in support of consideration of a CEE; 
 
iii)  that under CEP Rule 15 a majority in favour of consideration is 
required, or; 
 
iv)   that a minority, including any one Party, may determine that it is 
appropriate that a CEE should be considered by the CEP. 
 
The automaticity of option (i) runs contrary to the understanding of 
Article 3(4), whilst option (ii) is patently unworkable.  Whilst CEP 
Rule 15 could be deployed (option iii), the UK is of the view that the 
fourth option is the most appropriate.  And for two principal reasons: 
 
1.  To reduce the risks of triggering dispute mechanisms. 
 
There is the possibility that an activity, that has been subject to a 
CEE, could impact the interests of any one other Party.  It is essential 
therefore that such a Party is given the right within the CEP to express 
its views on the CEE and the activity in question.  Without such an 
opportunity the aggrieved Party may feel obliged to invoke the Dispute 
Mechanism of Article 18 of the Protocol.  That would be unfortunate. 
 
2.  To reflect the constitution of the CEP. 
 
It is important to recall that the CEP is not necessarily bound by 
consensus.  Article 11(5) of the Protocol and Rule 14 of the CEP's Rules 
of Procedure require that the Report of the CEP reflects the views 
expressed, including minority views. 
 
It is therefore appropriate for one, some or all Parties to determine 
that consideration of a CEE by the CEP is warranted, and for the views 
of that Party, or Parties to be reflected in the Report of the CEP. 
 
 
Proposed Mechanism for Handling CEEs. 
 
Based on the above understanding, and recalling the timeframe for the 
CEP's handling of CEEs set out in Annex 1 Article 3(3) and 3(4), the 
following modifications are proposed to the Guidelines developed in 
paragraph 4i - vii of XXIII ATCM/WP2: 
 
 
 
A.  Draft CEE is provided by the originating Party to all other Parties 
and to the Committee as required by Annex 1 Article 3(3) and 3(4) of the 
Protocol. 
 
B.  CEP Chair circulates the Executive summary of the CEE to each 
national Representative of the Committee and seeks advice as to whether 
that Representative considers it appropriate for the CEE to be discussed 
at the next meeting of the CEP. 
 
C.  If any one Party responds stating that it believes it would be 
appropriate, then the CEP Chair shall inform all Parties as such, and 
shall ensure that the CEE will be the subject of consideration at the 
next CEP meeting. 
 
D.  In such a situation the CEP Chair may suggest constituting an 
informal open-ended contact group to liaise ahead of the CEP with a view 
to preparing advice on the CEE to the Committee.  Such a contact group 
would be led by a facilitator to be identified by the CEP Chair after 
consultation with Parties as appropriate. 
 
E.  Following consideration by the CEP of the CEE and the findings of 
the informal open-ended contact group, the advice of the CEP is passed 
to the ATCM as part of its Report. 
 
In setting out these suggested modifications, two points are noted.  
Firstly, the advice of the CEP to the ATCM does not need to be "adopted" 
(by consensus).  The option for minority, dissenting views are provided 
for (Reference para 4vii of XXIII ATCM/WP2; CEP Rule 14 and Article 
11(5) of the Protocol apply). 
 
Secondly, it would be too prescriptive to determine the nature of the 
report to be produced by the informal open-ended contact group 
(Reference para 5iii of XXIII ATCM/WP2).  The report should not cover 
the same ground outlined in the CEE, and need do no more than identify 
problem areas and possible options to address them.  Nevertheless, each 
CEE should be taken on a case-by-case basis. 
 
 
 
Conclusions. 
 
It is important for the CEP to agree a mechanism as to how the Committee 
will process CEEs.  The above proposal aims to further develop the 
guidelines outlined in XXIII ATCM/WP2 and is offered to the Committee 
for consideration. 
44444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444444
4444444444
