 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Council of Managers of
National Antarctic Programs
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
ATCM XXIII 
Lima  Peru 
 
 
 
 
Working Paper  
Submitted by SCAR and COMNAP  
on the Monitoring of Environmental Impacts 
of Scientific Activities and Operations 
in Antarctica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
1. 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties have recognized for some time the need to monitor 
the impacts of human activities on the Antarctic environment.  The science programs conducted by 
several Parties have for many years monitored changes in the global environment linked to human 
activities outside the Antarctic e.g. ozone destruction, increasing carbon dioxide etc.  More recently 
ATCPs have become concerned about measuring the direct impacts on the Antarctic of activities on 
and around the continent within the Antarctic Treaty area, south of 60º South latitude. 
 
2. 
ATCM XV (1989) adopted Recommendation XV-5 which set out a series of activities that 
should be monitored (namely; waste disposal, contamination by hydrocarbons or toxic chemicals, 
construction and operation of logistic facilities, conduct of scientific programs, recreational 
activities).  In addition, it was recommended that a Group of Experts be convened to offer more 
specific advice on how monitoring should be implemented. 
 
3. 
The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was signed in October 
1991 and came into force on 14 January 1998.  It provides an organized framework for all 
environmental recommendations and specifically calls for regular and effective monitoring to allow 
assessment of the impacts of on-going activities in the Antarctic environment and associated 
ecosystems. The Protocol does not specify how such monitoring should be targeted or implemented. 
 
4. 
In 1991 XVI ATCM developed the discussion on monitoring using a working paper 
provided by SCAR and COMNAP, and provided the Terms of Reference for the First Meeting of 
Experts (Para 66 of the XVI ATCM Report).  This Meeting was convened in June 1992 in Buenos 
Aires and provided a report containing nine recommendations to XVII ATCM in November 1992.  
One of these recommendations was for a meeting of technical experts and at XVIII ATCM in April 
1994 SCAR and COMNAP offered to convene such a meeting. The consolidated report from the 
two workshops, entitled “Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and Operations in 
Antarctica”, was sent to all Antarctic Treaty Parties in November 1996. 
 
 
2
5. 
In XXI ATCM/WP20, SCAR and COMNAP presented the key conclusions from the 
workshops and outlined recommendations for future actions.  ATCM XXI welcomed the paper and 
endorsed the proposals as subjects for future action. 
 
6. 
The first meeting of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) held in Tromsø 
during May 1998, invited COMNAP to submit an updated paper on monitoring at the next CEP 
meeting.  This update is intended to create a foundation for further discussions on environmental 
monitoring at the second meeting of the CEP. 
 
 
 
STATUS OF WORK : JANUARY 1999  
 
 
 
7. 
The two SCAR/COMNAP monitoring workshops provided considerable clarification of 
how to structure monitoring programs, which key activities to monitor, some of the potential ways 
to make the monitoring measurements, how to handle the data and how to assess whether or not a 
monitoring project has been successful.  
 
8. 
In WP20 to ATCM XXI, SCAR and COMNAP proposed four recommendations for future 
action with respect to monitoring of impacts from science and operational activities in Antarctica.  
The four recommendations were endorsed by the Meeting as subjects to future action.  In the 
following is provided an update of the status for the four recommendations.  This status report on 
the SCAR/COMNAP Recommendations should provide a platform for further discussion regarding 
monitoring impacts of activity in Antarctica. 
 
 
 
Recommendation 1:  
A technical handbook of standardised monitoring techniques to be 
prepared by COMNAP, with advice from SCAR, based on the parameters 
and key indicators identified in the workshop report. 
 
9. 
The COMNAP Executive Committee (EXCOM) and Environmental Coordinating Group 
(ECG) identified the development of the handbook as a monitoring priority.  Terms of reference for 
the work were agreed upon in May 1998.  The main objective of the work is to prepare a technical 
handbook of standardized monitoring methodologies for a common set of indicators. These will be 
available for use by national Antarctic programs and other Antarctic operators for monitoring the 
impact of science and operations activities in Antarctica in order to comply with the Protocol's 
requirements for monitoring.  The priority of the first edition of the handbook will be 
methodologies for monitoring the impacts of stations in Antarctica. 
 
10. 
A Project Team with representatives from COMNAP and SCAR has been established and 
is responsible for coordinating the work.  The Project Team developed a list of key priority 
indicators for inclusion in the Handbook (see Attachment), and in November 1998 the Project Team 
invited organizations to send in proposals for the preparation of a draft Handbook based on the 
given Terms of Reference.  A contractor is to be selected at the beginning of February 1999. 
 
11. 
A Workshop on Environmental Monitoring is planned to be held in conjunction with the 
COMNAP XI Meeting at Goa, India in September 1999.  The Workshop will discuss the first draft 
of the Environmental Monitoring Handbook and provide an opportunity for presentation of 
techniques presented in the Handbook. National operators will have the opportunity of providing 
input to the discussions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Recommendation 2:  
A review of existing data and of key research issues to be undertaken 
through SCAR 
 
12. 
The topic of existing research data and activity and research requirements with respect to 
monitoring was on the agenda of SCAR’s Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and 
Conservation (GOSEAC) at their meeting in Switzerland in September 1998.  GOSEAC welcomed 
the document containing the summary of monitoring projects in Antarctica developed by COMNAP 
(tabled as Information Paper 54 at ATCM XXII).  GOSEAC identified this as a major step forward 
in identifying both existing monitoring projects and published sources of data.  GOSEAC 
emphasized that the initiative should be further developed and made generally available.  Several 
other SCAR groups had important contributions to make in this field.  It was suggested, inter alia, 
that an updated version of this information should be available on the Web providing access to the 
necessary metadata entries where these existed.  Many important data sets did not yet have metadata 
entries on the Antarctic Master Data Directory.   
 
13. 
Regarding further research, GOSEAC reached the following conclusions: 
 
• With respect to physiological and biochemical monitoring:   
Future research should be directed towards the establishment of baselines and the detection of 
early biological changes at low levels of pollutants.  Methodologies developed for temperate 
regions had yet to be tested on Antarctic species. 
 
• With respect to biological monitoring methods:   
Several SCAR groups (EASIZ, the Group of Specialists on Seals and the Subcommittee on Bird 
Biology) have been requested to give an up-date of biological monitoring methodologies (cf. 
matrix in table 9.1 of the report from the two monitoring workshops) so as to incorporate new 
methodologies that have been developed since the conclusion of the workshops. 
 
• With respect to monitoring responses of birds and seals to disturbance:   
The literature is limited and contradictory on the effects of human disturbance in penguin 
colonies.  Questions of the timing of disturbance, the interaction with species specific behavior 
patterns and the significance of threshold effects on colonies possibly stressed by food 
limitations have yet to be examined.  There was some anecdotal evidence of habituation effects 
in rookeries close to scientific stations, but there was little hard data available.  Even less 
information is available about the effects of human disturbance on the six species of seals that 
occur in Antarctica. Questions were also raised about the significance of helicopter over-flights 
on bird colonies in the light of conflicting recommendations on minimum heights over penguin 
rookeries.  Discussions on some recent information from Australia suggested that the whole field 
of noise effects on birds and seals needs investigation.  It was concluded that at present state of 
knowledge that birds and seals are not adequate indicators for monitoring purposes as variability 
in the reactions to human presence is high. More data is also necessary on the natural fluctuation 
in the populations of birds and seals to ensure that human disturbance effects can be adequately 
distinguished from natural background variation. This would necessitate more long-term 
monitoring on a range of species.  
 
• With respect to monitoring of organic and inorganic pollutants:   
Firstly, there was agreement that there is a need to develop simple cost-effective techniques of 
initial screening which would enable managers/scientists to decide whether further high cost 
analyses are actually warranted.  Secondly, it was agreed that there is a need to continue the 
development of methods for continuous or near-continuous measurements.  Thirdly, the group 
agreed that there is a need to develop a better understanding of the linkages between levels of 
contaminants and the consequent biological effects. This was especially the case for heavy 
metals where there was data which showed that some species are tolerant of high naturally 
occurring concentrations. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 
Recommendation 3:   The process of data management to be developed through the 
SCAR/COMNAP Data Management Group to allow synthesis of data for 
comparative purposes. 
 
14. 
In May 1997 SCAR and COMNAP established the Antarctic Data Directory System 
(ADDS) based on an the recommendation of its ad hoc Planning Group on Antarctic Data 
Management. The ADDS consists of a network of National Antarctic Data Centres (NADC) 
responsible for collecting descriptions of Antarctic data sets and then submitting these to a central 
Antarctic Master Directory (AMD).  The AMD provides a single point of contact for information 
on Antarctic data sets and is itself a part of the International Directory Network.  In 1997 the Joint 
SCAR-COMNAP Committee on Antarctic Data Management (JCADM) was established, replacing 
the ad hoc group.  Members of JCADM are primarily NADC managers.  There is also a joint 
SCAR/COMNAP steering committee on Antarctic Data Management that is responsible for 
overseeing the continued development of the AMD. 
 
15. 
JCADM continues to emphasize the importance of data from monitoring programs being 
available and comparable.  This is reflected in the terms of reference of the Joint Committee, which 
states that it should interact with the COMNAP-ECG toward the goal of allowing synthesis of data 
for comparative purposes (a similar provision is found in the Terms of Reference for the ECG).  To 
this end JCADM needs to ensure that metadata on monitoring can readily be included in the AMD, 
and furthermore continue to motivate scientists/managers to create metadata records of monitoring 
data to be submitted to AMD as soon as is practicable after the monitoring data has been collected.   
 
16. 
Further effort is also necessary to ensure that the data sets themselves are comparative in 
form, so that comparison of monitoring data from various locations for management purposes may 
be simplified.  The issue of comparability of the data sets is an issue that is also relevant in relation 
to the “technical handbook of standardized monitoring techniques” under development, and a 
section covering the issue of comparability of data could possibly be included in the handbook. 
 
 
Recommendation 4:   Methods of coordination of environmental monitoring activities to be 
developed through COMNAP to avoid wasteful duplication and ensure 
effective use of resources. 
 
17. 
At ATCM XXII, COMNAP tabled the document “Summary of Environmental Monitoring 
Activities in Antarctica” as Information Paper 54. The document summarizes environmental 
monitoring activity recently carried out in Antarctica.  By doing this, it aims to demonstrate the 
existing level of Antarctic monitoring, to increase awareness of monitoring activities and to avoid 
duplication of information particularly at multiple-operator sites. The document provides an 
accessible reference (including contacts) for those planning monitoring programs in Antarctica.  
The aim is to provide a version of the report on the COMNAP WWW site and to develop a 
mechanism by which it can be updated regularly. 
 
18. 
The Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) is planning to arrange a workshop 
during the COMNAP meeting in Goa, India in September 1999.  Environmental monitoring, in 
particular the ways in which operators might develop programs for multiple-operator sites will be 
discussed at this workshop. 
 
19. 
CEP I asked Argentina to coordinate the work of an inter-sessional contact group to 
establish a set of guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAs). The COMNAP EIA 
Guidelines (1991/92) were to form the basis of this work.  Monitoring is a key part of the EIA 
process and is expected to be addressed in the context of EIA within the guidelines.  COMNAP, 
including members of AEON, have been taking an active part in this work. 
 
 
 
 
 
5
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
20. 
COMNAP and SCAR jointly recommend that the ATCM: 
 
• 
endorse the work being carried out by COMNAP and SCAR following the workshops and 
previous recommendations reported to the ATCM; 
 
• 
encourage COMNAP and SCAR to focus on ensuring comparability of environmental 
monitoring data so that evaluation of the data for management purposes may be simplified and 
thus useful for management decision making:  
 
• 
request COMNAP and SCAR provide CEP3/ATCMXXIV with an Information Paper on the 
status of their work on environmental monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
ATTACHMENT 
 
 
INDICATORS 
Environmental Impacts from Human Activities at Antarctic Stations 
 
 
Indicator 
 
Measured in 
 
 
Waste water 
(sewage/ 
grey water) 
Fresh or 
sea water 
Soil 
Marine 
sediments 
Snow 
Other 
1.  
Suspended solids (total and 
volatile) 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
2.  
BOD 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
3.  
COD 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
4.  
DO  
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
5.  
pH 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
6.  
Conductivity 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
7.  
Nutrients (N, P) 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
8.  
Temperature 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
9.  
Coliform bacteria 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
10.  
Grain size 
 
 
x 
x 
 
 
11.  
TOC  
 
 
x 
x 
 
 
12.  
TIC 
 
 
x 
x 
 
 
13.  
Trace Metals (Cu, Pb, Zn, 
Cd, Hg) 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
14.  
Total Petroleum 
Hydrocarbons (TPH) 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
15.  
PAH 
 
 
x 
x 
 
 
16.  
Particulates 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
17.  
Phytoplankton 
 
x 
 
 
 
 
18.  
Waste water 
production/emission 
(quantity/time) 
x 
 
 
 
 
 
19.  
Fuel consumption 
(quantity/type/time) 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
20.  
Waste incineration 
(quantity/type/time) 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
21.  
Hydrocarbon spills (record 
of spills, 
amount/type/location  and 
monitoring of spill area) 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
22.  
Station area (monitoring of 
coverage/use - e.g. 
photomonitoring) 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
Abbrevations 
BOD: Biological Oxygen Demand 
COD:  Chemical Oxygen Demand 
DO:  Dissolved Oxygen 
N:  Nitrate 
P:  Phosphate 
 
PAH:  Poly-Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
pH:  Hydrogen potential (acidity) 
TIC:  Total Inorganic Carbon 
TOC: Total Organic Carbon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
