 
 
Management Plan  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) No. 23 
SVARTHAMAREN 
 
 
 
 
1.  Description of values to be protected 
The Area was originally designated in Recommendation XIV-5 (1987, SSSI No. 23) 
after a proposal by Norway based on the following factors, which still give relevant 
grounds for designation:   
• the fact that the colony of Antarctic petrel (Thalassoica antarctica)  is 
the largest known inland seabird colony on the Antarctic continent 
• the fact that the colony constitutes a large proportion of the known world 
population of Antarctic petrel 
• the fact that the colony is an exceptional “natural research laboratory” 
providing for research on the Antarctic petrel, snow petrel (Pagodroma 
nivea) and south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki), and their 
adaptation to breeding in the inland/interior of Antarctica 
 
 
2.  Aim and objectives 
The aim of managing Svarthamaren is to: 
• avoid human induced changes to the population structure, composition 
and size of the seabird colonies present at the site 
• prevent unnecessary disturbance to the seabird colonies, as well as to the 
surrounding environment 
• allow for undisturbed research on the adaptations of the Antarctic petrel, 
snow petrel and south polar skua to the inland conditions in Antarctica 
(Primary Research ) 
• allow access for other scientific reasons where the investigations will not 
damage the objectives of the bird research 
 
The focus of the Primary Research in Svarthamaren SSSI is as follows: 
• Monitoring of the population size 
• Monitoring of the annual variation in hatching success and adult 
survival rates in the petrel colonies in order to estimate changes in the 
size and structure of the colony.   
• Experimental studies in order to increase the understanding of the 
mechanisms that regulate nesting success and survival rates, and the 
adaptation of the Antarctic petrel to the extreme environmental 
conditions in Antarctica.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Management activities 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
1
 
 
Management activities at Svarthamaren shall: 
• ensure that the seabird colonies are adequately monitored, preferably by 
non-invasive methods.   
• allow erection of signs/posters, border markers, etc. in connection to the 
site, and ensure that these are serviced and maintained in good condition 
• allow visits as necessary to assess whether the Area continues to serve 
the purposes for which it was designated and to ensure management and 
maintenance measures are adequate 
 
Any direct intervention management activity in the area must be subject to an 
environmental impact assessment before any decision to proceed is taken.   
 
 
4.  Period of Designation 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
 
5.  Maps and Illustrations 
Map A:  Dronning Maud Land (showing location of Map B).  Map specifications: 
Projection:  Lambert Conformal Conic; 
Standard parallels: SP1 70º S, SP2 73ºS 
Central Meridian: 5ºE 
Latitude of origin: 71º30’S 
Spheroid: WGS84 
 
Map B:  Svarthamaren and surroundings (showing location of Svarthamaren SSSI).  
Map specifications are the same as for Map A. 
 
Map C: Site of Special Scientific Interest No. 23, protected area topographic map.  
Map specifications are the same as for Map A. 
 
 
6.  Description of Area 
 
6 (i). Geographic co-ordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
The Svarthamaren SSSI is situated in Mühlig-Hoffmannfjella, Dronning Maud Land, 
stretching from approx. 71˚ 33’17” S, 5˚09’12” E the north-west to approx. 
71˚55’58”S, 5˚15’12” E in the south-east.  The distance from the ice front is about 
200 km.  The Area covers approximately 6.4 km2, and consists of the ice-free areas of 
the Svarthamaren nunatak, including the areas in the immediate vicinity of the ice-
free areas naturally belonging to the nunatak (i.e. rocks).  The Area is shown in Map 
B and C. 
 
The Norwegian field station Tor is located in the Svarthamaren nunatak at lat. 
71º53’S, long. 5º10’E.  The station, including a 10 meter buffer zone around the 
station buildings, is excluded from the Svarthamaren Site of Special Scientific 
Interest.  Access to the station is by the shortest route from the ice. 
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
2
 
 
The main rock types in the Area are coarse and medium grained charnockites with 
small amounts of xenoliths.  Included in the charnockitoids are banded gneisses, 
amphibolites and granites of the amphibolite facies mineralogy.  The slopes are 
covered by decomposed feldspathic sand.  The north-eastern side of the Svart-
hamaren nunatak is dominated by scree slopes (slope 31º-34º), extending 240 metres 
upwards from the base of the mountain at about 1600 metres above sea level. The 
major features of this area are two rock amphitheatres inhabited by breeding Antarctic 
petrels.  It is this area which makes up the core of the protected site. 
 
No continuos weather observations have been carried through in the Area, but 
prevalent air temperature has been observed to range between -5º and -15ºC in 
January, with somewhat lower minimum temperatures in February.  
 
The flora and vegetation at Svarthamaren are sparse compared with other areas in 
Mühlig-Hofmannfjella and Gjelsvikfjella to the west of the site.  The only plant 
species occurring in abundance, but peripherally to the most manured areas, is the 
foliose green alga, Prasiola crispa.  There are a few lichen species on glacier-borne 
erratics 1-2 km away from the bird  colonies:  Candelariella hallettensis (= C. 
antarctica), Rhizoplaca (= Lecanora) melanophthalma, Umbilicaria spp. and 
Xanthoria spp.  Areas covered with Prasiola are inhabited by collembola 
(Cryptopygus sverdrupi) and a rich fauna of mites (Eupodes anghardi, Tydeus erebus) 
protozoan, nematodes and rotifers.  A shallow pond measuring about 20 x 30 m, lying 
below the middle and largest bird sub-colony at Svarthamaren, is heavily polluted by 
petrel carcasses, and supports a strong growth of a yellowish-green unicellular algae, 
Chlamydomonas, sp.  No aquatic invertebrates have yet been recorded. 
 
The colonies of breeding seabirds are the most conspicuous biological element in the 
Area.  The north-eastern slopes of Svarthamaren are occupied by a densely populated 
colony of Antarctic petrels (Thalassoica antarctica) divided into three separate sub-
colonies.  The total number of breeding pairs is estimated to be approximately 
250,000 pairs.  In addition, 500-1000 pairs of snow petrels (Pagodroma nivea) and 
approx. 80 pairs of south polar skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) breed in the area.  
The two main colonies of Antarctic petrels are situated in the two rocky 
amphitheatres.  The main colonies of snow petrels are located in separate parts of the 
scree-slope that are characterised by larger rocks.  The south polar skuas nest on the 
narrow strip of flat, snow-free ground below the scree-slopes. 
 
The main concentrations of seabirds are indicated on Map C.  Readers should, 
however, be aware that birds are also found in other areas than these densely 
populated areas. 
 
 
6 (ii). Restricted zones within the Area 
None 
 
 
6 (iii). Location of structures within the Area 
There are no structures within the Area.   
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
3
 
 
The Norwegian field station Tor is located on the Svarthamaren nunatak, at 
71º53.4’S, 5º09.6’E.  The station, including a 10 meter buffer zone around the station 
buildings, is excluded from the Area.  Access to the station is by the shortest route 
from the ice. 
 
 
6 (iv). Location of other Protected Areas within close proximity 
None 
 
 
7.  Permit Conditions 
Permits may be issued only by appropriate national authorities as designated under 
Annex V, Article 7 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty.  Conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that: 
• the actions permitted are in accordance with this Management Plan 
• the permit, or a copy, shall be carried within the area 
• any permit issued shall be valid for a stated period 
• a visit report is supplied to the authority named in the permit 
 
 
7 (i) Access to and movement within the Area 
Access to the area is restricted by the following conditions: 
• No pedestrian routes are designated, but persons on foot shall at all times 
avoid disturbances to birds, and as far as possible also to the sparse 
vegetation cover in the Area. 
• Vehicles should not enter the site.   
• No flying of helicopters or other aircraft over the Area is allowed. 
• Helicopter landings are not allowed within the boundaries of the SSSI.  
Landings associated with activities at the field station Tor should 
preferably take place at the north-eastern tip of the Svarthamaren nunatak 
(as marked on map C). 
 
 
 7 (ii). Activities that are or may be conducted within the Area, including restrictions 
on time and place 
The following activities are or may be conducted within the Area in accordance with 
permit: 
• Primary biological research programs for which the area was designated. 
• Other research programs of a compelling scientific nature that will not 
interfere with the bird research in the Area. 
 
 
7 (iii)  Installation, modification or removal of structures 
No structures are to be erected in the Area, or scientific equipment installed, except 
for equipment essential for scientific or management activities as specified in the 
permit, or for modification of the field station, also as specified in permit. 
 
 
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
4
 
 
7 (iv)  Location of field camps 
No field camps should be established in the Area. The field station Tor should only be 
used with permission from the Norwegian Polar Institute.  
 
 
7 (v)  Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area 
• No living animals or plant material shall be deliberately introduced into 
the Area. 
• No poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried 
eggs, shall be taken into the Area. 
• No herbicides or pesticides shall be brought into the Area. 
• Any other chemicals (including fuel), which may be introduced for a 
compelling scientific purpose specified in the permit, shall be removed 
from the Area before or at the conclusion of the activity for which the 
permit was granted. 
• All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be 
removed at or before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be 
stored and handled so that risk of their introduction into the environment 
is minimised.   
 
 
7 (vi). Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna 
Taking or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited, except in 
accordance with a permit.  Where taking or harmful interference with animals is 
involved, SCAR Code of Conduct for Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes in 
Antarctica should be used as a minimum standard. 
 
It is recommended that those responsible for the primary research in the Area should 
be consulted before permit is granted for taking of birds for purposes not associated 
with the primary research.  Studies requiring taking of birds for other purposes 
should be planned and carried through in such a manner that it will interfere as little 
as possible with the objectives of the bird research in the Area.  
 
 
7 (vii). Collection and removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit 
holder 
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a 
permit, except that debris of man-made origin should be removed or pathological 
specimens of fauna may be removed for laboratory examination. 
 
 
7 (viii)  Disposal of waste 
All wastes is to be removed from the area. 
 
 
7 (ix)  Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan continue to be met 
Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities which may involve the collection of small amounts of plant 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
5
 
 
material or small numbers of animals for analysis or audit, to erect or maintain notice 
boards, to maintain the field station, or to initiate protective measures. 
 
 
7 (x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each permit issued submit to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports 
should include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form 
suggested by SCAR.  Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the 
Annual Exchange of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities 
conducted by persons subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail 
to allow evaluation of the effectiveness of the Management Plan.  Parties should, 
wherever possible, deposit originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly 
accessible archive to maintain a record of usage, to be used both in any review of the 
management plan and in organising the scientific use of the Area.   
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
6
 
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
7
 
 
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
8
 
 
Management Plan SSSI No. 23 
 
 
 
 
9
