BACKGROUND 
 
At the XIV ATCM (Rio de Janeiro, 1987) Parties agreed on Recommendation XIV-2, which provided 
ATCPs with a set of basic procedures with which to undertake Environmental Impact Assessments 
(ElAs) in Antarctica. This Recommendation formed the basis for the EIA obligations and procedures of 
Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (Madrid Protocol). 
 
The Protocol, through Articles 3, 8 and specifically Annex 1, requires prior Environmental Impact 
Assessment of all activities proposed in the Antarctic Treaty Area. In parallel, CoMNAP's 1991 Bologna 
workshop on "Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica" provided managers with a set of 
guidelines for the implementation of the EIA procedures. 
 
After the adoption of the Madrid Protocol (october 1991), the CoMNAP guidelines were updated to meet 
the requirements of Annex 1. Since then, experience gained by ATCPs through carrying out numerous of 
ElAs, led to the necessity of providing more clear and accurate concepts to such guidelines, 
incorporating previous knowledge from Bologna's work and from other relevant meetings and technical 
workshops convened by SCAR, CoMNAP and IUCN. 
 
At the First Meeting of the Committee of Environmental Protection (CEP), held in Troms0 (Norway), May 
1998, after presentation of the Working Paper Nr. 14 by Argentina, the Committee supported the 
proposal to establish a set of guidelines and decided that: 
 
a,,, an open-ended intersessional contact group should be established which would prepare a dran guide 
on EM procedures to be presented at the next meeting of the CEP for further consideration. Such a guide 
should be very useful both to Parties with considerable experience in EIA procedures, and to those with 
little experience in such work.. The CoMNAP EM Guidelines will form the basis for this work. The issue of 
cumulative environmental impacts considered by the 1996 IUCN Workshop will also be considered." 
 
During the intersessional period several contact points designated by Consultative Parties and observers 
have participated in preparing a set of guidelines, in order to comply with CEP's statement. Argentina 
was responsible for co-ordinating this openended group. Representatives from Australia, Finland, 
Germany, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Romania, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, 
SCAR (Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research), through its Group of Specialists on Environmental 
Affairs and Conservation (GoSEAC), ASoC (Antarctic and Southern ocean Coalition), and IUCN (World 
Conservation Union) contributed to prepare this draft. 
 
The contact group has also drawn on the following reports: 
 
CoMNAP Practical Guidelines on Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process; 
 
IUCN Workshop Report on Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica; 
 
SCAR/CoMNAP Workshop Report on Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and operations 
in Antarctica; 
Guidelines for Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA) in the Arctic; various national guidelines on EIA 
in Antarctica . 
 
This draft guide on EIA procedures in Antarctica is provided to the Committee for Environmental 
Protection for further consideration. 
GUIDELINES FoR 
ENVlRoNMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
IN ANTARCTICA 
Contents 
 
BACKGRoUND .......................................................................................................
 
1. 
 
INTRoDUCTIoN............................................................................................ 
2. 
 
oBJECTIVES ............................................................................................. 
3. 
 
THE EIA PRoCESS ........................................................................................ 
 
3.1. 
   Considering the activity............................................................................. 
 3.1.1. 
 Defining the activity ..................................................................................
 3.1.2. 
 Alternatives to the activity ...........................................................................
 3.1.3. 
 Identification of outputs of the activity .............................................................. 
3.2. 
Considering the environment.............................................................................. 
3.3. 
Analysis of Impacts..................................................................................... 
 3.3.1. 
 Identification of exposures ...........................................................................
 3.3.2. 
 Impact identification .................................................................................
 3.3.3. 
 Impact Evaluation......................................................................................
3.4. 
Comparison of impacts................................................................................... 
3.5. 
Proposal for corrective measures........................................................................ 
3.6. 
Proposal for Monitoring Programs........................................................................ 
4. 
 
WRITING THE EIA DoCUMENT ..............................................................................
 
 
Description of the Purpose and Need for the Proposed Activity.......................................... 
Description of the proposed activity and possible alternatives and the consequences of those alternatives16 
 
 
Alternative of not proceeding wHh the activity ........................................................ 
 
 
Description of the initial environmental reference state and prediction of the environmental state in 
 
 
absence of the activity................................................................................
 
 
Description of methods and data used to forecast the impacts .......................................... 
Estimation of nature, extent, duration and intensity of impacts (including consideration of possible indirect 
 
 
and cumulative impacts)................................................................................
 
 
Monitoring programs ...................................................................................
 
 
Mitigation and remediation measures ................................................................... 
 
 
Identification of unavoidable impacts ................................................................. 
 
 
Effects of the activity on scientific research and other uses or values................................ 
 
 
Identification of gaps in the knowledge ............................................................... 
 
 
Preparers and Advisors.................................................................................
 
 
References.............................................................................................
 
 
Index .................................................................................................
 
 
Glossary ..............................................................................................
 
 
Cover Sheet ...........................................................................................
 
 
Non-Technical Summary.................................................................................. 
5. 
 
ANNEX I REQUIREMENTS FoR ClRCUL~TIoN ..................................................................
 
5.1. 
   Public circulation of an EM......................................................................... 
 
5.2. 
   F~eceipt and incorporation of comments .............................................................
6. 
 
DEFINITIoN oF TERMS IN THE EIA PRoCESS ................................................................
7. 
 
REFERENCES............................................................................................. 
8. 
 
ACRoNYMS............................................................................................... 
l.lntroduction 
 
The Madrid Protocol, in Article 3, establishes a number of environmental principles which can be 
considered a guide to environmental protection in Antarctica and its dependent and associated 
ecosystems. Among such principles, those stated under paragraph C express the necessity of collecting 
sufficient information "to allow prior assessments of, and informed judgements about, their possible 
impacts on the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems and on the value of 
Antarctica for the conduct of scientific research". In addition, it states that "such judgements shall take 
account of: 
 
i) the scope of the activity, including its area, duration and intensity; 
 
ii) the cumulative impacts of the activity, both by itself and in combination with other activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area; 
 
iii) whether the activity will detrimentally affect any other activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area; 
 
iv) whether technology and procedures are available to provide for environmentally safe operations; 
 
v) whether there exists the capacity to monitor key environmental parameters and ecosystem 
components so as to identify and provide early warning of any adverse effects of the activity and to 
provide for such modification of operating procedures as may be necessary in the light of the results of 
monitoring or increased knowledge of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems; and 
 
vi) whether there exists the capacity to respond promptly and effectively to accidents, particularly those 
with potential environmental effects" 
 
Article 8 of the Protocol introduces the term Environmental ImpactAssessment and provides three 
categories of environmental impacts (less than, equal to and more than minor or transitory), according to 
their significance. The Article also requires that assessment of planned activities to be undertaken in 
Antarctica, subject to the procedures set out in Annex 1. 
 
Annex I of the Protocol provides a more comprehensive explanation of the different impact categories 
and establishes a set of basic principles to conduct an EIA for planned activities in Antarctica. 
 
In addition, it sets up a preliminary stage for assessing the environmental impact of Antarctic activities, 
which is intended to determine if an impact produced by a certain activity is less than minor or transitory 
or not. Such determination must be accomplished through the appropriate national procedures. 
According to the results of the preliminary stage, the activity can either: 
 
proceed (if the predicted impacts of the activity are likely to be less than minor or transitory), or 
 
be preceded by a an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE), if predicted impacts are likely to be minor or 
transitory; or 
be preceded by a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE), if the predicted impacts are to be 
more than minor or transitory. 
 
Although the key to decide whether an activity shall be preceded by an IEE or a CEE is the concept of 
aminor or transitory impact", no agreement on this term has so far been reached (contributions to this 
subject can be found in XX ATCM/IP 2, New Zealand; XXI ATCM/\NP 35, New Zealand; XXI ATCM/IP 
55, Argentina, XXII ATCM/IP 66, Russia and X)~ll ATCM/WP 19, Australia, among others). The difficulty 
with defining "minor and transitory impactn thus far appear to be due to the dependence of a number of 
variables associated with each activity and each environmental context. Therefore the interpretation of 
this term will need to be made on a case by case site specific basis. As a consequence, this document 
does not focus on seeking a clear definition of "minor or transitory impactn, but rather is an attempt to 
provide basic elements for the development of the EIA process. 
 
Article 8 and Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty set out the 
requirements for Environmental Impact Assessments (ElAs) for proposed activities in Antarctica. These 
Guidelines to EIA in Antarctica do not amend, modify or interpret the requirements set out in Article 8 and 
Annex I of the Environmental Protocol, or the requirements of national legislation which may include 
procedures and guidelines for the preparation of ElAs in Antarctica. These Guidelines have been 
produced to assist those preparing ElAs for proposed activities in Antarctica. 
 
2.objectives 
 
The general objective of these guidelines is to achieve transparency and effectiveness in assessing 
environmental impacts during the planning stages of possible activities in Antarctica, as well as 
consistency of approach in fulfilling the obligations of the Protocol. Specifically, the guidelines aim to 
 
assist proponents of activities who may have little experience of EIA in Antarctica; 
 
assist in determining the proper level of EIA document (according to the Protocol) to be prepared; 
facilitate co-operation and co-ordination in EIA for joint activities; 
 
facilitate comparison of ElAs for similar activities and/or environmental conditions; provide advice to 
operators other than ATCPs; assist in the retrospective analysis of cumulative impacts for specific sites; 
initiate a process of continuous improvement of EIA. 
3.The EIA Process 
 
The EIA is a process having the ultimate objective of providing decision makers with an indication of the 
likely environmental consequences of a proposed activity ffigure 1 ). 
 
The process of predicting the environmental impacts of an activity and assessing their significance is the 
same regardless of the apparent magnitude of the activity. Some activities require no more than a 
cursory examination to determine impacts, although it must be remembered that the level of assessment 
is relative to the significance of the environmental impacts, not to the scale or complexity of the activity. 
Thus, the picture that emerges with respect to the impacts of the activity will determine how much further 
the EIA process needs to be taken, and how complex it should be. 
Those persons responsible for an Environmental Impact Assessment Process need to ensure that they 
consult as widely as is reasonably necessary and possible in order that the best available information 
and professional advice contribute to the outcome. A number of different participants may be involved 
throughout this process, ranging from those who are involved in the details of nearly all parts of the 
process (e.g. environmental officer, proponent of the activity) to those who are the technical experts who 
provide input in particular subjects of the process (e.g. researchers, logistic personnel, others with 
experience at the location or in a particular activity). In addition, ElAs undertaken in Antarctica for 
planned activities may represent a valuable source of information. At this respect, it should be pointed 
out that an updated list of ElAs is presented every ATCM, according to Resolution XIX-6. The Antarctic 
Data Directory System (ADDS) can also represent an helpful source of metadata. 
 
3.1.Considering the activity 
 
3.1.1.Defining the activity 
 
An activity is an event or process resulting from (or associated with) the presence of humans in the 
Antarctic, and/or which may lead to the presence of humans in Antarctica. An activity may consist of 
several actions, e.g. an ice drilling activity may require actions such as the transport of equipment, 
establishment of a field camp, power generation for drilling, fuel management, drilling operation, waste 
management, etc. An activity should be analysed by considering all phases involved (e.g. construction, 
operation and potential dismantling or decommissioning phases). 
 
The activity and the individual actions should be defined through a planning process which considers the 
physical, technical and economic aspects of the proposed project and its alternatives. Consultation with 
relevant experts to identify all these aspects is an important part of this initial scoping process. It is 
important to accurately define all aspects of the activity which could have environmental impacts. The 
rest of the EIA process relies on this initial description, which should occur during the planning process. 
The following aspects of the proposed activity and its alternatives should be clearly identified: the 
purpose of and the need for the activity; 
 
the principal characteristics of the activity that might cause impact on the environment; for instance: 
design characteristics; construction requirements (types of material, technologies, energy, size of any 
installation, personnel, temporary constructions, etc.); transportation requirements (e.g. types, numbers 
and frequency of use of vehicles, fuel types); type (according to Annex lll of the Protocol) and volume of 
wastes generated through different phases of the activity and their final disposition; dismantling of 
temporary constructions; decommissioning the activity if necessary; as well as those aspects that will 
result from the operational phase of the activity. 
 
the relationship of the proposed activity to relevant previous or current activities; 
 
a description of the activity's location and geographical area, indicating access roads, etc. Using maps 
will ease the evaluation process and, therefore, will be useful in the EIA documentation. 
timing of the activity (including range of calendar dates for construction time, as well as overall duration, 
periods of operation of the activity and decommissioning. This may be significant with respect to wildlife 
breeding cycles, for example.); 
 
Iocation of the activity with regard to areas with special management requirements (SPA, SSSI, HSM, 
CCAMLR CEMP sites, already proposed ASPAs and/or ASMAs, etc.). 
 
precautionary measures that are integral to the project including during the construction, operational and 
decommissioning phases. 
 
Careful consideration is required to determine the full scope of the activity so that the impacts can be 
properly assessed. This is necessary to avoid preparing a number of separate ElAs on actions which 
indicate an apparent low impact, when in fact, taken in its entirety, the activity actually has potential for 
impacts of much greater significance. This particularly common where a number of activities take place 
at the same site either spatially and/or temporally. 
 
When defining an Antarctic activity, experience gained in similar projects undertaken within and outside 
the Antarctic Treaty System Area (e.g. the Arctic) may be an additional and valuable source of 
information. 
 
once the activity is defined, any subsequent changes to the activity must be clearly identified and 
addressed according to when they occur in the EIA process (e.g. if the change occurs once the EIA 
document is completed, then an amendment to the EIA or a rewrite of the document may be necessary 
depending on how significant the change is). In every case it is important that the change and its 
implications (in terms of impacts) is assessed in the same manner as other impacts previously identified 
in the EIA process. 
 
3.1.2.Alternatives to the activity 
 
Both the proposed activity and possible alternatives should be examined in concert so that a decision 
maker can more easily compare the potential impacts. Both the environmental and scientific 
consequences should be considered during the evaluation. Examples of alternatives for consideration 
include: use of different locations or sites for the activity, 
 
use of different technologies, in order to reduce the outputs (or the intensity of the outputs) of the activity. 
use of pre-existing facilities, and different timing for the activity. 
 
The alternative of not proceeding with the proposed activity (i.e. the "no-action" alternative) should 
always be included in any analysis of environmental impacts of the proposed activity. 
3.1.3.1dentification of outputs of the activity 
 
An output is a physical change (e.g. movement of sediments by vehicle passage, noise) or an entity (e.g. 
emissions, an introduced species) imposed on or released to the environment as the result of an action 
or an activity. outputs can also be defined as by-products of the activity (or action) and can include 
emissions, dust, mechanical action on substrate, fuel spills, noise, light, electromagnetic radiation, 
wastes, heat, introductions of alien species, etc. 
 
Note that a single action may generate several different outputs (for example the use of vehicles may 
cause soil compaction, emissions, noise, visual interference etc.) and that the same type of output may 
be generated by different actions of a single activity, (for example in an ice drilling activity emissions may 
come from the use of vehicles, drilling operations, power generation, etc.). 
 
output levels may play a relevant role especially if several activities take place at the same time. 
Therefore, potential for additive, synergistic or antagonistic interactions between outputs (thus resulting in 
possible significant environmental impacts) has to be considered. 
 
Systematising outputs and actions in a matrix format may be helpful in this process. The example below, 
taken from "Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and operations in 
Antarctica"(SCAR/CoMNAP, 1996J, illustrates a potential situation (e.g. actions and outputs associated 
with a station complex). 
 
oUTPUTS 
ACTIONS Air emissions Wastes Noise Fuel Mechanical Heat 
 
(incl. Dust) 
 
spills 
action 
Vehicles 
    X 
X 
Power 
generation 
 
 
X 
_ 
 
Fuei 
    X 
 
X 
X 
storage 
 
outputs may vary across different alternatives. That is there may not be a single set of outputs, but rather 
multiple sets if the alternatives are significantly different from one another. 
 
The geographical spread of an output has to be accurately estimated in order to determine to what extent 
the environment is exposed. 
 
3.2. Considering the environment 
 
Consideration of the environment requires the characterisation of all relevant physical, biological, 
chemical and anthropic elements or values in a given area, where and when an activity is proposed. 
Relevant means all those aspects of the environment that the proposed activity might influence or which 
might influence the activity. 
Such information should be quantitative (e.g., heavy metal concentration on organisms or on river flows, 
a bird population size) where available and appropriate. In many cases qualitative descriptions (e.g., 
aesthetic value of a landscape) may have to be used. Maps, publications, research results and 
researchers are different sources of information to be identified and taken into account. Consideration of 
the existing environment should include: 
 
recognition of the special status accorded to Antarctica by the ATS, including its status as a natural 
reserve devoted to peace and science 
 
the physical and biological features that could be affected directly or indirectly, including: 
 
the physical characteristics (topography, bathymetry, geology, geomorphology, soils, hydrology, 
meteorology, glaciology etc.) 
 
the biota (e.g. inventories of plant and animal species, populations and communities, and other important 
features such as the presence of breeding grounds.) and 
 
any dependent and related populations (e.g. bird nesting areas related to feeding areas); 
 
natural variations in environmental conditions that could occur on a diurnal, seasonal, annual and/or 
interannual timescale; 
 
information about the spatial and temporal variability of the environmental sensitivity (e.g. differences in 
impacts when an area is snow covered compared to when it is not); 
 
current trends in natural processes such as population growth or spread of particular species, geological 
or hydrological phenomena; the reliability of the data (e.g. anecdotal, historical, scientific, etc.); 
 
aspects of the environment which have been changed, or may be changing as the result of other current 
or previous activities; special values of the area (if previously identified); the existence of areas potentially 
subject to indirect and cumulative impacts; 
 
the influence that the activity may exert on dependent and associated ecosystems; 
 
existing activities being carried out in the area or at the site, particularly scientific activities, given their 
intrinsic importance as a value to be protected in Antarctica 
 
specific parameters against which predicted changes are to be monitored, including: 
 
A thorough consideration of the environment before starting the activity (baseline information) is essential 
to ensure a valid prediction of impacts and to define 
monitoring parameters, if required. If such a baseline information is not available, field research may be 
necessary to obtain reliable data about the state of the environment before beginning the activity. 
 
It is also important to clearly identify gaps in knowledge and uncertainties encountered in compiling the 
information. 
 
3.3.Analysis of Impacts 
 
3.3.1.1dentification of exposures 
 
Exposure is the process of interaction between an identified potential output and an environmental 
element or value. Identifying exposure means determining which component of the environment is 
susceptible to be affected by the outputs of an activity or action. overlaying spatial information (e.g. use 
of a GIS) is a valuable tool to assist in this determination 
 
Determination of exposures may be summarised using a matrix of outputs and environmental elements 
or values, taking into account that matrices can only give information about the existence of exposures 
but not on their intensity . 
 
The table below provides an example of the interaction of various outputs with environmental elements to 
identify relevant exposures resulting from the activity. 
 
ENVlRoNMENTAL ELEMENTS oR VALUES 
    oUTPUTS 
Flora Fauna 
Freshwater / 
Soil 
Air 
 
 
_ 
Seawater 
Ernissions 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
Fuel spills 
W~ 
Introduced species 
X 
X 
 
When the box is crossed Q() it means that the environmental element is exposed to the considered 
output. This is a random example for a given environment and may, therefore, vary in another context. 
For example, a noise may occur when a breeding site is unoccupied, or a breeding site may be protected 
from noise by a topographic feature. From the examples above it can be inferred that the occurrence of 
an output does not necessarily lead to exposure of environmental element or value and hence potential 
for environmental effects. 
 
Correct identification of the intensity of exposure is a crucial step in making a reliable prediction of 
impacts. Some elements contributing to that identification are: 
 
Temporal variation. The exposure of an environmental element or value may change with the season in 
which the activity takes place, as climate cycles, breeding patterns, etc. may change over time. 
 
Cause-effect relationships between outputs and environmental elements or values must be determined, 
especially in cases where the relationships are indirect, or an element or value is exposed to outputs 
from numerous sources, or repeatedly from the same source. 
3.3.2.1mpact identification 
 
An impact ( Synonym: effect ) is a change in the values or resources attributable to a human activity. It 
is the consequence (e.g. reduced plant cover) of an agent of change, not the agent itself (e.g. increase of 
trampling). Impact may also be defined as the result of the interaction between an output and an 
environmental value or resource. 
 
The identification of environmental impacts consists of the characterisation of all changes in 
environmental elements or values exposed to the outputs of a given set of activities. The identification 
task requires that evaluators are able to determine the important cause-effect relationships between the 
activities and the environmental elements or values. only when the impact is identified can an evaluation 
be made of its significance. 
 
An impact may be identified by its nature, spatial extent, intensity, duration, reversibility and lag time. 
 
Nature: type of change imposed on the environment due to the activity (e.g. contamination, erosion, 
mortality). 
 
Spatial extent: area or volume where changes are likely to be detectable. 
 
Intenslty: a measure of the amount of change imposed on the environment due to the activity.(it can be 
measured, or estimated, through, e.g. number of species or individuals effected, concentration of a given 
pollutant in a waterbody, rates of erosion, rates of mortality, etc.) 
 
Duration: period of time during which changes in the environment are likely to occur. 
 
Reversibility: possibility of the system to retum to its initial environmental conditions once an impact is 
produced. 
 
Lag time: time span between the moment outputs are released to or imposed on the environment and 
the moment impacts occur. 
 
In addition, a proper impact identification should also enable a distinction between direct, indirect and 
cumulative impacts. 
 
A direct impact is a change in environmental components that results from direct cause-effect 
consequences of interaction between the exposed environment and outputs (e.g. decrease of a limpet 
population due to an oil spill). An indirect impact is a change in environmental components that results 
from interactions between the environment and other impacts -direct or indirect- (e.g. alteration in seagull 
population due to a decrease in limpet population which, in turn, was caused by an oil spill). 
 
A cumulative impact is the combined impact of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable activities. 
These activities may occur over time and space and can be additive or interactive/synergistic (e.g. 
decrease of limpet population due to the combined effect of oil discharges by base and ship operations). 
Cumulative impacts can often be one of the hardest impact categories to adequately identify in the EIA 
process. When attempting to identify cumulative impacts it is important to consider both spatial and 
temporal aspects and to identify other activities which have and could occur at the same site or within the 
same area. 
Several methods exist to identify impacts such as: overlay maps, checklists, matrices, etc. The choice of 
the methodology will depend on the character of the activity and the environment that is likely to be 
affected. 
 
3.3.3.1mpact Evaluation 
 
The purpose of impact evaluation is to assign relative significance to predicted impacts associated with 
an activity (and the various identified alternatives). 
 
Significance: It is a value judgement about the severity and importance of a change in a given 
environment or environmental value. 
 
According to the Madrid Protocol, impacts shall be evaluated by taking into account three levels of 
significance: Iess than minor or transitory impact; minor or transitory impact; or more than minor or 
transitory impact. 
 
The interpretation of these terms should be made on a case by case site specific basis. However it may 
be useful to consider how similar impacts have been judged in earlier ElAs at similar sites and/or for 
similar types of activities. 
 
An inherent consideration to judging significance is that it may have a rather subjective component and 
this fact should be acknowledged. Where an impact has the possibility of being significant, several 
experts should be consulted to achieve a view as objective as possible.. This is particularly important 
either if there is a reliance on incomplete data or if there are gaps in the knowledge. 
 
Judging significance should not be based solely on direct impacts, but must also take account of possible 
indirect and cumulative impacts. 
 
The significance of the unavoidable impacts (those impacts for which no further mitigation is possible) 
represents an important consideration for the decision maker in deciding whether, on balance, an activity 
is justified. 
 
Some problems can arise when evaluating impacts, due to misunderstanding or overlooking some 
aspects of the process of evaluating impacts. These can include for example: confusing duration of the 
impact with duration of the activity; confusing outputs of activities with impacts; 
 
Iimiting the analysis to direct impacts, without consideration of indirect and cumulative impacts. 
 
3.4. Comparison of impacts 
 
When the project has been assessed with respect to environmental impacts it is necessary to summarise 
and aggregate the significant impacts for the various alternatives in a form suitable for communication to 
the decision makers. From such an aggregation of information a comparison among alternatives can be 
easily made. 
3.5.Proposal for correcVve measures 
 
Corrective measures are composed of all steps conducted to decrease, avoid, or eliminate any of the 
components of an impact. It can be considered a process of feedback, and should occur throughout the 
EIA process, not simply as a final step. Corrective measures include mitigation and remediation actions. 
 
Mitigation is the use of practice, procedure or technology to minimise or to prevent impacts associated 
with proposed activities. The modification of any aspect of the activity (and hence the consideration of 
outputs and the environmental exposure) as well as the establishment of supervision procedures 
represent effective ways of mitigation. 
 
Mitigation measures will vary according to the activity and the characteristics of the environment, and 
may include: 
 
developing on site control procedures (e.g. recommended methods for waste disposal) 
 
establishing the best time for the activity (e.g. to avoid the breeding season of penguins) 
 
providing environmental education and training to personnel, or contractors, involved in the activity. 
 
ensuring adequate on site supervision of the activity by senior project staff or environmental specialists. 
 
Remediation consists of the steps taken after impacts have occurred to promote, as much as possible, 
the return of the environment to its original condition. 
 
The final version of the activity to be assessed must incorporate all corrective measures, including those 
associated with mitigation and remediation actions. Impact avoidance, as a form of mitigation, may 
contribute to minimising monitoring, reducing remediation costs and generally contribute also to 
maintaining the existing state of the environment. 
 
When considering mitigation and remediation measures, the following issues should be addressed: 
making a clear distinction between mitigation and remediation measures; 
 
clearly defining the state of the environment that is being aimed for through such measures; 
 
considering that new, unforeseen impacts may appear as a result of inadequate implementation of 
proposed mitigation measures; 
 
noting that the environment may not always be capable of returning to its original condition, even when 
remediation actions are implemented; 
 
considering that a given corrective measure may interact antagonistically or synergically with other 
corrective measures. 
3.6. Proposal for Monitoring Programs 
 
Monitoring consists of standardised measurements or observations of key parameters (outputs and 
environmental variables) over time, their statistical evaluation and reporting on the state of the 
environment in order to define quality and trends. For the EIA process, monitoring should be oriented 
towards confirming the accuracy of predictions about environmental impacts of the activity, and to detect 
unforeseen impacts or impacts more significant than expected. Given this, it may be useful to set 
environmental thresholds or standards for an activity that monitoring results are assessed against. If 
these thresholds are exceeded, then a review or reanalysis would be required of assumptions made 
regarding the environmental impacts or of management systems related to the activity. 
 
Monitoring may also include any other procedures that can be used to assess and verify the predicted 
impacts of the activity. Where measurement of specific parameters is not necessary or appropriate, 
assessment and verification procedures could include maintaining a log of the activity that actually 
occurred, and of changes in the nature of the activity where they were significantly different from those 
described in the EIA. This information can be useful for further minimising or mitigating impacts, and, 
where appropriate, for modifying, suspending or even cancelling all or part of the activity. 
 
Monitoring is not about the measurement of everything in a haphazard approach to detect change but 
about precise measurement of a few target species, processes, or other indicators, carefully selected on 
the basis of scientifically sound predetermined criteria. 
 
The process of selecting key indicators should be accomplished during the activity's planning stage, once 
outputs have been identified, the environment has been considered and associated impacts have been 
assessed, while monitoring environmental parameters generally should start before the commencement 
of the activity if adequate baseline information is not available. 
 
Planning or undertaking monitoring activities may be hindered by a number of situations: Ieaving the 
planning of monitoring programs until the activity is in progress; 
 
monitoring activities can be costly, especially for multi-year projects and activities; 
 
some assumptions about the environmental impacts of an activity cannot be tested; failure to follow 
through with monitoring; 
 
failure to distinguish between natural and human-induced variability in environmental parameters; 
 
4. Writing the EIA Document 
 
The outcome of an EIA is a formal document, which presents all the relevant information about the 
EIA process. The EIA document represents a fundamental link between the EIA process and decision 
makers seeing that conclusions stemming 
from the EIA process will assist decision makers to consider the environmental aspects of the proposed 
activity. 
 
Four bodies of information arise from an EIA process: methodology, data, results and conclusions 
derived from them. Since results and conclusions are of particular interest for decision makers, these 
chapters should be written in an accessible language, avoiding very technical terms. The use of graphical 
information, such as maps, tables and graphs, is an effective way of improving communication. 
 
The size and level of detail in the document will depend on the significance of the environmental impacts 
that have been identified throughout the EIA process. Thus, Annex I to the Protocol establishes two 
formats to document it: Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) and Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation (CEE), for which the Protocol requires the presentation of different volumes of information 
(Annex 1, 
Articles 2 and 3). 
 
Unless it has been determined that an activity will have less than a minor or transitory impact or it has 
already been determined that a Comprehensive Environmental 
Evaluation is needed, an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) shall be prepared. If the EIA process 
indicates that a proposed activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact a 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation must be prepared. 
According to Annex I requirements a draft CEE shall be prepared first, which shall be circulated to all 
Parties as well as to CEP for comments. once comments and 
suggestions have been incorporated, a final CEE is circulated to all Parties. 
 
The following table summarises the steps to be considered throughout the EIA process (which are 
explained in Section 3 of the present guidelines). It also lists the requirements stemming from Annex I 
that should be included in an EIA document. In the case of IEE, some of the marked items are not 
specifically mentioned in Annex 1, Article 2. However, their inclusion in the IEE document is often useful 
to communicate the results of the process in a transparent manner. These items were distinguished in 
the table with an X. 
 
L 
EIA Contents and Annex I Requirements
 
IEE
 
CEE 
Description of the purpose and need of the activity 
~ 
 
.~ 
|| 
Description of the proposed activity and possible alternatives and the 
.~ 
 . 
consequences of those alternatives 
Alternative of not proceeding with the activity 
 
 
.~ 
|| 
Description of the initial environmental reference state and prediction of 
 
 
.~ 
|| 
the environmental state in absence of the activity 
Description of methods and data used to forecast the impacts 
~ nullon ol na:re, extent, duration and intensity of direct impacts 
 
 
.f 
|| 
Consideration of cumulative impacts 
 
 
.~ 
1l 
Consideration of possible indirect impacts 
X 
 
~ 
|| 
Monitoring programs 
 
 . 
Mitigation and remediation measures 
Identification of unavoidable impacts 
 
 . 
Effects of the activity on scientific research and other uses or values 
Identification of gaps in the knowledge 
X 
Preparers and advisors 
X 
 . 
References 
X 
 
X 
Non-technical summary 
X 
 . 
In~e~ 
X 
 
X 
Glossary 
            . 
I Cover sheet                                               | X || 
 
~ required by Annex I 
 
X often useful 
 
The following text focuses briefly on how the items listed above should be referred to in the text of any 
EIA. Further technical information is already described in previous chapters. 
 
Description of the Purpose and Need for the Proposed Activity 
 
This section should include a brief description of the proposed activity and an explanation of the intent of 
the activity. It should include sufficient detail to make it clear why the activity is being proposed including 
the need for the activity to proceed. It should also provide details on the process by which the scope of 
the activity was defined. This will help ensure that the full scope of the activity has been included so that 
impacts can be properly assessed. If a formal process was used to accomplish this (a formal meeting or 
solicitation of input from the public or other groups), that process and its results should be discussed 
here. 
 
Description of the proposed acVvity and possible alternaVves and the consequences of those 
alternaVves 
 
This section should include a detailed description of the proposed activity as well as reasonable 
alternatives. The first alternative to be described would be the proposed activity. The description should 
be as comprehensive and detailed as possible (see section 3.1). 
 
It may be useful to provide a comparison of alternatives in this section. For instance, for a new research 
station, alternatives might include differences in the size of the station and the number of persons that 
could be accommodated. These differences would mean different quantities of materials required, fuels 
consumed and emissions or wastes generated. Tables showing appropriate comparisons can be very 
helpful to the reader of the document. 
 
AlternaVve of not proceeding with the acVvity 
 
The alternative of not proceeding with the proposed activity (i.e. the "no-action" alternative) should be 
described to highlight the pros and cons of not conducting the activity. Although the Protocol only 
requires its inclusion in CEEs, it is useful to also include the "no-action" alternative in the text of IEEs in 
order to better justify the need for proceeding with the activity. 
 
Description of the initial environmental reference state and prediction of the environmental state 
in absence of the activity 
 
Such a description should not be limited to a characterisation of the relevant physical, biological, 
chemical and anthropic elements of the environment, but should also take into account the existence and 
behaviour of dynamic trends and processes in order to predict the state of the environment in absence of 
the activity. A proper description of 
the initial environmental reference state provides elements against which changes are to be compared. 
 
Description of methods and data used to forecast the impacts 
 
The purpose of this section is to explain and, if necessary, defend the design of the assessment and then 
provide enough detail that a further evaluator can understand and reproduce the procedure. Careful 
writing of the methodology is critically important because it determines that results can be reproducible 
and/or comparable. 
 
Estimation of nature, extent, duration and intensity of impacts (including consideration of 
possible indirect and cumulative impacts). 
 
This section contains the results of analyses of impacts, which includes a clear description of identified 
exposures as well as the identification of impact aspects, in terms of their nature, spatial extent, intensity, 
duration, reversibility and lag time. It must clearly establish the significance assigned to each impact and 
the justification for such assignment. In addition, and to summarise this section, the inclusion of a table 
showing the environmental impacts on each environmental component can be very helpful. 
 
Special attention must be paid to the consideration of possible indirect and cumulative impacts, since 
cause-effect relationship determining the existence of such impacts usually exhibit a higher degree of 
complexity. 
 
Monitoring programs 
 
When necessary, this section should clearly define monitoring objectives, set testable hypotheses, 
choose key parameters to be monitored, assess data collection methods, design statistical sampling 
program, and decide on frequency and timing of data collection/recording. Implementation of such 
monitoring programs is a further step that may begin after the planning of the activity has been 
completed, even though the activity has not actually been initiated. 
 
Mitigation and remediation measures 
 
Since mitigation and remediation measures usually aim to correct some aspects of the activity, 
communication of these measures must be concrete, pointing out the proposed actions and their timing, 
as well as the benefits associated to each individual measure. It is often useful to include this section in 
the text of IEEs. 
 
Identification of unavoidable impacts 
 
Recognition of the existence of unavoidable impacts should be included within any impact analysis. 
Consideration of such impacts is of great importance given that the occurrence of unavoidable impacts 
may affect the decision on whether to proceed with the proposed activity. 
 
Effects of the acVvity on scientific research and other uses or values 
 
Taking into account that the Protocol designates Antarctica as an area devoted to peace and science, 
the effects of the proposed activity on ongoing scientific research, 
or on the potential of a site to future scientific research, must be a fundamental consideration when the 
impact analysis is carried out. 
 
Identification of gaps in the knowledge 
 
Existing bodies of knowledge (i.e., empirical, theoretical, or anecdotal data and information) are used to 
support the assessment process. Nonetheless, these bodies of knowledge may be incomplete or may be 
surrounded by varying degrees of uncertainty. It is critical to identify explicitly in the assessment where 
such incompleteness or uncertainty exists; and how this has been factored into the assessment process. 
This disclosure can be useful in assessment by clearly identifying where more knowledge is needed. 
 
Preparers and Advisors 
 
This section provides a list of those experts who were consulted in preparing the assessment, their areas 
of expertise, and appropriate contact information. It should also list the persons who were responsible for 
the actual preparation of the document. This information is useful to reviewers and decision makers to 
ensure that the appropriate expertise was brought to bear on the analyses needed to assess the type 
and degree of impact from the proposed activity. It is also useful information for future assessments on 
similar activities or issues. 
 
References 
 
This section should list any references used in preparing the evaluation. They may include research or 
other scientific papers used in the analysis of impacts or monitoring data used to establish baseline 
conditions in the area where the activity is proposed. They may also include other environmental 
assessments of similar activities at other or similar locations. 
 
Index 
 
As an EIA document may be fairly large, an index is a very helpful aid to the reader. 
 
Glossary 
 
This section provides a list of terms and definitions as well as abbreviations that are helpful to the reader, 
especially if the terms are not commonly understood . 
 
Cover Sheet 
 
The CEE should contain a title page or cover sheet that lists the name and address of the person or 
organization who prepared the CEE and the address to which comments should be sent (for the draft 
document only). 
 
Non-Technical Summary 
 
The CEE must contain a non-technical summary of the contents of the document. This summary should 
be written in an accessible language and include pertinent information on the purpose and need for the 
proposed activity, the issues and 
alternatives considered, the existing environment, and the impacts associated with each alternative. A 
non-technical summary might also be useful for an IEE. 
 
Finally, in either case (IEE or CEE) a number of considerations about writing the EIA document should 
be taken into account, such as: avoidance of including irrelevant descriptive information; documenting all 
relevant steps of the process; clearly describing the impact identification methodology; 
 
clearly distinguishing between results (identification of impacts, mitigation measures, etc.) and final value 
judgement of significance; properly connecting results and conclusions. 
 
5.Annex I Requirements for Circulation 
 
5.1.Public circulation of an EIA 
 
Under Annex 1, public circulation is only required for CEEs. The draft CEE shall be made publicly 
available and shall be circulated to all Parties, which shall also make it publicly available, for comment. A 
period of 9O days shall be allowed for the receipt of comments. It shall be forwarded to the CEP at the 
same time as it is circulated to the Parties, and at least 120 days before the next ATCM, for consideration 
as appropriate. 
 
5.2.Receipt and incorporation of comments 
 
No final decision shall be taken to proceed with the proposed activity in the Antarctic Treaty area unless 
there has been an opportunity for consideration of the draft CEE by the ATCM on the advice of the CEP, 
provided that no decision to proceed with a proposed activity shall be delayed for longer than fifteen 
months from the day of circulation of the draft CEE. A final CEE shall address and shall include or 
summarise comments received on the draft CEE. The final CEE, notice of any decision relating thereto, 
and any evaluation of the significance of the predicted impacts in relation to the advantages of the 
proposed activity, shall be circulated to all Parties, which shall also make them publicly available, at least 
sixty days before the commencement of the proposed activity in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
6.Definition of terms in the EIA process 
 
Action: any step taken as a part of an activity. 
 
Activity: an event or process resulting from (or associated with) the presence of humans in the Antarctic, 
and/or which may lead to the presence of humans in Antarctica. (adapted from SCAR/CoMNAP 
Monitoring Workshop) 
 
Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation (CEE): an environmental impact document required for 
proposed activities that may have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment 
(from Madrid Protocol, Annex 1, Article 3). 
 
Cumulative Impact: the combined impact of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable activities. These 
activities may occur over time and space and can be additive or interactive/synergistic (adapted from 
IUCN Cumulative Impacts Workshop). 
 
Direct Impact: a change in environmental components that results from direct causeeffect 
consequences of interaction between the exposed environment and outputs. ffrom Guidelines for EIA in 
the Arctic) 
 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): a process for identifying, predicting, evaluating and 
mitigating the biophysical, social and other relevant effects of proposed projects and physical activities 
prior to major decisions and commitments being made (from Guidelines EM in the Arctic) 
 
Exposure: the process of interaction between an identified potential output and an environmental 
element or value. (adapted from SCAR/CoMNAP Monitoring Workshop) 
 
Impact: a change in the values or resources attributable to a human activity. It is the consequence (e.g. 
reduced plant cover) of an agent of change, not the agent itself (e.g. increase of trampling). Synonym: 
effect. (from SCAR/CoMNAP Monitoring Workshop). 
 
Indirect Impact: a change in environmental components that results from interactions between the 
environment and other impacts (direct or indirect). ffrom Guidelines for EM in the Arctic) 
 
Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE): an environmental impact document required for proposed 
activities that may have a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment (from Madrid Protocol, 
Annex 1, Article 2). 
 
Mitigation: the use of practice, procedure or technology to minimise or to prevent impacts associated 
with proposed activities. (CoMNAP Practical Guidelines) 
 
Monitoring: consists of standardised measurements or observations of key parameters (outputs and 
environmental variables) over time, their statistical 
evaluation and reporting on the state of the environment in order to define quality and trends. (adapted 
from SCAR/CoMNAP Monitoring Workshop) 
 
output: a physical change (e.g. movement of sediments by vehicle passage, noise) or an entity (e.g. 
emissions, an introduced species) imposed on or released to the environment as the result of an action 
or an activity. (SCAR/CoMNAP Monitoring Workshop) 
 
Preliminary Stage (PS): a process that considers the level of environmental impacts of proposed 
activities -before their commencement- referred to in Article 8 of the Protocol, in accordance with 
appropriate national procedures. (from Madrid Protocol, Annex 1, Article 1 ) 
 
Remediation: consists of the steps taken after impacts have occurred to promote, as much as possible, 
the return of the environment to its original condition 
 
Unavoidable Impact: an impact for which no further mitigation is possible. 
7.References 
 
ARCTIC ENVlRoNMENTAL PRoTECTloN STRATEGY. 1997. Guidelines for Environmental Impacts 
Assessment (EIA) in the Arctic. Sustainable Development and Utilisation. Finnish Ministry of the 
Environment, Finland, 5O pp. 
 
ATCPs. 1991. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (plus annexes). 11 th, 
Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting. Madrid, 22-3O April, 17-23 June 1991. 
 
CoMNAP.1992. The Antarctic Environmental Assessment Process, Practical Guidelines. Bologna (Italy) 
June 2O, 1991, revised Washington D.C. (USA), March 4, 1992. 
 
FoRElGN AND CoMMoNWEALTH oFFlCE. 1995. Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment of 
Activities in Antarctica. Polar Regions Section, South Atlantic and Antarctic Department, London. 
 
IUCN - The World Conservation Union.1996. Cumulative Environmental Impacts in Antarctica. 
Minimisation and Management. Edited by M. de Poorter and J.C. Dalziell. Washington, D.C., USA. 145 
pp. 
 
MINISTRY oF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE. 1997. Guidelines and Procedures for Visitors to the 
Ross Sea Region. Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. New Zealand. 
 
SCAR/CoMNAP . 1996. Monitoring of Environmental Impacts from Science and operations in Antarctica. 
Workshop report. 43 pp and Annexes, .1996 Workshops 
 
X~( ATCM/IP 2, Developing and Understanding of Minor or Transitory, submitted by New Zealand. 
 
X)(l ATCM/IP 55, Elementos para la Interpretacion de los Procedimientos de Evaluacion de Impacto 
Ambiental contenidos en el Anexo I del Protocolo de Madrid, submitted by Argentina. 
 
XXI ATCM/WP 35, Further understanding of the term Minor or Transitory, submitted by New Zealand. 
 
XXII ATCM/IP 66, Application of the " minor or transitory impacts" criterion of EIA in different regions of 
Antarctica, submitted by Russian Federation. 
 
XXII ATCMIWP 19, Environmental Impact Assessment. The role of EIA Guidelines in understanding " 
Minor or Transitory", submitted by Australia. 
 
8.Acronyms 
 
ASMA: Antarctic Specially Managed Area 
ASPA: Antarctic Specially Protected Area 
ASoC: Antarctic and Southern ocean Coalition 
ATCM: Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
 
ATCP: Antarctic Treaty Consultative Party 
 
ATS: Antarctic Treaty System 
 
CCAMLR: Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
 
CEE: Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation 
 
CEMP: CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Program 
 
CEP: Committee of Environmental Protection 
 
CoMNAP: Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
 
EIA: Environmental Impact Assessment 
 
GIS: Geographical Information System 
 
GoSEAC: SCAR Group of Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation 
 
HSM: Historic Sites and Monuments 
 
IEE: Initial Environmental Evaluation 
 
IUCN: International Union for the Conservation of Nature (World Conservation 
Union) 
 
SCAR: Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research 
 
SPA: Specially Protected Area 
 
SSSI: Site of Special Scientific Interest 
