 
 
LIABILITY 
 
 
 
This paper contains elements for an Annex addressing the question of liability.  
Although based on the previous  “Offerings”, the elements differ from them in three 
main ways. First, they are much less detailed, their purpose being to set out the essence 
of the provisions.  By this means future discussion may be able to focus better on the 
substance. More details will, inevitably, be added later.  Secondly, not all provisions, 
which will be needed, are included. This is also so that discussion can be devoted to the 
key elements on which agreement first needs to be reached.  Once that has been done, 
the other elements should more easily fit into place.  Thirdly, the attempt to identify a 
compromise position on which consensus might be reached.  They therefore try to steer 
a course between the different positions which emerged during the previous discussions, 
and which were reflected in the Report of the Cape Town meeting. 
 
 
In drawing up the paper the United Kingdom has proceeded on the basis of the 
following propositions. 
 
 
1. It is important to construct a liability regime, which will help to ensure the 
protection of the Antarctic environment for an indefinite period. 
 
 
2. The regime must reflect the reality of Antarctica in terms of the range and scale of 
activities taking place there; the risk of those activities giving rise to damage; and 
the likely consequences for the Antarctic environment were a harmful impact 
actually to occur. 
 
 
3. The notion that liability under the Environmental Protocol needs to be addressed in 
a manner comparable to that foreseen under Article 8 of CRAMRA needs to be 
dispelled.  A minerals/hydrocarbons regime would have required a tough liability 
regime.  But that scenario no longer exists.  Mineral resource activities are now 
prohibited by the Protocol. 
 
 
4. In contrast to minerals exploitation, current activities in Antarctica are relatively 
modest in scale, and the trend looks set to continue.  Principal activities consist 
largely of scientific research, tourism and fishing.  Potentially more damaging 
activities which are commonplace elsewhere, such as transport of crude oil and 
hazardous cargoes in large amounts are absent. 
 
 
1 
 
 
5. In any assessment of the likely potential for liability, the scale of Antarctica also 
needs to be taken into account.  The continent is vast, roughly the size of Europe (14 
million sq. km) yet, unlike other continents, is virtually uninhabited. It remains 
largely pristine.  In relative terms the “footprint” of past and present human activity 
in Antarctica is minuscule.  Although there are anthropogenic impacts on Antarctica 
from activities taking place elsewhere (e.g. CFCs), nothing in the Protocol or the 
proposed Annex can deal with these external influences.  It must be recognised, 
however, that in the longer term it may well be these very influences which create 
the most significant and widespread impacts on the Antarctic environment. 
 
6. COMNAP has been tasked with providing a risk analysis of activities in Antarctica 
(see WP/4).  Pending receipt of that analysis, our informal view is that: 
 
- 
the current risk of harmful impacts on the Antarctic environment which would 
be sufficient to give rise to liability is low; and 
 
- 
that such impacts over the past 20 years of operations in Antarctica have been 
few in number, and possibly as low as three or four. 
 
It is against this order of magnitude that a workable and realistic liability regime 
needs to be elaborated. 
Unlike developed areas of the world, environmental damage is not a regular daily, 
monthly or even yearly occurrence in Antarctica. 
 
 
7.  Should any major shift in the intensity or type of activities taking place in Antarctica 
occur, this can - and rightly should - be addressed by amendments to the Liability 
Annex.  It was to cope with just such changing situations in environmental standards 
and conditions that the Environmental Protocol was adopted as a framework 
instrument with the ability to add Annexes, and to amend them quickly and simply. 
 
 
April 1999 
 
 
2 
 
ARTICLE A 
 
 
Damage 
 
 
For the purpose of this Annex, “damage” means the harmful effect of an impact on the 
environment of Antarctica which is significant and lasting.  Damage does not include a 
harmful effect in so far as the impact results from an activity which has been authorised 
by a State Party following the application of the assessment procedures provided for by 
Article 8 of, and Annex I to, the Protocol. 
 
 
Notes 
 
 
- 
“Significant” is the term normally used in referring to environmental damage. 
 
 
- 
The term “lasting” has been chosen rather than “permanent”, which might imply 
that, before one could determine that damage had been caused, one would have 
to be certain that the impact would last forever. 
 
 
- 
In order to determine whether the harmful effect is “lasting”, some form of 
monitoring may be necessary, and may have to be done for a number years. 
 
 
- 
The second sentence reflects the proposition that when an activity has been 
authorised following EIA procedures under the Protocol an impact resulting 
from the activity should not give rise to liability.  But harmful impact caused by 
an operator broadening the scope of an authorised activity without further 
authorisation could amount to damage (NB “in so far as”). 
3 
 
ARTICLE B 
 
 
Operator 
 
 
For the purpose of this Annex, “operator” means any natural or legal person, public or 
private, and, for this purpose, includes a State Party or an agency of a State Party in so 
far as it carries out activities in Antarctica. 
 
 
Note 
 
This confirms that all operators are subject to the regime.  No operator should be 
outside the regime because, for example, a State Party conducts its operations in 
Antarctica directly or by means of an agency of the State.  Most scientific operations are 
conducted by government-funded, public bodies. 
4 
 
ARTICLE C 
 
 
Liability 
 
 
 
1. An operator shall take all reasonable measures to deal with the harmful effects of an 
impact caused by an unauthorised activity and to prevent further harmful effects. 
 
2. If damage nevertheless results, the operator shall be liable without proof of fault. 
 
 
Note 
 
 
Paragraph1 is much simplified.  It is not considered appropriate to include the notion of 
“reinstatement” or “restoration”.  Whether such action would be possible would depend 
entirely  on the circumstances, which cannot be predicted. However, the generic phrase 
“deal with the harmful effects” is intended to include “clean-up” and 
“reinstatement/restoration”, where that is possible 
.
5 
 
ARTICLE D 
 
 
Establishment of Jurisdiction 
 
 
 
With respect to liability arising in accordance with the provisions of this Annex, a State 
Party shall take such measures as are necessary to establish its jurisdiction over: 
 
a) any operator who in the territory of the State Party organises an activity in 
Antarctica, or for which the final place of departure of the expedition to carry our 
the activity was in the territory of the State Party; and 
 
b) in so as its laws provide, any operator of its nationality who organises outside its 
territory an activity in Antarctica. 
 
6 
 
ARTICLE E 
 
 
Compensation 
 
 
 
1.  Where liability has been established, the operator shall: 
 
 
a) reimburse a person for the reasonable costs incurred by him in taking reasonable 
measures to deal with the harmful effects of the impact; or 
 
 
b) to the extent to which the damage is, for whatever reason, unreparable, pay to the 
Fund a sum determined in accordance with the provisions of Article G. 
 
7 
 
ARTICLE F 
 
 
Determination of Liability 
 
 
1. If a person has a claim for compensation in accordance with Article E (a) he may 
bring proceedings to determine liability and the amount of compensation in the 
courts of any State Party in which the operator is located or carries on business. 
 
 
2. If two or more States Parties consider that an operator is liable for unreparable 
damage in accordance with Article E (b), they may bring proceedings to determine 
liability in the courts of any State Party in which the operator is located or carries on 
business. 
 
 
Note 
 
Determination of liability is most effectively done by domestic courts. 
 
 
8 
 
ARTICLE G 
 
 
Compensation for Unreparable Damage 
 
 
 
1. In so far as damage is unreparable, an operator who has admitted liability, or whose 
liability has been determined in accordance with Article F (2), shall , within three 
months of such admission or determination, make a proposal as to the amount of the 
contribution he should pay to the Fund.  The proposal shall be communicated to the 
Government of the Antarctic Consultative Party with which the operator is most 
closely connected or to the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, which shall notify the 
Consultative Parties.  The amount proposed shall reflect the nature and significance 
of the damage, including any loss of or impairment to potential future use of the 
damaged environment (in particular for scientific research), and the circumstances 
which gave rise to the damage. 
 
2. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties shall then consider the matter an decide 
either: 
 
a) that the proposal is acceptable, in which case the operator shall make the 
contribution to the Fund within such reasonable period or periods as the 
Consultative Parties shall determine; or 
 
b) that the proposal is not acceptable. 
 
3. 
a) If no proposal is made within the three months’ period, or the Consultative 
Parties decide that the proposal is not acceptable, they shall determine the 
amount of the contribution. 
 
b) With view to facilitating such determination the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties may, guided by the factors referred to in paragraph 1, third sentence, 
adopt guidelines to assist them in making the determination.  In developing such 
guidelines the Consultative Parties may seek the advice of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection. 
 
4. If the Consultative Parties, within one year after liability was admitted or 
determined, have been unable to decide on the amount of the contribution, the 
matter may be referred, by two or more Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, to the 
dispute settlement procedure in Article (TBD). 
 
5. A determination under paragraph 2 (a) or 3 (a) shall be final and binding an 
enforceable in the territory of any State Party as if it were a judgement of its highest 
court. 
 
9 
 
Note 
 
 
Paragraph 1 requires liability to be either admitted by the operator or determined by a 
court of law.  Liability cannot be assumed. 
 
 
10 
 
ARTICLE H 
 
 
Extent of Liability 
 
 
1. No liability shall be incurred when the impact causing a harmful effect results from 
an activity not covered by the Protocol, whether because of an express exemption or 
exception, or otherwise. 
 
 
2. Even when the activity is covered by the Protocol, no liability shall arise in so far as 
the damage was caused by: 
 
 
a) an event constitution in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an 
exceptional character which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either 
generally or in the particular case, provided that all reasonable safety measures 
were taken by the operator to prevent damage; or 
 
 
b) an armed conflict, should it occur notwithstanding the Antarctic Treaty, or an act 
of terrorism against which no reasonable measures could have been effective. 
 
 
Note 
 
 
As with activity which has been authorised following EIA procedure, there should be no 
liability if the activity is not, for whatever reason, covered by the Protocol. 
11 
12 
 
ARTICLE I 
 
 
Liability of States Parties 
 
 
1. Damage which would not have occured if a State Party had carried out its 
obligations under the Protocol shall, in accordance with the applicable rules of 
international law, incur the liability of the State Party. 
 
 
2. A State Party shall not otherwise be liable for damage by an operator, unless the 
operator is the State Party itself or one of its agencies. 
 
 
