ANNUAL EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 
 
 
Summary 
 
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, and members of COMNAP and SCAR, exchange annual 
reports following prescribed content, format, and deadline.  Much of the content of the 
three reports is the same.  Content and format were specified years ago, before the 
World Wide Web was used widely for information exchange.  There are also 
requirements to exchange information under the Protocol on Environmental Protection 
to the Antarctic Treaty.  This working paper suggests that Treaty Parties adopt a 
reporting format that is Web-based and amenable to the needs of the reporting 
requirements for Treaty and Protocol Parties and for COMNAP and SCAR.  Managers 
of the National Antarctic Programs would prepare the reports and place them on their 
Web sites.  Web sites now maintained by the ATCM, COMNAP, and SCAR could list 
the national Web sites containing the reports.  Advantages of shifting to the Web and 
adopting a common format will be reduced effort, reduced cost, improved timeliness, 
and easier access for users. 
 
Recent actions leading to this paper 
 
An Information Paperi and the Final Reportii of ATCM XXII (1998) encourage each 
Treaty Party to identify and use a WWW site for its annual exchange and to collaborate 
with SCAR on preparation of SCAR annual reports for the Web.  The Final Report 
states that “exchange of information would be a priority item on the agenda of ATCM 
XXIII”. 
 
The ATCM XXII Final Report states the “need to rationalize the information exchange 
system and that consideration should be given to what information is exchanged and 
why, as well as how the process could be improved.  SCAR and COMNAP informed 
the Meeting that they were both intending to review their information exchange 
formats.” 
 
ATCM XXII Resolution 5(1998) calls for the establishment of an ATCM home pageiii 
to be maintained by the host government of the following year’s ATCM. 
 
The 1998 meeting of SCARiv states that annual report amalgamation, in addition to 
Treaty and SCAR reports, “should logically also include the COMNAP annual 
exchange of information.” 
 
Progress 
 
The ATCM, COMNAP, and SCAR have Web sites.v 
 
All national Antarctic offices are believed to have electronic mail capability and access 
to the Internet, and at least 14 offices have Internet sites. 
 
 
1
At least three Treaty Parties posed their 1998 Antarctic Treaty information exchanges 
on the Web.  For example, the United States posting is on the National Science 
Foundation Web site.vi  The U.S. Department of Stat4e circulated a diplomatic note to 
the other Antarctic Treaty nations advising of this posting.  Paper copies of the U.S. 
Annual Exchange of Information, though available upon request, were not circulated. 
 
The COMNAP advance exchange of operational information currently is done 
electronically, by e-mail. 
 
Discussion 
 
Improving annual information exchange has been discussed at least since ATCM XVI 
(1991), whose report notes the task is a burden, information may not reach those who 
need it, and some of it is too late to be useful.vii  The 1991 discussion recognized the 
potential 
for 
duplication 
of 
some 
information 
exchanged 
noting 
that 
COMNAP/SCALOP exchange focused on logistics; and SCAR, on science. 
 
The annual reports required by the Antarctic Treaty,viii COMNAP,ix and SCARx and the 
Protocol are susceptible to improvement because of overlap: overlap of the originators 
of the information, overlap of the content of the reports (table 1), and overlap of the 
users.  The World Wide Web makes it feasible to issue all the Antarctic information 
required for the reports, but no publish the material electronically just once. 
 
For example, in the United States the process is unfolding this way: 
  
• The National Science Foundation (NSF) placed the U.S. annual exchange of 
Antarctic Treaty information on its Web site on 30 November 1998. 
• NSF is working with the Polar Research Board, National Academy of Sciences, 
which represents the United States on SCAR, to establish links from the Academy’s 
Web site to those categories of information on the NSF site that are required for the 
SCAR annual report.  Persons requiring the U.S. SCAR report will read it on the 
Academy Web site, in effect seeing a SCAR report format even though the 
information is on the NSF site and originally was posted as a Treaty report. 
• By 1 September NSF can post on its Web site the information required by 
COMNAP for the 1999-2000 season. 
 
To make it easier for users to access the reports of every reporting country, it is 
suggested that the ATCM, SCAR, and COMNAP Web sites establish links from a list 
of countries to each country’s site. 
 
Best use of efficiencies offered by the Web would assist in the posting of needed 
information once, as soon as it is available, rather than on the preparation of reports in 
specified formats. 
 
The U.S. National Science Foundation and U.S. National Science Foundation and the 
U.S. National Academy of Sciences would offer to share the use of design and other 
parameters of their Antarctic information exchange sites, upon request. 
 
 
2
 
Recommended action 
 
1. Parties shift from paper to electronic publication of the annual exchange of 
information under the Antarctic Treaty. 
2. Parties include, as part of their annual exchange of information under the Treaty, 
information that must be exchanged under the Protocol. 
3. ATCM XXIII encourages SCAR and COMNAP to consider a shift form paper to 
electronic publication of annual exchanges. 
4. ATCM WWW home page should list locations of national annual reports, SCAR 
and COMNAP home pages might provide similar lists on their home pages.  
 
 
Table 1.  Comparison of subjects and due dates, annual international Antarctic 
reports. 
 
COMNAP (due 1 Sep) 
Antarctic Treaty (30 Nov) SCAR (1 Jun, yr+1) 
2. Shipping 
3. Air operations 
I. Ships, aircraft, vehicles 
 
 
II. Expedition dates 
 
4.  Stations 
III.  Station locations and 
dates 
2.  Wintering stations, lat., 
long. 
1. Contact information 
9.  Emergency contacts 
IV.  Names and functions of 
personnel 
1.  Addresses of SCAR 
committee, 
operating 
agency 
 
V.  Armaments 
 
7. Major field activities 
8. Other activities 
VI.  Program of work and 
science, and where 
4. Automatic observatories, 
stations 
5. Project descriptions 
6. Planned new programs 
 
VII. Scientific equipment 
 
5.  Communications 
VIII.  Transportation and 
communication 
 
6.  Logistics affecting other 
nations 
IX.  Facilities for rendering 
assistance 
 
 
X. Nongovernment 
expeditions 
 
 
 
XI.  Unoccupied refuges 
 
 
XII. 
Numbers of species 
killed or captured 
 
 
XIII.  Radioisotopes used 
 
 
XIV.  Research rockets used  
 
XV.  Oceanic research 
 
 
XVI.  NGA station visits 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
4
 
Glossary 
 
ATCM  
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
COMNAP 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs 
ICSU  
International Council for Science (http://www.icsu.org/) 
NGA  
Nongovernmental activity 
SCALOP 
Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistics and Operations 
SCAR  
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research of ICSU 
Web 
 
World Wide Web on the Internet 
WWW  
World Wide Web on the Internet 
 
                                                           
i XXII ATCM information paper 28, improving annual exchange of Antarctic information – facilitating 
information exchange (May 1998) 
 
ii XXII ATCM final report, item 14, operational issues, paragraphs 115 and 116 (June 1998) 
 
iii XXII ATCM resolution 5, ATCM home page (June 1998)  
 
iv XXV SCAR item 7.1.5, review of national reports to SCAR (July 1998) 
  
v 
ATCM:  http://www.antartica-rcta.com.pe 
 
SCAR:  http://www.scar.org./ 
 
COMNAP:  http://www.delm.tas.gov.au/comnap/ 
  
vi http://www.nsf.gov/od/opp/antarct/treaty/index.htm 
 
vii XVI ATCM final report, paragraph 53.  XVI ATCM/WP42 
 
viii Treaty Article III states, “information regarding plans for scientific programs in Antarctica shall be 
exchanged to permit maximum economy and efficiency of operations.”  Article VII obliges parties to give 
advance notice of expeditions, stations, and military.  Recommendation VIII-6 (1975) prescribes the 
format and says the information should be exchanged “as early as possible but in no case later than 30 
November.” 
 
ix COMNAP/SCALOP requests advance information of aircraft and ship operations to help coordinate 
activities and share resources where appropriate. 
 
x SCAR (Circular 669, 1995) maintains an annual exchange of information to keep members informed of 
the current status of Antarctic research. 
