XXIII ATCM/ WP26 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
CEP II Agenda Item 4 
 
CEP Home Page 
Submitted by 
Norway 
CEP Home Page 
 
 
 
Background 
 
1. At CEP I in Tromsø (1998) Norway, as home country of the CEP Chair, offered to 
develop and establish a temporary CEP Home Page, to be ready for use in advance of 
the next meeting of the Committee.  Furthermore, Norway stated that it would 
provide the CEP II with a working paper discussing various aspects of the operations 
of a CEP Home Page. 
 
2. The Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) is presently responsible for operation and 
maintenance of  the CEP Home Page.  In October 1998, the NPI distributed a draft 
structure and draft text for the Home Page, giving the CEP Members and CEP 
Member contacts (identified in an informal listing at CEP I) the possibility to give 
input to the structure and text before the Home Page itself was established. 
 
3. On 16 December 1998 the NPI established a CEP Home Page at the following 
address: http://www.npolar.no/cep 
 
4. An e-mail note was forwarded to the CEP contacts identified at CEP I announcing the 
establishment of the page.  The message was also forwarded to CEP Observers as 
defined by Rule 4 a) and 4 b) of the CEP Rules of Procedure. 
 
5. The foreign ministries of the Member countries were notified through diplomatic note 
in February 1999, and in mid-February an e-mail message was forwarded to 
Observers as defined by Rule 4 c) of the Rules of Procedure. 
 
6. At the time of establishment the entire Home Page was username and password 
protected.  In February several levels of the Home Page were made publicly 
available, although in order to access the level entitled “Members only” (and its sub-
levels) the user needs knowledge of the username and password. 
 
7. The following is a preliminary discussion of some aspects regarding the operation of 
the CEP Home Page that may have bearings on the future operations of the site.  The 
discussion is accompanied by proposals for the CEP’s consideration and which may 
lead to some guidelines as how to operate the home page. 
 
8. For a discussion on the use of a Home Page for document distribution and document 
archiving, please refer to ATCM XXII/WP 25 (submitted by Norway).  This 
document also gives a general introduction to the use of the world wide web in the 
Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
 
 
 
1
Reflections around the operation of a CEP Home Page 
 
9. The world wide web establishes a framework that, if made use of in a proper manner, 
may enhance the operation of the CEP significantly (e.g. document distribution, 
exchange of information, news, etc.). A Home Page is also a convenient tool for the 
CEP Chair to communicate to the members as necessary.  There are, however, certain 
operational frameworks that need to be in place before the CEP Home Page can 
become an official aspect of the operations of the CEP. 
 
 
A.  Allocation of responsibility and resources 
10. In order for a home page to be a truly efficient and useful tool, the operational 
framework must be in place, i.e. there must be a clear-cut allocation of responsibility 
and resources, there must be terms of reference for the operations, etc. 
 
11. Once the structural framework for a home page is in place, it is not expected that the 
operational costs will be very high.  A home page operated on a voluntary basis is, 
however, susceptible to the availability of resources.  For the web site to be a genuine 
alternative for document access in advance of CEP meetings, for example, it is 
important that sufficient resources are available to keep the Home Page up-dated at 
all times, with documents being posted as soon as they are available. Timely and 
regular operation and maintenance require dedicated personnel who are able to 
prioritize the operations of the Home Page when update and maintenance are  
required.   
 
12. Clearly it would be of advantage that the responsibility for the CEP Home Page is 
allocated to an entity that would be able to maintain the web site continuously, and 
that sufficient resources were set aside for this purpose. The operation and 
maintenance of a CEP Home Page could naturally fall under a secretarial function 
should this be established in the Antarctic Treaty system.   
 
13. Meanwhile, while there still is no formal mechanism in place that allows for the 
allocation of necessary resources to operate a home page, it is believed to be in the 
interest to the CEP Members that there is a CEP Home Page.  As an interim solution 
it therefore seems most appropriate to encourage the home country of the CEP Chair 
to take upon itself the responsibility within the resource framework it sees fit. 
 
 
B.  Language 
14. The general information in the CEP Home Page is presently mainly available in 
English.  Documents, however, have been posted in the language they have been 
received, and an effort has been made to make meeting documents available in all 
translated versions as well.  The final report from CEP I is available in all four treaty 
languages on the Home Page.   
 
 
2
15. It is essential for the CEP Home Page to provide all important text in all four official 
languages.  A major obstacle to operating the Home Page in four languages, however, 
is the costs of maintaining a multi-language web site.  Translation and operations will 
require a significant increase in resources relative to that which is required to 
maintain the Home Page at today’s level.  Unless a cost-sharing mechanism comes 
into being (e.g., secretariat) or unless an individual nation is able to support such 
operation, it is to be feared that the Home Page will remain a home page with much 
information only in one language, with the limitations this entails.  
 
 
C.  Access and use 
16. Although internet is becoming a widely used tool, not everybody has access to the 
internet yet.  Thus, a home page cannot yet replace other means of communication, 
but must for the time being be supplemented by the other communication channels. 
 
17. Statistics generated for the use of the CEP Home Page show an increased use with 
time.  By the end of April approximately 450 user sessions have been registered, with 
users from approximately 20 countries.  European countries dominate the user 
statistics, although the Americas, Oceania and Japan are also registered.   Statistics 
from the ATCM XXII Home Page (1998) show that there was a large increase in use 
of the home page from May onward, peaking around the time of the meeting.  Similar 
trends should be expected for the CEP Home Page.  User statistics from ATCM XXII 
Home Page also show that the document page was one of the most popular sites of 
the home page.   Trends at the time the statistics were run show that the archive is a 
popular site at the CEP Home Page.   
 
18. The NPI has had some problems in the initial phase of operating the home page, and 
some users have experienced difficulties accessing the page.  This has of course been 
an obstacle to fully successful initiation of the home page.  The NPI are currently 
looking at solving these problems.   
 
19. Although the statistics show that the CEP Home Page is experiencing an increased 
use, it is yet too early to say how successful the home page is.  We believe that it is 
necessary to operate the home page over a longer time period in order for the users to 
gain confidence in the use and for the operators to adjust the home page to the needs 
of the users.    
 
 
D.  Protection and access 
20. Presently the CEP Home Page consists of a general part and a document archive (past 
meetings) which is available to the public, and one part available to members and 
observers only.  Access to the Members Only page requires username and password.  
It has been suggested that in order to hinder hackers from accessing the protected 
parts, a separate home page should be established for the Members Only site.  On the 
other hand it has been suggested that it will never be possible to make the information 
on the web completely protected.  In a sense it is the purpose of the Home Page to 
 
3
spread information. One solution is therefore to not place any information that is 
considered confidential on the Home Page.   
 
21. All members and observers have been given the access information to the CEP Home 
Page in advance of CEP II.  It seems reasonable that both members and observers 
should have access to the protected part since these same entities at any rate receive 
the paper versions of the documents that are posted in the protected area.   See, 
however, further discussion under heading “Home Page contacts”. 
 
 
E.  Home Page contacts 
22. At the CEP meeting in Tromsø an informal list of CEP contacts (e-mail addresses) 
was compiled.  The persons identified on this list have been used as contact points for 
information regarding the CEP Home Page.  Some members, however, did not 
identify contacts, and it has therefore been necessary to communicate through 
traditional diplomatic channels as well.   
 
23. Some members identified several contacts. It would, however, be more convenient for 
the Home Page administrator to have only one contact identified in each member 
country (or observer organization).  Two reasons are obvious with respect to this: 
 
• It is not possible for the Home Page administrator to keep track of which persons 
within each member country should have access to the protected area.  It would be 
best for the administrator to distribute the access information to only one contact in 
each member country and observer organization.  It would then be the responsibility 
of the contact to distribute access information to relevant people within the member 
country/observer organization. The administrator would refer any requests from non-
contacts to the relevant member contact/observer contact. 
• It will also be more convenient for the administrator if all documents/news/etc. to be 
posted on the Home Page is channeled through one contact point.  This would prevent 
posting of documents, news, etc. that are not cleared as official input from the 
member country or observer organization.  
 
 
F.   Up-to-date document listing and document archive 
24. In order for the Home Page to be efficient as a document distribution tool in advance 
of a meeting and as an archive of all CEP-papers, it is of utmost importance that 
reports, working and information papers, etc. are made available on the Home Page as 
soon as practicable.  If few documents are made available in advance or the document 
archive is only partially complete, the purpose of the Home Page to a large degree 
falls apart.   
 
25. In order to ensure an up-to-date access in advance of a meeting, Members should 
ensure that copies of all papers are sent to the CEP home page administrator as soon 
as they are forwarded to the host country of the meeting at which they are to be 
discussed.  The papers should at this time be posted in the listing of meeting 
 
4
documents in the protected area of the Home Page.  Furthermore, the host country of 
the meeting should ensure that electronic versions of all translations of these papers 
are forwarded to CEP home page administrator as soon as they are available.   
 
26. Papers that for some reason are not submitted for posting in advance of the meeting 
should nevertheless be forwarded to the CEP Home Page administrator after the 
closing of the meeting in order that it might be archived in the electronic document 
archive on the Home Page1. 
 
 
                                                           
1 For the development of the ATS towards public availability of  ATCM documents see: relevant 
paragraphs in the Final Reports of the VII ATCM (1972), IX ATCM (1977), X ATCM (1979), XI ATCM 
(1981), Recommendation XII-6 (1983), paras. 29-33 of the Final Report of  XIII ATCM (1985), paras 61-
67 of the Final Report of XIV ATCM (1987) and Recommendation XIV-1 of that Meeting; and the further 
development through Final Reports from ATCMs since:  paras. 35-39 from  XV ATCM (1989), paras 44-
47 from XVI ATCM (1991), para. 52 from XVII ATCM (1992),  para. 71 from the XVIII ATCM (1994) 
and para. 69 from XIX ATCM (1995). 
 
5
 
6
 
 
Draft Decision [    ]  (1999) 
 
CEP Home Page 
  
 
The Representatives, 
 
Decide: 
 
1. That the Home Country of the Chair of the Committee for Environmental Protection 
(CEP) shall operate a CEP Home Page on the World Wide Web on an interim basis. 
 
2. The CEP Home Page shall inter alia contain: 
 
a) in an area freely accessible to the general public: 
• general information about the Committee on Environmental Protection and 
environmental management in Antarctica 
• within the resources available, and in accordance with paragraph 3 of this 
Decision, an archive of official documentation from the previous meetings of 
the Committee, containing working and information papers submitted to the 
meetings, as well as the final reports of the meetings. 
 
b) in a password protected area accessible only to the CEP Members, CEP 
Observers, and any other entities that the Committee decides should have such 
access: 
• official documents submitted electronically to the Host Country of the 
meeting and the CEP Chair in advance of a CEP meeting 
 
 
3. As from the closure of the CEP meeting, and if no member has indicated its intention 
to the contrary when submitting a document, all official documents shall be made 
freely available on the CEP Home Page.  
 
4. As an interim solution the CEP Home Page is to be operated mainly as a one 
language home page.  Meeting documents are to be posted in all available 
translations.  Any other input from Members or Observers shall be posted in the 
official treaty language it is submitted in. 
 
5. All communications regarding the CEP Home Page (ie. password/username 
information, documents to be posted, etc.) shall go through a national CEP contact 
point, identified in an annex to the CEP report. 
 
6. This decision shall be operative at adoption. 
