XXIII ATCM/WP31 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
 
Agenda Item 7f) 
CEP II Agenda Item 5e) 
 
 
Proposed Balleny Island Specially 
Protected Area 
Submitted by 
New Zealand 
Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
1
 
Proposed Balleny Island Specially Protected Area 
 
 
Summary 
 
New Zealand proposes that consideration be given to Specially Protected Area No.4 
concerning Sabrina Island in the Balleny Islands being enlarged to include other 
Balleny Islands, together with a marine area surrounding the islands.  A copy of the 
draft management plan is provided for information and consultation.  The designation of 
an enlarged SPA is considered necessary to protect the unique and special ecological, 
scientific and aesthetic values of the area and to establish an archipelagic SPA in the 
Ross Sea region. 
 
 
Background 
 
At the Fourth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Santiago in 1966, a small island 
in the Balleny Islands was designated as Specially Protected Area No. 4.  Sabrina Island 
was accorded this status in recognition that the Balleny Islands are the most northerly 
Antarctic land in the Ross Sea region and support fauna and flora which reflect many 
circumpolar distributions at this latitude.   
 
The Balleny Islands (together with Scott Island) are the only truly marine or oceanic 
islands (rather than continental islands) on this side of Antarctica making them 
distinctive from any neighbouring areas.  Located 250km off the coast of Antarctica in 
the northern Ross Sea, the Balleny Islands are a rare “oasis” of land in the Southern 
Ocean and their position is far enough north to be directly in the path of circumpolar 
ocean currents.  Consequently their presence is likely to create upwellings, which tend 
to bring nutrient-rich deep water closer to the surface, which in turn makes the area 
biologically very productive.  Volcanic in origin the islands rise sharply from the ocean 
floor with depths of 2000m found within five nautical miles of the coast.  The Balleny 
Islands are largely ice and snow covered and offers few landing sites from the sea.  
Most of the islands are ringed by steep spectacular cliffs with offshore rock stacks. 
 
The biological diversity of the Balleny Islands exceeds that of any other site in the Ross 
Sea region, with at least seven species of breeding birds and three species of seals.  A 
small colony of Chinstrap penguins on Chinstrap Island is a locally rare species and 
represents the only site between Bouvet∅ya and Peter 1 Islands (264° range of 
longitude) where these penguins breed. 
 
Numerous species of soil fauna and algae have been recorded from Sabrina Island and 
are expected to occur on other islands.  Weddell, crabeater and southern elephant seals 
have all been reported hauled out on the Ballenys and leopard seals have been observed 
on ice floes close inshore.  The marine ecosystem is highly productive and supports a 
diverse benthic and pelagic fauna. 
 
As isolated islands where access is difficult, the Balleny Archipelago has been visited 
infrequently since discovery in 1839.  While the Balleny Islands and surrounding 
marine ecosystem have not been comprehensively studied or documented they are 
essentially undisturbed by direct human activity.  The ecological, scientific and 
aesthetic values derived from the isolation, unique position as Antarctic oceanic islands 
and the low level of human impact are important reasons for special protection of the 
Balleny Islands and the adjacent marine area. 
 
 
Marine Protected and Managed Areas in Antarctica 
 
While several Specially Protected Areas adopted under the Antarctic Treaty System 
include adjacent marine areas, all are small.  The only substantial marine areas are 
designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest and include SSSI 35 West Bransfield 
Strait, South Shetland Islands (1100km2) and SSSI 36 Eastern Dallmann Bay, Palmer 
Archipelago (710km2) both located on the Antarctic Peninsula.   
 
One marine area on the Antarctic Peninsula is designated as a Multiple Use Planning 
Area.  The Southwest Anders Island area encompasses 1,535km2 in the vicinity of the 
western Antarctic Peninsula and Palmer Archipelago, including Bismarck Strait.  An 
Antarctic Specially Managed Area also exists in Admiralty Bay, King George Island, 
South Shetland Islands (370km2). 
 
Cape Royds SSSI 1 (4.6km2) is the only area in the Ross Sea region with any form of 
marine protection. 
 
No where in the Antarctic has an entire archipelago and the adjacent marine ecosystem 
been afforded protection in a comprehensive manner.  By designating the Balleny 
Islands as a Specially Protected Area, an important gap in the Antarctic protected area 
system could be filled.   
 
 
Proposed Archipelagic Protected Area (Enlargement of SPA No.4) 
 
Pending entry into force of Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty, Measure (1) 1998, adopted by ATCM XXII, confirmed that proposals 
to designate and adopt management plans for the protection of particular areas should 
be viewed as proposals for the designation of Specially Protected Areas (SPAs) in 
accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and 
Fauna. 
 
Accordingly, New Zealand considers that SPA 4 for Sabrina Island could be expanded 
to include all islands in the Balleny Islands together with an adjacent marine area.  A 
draft management plan for the area is attached.  Over the next year comments will be 
sought from the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the Scientific 
Committee and Commission established pursuant to the Convention on the 
2Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the scientific 
community and other interested parties. 
 
The Committee for Environmental Protection is accordingly advised that the draft 
management plan is to be finalised and proposed by New Zealand for designation as a 
SPA at ATCM XXIV in 2000. 
3Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
DRAFT Management Plan for Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 4 
BALLENY ISLANDS, NORTHERN ROSS SEA 
 
 
1. 
Description of values to be protected 
Sabrina Island in the Balleny Archipelago was originally designated as SPA No. 4 in 
Recommendation IV-4 after proposals by New Zealand on the grounds that “the 
Balleny Islands, as the most northerly Antarctic land in the Ross Sea region, support 
fauna and flora which reflect many circumpolar distributions at this latitude and that 
Sabrina Island in particular provides a representative sample of such fauna and flora”.  
The boundaries of the area, which previously excluded the other islands in the Balleny 
group and the adjacent marine ecosystem, have been extended to include Young, Row, 
Borradaile, Buckle, Sabrina, Chinstrap, Monolith and Sturge Islands and all outlying 
rock promontories as well as the surrounding marine area out to a distance of 12 
nautical miles.  The original area was set aside primarily to protect the ecological values 
of Sabrina Island and these reasons for long-term protection now apply to the entire 
Balleny Archipelago. 
 
The Balleny Islands (together with Scott Island) are the only oceanic islands 
(rather than continental islands) on this side of Antarctica making them distinctive from 
any neighbouring areas.  Located 250km off the coast of Antarctica in the northern Ross 
Sea, the Balleny Islands are a rare “oasis” of land in the Southern Ocean and their 
position is far enough north to be directly in the path of circumpolar ocean currents.  
Consequently their presence is likely to create upwellings, which tend to bring nutrient-
rich deep water closer to the surface, which in turn makes the area biologically very 
productive.  Volcanic in origin the islands rise sharply from the ocean floor with depths 
of 2000m found within five nautical miles of the coast.  The Balleny Islands are largely 
ice and snow covered and offers few landing sites from the sea.  Most of the islands are 
ringed by steep spectacular cliffs and offshore rock stacks, the highest, the Monolith, 
reaches 78m in height. 
The biological diversity of the Balleny Islands exceeds that of any other site in 
the Ross Sea region, with at least seven species of breeding birds and three species of 
seals.  Adelie Penguins and Chinstrap Penguins breed on the islands together with Cape 
Pigeons, Snow Petrels, Antarctic Petrels, Wilson’s Storm Petrels and Antarctic Fulmars.  
Snow Petrels and Antarctic Fulmars occur in the greatest numbers, with some colonies 
exceeding 10,000 pairs.  Adelie Penguins are the most numerous penguin species, with 
a total population of approximately 6800 pairs over all of the Balleny Islands.  The 
small (approximately 10 pairs) colony of Chinstrap penguins on Chinstrap Island is a 
locally rare species and represents the only site between Bouvet∅ya and Peter 1 Islands 
(264° range of longitude) where Chinstrap Penguins breed. 
Numerous species of soil fauna have been recorded including mites, nematodes 
and bacteria.  Algae have been recorded from Sabrina Island although  a comprehensive 
survey of vegetation has yet to be  carried out on the islands. 
 
4Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
Weddell, crabeater and southern elephant seals have all been reported hauled out on the 
Ballenys and leopard seals have been observed on ice floes close inshore.  The marine 
ecosystem is likely to be highly productive and supports a diverse benthic fauna.  
Twenty-five species of echinoderms have been recorded from around the islands.  As 
isolated islands where access is difficult, the Balleny Archipelago has been visited 
infrequently.  An estimated 15 landings have been made on the islands since discovery 
in 1839.  While the Balleny Islands and surrounding marine ecosystem have not been 
comprehensively studied or documented they are largely undisturbed by direct human 
activity.  The ecological, scientific and aesthetic values derived from the isolation, 
unique position as Antarctic oceanic islands and the low level of human impact are 
important reasons for special protection of the Balleny Islands and the adjacent marine 
area.  The establishment of a marine SPA around the Balleny Island is also consistent 
with international marine management and conservation objectives, in particularly  with 
relation to the Convention on Biologicial Diversity. 
 
2. 
Aims and objectives 
Management at the Balleny Islands aims to: 
• 
avoid degradation of, or substantial risk to, the values of the Area by preventing 
unnecessary human disturbance to the Area; 
• 
preserve the natural ecosystem as a reference area largely undisturbed by direct 
human influence; 
• 
allow scientific research on the terrestrial and marine ecosystems, in particular on 
the avifauna, plants, algae, invertebrates, geology and marine communities in the 
Area; 
• 
allow other scientific research provided it is for compelling reasons which cannot 
be served elsewhere; 
• 
minimise human disturbance by preventing unnecessary sampling of fauna and 
flora; 
• 
minimise the possibility of introduction of alien plants, animals and microbes into 
the Area; 
• 
allow visits for management purposes in support of the aims and objective of the 
management plan. 
 
3. 
Management activities 
The following management activities are to be undertaken to protect the values of the 
Area: 
• 
A copy of this Management Plan shall be kept available, on all ships visiting the 
Area. 
• 
Markers, signs or structures erected within the Area for scientific or management 
purposes shall be secured and maintained in good condition. 
• 
Visits shall be made as necessary to assess (no less than once every five years) 
whether the Area continues to serve the purposes for which it was designated and 
to ensure management and maintenance measures are adequate. 
• 
National Antarctic Programmes operating in the region shall consult together with 
a view to ensuring these steps are carried out. 
4. 
Period of designation 
5Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
Designated for an indefinite period. 
 
5. 
Maps and photographs 
Map A: 
Balleny Islands, Northern Ross Sea  
Figure 1: 
Perspective view of Sabrina, Chinstrap and Buckle Islands 
Figure 2: 
Perspective view of Sturge Island from the summit of the island 
 
6. 
Description of the Area 
6(i)  Geographical coordinates, boundary markers and natural features 
The designated area encompasses the whole of the Balleny Islands archipelago and the 
adjacent marine area out to a distance of 12nm from mean low water mark of each 
island.  The Balleny Islands consist of three main islands (Sturge, Buckle and Young) 
and numerous smaller islands located about 250 km off the coast of Northern Victoria 
Land, Antarctica straddling the Antarctic Circle in the northern Ross Sea.  The islands 
form a chain in a generally NW-SE direction for about 160 km between 66°15’S to 
67°10’S and 162°15’ E and 164°45’E (Map A). 
 All the islands are of volcanic origin and are mainly snow and ice covered, bounded by 
steep cliffs.  The islands are constructed on an oceanic crust 10-15 million years old, 
although the islands are thought to be much younger.  Reports of volcanic activity on 
Buckle Island and Sturge Island were reported last century and early this century, 
although there has been no recent recorded activity.   
Young Island, the most northerly of the group is approximately 29 km long and 
8 km wide with a coastline of alternating cliffs and glaciers with no beaches suitable for 
sea landings.  Cape Pigeons (Daption capense) and snow petrels (Padodroma nivea 
major) nest on the island with smaller numbers of Antarctic Fulmars (Fulmarus 
glacialoides).  Row Island is a small island just SSE of Young Island covered with 
glacial ice with one small beach.  Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddelli) have been 
recorded hauled out on the island.  A colony of approximately 6000 Antarctic Fulmars 
have been observed on the NE coast.  Borradaile Island is capped by a glacier and has 
two beaches on the NW and SW coasts.  Weddell, Crabeater (Lobodon carcinophagus) 
and Elephant Seals (Miroungs leonina) have been observed on the beaches.  Colonies 
of Snow Petrels, Cape Pigeons and Antarctic Fulmars have been observed on the island 
and on the Beale Pinnacle (just offshore to the SE).  Buckle Island is approximately 30 
km long and 8 km wide covered by glacial ice with a coastline of alternating cliffs and 
glaciers.  Bird species recorded here include Snow Petrels, Cape Pigeons, and three 
colonies of Adelie Penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) at Cape Cornish (533 pairs), Cape 
Davis (502 pairs) and SE Promontory (322 pairs) (all 1984 counts).  Sabrina, Monolith 
and Chinstrap Islands are located 3 km SSE of Buckle Island.  Sabrina Island is less 
than two km across with a small permanent ice cap covering about 25% of the Island.  
Two beaches, one at the northern end and one at the SW end offer possible landing 
sites.  Approximately 3500 pairs (1984 count) of Adelie Penguins nest on Sabrina, the 
largest colony in the Balleny Islands.  Cape Pigeons also nest on the island.   
6Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
Various species of algae, bacteria, yeasts, fungi, mites and nemotodes have been 
recorded on Sabrina Island and are likely to occur on ice free areas of other islands in 
the Balleny Archipelago, although no detailed surveys have been undertaken.  
Associated with Sabrina Island are two smaller rocky islets, the Monolith to the south 
and Chinstrap Island to the NE.  The Monolith is dominated by a spectacular 78m high 
volcanic plug and is connected to Sabrina Island by a boulder spit.  Adelie Penguins, 
approximately 2000 pairs (1984 count) and Chinstrap Penguins (Pygoscelis antarctica) 
(approximately 10 pairs) nest on Chinstrap Island (1984 count).  Cape Pigeons also nest 
on the island.  Sturge Island is the largest (approximately 29 km by 13 km) and most 
southerly of the Balleny Islands.  It is almost completely covered by ice except for 
several cliffs along the west and south coasts.  One gravel spit at the SE corner of the 
island is suitable for landings from the sea where Weddell and Elephant Seals have 
been observed.  A small colony of 10 Adelie Penguins is thought to nest on a rocky 
promontory at Cape Symth.  Extensive colonies of Antarctic Fulmars (10,000-20,000 
pairs) have been observed on the NW coast and up to 10,000 Snow Petrels on the 
central west coast.  Cape Pigeons and Antarctic Fulmars have also been recorded along 
the island’s coastline. 
Numerous other bird species have been observed near the Balleny Islands and 
include the Emperor penguin, Southern Giant Petrel, Antarctic Petrel, Prion species, 
sooty shearwater, Arctic Tern and the Southern Skua. 
The Balleny Islands lie at the southern end of a more or less continuous 
submarine ridge linking the Antarctic continent with the New Zealand plateau by way 
of Macquarie Island.  This feature of the sea floor of the Southern Ocean is likely to be 
of great significance as a faunal migration route between the Antarctic and the New 
Zealand and Indo-Pacific regions.  In the near-shore marine environment, green, brown 
and red marine algae occur on rocks at the waters edge.  In deeper water (200-500m) 
around the Balleny Islands the bottom sediments are a black, greasy mud which support 
an abundant fauna of echinoderms (25 species), gorgonacians and sponges.  gastropods, 
ascidians, polycheates, pycnogonids, bryozoans, bivalves, amphipods, anemones, 
brachipods and scaphopod molluscs.  In general the echinoderm fauna shows close 
relationships with those of the Ross Sea region.   The marine ecosystem and much of 
the associated fauna are  unique to the geographic area.  The area is the only substantial 
oceanic island marine ecosystem south of 60 degrees south in the Ross Sea Region.  
There is a biographic link between these Antarctic areas and the temperate New 
Zealand region.  
A marine reserve would protect marine habitats, fish and other biota over a 
range of depths from mean low water mark to deep water habitats of over 2000m depth.  
The area is the key site as a spawning ground for fish stocks, protection of which can 
contribute to maintaining marine biological diversity in the Ross Sea region and the 
Southern Ocean.   
A boundary out to 12 nautical miles is required to adequately protect 
representative benthic communities and fish species.  Such a zone around each land 
mass is necessary to protect the ranges of communities, over latitude and water depth, 
which are unique for this area.   
 
No visible human impacts have been observed or recorded on the Balleny Islands. 
7Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
6(ii)  Restricted and managed zones within the Area  
Restricted Zone 
Both Sabrina Island and Chinstrap Islands are designated as a Restricted Zone in 
order to protect part of the Area as a reference site for future comparative studies (for 
which Sabrina Island was originally designated) and to protect the site of the only 
Chinstrap Penguin colony in this part of the Antarctic.  The Restricted Zone 
encompasses all of Sabrina and Chinstrap Islands with the marine boundary extending 
to 500 metres offshore from mean low water.  Access to the Restricted Zone is allowed 
only for compelling scientific and management (such as inspection and review) 
purposes that cannot be served by visits elsewhere in the Area. 
 
Access to the Area outside of the Restricted Zone is allowed only for 
compelling scientific and management (such as inspection and review) purposes that 
cannot be served elsewhere and for recreation or tourism purposes that do not 
jeopardise the ecological or scientific values of the Area or other permitted activities 
and only at designated sites (TO BE DETERMINED).  
 
6(iii)  Structures within and near the Area 
No structures are known to exist in the Area.  
 
6(iv)  Location of other protected areas within close proximity of the Area 
The nearest protected area is at Cape Adare (SPA 29) in Northern Victoria Land, 
approximately 250 kilometers to the southeast. 
 
7. 
Permit conditions 
Entry into the Area is prohibited except in accordance with a Permit issued by 
appropriate national authorities.  Conditions for issuing a Permit to enter the Area are 
that: 
• 
access to the Restricted Zone is allowed only for compelling scientific or 
management reasons that cannot be served elsewhere in the Area; 
• 
access to the Area outside the Restricted Zone is allowed only for compelling 
scientific reasons that cannot be served elsewhere, for essential management 
purposes consistent with plan objectives such as inspection or review or for 
recreation or tourism purposes that do not jeopardise the ecological or scientific 
values of the Area or other permitted activities and only at designated sites; 
• 
the actions permitted are not likely to jeopardise the ecological or scientific values 
of the Area or other permitted activities and are consistent with the aims and 
objectives of the management plan; 
• 
the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan; 
• 
the Permit, or a copy, shall be carried within the Area; 
• 
a visit report shall be supplied to the authority named in the Permit; 
• 
the Permit shall be issued for a stated period. 
8Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
7(i)  Access to and movement within the Area 
Land vehicles are prohibited on all islands within the Area and access shall be by boat 
or by aircraft.  Aircraft should land on the islands only at designated sites (TO BE 
DETERMINED).  It is preferred that aircraft approach and depart from the designated 
landing sites as shown on Map XX.  Movement over the islands shall be by foot.  Use 
of smoke grenades when landing within the Area is prohibited.  There are no special 
restrictions on where access can be gained to the islands by small boat except for 
recreation or tourism activities which shall be at designated sites (TO BE 
DETERMINED).  Pilots, air or boat crew, or other people on aircraft or boats, are 
prohibited from moving on foot beyond the immediate vicinity of the landing site 
unless specifically authorised by a Permit.  
Overflight of bird breeding areas lower than 750 m is normally prohibited 
(MapXX).  When required for essential scientific or management purposes, transient 
overflight down to a minimum altitude of 300m may be allowed and must be 
specifically authorised by a Permit.   
Landings for tourism and recreational purposes shall only be made at designated 
sites (MAP XX).  The maximum number of people ashore at any one site at any one 
time shall be 40 people.  The annual limit on the visitor numbers at each site shall be 
200 people.  Appropriate national authorities with an interest in the region shall consult 
together to ensure these limits are not exceeded. 
Ships and boats entering the marine component of the Area shall  comply with 
this management plan.    
 
7(ii) Activities that are or may be conducted in the Area, including restrictions on time 
or place 
• Scientific research, including sample collection, that will not jeopardise the 
terrestrial and marine ecosystems of the Area; 
• Essential management activities, including monitoring and inspection. 
• Recreation and tourism activities outside the Restricted Zone that will not 
jeopardise the terrestrial and marine ecosystems of the Area and only at designated 
sites. 
 
7(iii) Installation, modification or removal of structures 
No structures are to be erected within the Area except as specified in a Permit.  Any 
structure erected within the area shall be associated with approved scientific research 
activities only.  All scientific equipment installed in the Area must be authorised by 
Permit and clearly identified by country, name of the principal investigator and year of 
installation.  All such items should be made of materials that pose minimal risk of 
contamination of the Area.  Removal of specific equipment for which the Permit has 
expired shall be a condition of the Permit. 
9Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
 
7(iv)  Location of field camps 
Camping is permitted only at the designated sites (Map XX) and is prohibited on 
Chinstrap Island.  Camping is only permitted in association with approved scientific 
research or management activities. 
 
7(v) Restrictions on materials and organisms which can be brought into the Area 
No living animals, plant material or microorganisms shall be deliberately introduced 
into the Area and precautions shall be taken against accidental introductions.  No 
poultry products, including food products containing uncooked dried eggs, shall be 
taken ashore within the Area.  No herbicides or pesticides shall be introduced into the 
Area.  Any other chemicals, including radio-nuclides or stable isotopes, which may be 
introduced for scientific or management purposes specified in the Permit, shall be 
removed from the Area at or before the conclusion of the activity for which the Permit 
was granted.  Fuel is not to be stored in the Area, unless required for essential purposes 
connected with the activity for which the Permit has been granted.   
All materials introduced shall be for a stated period only, shall be removed at or 
before the conclusion of that stated period, and shall be stored and handled so that risk 
of their introduction into the environment is minimised. 
 
7(vi) Taking or harmful interference with native flora or fauna 
This is prohibited, except in accordance with a Permit.  Terrestrial and marine flora and 
fauna may only be taken for compelling scientific purposes and only in accordance with 
a permit.  Where animal taking or harmful interference is involved, this should, as a 
minimum standard, be in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct for the Use of 
Animals for Scientific Purposes in Antarctica. 
 
7(vii) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder 
Material may be collected or removed from the Area only in accordance with a Permit 
and should be limited to the minimum necessary to meet scientific or management 
needs.  Material of human origin likely to compromise the values of the Area, which 
was not brought into the Area by the Permit holder or otherwise authorised, may be 
removed from any part of the Area, including the Restricted Zone, unless the impact of 
removal is likely to be greater than leaving the material in situ: if this is the case the 
appropriate authority should be notified. 
 
7(viii) Disposal of waste 
All wastes, including all human wastes, shall be removed from the Area.  No waste, 
including bilge water, sewage or solid waste, shall be discharged from any ship or boat 
within the Area. 
 
7(ix)  Measures that are necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan can continue to be met 
1. Permits may be granted to enter the Area to carry out biological monitoring and site 
inspection activities, which may involve the collection of small samples for 
analysis or review, to erect or maintain signposts or for management activities. 
2. Any specific sites of long-term monitoring shall be appropriately marked. 
10Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
 
11Error! Reference source not found. 
 
 
3. To help maintain the ecological and scientific values of the isolation and relatively 
low level of human impact at the Area visitors shall take special precautions against 
introductions.  Of particular concern are microbial or vegetation introductions 
sourced from soils at other Antarctic sites, including stations, or from regions 
outside Antarctica.  To minimise the risk of introductions, visitors shall thoroughly 
clean footwear and any equipment to be used in the area — particularly sampling 
equipment and markers — before entering the Area. 
 
7(x)  Requirements for reports 
Parties should ensure that the principal holder for each Permit issued submits to the 
appropriate authority a report describing the activities undertaken.  Such reports should 
include, as appropriate, the information identified in the Visit Report form suggested by 
SCAR.   
Parties should maintain a record of such activities and, in the Annual Exchange 
of Information, should provide summary descriptions of activities conducted by persons 
subject to their jurisdiction, which should be in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of the Management Plan.  Parties should, wherever possible, deposit 
originals or copies of such original reports in a publicly accessible archive to maintain a 
record of usage, to be used both in any review of the management plan and in 
organising the scientific use of the Area. 
 
