 
Specially Protected Species in Antarctica 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The concept of Specially Protected Species was first introduced to the Antarctic Treaty 
System within the 1964 Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora 
(the Agreed Measures). On the advice of SCAR, two species of seal were accorded special 
protection. They were: 
 
♦ all species of the genus Arctocephalus (Fur Seals) 
♦ the Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii)  
 
Provisions for designating specially protected species are also included in the Convention for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (CCAS) and Annex II of the Environmental Protocol. 
However, in all three instruments special protection has to date only been afforded to the 
same two species of seal. 
 
No thorough re-assessment of the issue of Specially Protected Species has been made by the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) since 1964, despite substantial increases in the 
population of fur seals and major changes to the regulations governing Antarctic wildlife. 
Such a re-assessment is now thought necessary, in particular because Article 8 of Annex II of 
the Environmental Protocol requires Parties to "keep under continuing review measures for 
the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, taking into account any recommendations from 
the Committee" (for Environmental Protection (CEP)). 
 
Protected species status as a conservation management tool 
 
It is important that the designation of Specially Protected Species is used as a mechanism for 
conserving and managing species of flora and fauna which have been identified as being: 
− native to the Antarctic Treaty Area or occurring there seasonally through natural 
migrations; and 
 
− of conservation importance whether by virtue of populations which are 
endangered, declining or are restricted in size and/or extent. 
 
The mechanism of special protection for species should be a flexible management tool with 
the ability to add or delete species from the list of Specially Protected Species as appropriate. 
Such an approach parallels the objectives of many other species protection mechanisms 
elsewhere in the world, for example, the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (see 
background), as well as examples of national conservation legislation. 
  
The status of currently protected species in Antarctica 
 
Genus Arctocephalus (Fur Seals) 
 
The most abundant member of this genus in Antarctica is the Antarctic Fur Seal 
(Arctocephalus gazella). Since the early 1980s, the numbers of this species have rapidly 
1 
increased both inside the Antarctic Treaty Area, and in the CCAMLR Convention Area. 
About 96% of the breeding population of this seal is found at South Georgia, where the total 
population size is now estimated to be about 3 million animals. Fur seals are highly mobile 
and large numbers of immature males are known to visit the South Orkney Islands, with as 
many as 20,000 recorded on Signy Island in recent summers. 
 
A. gazella is now one of the most abundant of the Arctocephalus species.  Whether it 
therefore still merits special protection status is questionable. 
 
The Ross Seal (Ommatophoca rossii) 
 
Ross seals live all year round in the high latitude pack-ice zone in Antarctica and are rarely 
observed. Their ecology and demography is the least well known of the Antarctic seals. The 
population size of the Ross seal was estimated to be about 220,000 in 1984. The Ross seal 
has the lowest population of the Antarctic seals and it is the only one for which there is no 
information on their current status or population trend i.e. increasing, decreasing or stable. 
Although, sightings of individual seals at widely distributed locations continue, no revision of 
the 1984 population size estimate has been made. 
 
Recommendations 
 
Given the requirements of Article 8 of Annex II of the Environmental Protocol, it is 
suggested that the list of Specially Protected Species, attached as Appendix A to Annex II of 
the Environmental Protocol, is in need of revision. The UK is of the opinion that a review of 
this matter should be undertaken by the CEP, with SCAR, assisted by CCAMLR and other 
expert bodies as appropriate, providing expert scientific advice on the conservation status of 
native Antarctic fauna and flora. 
 
The UK recommends that: 
 
♦ The subject of Specially Protected Species is included on the agenda of the CEP, under 
Matters covered by Annex II (Conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora); 
 
♦ A review should be limited to native mammals and native birds indigenous to the 
Antarctic Treaty Area or occurring there seasonally through natural migrations, and to 
plants indigenous to the Antarctic Treaty Area. The review would thus be consistent with 
Article 1 (a-c), Article 3 (4) and Article 8 of Annex II of the Environmental Protocol. 
 
♦ The review should have two purposes: 
 
 i) To determine whether the existing seal species should be retained on the list, and: 
 
ii) To examine whether other species of fauna and flora should be added to the list. 
 
♦ The CEP should agree Terms of Reference for the review of the list of Specially 
Protected Species. 
 
♦ The CEP agrees a draft Resolution requesting SCAR, with the assistance of Contracting 
Parties, CCAMLR and other expert bodies, such as IUCN and Bird Life International (see 
background) as appropriate, to undertake a review of Specially Protected Species, using 
the Terms of Reference referred to above, and to report back to the CEP accordingly. 
2 
Timetable. 
 
SCAR will need time to consider this important issue at its next meeting, XXVI SCAR, to be 
held in July 2000 in Japan.  In October 2000, BirdLife International will be publishing the 
updated Red List for Birds and, at the IUCN General Assembly in that year, IUCN may also 
approve updates to the 1994 (published 1996) Red List for other taxa.  This means that it will 
be impractical to expect SCAR to report back to CEP 3 in 2000 with a completed review of 
the list of Specially Protected Species.  Instead, the UK proposes that SCAR should present 
the review for discussion by the CEP at its fourth meeting in 2001. 
 
Attached to this Working Paper is a draft Resolution prepared by the UK concerning the 
review of the list of Specially Protected Species (Annex A). 
 
3 
ANNEX A 
 
Resolution ... (1999) 
 
List of Specially Protected Species: Annex II to the Environmental Protocol. 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
 
The Representatives, 
 
Noting that the provisions of Article 8 of Annex II to the Environmental Protocol require that 
the Consultative Parties keep under continuing review measures for the conservation of 
Antarctic fauna and flora, taking into account any recommendations from the Committee for 
Environmental Protection; 
 
Aware that there has been no review of the list of Specially Protected Species in Appendix A 
to Annex II since the list was originally introduced by Consultative Parties in the 1964 
Agreed Measures; 
 
Recognising that since 1964 there has been a major and significant increase in the population 
of Antarctic fur seals (Arctocephalus gazella) to over 3 million animals, but that this species 
continues to be designated as a Specially Protected Species; 
 
Aware also that consideration needs to be given to including other species of fauna and flora  
on the list of Specially Protected Species as appropriate; 
 
 
Recommend that: 
 
1. 
SCAR, with the assistance of Contracting Parties, CCAMLR and other expert bodies as 
appropriate, are requested to review the list of Specially Protected Species in Appendix 
A to Annex II of the Environmental Protocol. 
 
2. 
The following Terms of Reference should be used by SCAR: 
 
i) Examine the status of those species which are currently designated as Specially 
Protected Species: 
 
    - Genus Arctocephalus (Fur Seals); and 
    - The Ross seal (Ommatophoca rossii). 
 
ii) Examine the status of those species which are not currently designated as Specially 
Protected Species and: 
 
- 
are native to the Antarctic Treaty Area or occur there seasonally through natural                
migration; and 
- 
whose status is of conservation importance whether by virtue of populations 
which are endangered, declining or are restricted in size and/or extent. 
 
iii) With the assistance of IUCN, use the information contained in the IUCN Red Lists 
to help determine the conservation status of native Antarctic fauna and flora;  
4 
 
iv) Provide expert scientific advice to the Committee on Environmental Protection as to 
which species of native Antarctic mammals, birds and plants should be designated by 
the Consultative Parties as Specially Protected Species. 
 
3. 
The review should be completed by 2001, and submitted to the Committee for 
Environmental Protection for discussion at its meeting in that year. 
5 
6 
Background. 
 
The IUCN Red List 
 
Since the 1960s, IUCN has been publishing the Red List of Threatened Species. The aim of 
the Red List is to categorize species at risk according to the severity of the threats facing 
them and to identify the species that are in jeopardy of overall extinction. The Red List is 
produced with the help of more than 7000 scientists working on the IUCN Species Survival 
Commission (SSC). This makes the list the most authoritative assessment on the status of 
species world-wide.  
 
BirdLife International, on behalf of IUCN, are currently undertaking a major review of the 
Red List for Birds, which will be published in October 2000. As part of this review, all 
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic bird species are being assessed by BirdLife International, with 
the assistance of the SCAR Bird Biology Subcommittee, for inclusion in the List. 
