 
JANUARY 1999 MINISTERIAL MEETING IN ANTARCTICA 
 
 
NEW ZEALAND WORKING PAPER 
 
 
New Zealand recommends that the Committee for Environmental Protection 
(CEP) and the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) consider the 
attached communique issued by representatives at the January 1999 Ministerial 
meeting in Antarctica. 
 
COMMUNIQUE 
 
At the invitation of New Zealand, representatives from twenty-three Parties to the 
Antarctic Treaty met informally in the fortieth anniversary year of the Treaty at Ross 
Island, Antarctica, from 25-28 January 1999.  Representatives were hosted by New 
Zealand, with assistance from the Italian and United States Antarctic programmes. 
 
Representatives recorded the achievements of the Treaty in keeping the continent free 
from discord and dedicated to peace and science.  They stressed the importance of the 
entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Treaty (the Madrid 
Protocol) that will promote the protection of the Antarctic environment for the benefit 
of present and future generations. 
 
Representatives noted the importance of the scientific research being conducted in 
Antarctica, in fields such as global climate change, much of which is through successful 
international cooperation.  They stressed the value of this cooperation in fostering the 
aims of the Antarctic Treaty System. 
 
The Antarctic Treaty System is facing new challenges, including pressures from non-
sustainable use of resources.  Representatives expressed in particular their grave 
concern at the threat posed by continuing illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing for 
toothfish.  Representatives pledged themselves to work to meet these new challenges 
and to maintain the integrity of the Antarctic Treaty System.  
 
Representatives drew attention to the integrated nature of the marine and terrestrial 
ecosystems of the Antarctic.  Recalling the origins of the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) as an integral part of 
the Antarctic Treaty System, representatives acknowledged the significance of the work 
of the CCAMLR Commission in the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources.  
They welcomed the prospect of close cooperation between the Committee for 
Environmental Protection established under the Madrid Protocol and the CCAMLR 
Scientific Committee in addressing the threats to the Antarctic ecosystems. 
 
Representatives looked forward to the Twenty-third Consultative Meeting of Parties to 
be held in Lima, Peru, from 24 May to 4 June 1999, and to the commemoration at that 
 
 
WP1.doc 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
WP1.doc 
occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the Antarctic Treaty.  They looked forward to 
making progress at the Meeting on key policy matters, including the further 
development of a Liability Annex, or Annexes, to the Madrid Protocol.   
 
Representatives reaffirmed their commitment to the Antarctic Treaty and to the System 
as the best means of protecting and preserving the Antarctic in the twenty-first century. 
 
Representatives thanked the Government of New Zealand for its kind invitation to 
familiarise themselves with the reality and challenges of Antarctica, and for the 
hospitality and support of the Italian and United States Antarctic programmes. 
 
 
 
Scott Base 
Antarctica 
 
27 January 1999 
