 
XXIII ATCM/ WP33 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
  
Agenda Item 18 
CEP II Agenda Item 9 
 
Annual Exchange of 
Information 
 
 
Submitted by   
Australia
 
 
ANNUAL EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 
 
 
 
1. 
Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty requires Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Parties to inform other Contracting Parties, in advance, of 
(a) 
all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part of its ships or nationals, 
and all expeditions to Antarctica organised in or proceeding from its 
territory; 
(b) 
all stations in Antarctica occupied by its nationals; and 
(c) 
all military personnel or equipment intended to be introduced by it into 
Antarctica subject to the conditions prescribed in paragraph 2 of Article I of 
the present Treaty. 
 
2. 
Prior to 1999 all Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties (ATCPs) reported 
annually to all other Contracting Parties through diplomatic channels.  This 
information is required to be provided in a set format and distributed as a paper 
copy by no later than 30 November each year; few Parties, however, regularly meet 
this deadline. 
 
3. 
In addition to ATCM reporting requirements, COMNAP and SCAR also 
require the exchange of information on an annual basis.  COMNAP requires 
advance information on logistics by no later than 1 September each year and SCAR 
requires information that focuses on planned scientific activities by no later than 1 
June each year. 
 
4. 
ATCM has long recognised the need to review the annual information 
exchange requirements with a view to ensuring that information is provided in a 
timely way to those who require it. 
 
5. 
With the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty and the establishment of the CEP, there has been an increase in 
reporting requirements and a renewed pressure for the Treaty Parties, SCAR and 
COMNAP to rationalise the exchange of information, particularly as there is now 
some duplication of the information being exchanged. 
 
6. 
At ATCM XXII the United States presented Information Paper 28 : 'Improving 
the Annual Exchange of Antarctic Information to ATCM'.  This paper highlighted 
three issues, in particular: 
(a) 
overlap and duplication; 
(b) 
outdated and inefficient mechanisms for preparation and distribution of 
information; and 
(c) 
loss in timely delivery of information. 
 
7. 
As a result of discussions at ATCM XXII, it was agreed that review of the 
annual information exchange requirements would be a priority for ATCM XXIII.  A 
joint e-mail contact group could be formed to undertake a review and/or 
 
1
 
 
2
rationalisation of all exchange reporting requirements.  This group should include 
representatives from Treaty Parties, COMNAP and SCAR. 
 
8. 
ATCM XXII also noted that the web would be a useful method for 
distribution of information and since that time some Parties have started the shift 
from paper to electronic publishing of the annual Treaty exchange of information. 
 
9. 
In late 1998 and early 1999 Australia, Argentina, Belgium and the United 
States of America published on the web for the first time their annual exchange of 
information.  This method of distribution is not only more timely than distribution 
of paper copies but is more cost-effective. 
 
10. 
Australia presents its information exchange web site as a mix of static and 
live reports.  The live reports used by Australia are generated direct from the 
Australian Antarctic Division database and allow Parties to access up-to-date 
information.  At the end of each reporting period Australia converts the live reports 
into static reports for archival purposes. 
 
11. 
It is expected that national web sites will continue to be developed, 
particularly with the rationalisation by ATCM, SCAR and COMNAP of reporting 
requirements and it is anticipated that all Parties will eventually have their 
individual information exchange web sites. 
 
12. 
It should be noted that COMNAP and SCAR have developed individual web 
sites.  The COMNAP home page has links to advance information exchange reports 
with some of the information being passworded.  SCAR has yet to include links to 
its information exchange reports. 
 
13. 
Resolution 5 (1998) called for the establishment of an ATCM home page to be 
maintained by the host government of the following year's ATCM.  To enable easy 
access of the ATCM, SCAR and COMNAP exchange reports, it is proposed that a list 
of all Parties be included on the ATCM home page with links to national exchange 
web sites. 
 
14. 
It is suggested that: 
 
(a) 
a joint e-mail contact group be formed to undertake a review of all 
exchange reporting requirements.  This group should include 
representatives from Treaty Parties, COMNAP and SCAR; 
 
(b) 
all Parties be encouraged to establish their individual information 
exchange web sites as soon as practicable; and 
 
(c) 
a list of all Parties be included on the ATCM home page with links to 
national information exchange web sites. 
 
