XXIII ATCM/ WP34 
May, 1999 
Original: English 
  
Agenda Item 10 
 
Draft Annex on Environmental 
Liability to the Madrid Protocol 
 
 
Submitted by   
Chile  
 
 
Draft Annex on Environmental Liability to the Madrid Protocol 
 
 
I 
 
PURPOSE 
 
 
The purpose of this Annex is, consistent with the objective and the environmental 
principles of the Protocol, to strengthen the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associate ecosystems, to promote the prevention, 
minimization and containment of damage to such environment and ecosystems, and provide 
as appropriate for reinstatement, rehabilitation and compensation for damage to such 
environment and ecosystems. 
 
 
2 
 
SCOPE OF APPLICATION 
 
 
1.- This Annex shall aply to liability for damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent 
or associated ecosystems arising from activities in the Antarctic Treaty area which have 
been undertaken after the date of entry into force of this Annex and which are covered by 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
2.- No liability is incurred under the present Annex for damage arising from acts or events 
covered by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, 
including its conservation measures, or the Convention for Conservation of Antarctic Seals, 
or the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. This does not, however, 
preclude the application of this Annex to damage caused in connection with acts or events 
covered by those Conventions, but which are not subject to regulation by those 
Conventions. 
 
 
3 
 
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS 
 
 
1.- Nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the rights and obligations of the Parties to 
this Annex under other international instruments in force in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
2.- Nothing in this Annex shall be construed as derogating or limiting in any way the 
provisions concerning the protection, reinstatement or rehabilitation of the Antarctic 
environment and dependent and associate ecosystems, wich may be provided under the 
 
1
laws of any Party or under any other international agreement to which it is a Party and may 
be presently in force or enter subsequently into force in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
 
4 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
For the purposes of this Annex 
 
(a) "Damage" means any adverse effect, unless insignificant or transitory  of an impact on 
the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems, caused by an activity in 
the Antarctic Treaty area. It does not include the effects of an impact caused by an activity 
that: 
i) 
has been duly assessed in an IIE or CEE in accordance with Article 8 and Annex I 
to the Protocol and has been judged acceptable in accordance with the prescribed 
procedures. 
ii) 
the adverse effects of which are within reasonably acceptable limits in accordance 
with the values, criteria and standards contained in the Protocol and in its Annexes 
when providing for unavoidable consequences of scientific activity and of the 
operation of scientific support facilities. 
iii) 
could not have been foreseen as constituting or generating an impact with a 
significant and lasting effect in the light of the state of scientific knowledge which 
prevailed at the time the activity was assessed, provided that such activity was not 
prohibited by the Protocol. 
 
(b) "Incident" means any sudden or continuous occurrence or any series of occurrences  
having the same origin, which causes or threatens to cause an impact with adverse  effects. 
(c) "Precautionary measures" means measures intended to provide advance protection to 
the Antarctic environment and dependent and associate ecosystems and preventing an 
incident from taking place, or otherwise minimising or mitigating its possible effects. 
(d) "Response measures" means any measures taken after an incident has occurred and 
designed to prevent, minimise or mitigate an impact and its effects, including 
prevention, containment, clean up and removal measures. 
(e) "Measures of reinstatement" means any measure aiming to reinstate or rehabilitate 
destroyed components of the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated 
ecosystems, or otherwise assess equitable options including, where reasonable, 
introducing the equivalent of these components into such environments or ecosystems. 
(f)  "Unrepaired damage" means damage that can reasonably not be repaired, or that can 
reasonably be repaired, but for which measures of reinstatement have not been actually 
undertaken. 
(g)  "Reasonable" as applied to precautionary measures, response measures, measures of 
reinstatement and unrepaired damage, means measures which are appropriate and 
proportionate, having regard to all circumstances, including prior assessments and 
informed judgements concerning any planned activity, made in accordance with article 
3.c of the Protocol, in the case of precautionary measures; 
 
 
2
 
 
i) 
the nature and extent of damage incurred, and the risk of further damage, in the 
case of response measures, further response measures, and measures of 
reinstatement; 
ii) 
the extent to which, at the time they are taken, such measures are likely to be 
effective, considering the availability of scientific knowledge to monitor key 
environmental parameters and ecosystem components, of technology and 
procedures for environmentally safe operations and of the capacity to respond 
promptly and effectively to accidents with potential environmental effects. 
iii) 
the rate of natural recovery of the Antarctic environment or dependent or 
associated ecosystems threatened or actually damaged by an incident. 
 
(h) "Operator" means 
 
i) 
A State Party; 
ii) 
Any natural or juridical person, public or private and of whatever nationality, who 
organizes an activity or expedition in the Antarctic Treaty  area provided that such 
person is or may be brought under effective jurisdiction of a Party. 
(i) "Protocol" means the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 
(j) "The Fund" means the Fund for Antarctic Environmental Protection to be established 
by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) under Article IX of  the 
Antarctic Treaty. 
 
 
5 
 
DUTY TO COOPERATE 
 
 
1.- In compliance with Article 6 of the Protocol, Parties shall cooperate in the planning and 
conduct of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, mutually assist each other, consult and 
share information on potential risks to the Antarctic environment and dependent and 
associated ecosystems, promote scientific research concerning the protection of such 
environment and ecosystems, establish contingency plans for response to incidents with 
potential adverse effects and carry out such steps as may be agreed upon at Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Meetings, pursuant to advice or recommendations from the Committee for 
Environmental Protection. 
 
2.- Taking into account the need to avoid detrimental effects on dependent and associated 
ecosystems, Parties shall cooperate with those Parties which may exercise jurisdiction in 
areas adjacent to the Antarctic  Treaty area with a view to ensuring that activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty area do not have adverse environmental impacts on those areas. 
 
 
3
 
6 
 
OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES 
 
 
   Parties shall take appropriate measures within their competence, as set forth in Article 13 
of the Protocol, to ensure compliance with this Annex. 
 
7 
 
STRICT  LIABILITY 
 
    Liability arising from activities in the  Antarctic Treaty area which have been undertaken 
after the entry into force of this Annex shall be strict. 
 
8 
 
JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY 
 
 
1.-  When damage has been directly caused by two or more operators, all such operators 
shall be jointly and severally liable for such damage. 
 
2.-  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1,, each operator is entitled to: 
 
i) 
demonstrate that only part of the damage was caused by him; 
ii) 
the specific limits of liability which apply to his case; and  
iii) 
his right to seek recourse on other liable operators. 
 
9 
 
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE ACTION 
 
 
Within the cooperative framework set forth by Article 5, an operator shall: 
 
a) take reasonable precautionary measures to prevent, to the extent possible, the 
occurrence of incidents and shall prepare contingency plans which identify measures to 
minimize or mitigate the impact of incidents; 
 
b) take timely and reasonable response measures if an incident occurs; and 
 
c) take further response action to clean up or otherwise remedy any damage, to the extent 
that damage resulting from the incident can be repaired, in compliance with Article 10 
of this Annex. 
 
 
4
 
10 
 
DETERMINATION CONCERNING FURTHER RESPONSE ACTION 
 
1. The State Party exercising jurisdiction on the operator shall determine through the 
procedures prescribed in Annex 1 to the Protocol if further response action is required 
after an incident attributable to its operator has ocurred. When making this assessment, 
criteria set forth in article 4, as well as any guidelines or recommendations provided by 
the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) and approved by the ATCM shall 
be duly taken into account. 
 
2. If the State Party decides that no further Response action is required it shall notify 
accordingly all other Parties and the CEP. 
 
3. If no such assessment is carried out and neither the operator nor the State Party 
exercising jurisdiction have taken timely and reasonable response action or further 
response action, the State Party exercising jurisdiction on the operator to whom the 
incident is attributable shall authorise other State Parties or operators to take response 
action or further response action. 
 
4. If the specific circumstances of the case do not allow any delay without grave and 
imminent danger of further damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent or 
associated ecosystems, a Party may exceptionally proceed to notify the State Party 
exercising jurisdiction on the operator to whom the incident is  attributable that it is 
taking the appropriate response action. It shall also notify the CEP to  that effect. 
 
 
11 
 
LIABILITY FOR REIMBURSEMENT 
 
1. An operator to whom the incident is attributable shall reimburse the cost incurred by  a 
State Party or by another operator for reasonable response or further response action 
taken under article 10 paragraphs 3 and 4. 
     An  operator to whom the incident is attributable shall provide compensation to  
     the Fund  for Antarctic Environmental Protection mentioned in Article 17 in the  
     event that 
 
a) damage cannot be repaired; or 
b) damage can be repaired but measures of reinstatement have not been undertaken 
within three years of the occurrence of the incident. 
 
 
5
 
12 
 
COMPENSATION FOR UNREPAIRED DAMAGE 
 
An  operator to whom the incident is attributable shall provide compensation to the Fund  
for Antarctic Environmental Protection mentioned in Article 17 in the event that 
c) damage cannot be repaired; or 
d) damage can be repaired but measures of reinstatement have not been undertaken 
within three years of the occurrence of the incident. 
 
 
13 
 
STATE LIABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY 
 
 
1. A State  Party shall not be liable merely for the reason that damage has resulted 
from an incident attributable to an operator under its jurisdiction. 
2. Damage which would not have occurred or continued if a State Party had fulfilled 
its obligations under Article 13 of the Protocol and Article 6 of this Annex shall, in 
accordance with international law, entail liability of that State Party. Such liability 
shall be limited to that portion of liability not satisfied by the operator provided that 
the existence of a genuine link between that State Party and the liable operator 
ensures the exercise of effective jurisdiction by the  State Party on the operator. 
3. Nothing in paragraph 2 above shall affect the application of existing rules of 
international law concerning State responsibility and the further development of  
such rules of international law. 
 
 
14 
 
EXTENT OF LIABILITY 
 
 
The operator shall not be liable under this Annex if the failure to fulfill his obligations was  
caused by: 
 
(a) an event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an 
exceptional  character which could not have been reasonably foreseen; 
(b) an act of  war, hostilities, terrorism, or and act done with the intent to cause damage by 
a third party against which no reasonable safety measures could have been effective; 
(c) an act in a case of emergency to save human life, ships, aircraft or equipment or 
facilities of high value or to protect the environment, unless the emergency giving rise 
to the exemption was caused by the operator. 
 
 
 
6
15 
 
FINANCIAL  LIMITS 
 
Liability for damage under this Annex shall not exceed .... 
 
 
16 
 
TIME LIMITS OF LIABILITY 
 
 
Rights of compensation under this Annex, including those brought under Articles 18, 19 
and 20 of this Annex, may be subject to a  limitation period of... years from the date of 
occurrence of the incident, or the date that the incident and the resulting damage, as well as 
the identity of the operator, ought reasonably to have been known. 
 
 
17 
 
INSURANCE OR OTHER FINANCIAL SECURITY 
 
 
Parties shall ensure that non-State operators conducting activities in the Antarctic Treaty 
area be required to have and maintain insurance or other financial security, such as the 
guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover liability for damage up to the 
limits specified in Article 14 of this Annex. 
 
 
18 
 
THE FUND 
 
 
1. Parties commit themselves to the establishment of an Antarctic Environmental 
Protection Fund, hereinafter "the Fund", whose terms of reference shall be adopted and 
developed by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM) under Article IX of 
the Antartic Treaty. 
2. The Fund shall be administered by the Secretariat on behalf of the Antarctic Treaty 
Consultative Parties. 
3. The Fund shall undertake the following activities, in order of priority: 
 
(a) activities in furtherance of the fulfillment of Parties and of operators obligations 
under this Annex, including cooperative action such as envisaged in Article 5 of 
this Annex. 
(b) reinstatement or rehabilitation of destroyed components of the Antarctic 
environment or dependent or associated ecosystems. 
 
7
(c) other purpose in furtherance of the Protocol. 
 
4. Any Party to the Annex may make proposals for projects to be paid by proceeds from 
the Fund. The ATCM shall request the advice of the CEP on these proposals. 
5. The Fund shall seek recovery from a liable operator wherever activities undertaken 
under paragraph 3 of this Article are attributable to the failure of the operator to comply 
with his obligations under this Annex. 
6. The Fund is authorized to receive voluntary contributions. Such contributions and any 
other income recieved by the Fund may only be invested in accordance with paragraph 
3 of this Article. 
7. In order to appropriately fulfill the functions imposed in paragraph 3 of this Article, the 
Fund shall be empowered to take such actions in furtherance of the Protocol and of this 
Annex as decided by the ATCM. 
 
 
19 
 
UNREPAIRED DAMAGE AND ENVIRONMENTAL REINSTATEMENT 
 
1. 
The Parties shall notify the other Parties to this Annex, the Fund and the Committee 
for Environmental Protection (CEP) of any case of unrepaired damage which has 
been caused or may have been caused by an operator under their jurisdiction or has 
otherwise come to their attention. 
2. 
Where damage remains unrepaired and measures of  reinstatement or rehabilitation 
have not been undertaken within two years of the occurrence of the incident, the 
liable operator shall provide compensation to the Fund in accordance with the 
guidelines adopted by the ATCM pursuant to advice or recommendations provided 
by the Inquiry Committee established in accordance with the procedures prescribed 
in Article 19. 
3. 
The Fund shall thereafter undertake reinstatement or rehabilitation of the damage 
components of the Antarctic Environment when such damage can reasonably and 
feasible be repaired. The Fund shall also consider undertaking reinstatement or 
rehabilitation in other situations provided the following criteria are applied: 
 
(a) Damage consisting of adverse effects on climate or weather patterns; significant 
adverse effects on air and water quality or significant changes in atmospheric, 
terrestrial or marine environments; detrimental changes in the structure of species 
or further jeopardy to them; and degradation to, or substantial risk of such 
degradation to areas of scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness significance 
mentioned in Article 3.b of the Protocol must always be assessed as unrepaired; 
(b) Where damage remains unrepaired due to objective physical, technical, economic 
or environmental reasons, additional criteria should be made available for 
assessment of such damage including: 
i) 
partial reinstatement of those destroyed components of the Antarctic  
          environment or dependent or associated ecosystems which can           
          effectively be returned to the  statu quo ante; or 
ii) 
rehabilitation of those components to the extent that they can be  
 
8
         enabled to perform their systemic functions; or 
iii) 
introduction of the equivalent of those components, when ecologically 
feasible and advisable. 
 
(c)  Environmental reinstatement or rehabilitation in situations where       damage 
must always be assessed as unrepaired or has  remained unrepaired due to objective 
reasons shall not be undertaken by the Fund without prior agreement of the ATCM 
pursuant to advice or recommendations provided by the above mentioned Inquiry 
Committee. 
 
 
20 
 
ASSESSMENT, INQUIRY AND DISPUTE SETTLEMENT  
 
1. 
Subject to paragraph 2, 3, 4 and 5 below, disputes between Parties concerning the 
interpretation or application of this Annex shall be settled in accordance with 
Articles 18, 19 and 20 of the Protocol. 
2. 
Actions against non-governmental operators concerning rights to reimbursement 
under Article 11.1, rights of recourse under Article 8.2 or any other matter regarding 
exclusive reciprocal relations among non-governmental operators may be brought at 
competent court of a Party exercising jurisdiction on the defendant operator when 
the operator 
a) has the nationality of that Party; or 
b) has his habitual residence or has organized the activity which caused the 
incident in the territory of that Party. 
     Each Party shall ensure that its courts shall have jurisdiction to hear and        
     determine actions brought in accordance with this paragraph. 
3. 
The ATCM shall elaborate an Inquiry Procedure to facilitate the resolution of 
disputes concerning the interpretation or application of Article 3 of the Protocol 
with respect to activities undertaken or proposed to be undertaken in the Antarctic 
Treaty area and to liability for damage arising from such activities. 
4. 
The ATCM shall  establish, in accordance with the Inquiry Procedure and as a 
Subsidiary Body of the CEP an Inquiry Committee composed of seven  
          members, and  adopt  its  terms of reference, including the provision of      
          advice,  recommendations and findings on i.a. 
(a) the application of the Inquiry Procedure to matters concerning liability for 
damage to the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated      
          ecosystems; 
(b) guidelines for the calculation of compensation to be paid in cases of unrepaired 
damage by the liable operator to the Fund; 
(c) decisions concerning environmental reinstatement or rehabilitation in cases of 
unrepaired damage; 
(d) the prescription of provisional measures, pending a decision on reinstatement or 
rehabilitation in situations of unrepaired damage, in order to prevent further 
serious harm to the Antarctic environment or dependent or associated 
ecosystems; 
 
9
 10
(e) Policies, administration and operation of the Fund. 
 
5. 
The Inquiry Committee shall report its advice, recommendations or findings     
          to the ATCM through the Chairman of the CEP. 
 
 
21 
 
AMENDMENT  OR  MODIFICATION  
 
1. 
This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with 
Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the 
amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall 
become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting (ATCM) at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic 
Treaty Parties notifies the Depositary, within that period, that it wishes an extension 
of the period or that it is unable to approve the measure. 
2. 
Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in 
accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other 
Party when notice of appoval by it has been received by the Depositary. 
