The Question of Liability as Referred to in Article 16 of the Protocol 
 
 
1) Referring to paragraph 3c of Decision 3 (1998) Germany is of the opinion that further 
negotiations on an Liability Annex or Annexes should start with an in depth 
deliberation of inputs from SCAR, COMNAP and others on risk assessment. Germany 
will contribute to the discussions by submitting an Information Paper under agenda 
item 10. Though all national research institutions active in Antarctica as well as the 
Federal Environmental Agency participated in preparing this information paper, it 
proved to be very difficult to collect concrete data and facts which are necessary for 
risk assessment. 
 
2) Therefore, Germany referring to Decision 3 (1998) and in order to speed up the 
forthcoming negotiations proposes to establish a task force. It should be asked in 
parallel with the deliberations of Working Group I 
 
- 
to discuss the papers submitted by CEP, SCAR, COMNAP as well as other 
contributions, e.g. by Consultative Parties, and to draw appropriate conclusions 
 
- 
to elaborate guidelines for the calculation of the amount of compensation, i.a. in the 
case of unrepaired damage 
 
- 
 to recommend limits  
 
- 
 and to identify major outstanding problems of insurability and insurance rates 
 
The task force should submit its findings and recommendations to WG I as soon as 
possible.  
 
 
3) Opinions and statements  on legal provisions such as insurance, limits, strict liability, 
joint liability, the definition of damage, especially unrepaired damage, and the fund 
depend on a thorough collection and analysis of facts on the financial magnitude of 
damage, insurability etc. Germany therefore will reserve its final position on pertinent 
provisions until objective information on the aforementioned issues is available. 
Before agreeing to a liability annex there must be certainty, that activities with 
potential liability consequences are insurable and that the insurance will amount to an 
order of magnitude which is affordable and justifiable in budgetary terms. 
 
1 
