Reporting on the State of the Antarctic Environment: 
The SCAR view 
 
Working Paper submitted to CEP II, Agenda Item 7 
 
 
SCAR wishes to express its appreciation of Dr Anders Modig’s efforts to coordinate the 
work of the intersessional open-ended contact group considering the need for, and the 
development of, a State of the Antarctic Environment Report (SAER).  SCAR is also grateful 
for being included in the electronic distribution of the papers relating to this work.  SCAR 
has followed carefully the various arguments presented and wishes to make the following 
comments. 
 
SCAR considers these are good scientific reasons for undertaking some form of synthesis of 
available data on the Antarctic continent and the Southern Ocean.  It is also one way of 
meeting  the Protocol requirement that the Committee for Environmental Protection provide 
advice on the state of the Antarctic environment. 
 
The intersessional group appears to have largely reached agreement that the audience should 
be “decision- and policy-makers, including governments and the CEP”.  SCAR agrees with 
that. 
 
It is clear from experience elsewhere that a comprehensive synthesis of all available data will 
be a major undertaking and one that could not be accomplished quickly.  However, an 
overview of a range of key indicators is a realistic proposition, especially if resources are 
available to support  a small group dedicated to the task.  SCAR suggests that the level of 
synthesis shown in the Arctic SAER is adequate, although more extensive and longer term 
work is probably justified in some fields.  These fields will be determined by the synthesis.  
 
SCAR agrees with the five “Discussed Objectives” listed in the Working Paper by the 
Intersessional Open-ended Contact Group. 
 
Scientifically it would not be sensible to use the Treaty area boundary for any synthesis since 
this does not accord with any physical or biological feature.  SCAR remains convinced that 
the Polar Front is the most scientifically acceptable boundary. 
 
There is still clearly some disagreement on the need for an SAER and on the value and 
practical uses of the product.  SCAR believes that an interim synthesis, as suggested in inter-
sessional discussions, would be unlikely to be helpful.  On scientific grounds SCAR 
continues to believe in the value of a continent-wide synthesis and SCAR would be willing to 
assist in the compilation of such a synthesis but this must be adequately resourced. 
 
From much experience SCAR suggests that, should it be agreed to proceed with an SAER, it 
is unlikely that any definitive review or assessment could be achieved by a loosely co-
ordinated intersessional group with no fixed membership.  SCAR considers that to achieve 
even the limited objectives proposed it is essential to agree a task force with a defined 
membership, objectives, time-scale, deliverables and resources. 
 
 
1 
2 
Proposal 
It seems clear from the inter-sessional discussions that for some Parties there continues to be 
a lack of evidence on which to base a decision on whether or not to proceed with an SAER.  
SCAR suggests that one way forward might be for SCAR to be asked to produce a paper 
describing the key environmental variables that need to be considered and why; suggest 
present and future threats to the Antarctic environment; and indicate how these link with state 
of the environment reports for other parts of the world. 
