Development of Guidelines for the Protected Area Designation Process 
 
New Zealand Working Paper 
 
1. Introduction  - the need for guidelines 
 
The second Antarctic Protected Areas Workshops was held in Lima on 22-23 May at the 
instigation of the CEP. Inn this paper New Zealand presents a conceptual framework 
linking Annex V with workshop  proceedings and recommendations which could provide a 
start point for an intersessional contact group to develop further guidance on protected 
areas. 
 
   The discussion groups at the workshop each made contributions which can be grouped 
into a process for designating protected areas. These could develop into a set of tools to 
assist proponents of protected areas. These contributions are summarised here in a 
sequence. 
 
    A set of guidelines for designating protected areas in Antarctica would assist the parties 
and the CEP apply Annex V of the environmental protocol. Guidelines will enable more 
systematic identification and selection of areas that might received grater protection. They 
will facilitate methodological evaluation and designation . This seen as a comparable 
approach to the preparation to the EIA procedure guidelines under the Protocol in an 
intersessional contact group coordinated by Argentina following CEP I. 
 
2.- Overall Framework from the Protocol  ( Annex V, articles 3,1 and 3.2) 
 
     The  Protected Area Workshop and this summary focus on articles 3 and 6 of Annex V. 
The workshop reaffirmed that the legal framework for the protected area system provided 
by the protocol and its annexes, especially Annex V, provided  a good basis for developing 
guidelines. Article 3.1 provides a clear list of the outstanding values to be protected. Article 
3.2 provides a list of area categories. 
 
     The attached figure summarises Articles 3.1 and 3.2. It also places the relevant work of 
the discussion groups at the workshop in this context. 
 
3. Area  Categories 
 
Article 3,2 is a list of categories of area ( see figure ). These categories include a variety of 
types of area that can be protected. However it is not a uniform series of values, features or 
uses of Antarctic protected areas. In addition, discussion Group 3 and others noted that 
some of the categories ( eg ( c) assemblages of species and ( g ), aesthetic and wilderness 
value ) need a better practical understanding. 
 
 
4. Protection and Use Categories  
 
   Group 1 identified a conceptual methodological to help understand what is being 
protected and why ( see figure ) in a systematic way. Such a methodological will allow the 
important components or attributes and objectives of possible protected areas ( ie candidate 
protected areas ) to be more clearly identified. It will also help ensure that useful candidates 
are selected in a more standard way for further work  ( eg ranking and development of 
management plans).  
 
5. Priorisation  
 
 
Once candidates areas are identified they should be prioritised  ( ie ranked ), Three sets of 
tools ( or criteria for priorisation ) were identified by groups 2 and 4. They are 
environmental risk, quality and feasibility ( see figure ) 
 
6. Drafting Managing Plans 
 
Once candidate areas have been prioritised , the most appropiate area candidates are then 
ready for the next stages in the process. Firstly, a draft management plan is prepared as 
required by articles 5, 7 and 10 of Annex V following Guidelines for Management Plans. 
These guidelines were recommended by CEP I and adopted at ATCM XXII in 1998. 
 
7. Procedures for review of Draft Management Plans 
 
The final stage in the designation process involves consideration of a draft management 
plan following the outline in Article 6 of Annex  V. Group 5 presented a flow diagram 
of the procedure proposed for the submission and evaluation of these plans. Group 5 
noted that this would also apply to revisions of protected areas which have been 
designated previously. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The CEP establish an open ended contact group including SCAR, COMNAP  and other 
interest experts, in accordance with Rule  9 of the CEP Rules of Procedure, to further 
developed guidelines for protected areas. The group will work by email and have the 
following tasks: 
1. Further elaboration of categories under Article 3.2 as suggested by Discussion 
Group 3 and Section 3 above; 
2. Further elaboration of the framework suggested by discussion group 1 in order to 
demonstrate how important components and objectives of possible protected can be 
more clearly identified using this framework ( refer to section 4 above ); 
3. Demonstration of the use of tools for priorisation and evaluation of protected areas ( 
refer to section 5 above ); 
4. Further exploration of how SCAR’s ecosystem matrix might be used  with the 
above tools and broad geological, geographic and climatic information tom create a 
practical regional basis for the systematic environmental geographic framework 
referred to in Article 3.2; 
    5.     Report back to CEP III.   
 
 
Antarctic Protected Areas 
Conceptual Framework 
 
The protocol provides the framework with a statement of values and area categories. 
 
Values ( Annex V, Article 3.1) 
  Environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic, wilderness 
 
 
Protected Areas categories ( Annex V, Article 3, para 2) 
• Areas kept inviolate from human transference 
• Representative ecosystem 
• Important-unusual species assemblages 
• Type-only species locality 
• Area of interest for ongoing research 
• Outstanding geological, glaciological or geomorphological features 
• Aesthetic –wilderness value 
• Historic value 
• Other as appropiate 
 
 
Protection and use of categories and criteria for prioritising arte proposed as useful tools to 
assist in the implementation of Protected Areas. 
 
 
 
Protection Categories 
( What is being protected ) 
• Ecosystem 
• Habitat 
• Species 
• Landscape 
• Environmental features 
• Cultural features 
 
Use Categories 
( why the area is being protected ) 
• Science 
• Conservation 
• Intrinsic 
 
 
 
 
 
Criteria 
 
Quality 
Representativeness 
Uniqueness-rarity 
Biodiversity 
Geodiversity 
Naturalness 
Education potential 
Scientific importance 
Aesthetic quality 
 
Environmental risk 
Human activities 
Impact 
Natural variability 
Species Vulnerability 
Fragility 
Area 
Non Antarctic threats 
Urgency 
 
Feasibility 
Boundaries 
Conflicts 
Size 
Possible Management 
Tools 
Time periosd-duration 
Politics 
Ability to satisfy different 
Area categories 
( Complimentarity )  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
