Operation of Working Group II  
 
 
Background 
At ATCM XXII Working Group II (WG II), during their discussion on the items to be 
included for the agenda for ATCM XXIII, had a preliminary exchange of views on 
questions related to the future ways and means of conducting the business of WG II 
more efficiently.  It was felt that the valuable ideas raised in this discussion should be 
brought forward to ATCM XXIII for more comprehensive consideration and decision.  
A summary of the discussion was presented by the Chair of Working Group II to the 
ATCM Plenary.  The presentation was attached as Appendix 2 to the Final Report of 
ATCM XXII. 
 
In para (49) of the Final Report of ATCM XXII, the following is reported regarding 
this issue: 
 
(49) The Meeting had a preliminary exchange of views on questions related to the 
future ways and means of conducting ATCM business more efficiently.  During that 
discussion, many valuable ideas were raised.  The Meeting requested Norway as the 
Host Government to forward the summary of the ideas presented by the Chairman of 
Working Group II for consideration at ATCM XXIII. 
 
 
Issues raised in the discussion at ATCM XXII 
The discussion at ATCM XXII focused on how WG II could conduct its business 
more efficiently in support of inter alia Article IX of the Treaty.  The following ideas 
were brought forward by the Chairman of Working Group II for consideration: 
 
• Priority should be put on scientific research and cooperation in support of main 
objectives set out in Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. 
 
• WG II should focus and prioritize substantive issues of interest to all or at least a 
majority of Parties.   
 
• Among major issues mentioned were:  inspections under the Antarctic Treaty; 
specific science issues based i.a. on inputs from experts and observers; operations 
issues such as the Polar Code; rationalization and information exchange and 
channels, 
 
• Observers and expert groups should be invited to, in addition to their general 
reports to ATCM Plenary, present proposals on specific, important issues where 
ATCM consideration and follow-up action would seem particularly desirable.  
ATCM should in turn focus on the results of scientific research as reported i.a. by 
SCAR. 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
• During the meetings focus of discussion should be on Working Papers.  Parties 
should be advised to not introduce Information Papers orally, unless they had been 
requested to do so by another Party or unless it felt that the paper was of special 
relevance to a major topic under discussion. 
 
 
 
Proposal 
It is recommended that the ATCM discusses the above issues and other relevant 
issues, and considers whether these issues should in some manner be reflected as the 
mode of operation for the working group.   
 
 
