 
 
Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP): 
“A Discussion Paper“ 
 
I. Introduction 
 
After the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty had entered into 
force on 14 January 1998, the Committee on Environmental Protection (CEP) was 
established in accordance with Art. 11 of the Protocol. 
 
The CEP had its inaugural meeting on the 25 to the 29 May 1998 in conjunction with the 
XXII ATCM in Tromsö. The CEP, after adopting its rules of procedure, became 
operational and began discussing issues assigned to it and reported back to the ATCM. 
It soon became clear, that the inception of the CEP would have an impact on the 
organisational structure of the ATCM in particular with respect to WG II of the ATCM. 
This aspect was highlighted in paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 of the report of the CEP to the 
XXII ATCM and in paragraph 39 of the Final Report of the XXII ATCM.  
 
Issues regarding the establishment of the CEP were also addressed in XXI/ATCM WP 
2/Rev. 1(submitted by Netherlands/New Zealand/South Africa), XXII/ATCM WP 20, WP 
23 and WP 24 (submitted by Norway, New Zealand/ the Netherlands and United Kingdom 
respectively). 
This paper is intended to raise some further points of discussion regarding the 
interrelationship between the CEP and the organisational structure of the ATCM with 
particular reference to WG II.  
 
II. Principal deliberations 
 
With the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection, environmental 
issues form the second important pillar of our work in the ATCM. The first pillar and core 
of the Antarctic Treaty, however, remains science and research in the Antarctica, which are 
the actual reason for our consultative status. In addition, environmental protection also 
benefits from research, because it addresses to a large extent global climate issues. This 
equilibrium of science and research on one side and environmental protection on the other 
side also has to be reflected in the institutions of the ATCM. This means that WG II has to 
be retained. At the same time, an adaptation and new orientation of the work of WG II are 
necessary in the long term. 
 
1 
III. Role and function of the CEP and WG II of the ATCM 
 
1) The role, competence and functions of the CEP which are described in numerous articles 
of the Protocol and its annexes (e.g. Art. 10,11 or 12 of the protocol) can be summarised as 
providing environmental, technical and scientific advice to the ATCM on the 
implementation and effectiveness of the Protocol. From this description follows that the 
CEP is an advisory, non-political organ. 
 
2) The competence and functions of the WG II of the ATCM are not clearly described but 
were developed by working practice. Technical, scientific and environmental issues such 
as tourism, inspections or science in general were addressed by WG II, whereas WG I 
discussed issues of a more political nature.  
 
In this context, one should also recall the important impetus and contributions that WG II 
has given to the work of the ATCM's in the field of scientific research and logistic 
activities in the past. 
 
The description of the competencies of the two aforementioned bodies within the ATCM 
implies that there could be a duplication of work and therefore a clarification on the 
division of labour is warranted. 
 
IV. Premises of the future relationship between the CEP and WG II 
 
- the CEP is an advisory, non-political body 
- the CEP is still at a formative stage. More experience has to be gained as to the 
interactive  
  relationship of the CEP and WG II 
- duplication of work has to be avoided in order to ensure an effective functioning of the  
  ATCM 
- the principle of cost-effectiveness in relation to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty 
System  
   has to be observed 
- the financial aspect has to be taken into account. This means that the costs of a CEP 
meeting  
  have to be borne by the host country. 
 
 
 
2 
3 
V. Conclusions 
 
In the light of the above some preliminary conclusions can be drawn: 
It is premature to make a definite assessment of the impact of the establishment of the CEP 
on the organisational structure of the Antarctic Treaty System. After a good start of the 
CEP some time is needed for the CEP to fulfill its tasks in practice and to find its role 
within the institutional framework of the ATCM. The CEP also has to gain some practical 
experience in implementing its rules of procedure. Since all this needs time, the real 
consequences of the establishment of the CEP for the ATCM can only realistically be 
assessed in the future. We should therefore draw more comprehensive conclusions after the 
working experience of a few more ATCM’s. This should not prevent us in the meantime 
from pondering some aspects of the CEP and WG II and to make first steps to adjust the 
work of the CEP and WG II.  
 
Thought should also be given in relation to a more focused operation of the CEP and WG 
II in order to avoid duplication of work. Bearing this principle in mind the CEP already 
agreed on a priority agenda hereby concentrating its work programme on some essential 
issues such as the Environmental Impact Assessment or the Protected Areas.  
 
The principle of concentration and efficiency has also to be applied to WG II. This could 
mean that WG II should reduce the exchange of information and focus more on 
coordinating and planning logistic and research activities orienting its deliberations 
towards a more decision-based work. 
 
 
