 
XXIII ATCM/ WP28 
 
May 1999 
 
English 
 
Original: Spanish 
 
 
Agenda Item 15 
 
CEP II Agenda Item 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact Group on Renewable Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
 
Peru
 
CONTACT GROUP ON RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
 
Introduction 
 
To meet the energy needs of the Antarctic stations, there is a significant flow of 
fossil fuels to the region, with the ensuing risk of spills during their transportation, 
unloading, and storage. Additionally, as a result of fuel combustion, noxious gases, 
including carbon monoxide, nitrous and sulphurous oxides, are released into the atmosphere. 
 
Some of the non-conventional energy sources that had been tested in previous years 
with less than fully satisfactory results have now reached a higher level of technological 
development. New methods to harness alternative sources of energy have emerged, while 
research and development of new technologies in this field continue. 
 
Wind energy is already a technically feasible alternative in spite of the strong 
Antarctic winds. In the summer, solar energy can be used by photovoltaic panels not only to 
generate electricity, but also to heat water. Recently, the feasibility of using small-scale 
hydroelectric projects to harness energy released by melting glaciars has been shown. 
Technologies such as fuel cells, thermal gradients and the efficient use of energy are being 
researched. The latter is considered as a potential source, because it reduces fuel 
consumption. 
 
Energy is necessary for power generation, as well as room and water heating. Each 
use can be met by a renewable energy source. 
 
Background 
 
The exchange of data and information in accordance with the Treaty has generated 
considerable interest. The issue of renewable energy sources includes aspects of 
technological development that are vital in planning Antarctic stations and should be taken 
into account in the future. 
 
The concern regarding the response to potential spills should be added to a reduction 
in the volume of fuel transported to Antarctica. To this end, the use of renewable energy 
sources is, therefore, an appropriate alternative. 
 
A Contact Group has already been established in Latin America for the exchange of 
information on renewable energy. This Contact Group is gathering scientific and technical 
experiences with the assessment of renewable energy sources and the development of 
appropriate technologies for the Antarctic environment. 
 
 
2
DRAFT 
 
 
Considering: 
 
1. 
That renewable energy sources can partially meet the energy demand in 
Antarctic stations, thereby decreasing fuel handling in the region and 
reducing the environmental impact of Antarctic stations. 
 
2. 
The need for an efficient use of the resources available to the Parties for 
applied research and technological development in this field. 
 
3. 
The advantages of a fluid communication among researchers and users of 
renewable energy technology. 
 
The following is recommended: 
 
1. 
To name contacts in the respective national agencies to strengthen the 
technical and scientific expertise in the assessment and utilization of 
renewable energy in Antarctica. 
 
2. 
To establish a Contact Group on Renewable Energy, to be coordinated by 
Peru, to facilitate the exchange of information. 
