1 
 
 
 
LIABILITY 
Draft proposal by the Netherlands 
 
 
Article 1 
 
Definitions 
 
 
 
For the purposes of this Annex: 
 
(a) 
"impact" means any harmful effect unless insignificant, on the Antarctic environment 
or on dependent or associated ecosystems, caused by an activity in the Antarctic 
Treaty area. It does not include an effect which is the result  of an activity that: 
 
(1) has been assessed in a CEE in accordance with Article 8 of the Protocol and 
Annex I to the Protocol, 
 
(2) has been judged acceptable in accordance with such procedure, and 
 
(3) the harmful effects of which are within reasonably acceptable limits considering 
the consequences that are normally to be expected from such activity; 
 
(b) 
"damage" means: 
 
 
(i) 
the costs of response measures; 
 
 
(ii) 
the costs of measures of reinstatement; 
 
 
(iii) 
compensation payable to the Fund under Article 7 of this Annex; 
 
 
to the extent these costs or compensation are the result of an impact.  
 
(c) 
"incident" means any sudden or continuous occurrence or any series of occurrences 
having the same origin, which causes an impact or creates a grave and imminent 
threat of causing such an impact; 
 
(d) 
"response measures" means any measures taken after an incident has occurred to 
prevent or minimise an impact, including prevention, containment, clean up and 
removal measures; 
 
(e) 
"measures of reinstatement" means any measures aiming to reinstate or restore 
damaged or destroyed components of the Antarctic environment or of dependent or 
associated ecosystems, or to introduce, where reasonable, the equivalent of these 
components into such environment or ecosystems; 
 
(f) 
"reasonable" means a property or state of affairs in which factors such as risk to the 
environment, rate of natural recovery of the environment, risk to human life and 
2 
 
 
safety, technological or economic feasibility of measures or costs of measures relative 
to the extent of an impact have been duly taken into account; 
 
(g) 
"operator" means 
 
(i) 
any person who organizes in the territory of a Party an activity in the Antarctic 
Treaty area; 
 
(ii) 
in so far as the law of a Party so provides: 
 
 
(1) 
any person who is a national of that Party and organizes outside the 
territory of that Party an activity in the Antarctic Treaty area; 
 
 
(2) 
any person who undertakes an activity in the Antartic Treaty area and 
for whom the final place of departure for that activity is in the territory 
of that Party; 
 
(h) 
"person" means any natural or private or public legal person, including a State or any 
of its constituent subdivisions; 
 
 
(i) 
"Protocol" means the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty; 
 
(j) 
"Fund" means the Antarctica Environmental Protection Fund established under 
Article 13 of this Annex. 
 
 
Comment 
 
The definitions of "incident", "response measures" and "measures of reinstatement" are 
similar to those in other international conventions on civil liability for damage, see e.g. 
Article 2 of the Convention on Civil Liability for Damage Resulting from Activities 
Dangerous to the Environment (Lugano Convention of 1993), Article 1 of the International 
Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in connection with the Carriage of 
Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea (HNS Convention of 1996) and Article 1 of the 
Convention on Civil Liability for Damage Caused During Carriage of Dangerous Goods by 
Road, Rail and Inland Navigation Vessels (CRTD Convention of 1989). 
3 
 
 
 
 
Article 2 
 
Scope of Application 
 
 
1. 
This Annex applies to incidents arising from activities covered by the Protocol which 
have been undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area after the entry into force of this 
Annex. 
 
2. 
Notwithstanding paragraph 1 above, this Annex shall not apply to incidents arising 
from activities undertaken pursuant to the International Convention for the Regulation 
of Whaling, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals or the Convention 
on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, unless the incidents arise 
from acts or events occurring in connection with such activities and are not regulated 
by the Conventions concerned. 
 
 
Comment 
 
Paragraph 1 of this Article makes clear that no retroactive effect is intended. The reference to 
"incidents" rather than to "damage" is due to the fact that the notion of "damage in the Annex 
has been given a rather limited scope and the fact that Article 4 prescribes measures to be 
undertaken by the operator. 
Paragraph 2 excludes the application of the Annex to incidents arising from activities 
pursuant to the conventions mentioned, unless the incidents arise from acts or events 
occurring in connection with such activities and are not regulated by the conventions 
concerned. 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 3 
 
 
Relationship with Other International Agreements 
 
 
1. 
Subject to paragraph 2 below, nothing in this Annex shall derogate from the rights 
and obligations deriving from other international agreements in force in the Antarctic 
Treaty area. 
 
2. 
Nothing in this Annex shall be construed as limiting or derogating from any of the 
rights of persons, including the Fund, entitled to compensation for damage under this 
Annex or as limiting the provisions concerning the protection or reinstatement of the 
Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems, which may be 
provided under the laws of any Party or under any other international agreement to 
which it is a Party and in force in the Antarctic Treaty area.  
 
 
Comment 
 
With regard to possible conflicts between the present Annex and other liability treaty regimes 
the following may be noted: 
 
A particular topic as regards the scope of the application of the liability regime on 
environmental damage in Antarctica as proposed  in the Annex concerns the applicability  of 
other relevant liability regimes.  In this regard there exists a category of conventions that 
concur with the proposed regime while other conventions tend for exclusive application 
which has to be taken into account in respect of the cover under the proposed regime. 
 
As regards the first group relating to conventions that are applicable in concurrence with the 
proposed Annex, reference can be made to, inter alia,: 
 
the 1976 Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims (LLMC Convention) 
and the 1996 Protocol thereto; 
the 1989 Salvage Convention. 
 
Both the 1976 LLMC and the 1996 Protocol establish the right of the shipowner to limit his 
liability for maritime claims.  This might also be the case for claims for damage in the 
Antarctic.  The proposed Annex might be applicable but the shipowner still has the right to 
limit his liability for environmental claims according to the limits set in the applicable 
limitation convention. 
The 1989 Salvage Convention might geographically be applicable in the Antarctic when 
salvage operations take place to fulfill obligations to undertake precautionary measures or 
response actions. 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also State Parties to the !976 LLMC are: Australia, 
Belgium, China, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, 
5 
 
 
Poland, Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also signatories to the 1996 LLMC Protocol (not yet in 
force) are: Finland, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also State Parties to the 1989 Salvage Convention are: 
Australia, China, India, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom 
 
Conventions that might be applied exclusively, in case they are in fact applicable, could be: 
 
the 1969 Civil Liability Convention 
the 1971 Fund Convention; 
the 1992 Civil Liability Convention; 
the 1992 Fund Convention 
the 1996 International Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection 
with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea (HNS Convention). 
 
The definition of damage in these conventions includes also damage by contamination of the 
environment and it is further provided, that no claim for compensation for damage shall be 
made against the shipowner otherwise than in accordance with these conventions (exclusive 
applicability). 
 
As regards the geographical scope of application it is relevant that states have specifically 
declared that these conventions are applicable in Antarctica. 
 
In respect of the channeling of liability these conventions make the shipowner exclusively 
liable for damage occurred by contamination of the environment in the course of maritime 
transport.  As has been said, when these conventions are to be applied no claim for 
compensation for damage shall be made against the shipowner otherwise than in accordance 
with these conventions (exclusive applicability). 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also State Parties to the 1969 Civil Liability 
Convention are: Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, India, Italy, New Zealand, Peru, Poland and 
Russian Federation. 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also State Parties to the 1971 Fund Convention are:, 
China, , India, Italy, New Zealand, Poland and Russian Federation. 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also State Parties to the 1992 Civil Liability 
Convention are: Australia, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany; Japan, Netherlands, Norway, 
Republic of Korea, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and Uruquay. 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also State Parties to the 1992 Fund Convention are: 
Australia, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Republic of Korea, Spain, 
Sweden, United Kingdom and Uruguay. 
 
State Parties to the Protocol which are also signatories to the 1996 International Convention 
6 
 
 
on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous 
and Noxious Substances by Sea - HNS Convention (not yet in force) are: Finland, Germany, 
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and United Kingdom. 
 
However, parties to those conventions are entitled to derogate therefrom inter se in another 
treaty arrangement, such as the present Liability Annex to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the Antarctica Treaty. This is what is proposed in paragraph 2, thereby also 
giving priority to more favourable provisions for the protection or reinstatement of the 
Antarctic environment or dependent or associated ecosystems. An alternative, providing for 
the opposite, would be to delete paragraph 2 and keep paragraph 1 (with deletion of the 
words "subject to paragraph 2 below"). 
 
7 
 
 
Article 4 
 
Precautionary Measures, Response Measures and Measures of Reinstatement 
 
 
1. 
An operator shall take reasonable precautionary measures to prevent incidents 
andshall prepare contingency plans to minimise the impact of incidents. 
 
2. 
If  an incident occurs the operator shall take reasonable and timely response measures. 
 
3. 
If an impact has occurred the operator shall take reasonable measures of 
reinstatement. 
 
4. The operator may authorise another person to take the measures  referred to in paragraphs 
2 and 3 above on his behalf. 
 
5. 
Any other person may take the measures referred to in paragraph 2  above: 
 
(a) 
if the operator has not taken or authorised another person to take such 
measures within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the specific 
circumstances of the case; 
 
(b) 
if the operator has indicated that he will not take such measures or authorise 
another person to take such measures on his behalf; 
 
(c) 
if the operator can not be identified or contacted through reasonable means 
 
 
within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the specific  
 
circumstances of the case; or 
 
(d) 
if  the specific circumstances of the case do not allow any delay of such 
response measures. 
 
6.  
Any other person  may take the measures referred to in paragraph 3 above: 
 
 
(a) 
if the operator has not taken or authorised another person to take such 
measures within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the specific 
circumstances of the case; 
 
(b) 
if the operator has indicated that he will not take such measures or authorise 
another person to take such measures on his behalf; or 
 
(c) 
if the operator can not be identified.  
  
7. 
Any measure referred to in paragraph 3 above shall be taken in conformity with the 
provisions of Annex I to the Protocol.  
 
8.  
Nothing in this Article shall affect the obligations of Parties under Article 15 of the 
Protocol. 
8 
 
 
Comment 
 
In formulating this new Article 4, the principal aims were to simplify the text substantially 
and to create maximum clarity with regard to the question who may take (under certain 
conditions) response  measures and measures of reinstatement. Article 4 imposes the 
responsibility of taking measures in the first place on the operator as defined in Article 1(g). 
Because of clear definitions of the terms precautionary measures, response measures and 
measures of reinstatement - based on other international conventions and laid down in Article 
1 - the first four paragraphs can be kept very short without limiting the clarity of the 
obligations. As far as the measures of reinstatement are concerned, it is important to stress 
that these measures will off course only be  required if damage still exists after adequate 
response measures  have been undertaken.  
 
In developing paragraphs 5 and 6 of Article 4, regarding the possibilities of other persons to 
take response measures and measures of reinstatement, the purpose was to find a balance 
between two principles: 
(1) 
on the one hand, the protection of the Antarctic environment should not fully 
 
 
depend on the willingness of the operator to take measures; 
(2) 
on the other hand, the operator must have sufficient time to take his/her 
 
 
responsibility and to take the measures him/herself. 
As a consequence, also other persons than the operator should have the right to take response 
measures and measures of reinstatement, however, the conditions laid down in paragraphs 5 
and 6 should prevent that other persons act in a way that blocks or frustrates initiatives of the 
responsible operator. In this respect the difference between response measures and measures 
of reinstatement is that response measures should be undertaken as soon as possible, where 
measures of reinstatement may be delayed if necessary, for example to find the responsible 
operator. This is why other persons may also take response measures if the operator can not 
be identified or contacted within a reasonable period of time and if the specific circumstances 
of the case do not allow any delay of such response measures. This aspect of time also 
explains why paragraph 7 requires the application of the EIA-provisions of the Protocol for 
measures of reinstatement. By the way, formally this paragraph may be deleted as the 
preparation of an environmental impact assessment (PA, IEE or CEE) for measures of 
reinstatement is already required on the basis of the present Article 8 of the Protocol and 
Annex I to the Protocol. However, paragraph 7 increases the legal clarity and more in 
particular makes clear that the exoneration of the application of Annex I in cases of 
emergency (Article 7 of Annex I to the Protocol) does not apply to the situation in which 
measures of reinstatement must be taken.. 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Article 5 
 
 
Strict Liability 
 
 
An operator is strictly liable for damage caused by his activity in the Antarctic Treaty area. 
 
 
Comment 
 
In this Article is made clear that the liability of the operator is strict, which means that no 
fault on his part is required to establish liability. 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 6 
 
 
Joint and Several Liability 
 
 
1. 
 
When damage has been caused by two or more operators they will be jointly 
and severally liable for such damage. However, the operator who proves that 
only part of the damage was caused by him, shall be liable for that part of the 
damage only. 
 
2. 
 
Each operator shall be entitled to the limits of liability applicable to each of 
them. 
 
3. 
 
Nothing in this Annex shall prejudice any right of recourse of an operator 
against any third party. 
 
 
Comment 
 
This Article deals with the situation that damage is the result of the activities of more than one 
operator and it is not possible to establish the contribution of each operator to the damage. In 
that case claims for damage may be made severally against one or more of those liable or 
jointly against all liable at the choice of the claimant. This is without prejudice to the right of 
each operator to seek recourse on other liable operators (paragraph 3). 
In case a liability limit would apply, there is need to make clear that an operator can not be 
obliged to pay compensation beyond the limit of his liablity. Damage in excess of this limit, 
can be claimed from the other (jointly and severally) liable operators (paragraph 2). 
This provision is common in international liability conventions. 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 7 
 
Obligation to Pay Compensation to the Fund 
 
 
1. 
 
The operator who is responsible for the activity that caused damage shall 
provide compensation to the Fund in case: 
 
 
 
(a) 
an impact cannot be repaired, or  
 
 
 
(b) 
an impact can be repaired, but measures of reinstatement have 
not been undertaken in accordance with Article 4(6) of this 
Annex within 3 years after the incident that caused the impact 
took place. 
 
2. 
 
The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall -  on the basis of an advice of 
the Committee for Environmental Protection: 
 
 
(a) 
adopt under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty guidelines for the 
calculation of the amount of compensation in the case of an impact 
referred to in paragraph 1 above; 
 
 
(b) 
appoint under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty six experts in the field 
of calculation of compensation for an impact. 
 
3. 
 
The Parties shall notify the other Parties to the Protocol and the Fund of each 
situation in which an impact referred to in paragraph 1 above has been caused 
by an operator under its jurisdiction. Any other person may notify the Fund of 
such a situation. 
 
4. 
 
After receipt of a notice as referred to in paragraph 3 above, the Fund will ask 
three experts designated in accordance with paragraph 2 (b) above to assess 
whether there was an impact referred to in paragraph 1 above. When this is the 
case, the experts will calculate the amount of compensation, taking into 
account the guidelines referred to in paragraph 2(a) above. The operator shall 
be required to provide the experts with all the relevant information. As soon as 
possible and in any case within six months after the receipt of the notice 
referred to in paragraph 3 above, the experts will give notice to the Parties, the 
operator and the Fund of the amount of compensation that must be paid by the 
operator in accordance with paragraph 1 above. The operator will pay the 
compensation to the Fund within two months after the receipt of this notice. 
 
5. 
 
Each Party shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the Fund will have 
access to the national courts in case the operator does not pay the 
compensation in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 4 above. 
 
6. 
 
Each year the Fund will report to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
with regard to the contributions it has received in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in this Article. 
 
 
 
Comment 
12 
 
 
First of all, it must be stated that this is a very difficult Article. It is therefore a preliminary 
draft which should get a critical assessment. The draft is based on the following principles: 
 
- 
the ATCM should adopt guidelines for the calculation of compensation to be paid by 
the operator in cases when the harmful effect of an impact cannot be remedied or if 
this is possible no measures have been taken to do so; 
 
 
- 
the ATCM should not be asked to deal with individual cases of 
unrepaired damage; the assessment and calculation of compensation in 
individual cases should be the task of independent experts; 
 
 
- 
a permanent group of experts should be appointed: these experts can 
build up a special expertise in the course of the years and the risk of big 
differences between interpretation and calculation in individual cases 
are limited: 
 
 
- 
the Fund should not be involved in the calculation process itself; 
 
 
- 
the practice with regard to this Article should be discussed during 
ATCMs on the basis of a report of the Fund.  
 
It is clear that this Article is not the final solution of all questions. A concern is for example 
that the operator should not be stimulated to be passive: if the amount of compensation would 
in practice be very low, it would be profitable for the operator to wait and not to take any 
measures of reinstatement. Furthermore, the relation with the provision on the Fund asks for 
more attention. 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Article 8 
 
Extent of Liability    
 
The operator shall not be liable under this Annex for damage which he proves was caused by: 
(a) 
an event constituting in the circumstances of Antarctica a natural disaster of an 
exceptional character which could not have been reasonably foreseen, either generally 
or in the particular case, provided that all reasonable safety measures were taken by 
the operator to prevent damage; 
(b) 
an act of war, hostilities, or an act done with the intent to cause damage by a third 
party against which no reasonable safety measures could have been effective. 
(c) 
an act in a case of emergency to save human life, ships, aircraft or equipment or 
facilities of high value or to protect the environment, unless the emergency giving rise 
to the exemption was caused by the operator. 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
The exemptions mentioned in this Article can be found in other international conventions on 
liability, as there are the Paris and Vienna Conventions on Liability for Nuclear Damage, the 
conventions concerning liability for oil pollution at sea (CLC and IOPC Convention), liability 
for damage caused during the carriage of dangerous goods (CRTD) or the carriage of 
hazardous and noxious substances at sea (HNS) and liability for damage caused by activities 
dangerous to the environment (Lugano Convention). Subparagraph (c) is an abstraction from 
the provisions in the other Annexes to the Protocol dealing with cases of emergency to save 
human life, ships, aircraft or equipment or facilities of high value or to protect the 
environment. 
14 
 
 
Article 9 
 
State Liability and Responsibility 
 
1. 
 
Notwithstanding the liability of the operator provided for in this Annex, a Party 
shall be liable for damage caused by an operator under its jurisdiction which 
would not have occurred or continued if that Party would have fulfilled its 
obligations under Article 13 of the Protocol. Such liability shall be limited to 
that portion of liability not satisfied by the operator under its jurisdiction . 
 
2. 
 
Nothing in paragraph 1 above shall affect the application of  rules of 
international law on State responsibility.  
 
 
 
Comment 
 
Paragraph 1 creates a special liability for a Party  - under the conditions mentioned in that 
paragraph - vis-a-vis another person who is entitled to compensation  under this Annex which 
may be another Party or natural or legal person, including the Fund. The liability of the Party 
provided for in this Article must be  deemed to be unlimited because it is a liability based on 
fault. 
15 
 
Article 10 
 
Compulsory Insurance or Other Financial Security 
 
1. 
 
Each Party shall ensure, taking due account of the nature and the risks of the 
activities undertaken, that non-State operators conducting activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty area maintain insurance or other financial security, such as the 
guarantee of a bank or similar financial institution, to cover  liability for 
damage up to the limits specified in Article 11 of this Annex. 
 
2. 
 
Notwithstanding paragraph 1 above, each Party which is a Party to the 
International Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 1976, 
as amended by the 1996 Protocol, shall ensure that non-State operators, who 
are shipowners and sailors as defined in Article 1(1) of that Convention, 
conducting activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, shall ensure that liability for 
claims referred to in Article 2(1) of that Convention which are covered by this 
Annex is covered by insurance or other financial security up to the limits set 
under Article 6 of that Convention or the limits specified in Article 11 of this 
Annex, whichever are higher. 
 
Comment 
 
Since many activities in the Antarctic region are carried out by ships it is incumbent to 
consider the various conventions that exist in this field regarding liability and insurance. 
Compulsory insurance was already established under the 1969 Civil Liability Convention 
dealing with liability and compensation for damage caused by oiltankers and is recently 
reiterated in the Convention on Liability and Compensation for damage caused by the 
transport by sea of hazardous and noxious substances (HNS Convention). In case the 1969 
CLC and the HNS Convention are not applicable in the Antarctic region (because states did 
not state so), it is of relevance for the application of the proposed Annex that the 1976 
Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims Convention (LLMC) will also be applicable to 
ships in the Antarctic for claims as mentioned in the CLC and HNS Convention. The 1976 
Convention and 1996 Protocol grant the right to the shipowner, who in the context of the 
Environmental Protocol under circumstances can be regarded as operator, to limit his liability 
up to an amount relating to the tonnage of his ship. In assessing these specific shipowner 
limits due account has been given to the available insurance capacity. 
 
Therefore reference is made in paragraph 2 to Article 2(1) LLMC in the sense that insurance 
cover or other financial security will be provided for the claims mentioned in that Article. 
This would be in consistency with current developments within IMO to ensure that 
shipowners have effective cover in respect of their ships for their liabilities to third parties 
(draft IMO Guidelines on shipowners’ responsibilities in respect of maritime claims). 
 
An outstanding issue is whether such requirements can also be introduced in case limits are 
set in Article 11 of this Annex which are higher than those under Article 6 LLMC. Further 
advise of P&I Clubs, which provide for insurance cover of ships, might be helpful. 
From the point of view of protecting the victim it is of course desirable that higher limits 
prevail, however practical experience has shown that this is not always possible in the field of 
16 
 
shipping. The insurance capacity for shipping activities is restricted and this has certainly to 
be taken into account when assessing the scope of liability of the shipowner and the salvor. 
One of the reasons of limitation of liability provided by the LLMC is that salvors are 
protected against uninsurable liabilities for damage caused during salvage operations. 
Insurable liability can therefore be seen as an incentive to protect the marine environment 
which also seems to be relevant in the Antarctic (Bahia Paraiso).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
Article 11 
 
Limits 
 
[Liability for damage in accordance with Article 5 of this Annex shall not exceed... .] 
 
 
Comment 
 
See the comment to Article 10. 
 
 
18 
 
 
Article 12 
 
 
Limitation periods 
 
 
 
1.1. 
 
Actions for compensation under this Annex, including those brought against 
the Fund, or for measures under Article 4 of this Annex shall be subject to a 
limitation period of [.....] years from the date on which the person bringing the 
action knew or ought reasonably to have known of the damage and of the 
identity of the operator. The laws of the Parties regulating suspension or 
interruption of limitation periods shall apply to the limitation period prescribed 
in this paragraph. 
 
2. 
 
However, in no case shall actions be brought after [.....] years from the date of 
the incident which caused the damage. Where the incident consists of a 
continuous occurrence the [...] years' period shall run from the end of that 
occurrence. Where the incident consists of a series of occurrences having the 
same origin the [...] years' period shall run from the date of the last of such 
occurrences. 
 
 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
See Article 17 Lugano Convention, Article 18 CRTD and Article 32 HNS. 
19 
 
Article 13 
 
Antarctica Environmental Protection Fund 
 
 
1. 
An Antarctica Environmental Protection Fund is hereby established. 
 
2. 
The Fund shall pay compensation to any person suffering damage and entitled to 
compensation, if such person has been unable to obtain compensation for such damage 
under the terms of [Articles ..... of ] this Annex, 
 
 
(a) 
because no liability for such damage arises under this Annex; 
 
 
(b) 
because the identity of the operator cannot be established; 
 
 
(c) 
because the operator is financially incapable of meeting his obligations in full 
and any financial security that may be provided under Article 10 of this Annex 
does not cover or is insufficient to satisfy the claims for compensation for such 
damage; or 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
because such damage exceeds the limits of liability set in Article 11 of this 
Annex or under the terms of any other applicable international agreement. 
 
 
3. 
If the Fund proves that the damage resulted wholly or partially either from an act or 
omission done with the intent to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage 
or from negligence of that person, the Fund may be exonerated wholly or partially 
from its obligation to pay compensation to such person. 
 
4. 
The aggregate amount of compensation payable by the Fund under this Article shall in 
respect of any such incident be limited, so that the total sum of that amount and the 
amount of compensation actually paid under this Annex shall not exceed [...........] 
 
5. 
Where the amount of established claims against the Fund exceeds the aggregate 
amount of compensation payable under paragraph 4 above, the amount available shall 
be distributed in such a manner that the proportion between any established claim and 
the amount of compensation actually recovered by the claimant under this Annex shall 
be the same for all claimants. 
 
6. 
Contributions to the Fund shall be made: 
 
 
(a) 
in accordance with Article 7 of this Annex 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
.......... 
 
7. 
The Fund is authorized to receive voluntary contributions. 
 
8. 
The Fund shall in each Party be recognized as a legal person capable under the laws of 
that Party of assuming rights and obligations and being a party in legal proceedings 
20 
 
before the competent courts of that Party. 
 
9. 
The Fund shall be capable of assuming rights and obligations under this Annex and of 
being a party in proceedings involving actions submitted to arbitration under Article 
15 (2) of this Annex. 
 
10. 
The Fund shall, in respect of any amount of compensation for damage paid by the 
Fund in accordance with paragraph 2 above, acquire by subrogation the rights that the 
person so compensated may enjoy against the operator. 
 
 
Comment 
 
The Fund established under this Article shall pay  compensation to any person suffering 
damage and entitled to compensation, if such compensation could not be obtained from, or 
even by, the operator through the application of the other provisions of the Annex. In a 
limited number of cases such a person should be able to apply to the Fund as a 
(subsidiary/supplementary) source from compensation. 
The Article - which needs further reflection and elaboration - also provides for certain 
exoneration grounds for the Fund and for a limit to the aggregate amount of compensation to 
be paid in respect of a particular incident. Contributions to the Fund are to be made in 
accordance with Article 7 of the Annex, while possible further sources of contribution should 
be considered. The Fund should be able to act as a legal person before the competent courts of 
a Party or in arbitration proceedings envisaged under Article 15(2) of the Annex and acquire 
by subrogation rights that the person compensated by the Fund may enjoy against the 
operator. 
21 
 
Article 14 
 
Jurisdiction, Recognition and Enforcement 
 
1. 
 
Subject to Article 15 of this Annex, actions under this Annex may only be 
brought within a Party at the Court 
 
 
(a) 
of the place where the operator has his habitual residence or his 
principal place of business; 
 
 
(b) 
of the place where the operator organized an activity in the Antarctic 
Treaty area; 
 
 
(c) 
of a Party of which the operator has the nationality. 
 
2. 
 
Each Party shall ensure that its courts shall have jurisdiction to hear and 
determine actions brought in accordance with paragraph 1 above. 
 
3. 
 
Where an action has been brought before a court having jurisdiction under 
paragraph 1 above against the operator, such court shall have exclusive 
jurisdiction over any action against the Fund in respect of the same damage. 
 
4. 
 
Each Party shall ensure that the Fund shall have the right to intervene as a 
party to any legal proceedings instituted against the operator before a court of 
that Party having jurisdiction under paragraph 1 above. 
 
5. 
 
Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 6 below, the Fund shall not be 
bound by any decision in proceedings to which it has not been a party or by 
any settlement to which it is not a party. 
 
6. 
 
Without prejudice to paragraph 4 above, where an action has been brought 
against an operator before a court having jurisdiction under paragraph 1 above, 
each party to the proceedings shall be entitled under the national law of that 
Party to notify the Fund of the proceedings. Where such notification has been 
made in accordance with the formalities required by the law of the court seized 
and in such time and in such manner that the Fund has in fact been in a position 
effectively to intervene as a party to the proceedings, any decision rendered by 
the court in such proceedings shall, after it has become final and enforceable in 
the Party where the decision was given, become binding upon the Fund in the 
sense that the facts and findings in that decision may not be disputed by the 
Fund even if the Fund has not actually intervened in the proceedings. 
 
7. 
 
Any decision given by a court having jurisdiction under paragraph 1 above, 
subject to any decision concerning the distribution referred to in Article 13(5) 
of this Annex in the case of a decision against the Fund, which  is no longer 
subject to ordinary forms of review, shall be recognised in any Party, unless: 
 
 
(a) 
such recognition is contrary to public policy in the Party in which 
recognition is sought; 
 
 
(b) 
it was given in default of appearance and the defendant was not duly 
served with the document which instituted the proceedings or with an 
equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his 
22 
 
defence; 
 
 
(c) 
the decision is irreconcilable with a decision given in a dispute between 
the same parties in the Party in which recognition is sought; or 
 
 
(d) 
the decision is irreconcilable with an earlier decision given in another 
State involving the same cause of action and between the same parties, 
provided that this latter decision fulfils the conditions necessary for its 
recognition in the Party addressed. 
 
8. 
 
A decision recognised under paragraph 3 above which is enforceable in the 
Party of origin shall be enforceable in each Party as soon as the formalities 
required by that Party have been completed. The formalities shall not permit 
the merits of the case to be re-opened.  
 
Comment 
 
See Articles 33-35 HNS, Article 23 Lugano Convention, Article 20 CRTD. 
23 
 
Article 15 
 
Disputes and Actions Involving One or More Parties 
 
1. 
Subject to paragraph 2 below, disputes between Parties concerning the interpretation 
and application of this Annex shall be settled in accordance with Articles 18, 19 and 
20 of the Protocol, unless the parties otherwise agree. 
 
2. 
Actions for compensation under this Annex, including those brought by or against the 
Fund, or for measures under Article 4 of this Annex, involving one or more Parties, 
shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of the Schedule to 
the Protocol on Arbitration, unless the Party or Parties involved agree that such action 
be brought before a court having jurisdiction  under Article 14  of this Annex. For this 
purpose the Schedule to the Protocol shall apply to a party which is not a Party, as if it 
were a Party. 
 
 
 
3. 
The award of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be binding and enforceable in each Party as if 
it were a final judgment of its highest court. 
 
4. 
Where an action has been submitted to arbitration in accordance with paragraph 2 
above against the operator, the provisions of Article 14 (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this 
Annex shall apply mutatis mutandis in respect of the Fund. 
 
 
Comment 
 
This Article provides that apart from disputes between Parties concerning the interpretation 
and application of the Annex, also actions for compensation under the Annex involving one 
or more Parties shall in principle be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the provisions 
of the Schedule to the Protocol on Arbitration. 
24 
 
Article 16 
 
Amendment or Modification 
 
 
1. 
 
This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance 
with Article IX(1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies 
otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been 
approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that time 
period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve 
the measure. 
 
2. 
 
Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in 
accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any 
other Party when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary. 
 
 
Comment 
 
 
This text is entirely identical with the provisions on amendment and modification appearing 
in Annexes I, II, IV and V and (except for the word "measure" instead of "amendment" at the 
end of paragraph 1 of Article 13 of) Annex III. 
