 
XXIII ATCM/ WP27 
 
May 1999 
 
English 
 
Original: Spanish 
 
 
Agenda Item 8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cooperation among Parties  in accordance  
 
with Article 6 of the Protocol on 
 
Environmental Protection to  
 
the Antarctic Treaty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
 
Peru 
 
COOPERATION AMONG PARTIES  
IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 6 OF THE PROTOCOL ON  
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO THE ANTARCTIC TREATY 
 
 
1. 
The environmental provisions of the Antarctic Treaty are general and sometimes 
indirect. As a result of this initial approach, from an early stage the Consultative 
Parties have developed extensive legislation on this issue. This effort has led to 
the adoption of conventional regimes which were a significant step in the 
evolution of the Antarctic Treaty System. These regimes have allowed for a 
detailed approach to specific issues such as marine living resources and flora in 
the Treaty area. 
 
2. 
These measures, however, were strongly criticized at the time in an international 
context of growing concern for the environment. Criticism was directed 
particularly to the lack of a comprehensive environmental protection system, 
since many of those measures had resulted from specific concerns expressed by 
the Consultative Parties. The lack of general policies and precise definitions in 
the environmental protection system was also criticized. The fact that protective 
measures were not legally binding, making their enforceability uncertain, was 
stressed. As a result, the level of compliance was unsatisfactory and the system 
was, to a certain extent, weak. 
 
3. 
Faced with this challenge, the Consultative Parties agreed to design a new 
instrument to supplement the Antarctic Treaty1 and the environmental legislation. 
The result of this effort was the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty, known as “the Madrid Protocol.”  
 
4. 
The Madrid Protocol defines the basic environmental principles and includes a 
number of legal and institutional measures, including cooperation among all 
Parties.2 In this regard, it should be stressed that the implementation of the 
environmental principles in the Protocol is largely based on the development of 
frameworks for cooperation among Parties. 
 
5. 
The spirit of international scientific cooperation which permeated the 
International Geophysical Year was the source of inspiration for the Antarctic 
Treaty in 1959.3 In Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol, the concept of international 
cooperation is developed in a broader sense. Rather than limiting it to scientific 
activities, Article 6 includes the planning and implementation of all activities 
regulated by the Protocol. In addition, it is more specific, regulating in more 
detail the modes of cooperation in the area of environmental management. 
                                                           
1 Article 4 of the Madrid Protocol. 
2 Article 6 of the Madrid Protocol. 
3 Articles II and III of the Antartic Treaty. 
 
2
                                                          
 
6. 
Peru believes that international cooperation in accordance with the Madrid 
Protocol may be better served in an organized framework for international 
cooperation on environment issues among all Parties in the areas of science, 
technology, and logistics, to insure the satisfactory fulfillment of the 
commitments derived from the Madrid Protocol and its Annexes. The need for 
consistent international cooperation has already been recognized by the 
Consultative Parties.4 
 
7. 
In this regard, as a first step Peru proposes a study on the experiences in the area 
of Antarctic cooperation on the environment, in order to identify the advantages 
and difficulties encountered in the development of such cooperation and hence 
benefit from valuable instruments to assess the appropriateness of establishing an 
organizational framework for environmental cooperation. 
 
8. 
Peru suggests making use of existing arrangements in the Antarctic Treaty 
System such as the Antarctic Environmental Officers Network (AEON) created 
by COMNAP, with the cooperation of the SCAR's Group of Specialists on 
Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) and the CEP Contact 
Groups, which would be responsible for preparing a report to be submitted to the 
XXIV Consultative Meeting. Peru has offered to coordinate this effort, using 
available electronic media, with the cooperation of interested Parties. 
 
4 Final Report of the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative meeting, paragraph 104. 
 
