Antarctic Treaty                                  XXIII ATCM/ WP40
XXIII Consultative Meeting                       June, 1999
Traité sur l'Antarctique                         Original: English
XXIII* Réunion consultative                      
Tratado Antártico                                Agenda Item 11
XXIII Reunión Consultiva                         
Договор об Антарктике                            
XXIII Консультативное Совещание                 

                                  Polar Shipping Code

Submitted by
United Kingdom
Polar Shipping Code.

Working Paper Submitted by the United Kingdom.

Introduction.

The International Maritime Organisation (IMO), has been developing an international Code for vessels operating in the polar regions (Polar Code). The Code aims to harmonise the classification of polar class ships, and establish minimum standards for the design, construction and operation of vessels in polar waters.

The draft Polar Code, and its relevance to Antarctica, was considered by Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties at XXII ATCM (1998, Tromso). Paragraphs 85 to 96 of the Final Report, and Resolution 3 (1998), refer.

However, since XXII ATCM, and in response to concern amongst some IMO Member States regarding the scope of the Polar Code, the IMO has re-evaluated the Code's status and application. The outcome of the 71st session of the Maritime Safety Committee (MSC 71) is reported in XXIII ATCM/IP 111, submitted by the IMO.

Notably, MSC 71 decided that:

- Further development of the Polar Code principles should be in the form of non-mandatory "guidelines", and;

- Antarctic waters should be excluded from the application of the guidelines unless the Antarctic Treaty Parties decide otherwise.

Existing version of the draft Polar Code.

The UK recognises that the draft Polar Code has been based predominantly on Arctic shipping activities. The document fails to recognise adequately the nature of Antarctic shipping operations. Nor does the Code take sufficient account of the unique environmental conditions in Antarctica and the international system of governance for the Antarctic Treaty area.
Instead, the Code inappropriately attempts to address shipping activities in the Polar Regions in a 
unified fashion.

Nevertheless, despite these shortcomings the UK believes that the area of application of the guidelines 
that IMO now intends to develop, should include Antarctic waters, and for the following reasons:

1. Article 10 of Annex IV to the Protocol places an obligation on Parties to take account of the 
objectives of the Annex in the design, construction, manning and equipment of ships engaged 
in or supporting Antarctic operations.

2. For reasons of safety and environmental protection, it is wholly appropriate that Parties 
establish adequate minimum standards for vessels operating in Antarctic waters. This is 
issue is of particular relevance at a time when the trend in Antarctic maritime traffic, 
particularly in respect of tourist ships, is towards the use of larger vessels.

3. The IMO is the most appropriate organisation in which to develop such standards given that:
    - the IMO has the relevant technical expertise which the Antarctic Treaty System does not, 
      and;
    - guidelines developed through the IMO would apply to all IMO Member States and not 
      solely those States that are Party to the Antarctic Treaty. Again this is an important 
      consideration, particularly in relation to tourist vessels, a significant proportion of which 
      are flagged with non-Treaty Parties.

4. Existing international maritime instruments (eg MARPOL, SOLAS, UNCLOS), and the 
Environmental Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty do not address in a comprehensive fashion, 
all elements of polar ship design, construction, operation, manning and equipment, intended 
to be covered by the Polar Code / guidelines.

5. COMNAP has identified that shipping operations, particularly those relating to tourist 
operations, represent the most significant risk to the Antarctic environment (XXIII 
ATCM/WP 16)
Conclusions.

IMO now requires a decision from Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties as to whether the guidelines under development should apply to Antarctic waters. It is therefore essential that ATCPs consider the matter during the present ATCM and respond to IMO at the earliest opportunity.

The options available to Treaty Parties are:

i)      The status quo, i.e. unified IMO guidelines which do not distinguish between Arctic and Antarctic conditions in relation to shipping;

ii)     IMO guidelines which differentiate in two sections between the Arctic and the Antarctic;

iii)    Two distinct IMO guidelines dealing separately with the Arctic and the Antarctic;

iv)     IMO guidelines dealing only with the Arctic.

Option i) is clearly unacceptable in that the existing draft Code fails to adequately account for the unique environmental and political conditions pertaining to Antarctica. Option iv) would give rise to one of two situations: either a "do nothing" situation whereby Consultative Parties would fail to meet their obligations under Article 10 of Annex IV to the Protocol, or alternatively an attempt by Parties to take the issue forward within the Antarctic Treaty System, but for which they are not best placed to deal.

The UK believes that the only constructive way forward is through options ii) or iii), with a preference for option ii).

But it is clear that whichever option is pursued, Parties will need to substantively address the issue of standards for shipping operations in Antarctic waters in the near future.

Recommendations.

Parties are invited to consider the issues raised in the Working Paper. It is recommended that Parties:
endorse the proposal of retaining Antarctica within the area of application of the IMO guidelines for polar shipping and actively engage with the IMO on further development of the guidelines, so as to ensure that they adequately take into account the Antarctic situation.

The attached Resolution is offered to Parties for consideration.
Resolution ..... (1999)

Safety of Operations of Ships in Antarctic waters.

The Representatives,

Recalling Resolution 3 (1998) which recommended that Consultative Parties provide input to the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) in its development of the draft Polar Shipping Code;

Noting the decision of the 71^(st) session of IMO's Maritime Safety Committee to change the status of the Polar Shipping Code to non-mandatory guidelines and to request the advice of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties with regard to the application of the guidelines to Antarctica;

Recognising the importance of establishing standards for vessels operating in Antarctic waters, in the interests of safety and protection of the environment;

Acknowledging that the IMO is the most appropriate organisation within which to develop such standards,

Recommend that;

1. Peru, as host Government of XXIII ATCM, notify the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) as soon as after the closure of the Meeting as possible, that Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties believe that the guidelines on polar shipping activity, under development within the IMO, must apply, though in a suitably modified form, to Antarctic waters.

2. Consultative Parties, following consultation with their national operators and national IMO representatives as appropriate, and as a matter of priority:

- critically examine the existing version of the draft Polar Code;
- identify the key elements that would form an Antarctic section of the guidelines under development within IMO, to ensure that the guidelines adequately account for the Antarctic situation, and;
- convey comments on the guidelines to the IMO through national IMO representatives.
