Antarctic Treaty
XXIII Consultative Meeting

Traité sur l'Antarctique
XXIII^(e) Réunion consultative

Tratado Antártico
XXIII Reunión Consultiva

Договор об Антарктике
XXIII Консультативное Совещание

XXIII ATCM/ WP39
May, 1999
Original: English

Agenda Item 15

The World Conference on Science
and the Antarctic Treaty System

Submitted by
Ecuador and Canada
THE WORLD CONFERENCE ON SCIENCE AND THE ANTARCTIC TREATY SYSTEM

Purpose.

It is suggested that the ATCM send a message to the World Conference on Science, noting the achievements of the Antarctic Treaty System in international co-operation in the interests of peace and science, which are principal objectives of the Conference.

The Antarctic Treaty member states have each received through ICSU or UNESCO an invitation to contribute to the World Conference on Science and been requested to comment on the drafts of the proposed Declaration and Science Agenda. In addition, it is suggested that it would be useful for the ATCM, as a body, which represents an outstanding development in the use of science to achieve international co-operation and to advance knowledge for the benefit of all humankind, to draw the attention of the Conference to Antarctica as a region of peace and science.

Background

After four years of planning and several regional preparatory meetings, the International Council for Science (ICSU) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) are jointly sponsoring a World Conference on Science, to be held in Budapest, Hungary, 28 June-2 July 1999. One hundred and thirty-five countries are expected to be represented, including virtually all the adhering parties to the Antarctic Treaty. Most of the delegations will be led by Ministers of Science, heads of National Academies of Science, or their equivalent.

The Conference

The World Conference on Science, sub-titled "Science for the 21st Century: a New Commitment", will address the current status, trends, and shortcomings in research and its applications on a world-wide basis. It will examine the rapidly evolving knowledge and understanding of the universe and all its parts, including humans and their behaviour; consider the changing ways through which it is obtained, and the changing purposes to which it is put.

The Conference recognizes that although science and its applications have brought unprecedented benefits and opportunities to humankind,  it has also played a part in actions that have led to progressive deterioration of the life support capacity of the planet. It recognizes that the benefits from science have been unevenly distributed between and within societies, and have contributed to a growing disparity between industrialized and less-industrialized societies; that science has raised difficult ethical issues; and that throughout the world, scientific resources are devoted to war and the technologies of violence or domination. In addition, economic and political trends have made it increasingly difficult to support scientific activities and the creation of new knowledge as a public good as distinct from science for short-term profit.

A basic premise of the World Conference on Science is that whereas in the 20th Century science underwent a change from being basically an intellectual pursuit to becoming a tool for economic progress, in the 21st Century it must be part of a change no less remarkable, and increasingly be a means for exploring ethical issues, for finding both behavioural and material options and opportunities by which increasing numbers of people with different value systems can live in a sustainable manner in harmony with other forms of life on a finite planet.
It is planned that the Conference will produce two major statements. One will be "A 
World Declaration on Science and the Use of Scientific Knowledge", to be signed by 
representatives of all participating countries. The other is a "Science Agenda: Framework for 
Action", which, it is hoped, will help countries to examine the directions, purposes and support 
for scientific activities in relation to the human needs and sustainability issues in their 
respective situations, and then make commitments to bringing about a new emphasis in 
science for net human benefit. Drafts of these statements have been circulated for comment 
to all countries that are members of UNESCO or ICSU. Key elements of the draft statements 
include:-

    governments should reaffirm their obligation to use public funds to support 
science in its various forms and to increase public scientific knowledge for net 
human progress;

    an increasing portion of scientific activity must be systematically directed toward 
the achievement and maintenance of peace in all its forms;

    the progress of science must be based on full and open access to information 
and exchange of results of research;

    support for science, for scientific education, and for long-term research on 
fundamental questions about the natural and human world are global 
responsibilities.

The World Conference on Science and the Antarctic Treaty System

As the Antarctic Treaty System is committed to ensuring that the Antarctic Treaty area is a 
region dedicated to peace and science with open exchange of information, it is fitting that the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting should recognize the similarities between its purposes 
and activities and the concerns and topics being addressed by the World Conference on 
Science.

It would be appropriate for the ATCM to send a message to the World Conference on 
Science, expressing

support in principle for the objectives of the Conference, and noting that 40 years' experience 
within the Antarctic

Treaty System offers a demonstration of the role that international co-operation in science can 
play not only in avoiding conflicts and in successful management of a significant part 
of the planet, but in progress towards achieviements of many of the goals being 
addressed by the World Conference on Science.

A suggested text for such a message is attached.
TO
The International Council for Science (ICSU) and 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)
On the occasion of the World Conference on Science: -

The XXIII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, at its assembly in Lima, Peru, sends its best 
wishes to the World Conference on Science.  Through the Antarctic Treaty system, forty-four 
adhering states are committed to ensuring that the area south of Latitude 60 degrees south is 
dedicated to peace and science. The Antarctic Treaty System is based on co-operation and shared 
pursuit of scientific knowledge on subjects that are of increasing global importance.  The 
international Antarctic community looks forward to adoption of the World Declaration on Science, 
and to wide distribution of the Science Agenda. We are confident that scientific information from 
Antarctica will make an increasing contribution to the knowledge needed to address major world 
issues.
