 
Joint and Several Liability and International Collaborative Science 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Concerns have been expressed in the past that the draft Liability Annex to the Antarctic 
Environmental Protocol and in particular the concept of joint and several liability, if 
adopted, would have an adverse impact on international collaborative scientific 
programmes and shared logistical resources among Antarctic Treaty Parties.  It has been 
contended that a joint and several liability regime might discourage Parties from 
entering into valuable joint projects such as the Cape Roberts Project. 
 
2 
This paper examines this contention and encourages the adoption of practical 
mechanisms to meet the needs of international science and the interests of the 
participating States.  It concludes that the concept of joint and several liability should 
not necessarily affect the entering into collaborative science programmes in Antarctica. 
 
Background to the Cape Roberts Project 
 
3 
The Cape Roberts Project is a cooperative project between the Antarctic 
programmes of Australia, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and 
United States.  The aim of the project is to investigate Antarctic and glacial tectonic 
history for the period from 100 to 35 million years ago by drilling a series of holes 
several hundred metres into the sea floor off the shore fast sea-ice 15 kilometres from 
Cape Roberts in the Ross Sea. 
 
4 
From the outset the project has been based on international cooperation and 
collaboration, its framework having been agreed by discussions among scientists from 
all six countries.  A Record of Understanding was signed in late 1993, designed to serve 
as a guide for the cooperation between the six partner countries during the project.  The 
financial contributions are shared between the Parties with three Parties sharing the bulk 
of the project equally.  Each contributing Party is entitled to a degree of scientific 
involvement in the project in general proportion to their contributions to the Project.  
Overall supervision of the Project is the responsibility of an International Steering 
Committee 
(ISC) 
while 
logistics 
support 
is 
the 
responsibility 
of 
the 
Operations/Logistics Management Group (OMG).  The project is managed by 
Antarctica New Zealand, which is responsible for coordinating the logistic support and 
the drilling operation, including safety aspects. 
 
5 
It has been contended that the adoption of the concept of joint and several 
liability would place in jeopardy such collaborative programmes because all six States 
would become jointly and severally liable regardless of their share in the project or their 
efforts to prevent any damage.  This, it is argued, may result in the Party against whom 
it is most easy to make a claim, or with the most resources, bearing the full (or 
disproportionate) burden of liability.   
 
1 
 
 
Joint and Several Liability - The Nature of the Concept 
 
6 
New Zealand believes that joint and several liability is appropriate where the 
conduct leading to harm is a result of States acting in concert and where responsibility 
cannot easily be attributable to one State alone.  Furthermore, there are a number of 
policy factors which support joint and several liability being adopted: 
 
• 
it maximises the likelihood of harm being properly and fully compensated; 
• 
it supports the objective of providing injured parties with the greatest 
opportunity to achieve compensation; and 
• 
it operates as a deterrent and provides an incentive to prevent harm occurring on 
the part of all States participating in an international science project. 
7 
Participation in an enterprise to achieve a common benefit renders the costs or 
consequences of that enterprise common to all the participants.  The allocation of the 
costs or consequences between the participants may vary.  This suggests that States 
participating in a common enterprise should ultimately bear only the consequences of 
its share of the common enterprise.  Cooperating States can establish a mechanism for 
settlement of allocation issues between them.  This can be achieved through prior 
agreements establishing specific contribution or indemnity obligations representing 
their own views of the appropriate allocation of risk. 
 
International Precedents 
 
8 
There are a number of international legal precedents which provide for joint and 
several liability to deal with situations of multiple responsibility.  These range from 
conventions concerning liability for nuclear accidents to those concerned with liability 
for environmental damage as a result of transportation by sea or seabed exploitation.1  
The adoption of joint and several liability has become an established precedent in 
international liability regimes. 
 
9 
The 1972 Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space 
Objects goes beyond most other precedents by establishing a right of contribution from 
among those responsible for the damage.  Where two or more States have jointly 
launched a space object they are jointly and severally liable.  However a launching State 
which has paid compensation has the right to present a claim for indemnification to the 
other participants in the joint launching.  Cooperating States may also conclude an  
 
 
                                                 
1   See for example, Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, 1963 (Article II(3)(a)); 
Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy, 1960 (Article 5(b); 
International Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of 
Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea, 1996 (Article 8); Convention on Civil Liability for Oil 
Pollution Damage Resulting from Exploration for and Exploitation of Seabed Mineral Resources, 1977 
(Article 5); and United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 (Article 139). 
2 
 
 
 
 
agreement regarding the apportioning of the financial obligation in respect of which 
they are jointly and severally liable (Article V). 
 
10 
The Space Objects Convention also deals with the situation of States acting 
independently with respect to a single event which causes damage.  Article IV provides 
that a third party injured as a consequence of the collision of two space objects may 
claim compensation for the total injury from any or all of the launching States of either 
space object, irrespective of which may be ultimately responsible. As between the two 
launching States, however, the burden of compensation is divided according to the 
extent to which they were at fault.  In this way the Convention adopted the concept of 
contribution based on comparative fault. 
 
11 
While the circumstances with which these international legal precedents deal 
and under which they were concluded may be different from that applying to the 
Antarctic situation, they nevertheless provide useful insights into the manner in which 
multiple responsibility may be handled in the Antarctic context.  The Space Objects 
Convention in particular shows that participating States may choose to apportion 
liability unevenly by inter se agreement. 
 
Apportionment of Liability 
 
12 
Apportionment could be agreed between the States collaborating in Antarctica, 
and may be premised on principles of causation, blameworthiness, or both, depending 
on the facts of a specific case.  In this way a number of factors may be taken into 
account, such as: 
 
• 
the character of each participating State’s intent, negligence, or lack of due 
diligence; 
• 
relative or proportional responsibility, including contributory conduct; 
• 
the character of each State’s financial participation, decision-making authority, 
or expected benefit of the enterprise; 
• 
the measure of each State’s legal authority or jurisdiction over the conduct 
producing the harm - ie the measure of its effective control of an event; and 
• 
an analysis of relative causation, including the relative capacities of the States to 
prevent the injurious event or its repetition. 
13 
The Cape Roberts Project is a good example of the various interests which might 
be taken into account in deciding on any apportionment of liability as between the 
participating States. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
14 
In the case of a joint scientific project, the shared values and expectations of the 
participants in the project mean that they can develop in advance a clear idea of the 
arrangements for the sharing of any allocation of reparations or any action to prevent or 
mitigate damage.  Solutions can be arrived at which do justice to the interests of the 
participating and other States.  But this does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that 
the adoption of joint and several liability would affect the carrying out of collaborative 
projects.  Indeed, any problems concerning the uneven burden on one participating State 
which may be the consequence of joint and several liability should be overcome 
through efforts to address the issues by the participating States in advance of any 
incident occurring.  Collaborative scientific endeavour need not be adversely affected. 
