 
Co-operation among Parties with respect to Article 6 of the Protocol 
Submitted by Germany 
 
I. 
Introduction 
 
At the XXII ATCM from 25 May – 5 June 1998 in Tromsö, Peru proposed the 
agenda item "Co-operation among Parties with respect to Article 6 of the Protocol" 
for inclusion in the preliminary agenda of the XXIII ATCM in Lima. This proposal 
was agreed to by all Consultative Parties.  
A discussion of this agenda item is useful and necessary. After its entry into force 
the Protocol of Environmental Protection has to be implemented and the given 
frame has to be filled out. Of course the practical implementation also concerns 
Article 6 of the Protocol addressing international cooperation. First approaches to 
concretise this cooperation have already been undertaken both in the framework of 
the ATCM and at the bilateral level. These concepts should be supplemented and 
intensified. 
 
II. 
At the XVIth ATCM from 7.-28. October 1991 in Bonn and at the XVIIth ATCM 
from 11. – 20. November 1992 in Venice the Consultative Parties have broadly 
discussed the issue of international cooperation in the field of scientific research 
and their associate logistic activities.  
 
In this context, numerous working papers as well as relevant paragraphs in the 
respective Final Reports regarding this issue are recalled. Paragraph 104 of the 
Final Report of the XVI. ATCM, which was by and large confirmed by the 
Recommendation XVII-4, reads as follows: 
 
„Papers submitted to the Meeting noted the benefits to be derived from increased 
international cooperation in the fields of: 
 
- mutual exchange of information on long-term scientific programmes 
 
- more efficient use of human scientific capacity 
 
- cost-effectiveness for laboratories, instruments, stations and logistics 
 
- reduced environmental impact and improved safety of operations 
 
- more systematic and coordinated scientific observations 
 
- a coordinated approach to the siting of stations 
 
- integration into existing arrangements of the scientific programmes of new  
 
  Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. 
 
1 
 
In this context, the Meeting welcomed with satisfaction SCAR’s Conference on 
Antarctic Science, designed to foster interdisciplinary research, to strengthen the 
interaction within the international scientific community and to further integrate 
scientific planning into programmes of global significance.  
 
In the long line of Antarctic tradition which stems from the International 
Geophysical Year, the Meeting felt that the time might have come for consideration 
of a more systematic approach to international collaboration in research 
programmes and their associate logistic activities in Antarctica.“ 
 
III. 
Environmental protection in Antarctica is task and challenge for all Consultative 
Parties. To international cooperation in this field the same principles should apply 
as to international cooperation in scientific research and associate logistic activities. 
 
This primarily concerns cooperation with respect to Art 6 of the Protocol, but also 
bilateral cooperation. 
 
1) Cooperation with respect to Art. 6 of the Protocol 
In order to implement Art. 6 of the Protocol and especially paragraph 2 of this 
provision, it is important first of all to broaden and to strengthen exchange of 
information on the planning and carrying out of activities in Antarctica.  
 
Furthermore in accordance with the other provisions of Art. 6 there is a need for  
 
- 
the promotion of co-operative programmes 
- 
assistance in the preparation of environmental impact assessments 
- 
information on and assistance in environmental risks 
- 
consultation on the planning of sites for prospective stations and other facilities  
 
2) Bilateral Cooperation 
As far as its bilateral cooperation is concerned, Germany since years has pursued 
the objective, to include as far as possible other Consultative Parties in its own 
activities in Antarctica. This is especially true in relation to those Consultative 
Parties which feel a need to catch up in special Antarctica related technologies 
and/or which want to reduce their otherwise higher financial burden in the 
framework of joint projects.  
 
 
2 
3 
 
Germany also pursues these objectives with a view to environmental protection 
especially since the Protocol of Environmental Protection entered into force.  
Thus in the framework of a cooperation treaty with Argentine Germany and the 
Netherlands put a sewage treatment device at the disposal of the Argentine 
Antarctic Institute for use in the Jubany Station.  
 
 
Generally it should be kept in mind that environmental protection also benefits 
from the various projects that Germany undertakes with other Consultative 
States in the area of scientific research and the associate logistic activities. In 
this sense joint projects with other Consultative States Parties are either 
planned or have already been put to practice. In this context Germany mainly 
focusses on the promotion of assistance in training, e.g. through participation in 
joint projects, invitation to relevant workshops and information visits to its 
Federal Environmental Agency. 
 
 
 
