REPORT OF THE SECOND WORKSHOP ON  ANTARTIC PROTECTED 
AREAS  
 
1. Introduction 
 
A Second Antarctic Protected Areas Workshop was held in Lima on May 22-23 1999 
shortly before the XXIII ATCM in Tromso, Norway. The CEP at ATCM XXII had 
provided the following Terms of Reference: 
 
i) Examine how the overall Antarctic protected areas framework envisioned in article 
3(2) of the Protocol Annex V could be developed.  This framework should: 
 
a) 
Identify and take into account threats to the different categories and 
special features of protected areas listed in Article 3(2) of Annex V and 
thus provide priorities for protection; 
 
b) 
Provide guidelines to identify areas needing special protection; 
 
 
c) 
Propose criteria to evaluate proposals for establishing new protected areas 
 
keeping in mind that all of Antarctica has been designated as a natural 
 
reserve devoted to peace and science. 
 
ii) Develop better systems for categorising protected areas in Antarctica making good use 
of existing knowledge and methods; 
 
iii) Undertake a gap analysis based on the values for site protection identified in article 3 
of Annex V, in order to make recommendations for new protected areas, with particular 
attention given to identifying: 
 
a) Areas kept inviolate from human interference so that future comparisons may be 
possible with localities that have been affected by human activities; 
 
b) Representative examples of major terrestrial, including glacial and aquatic, 
ecosystems and marine ecosystems. 
 
iv) Suggest how the CEP could best review draft management plans for ASPAs and assist 
proposers in developing plans 
 
The Workshop attempted to address all elements of the Terms of Reference but lack of 
time limited the extent to which it could fully address all items.  Further specialised 
consideration will be necessary to provide to ensure comprehensive guidance is 
provided on protected areas, their designation, management and conservation value.  
It would helpful, as noted at the previous Workshop, if all Parties could ratify Annex 
V as soon as possible. 
 
Finally the workshop  decided that the full proceedings of the workshop be compiled, 
edited and distributed, including the key note introductory address, the position papers 
and the proceedings of each of the discussion groups. 
 
2.  
Key points 
The Workshop noted the following key points: 
• That the Protocol, and particularily Annex V,  provides the necessary 
framework for a protected areas strategy but that it needs elaboration for 
practical use; 
• Analysis of risks to the Antarctic environment could provide a useful tool in 
identifying requirements for new protected areas; 
• That the development of a "toolbox" of criteria for assessing existing and new 
protected areas offers opportunities for systematic development of the present 
protected area system; 
• There are several available analytical methods for determining the adequacy 
of representativeness of existing  protected areas; 
• Methods for reviewing draft plans could be improved on. 
 
3.  Recommendations 
 
The Workshop developed five recommendations for consideration by the CEP. 
 
Development of protected areas framework  (ToR i & ii) 
 
It has become apparent in attempting to apply elements of Annex V of the Protocol that 
some practical elaboration of details is needed. It was for this reason that the Guide to the 
Preparation of Management Plans for Protected Areas was adopted at XXII ATCM. The 
Workshop concluded that a similar approach would facilitate the assessment of how 
protected areas complied with the categories in Annex V. 
 
Recommendation 1 
 
 
That the CEP adopts an elaborated framework for protected areas in Antarctica which 
draws on the following conceptual schema: 
 
Since protected areas are but one element of the conservation requirements for Antarctica 
the Workshop further recommends: 
Values (as identified in Article 3 of Annex V) 
Environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic, wilderness. 
Protection Categories 
Use Categories 
• 
Ecosystems 
• 
Science 
• 
Habitat 
• 
Conservation 
• 
Species 
• 
Economic 
• 
Landscape 
• 
Recreation/Tourism 
• 
Environmental features 
• 
Non-use/intrinsic 
• 
Cultural/historic features 
 
Recommendation 2 
 
That the CEP considers the need for further elaboration of an Antarctic conservation 
strategy.  
 
Undertake a gap analysis to recommend  new protected areas (ToR iii) 
 
The Workshop heard the results of a gap analysis and considered the opportunities 
afforded by other analytical tools  recommended by SCAR.  In order to capture the 
importance of threats to the Antarctic environment as a tool for prioritising a protected 
areas strategy the value of environmental risk analysis was explored. 
 
Recommendation 3 
 
That in selecting new protected areas, a range of tools be used, including: environmental 
risk analysis (a useful systematic/integrative tool), complementarity analysis ; and other 
criteria as listed below. 
 
 
QUALITY 
ENVIRONMENTAL RISK 
FEASIBILITY 
· representativeness 
· human activities/impact 
 
· boundaries 
· uniqueness/rarity 
· natural variability 
 
· conflicts 
· biodiversity 
· species vulnerability/fragility  
· size 
· geodiversity 
· area 
 
· possible management 
 
 
 
 
 
 tools 
· naturalness 
· non-Antarctic threats 
· time period/duration 
· amount of existing damage · urgency/time over which 
· accessibility/logistics 
· education potential 
 
additional protection/need 
· politics 
· scientific importance 
 
for rapid action 
· fits categories of 
 
 
 
 
    Annex V  
 
· aesthetic quality 
 
 
 
 
 
Complementarity assessment would provide an indication of  how well existing 
protected areas provide protection for values not declared in the existing management 
plan. The workshop therefore recommends: 
 
Recommendation 4 
 
That in the process of reviewing protected area management plans, the responsible Party 
compile inventories of the values found in those areas to ascertain whether they are 
working in the area to protect the designated assemblages, whether there is 
inappropriate duplication between areas, and whether there are other assemblages 
which need inclusion in the protected area. 
 
 
Review of draft management plans (ToR iv) 
 
The workshop noted a need to consider the content and effectiveness of existing 
management plans in a consistent manner as well as  how the CEP could best review 
draft management plans for ASPAs and assist proposers in developing plans. It is 
recommended that: 
 
Recommendation  5 
 A Contact Group  should be established  by the CEP, in accordance with Rule 9 of 
the CEP Rules of Procedure with  the following functions: 
• Provision of advice to proponents and the CEP on new management plans. 
• Reminding proponents when revisions to existing plans are due. 
• Provision of advice on such revisions. 
• Monitoring the operation of plans and advising the CEP / Parties accordingly as 
requested by CEP. 
 
The following flow diagram is proposed for the submission of, and the provision of 
advice to the ATCM on, Protected Area Management Plans. 
 
 
Proponent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally the workshop decided that the full proceedings of the workshop be compiled, 
edited and distributed, including the key note introductory address, the position 
papers and the proceedings of each of the working group. 
advice 
ATCM 
CEP 
Contact 
group 
CEP 
as appropriate 
CCAMLR 
SCAR 
Protocol 
Article 10.2 
