ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

ANT/3
April 1975
Original:  English

SPECIALLY PROTECTED MARINE AREAS AND MARINE SITES OF
SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST.

(SCAR paper submitted by Norway)

In transmitting the attached paper SCAR requested
the National Committees to invite their Governments to
consider actions whereby areas as referred to can be established.
- 2 -

SCAR Proposals regarding Specially Protected 
Marine Areas and Marine Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest

A number of SCAR National Committees have expressed interest 
in the possibility of designating inshore marine areas either 
as Specially Protected Areas or as Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest.  However, at present this is not possible under the 
Agreed Measures for the Preservation of Flora and Fauna as they 
apply to terrestrial and ice shelf areas only.

There is a distinct need for affording some degree of protection 
to selected inshore areas since:

    1.  Some inshore benthic areas adjacent to shore bases 
have been subject to modification by man's 
activities.

    2.  A number of unique assemblages of shallow water 
benthic plants and animals have been identified 
at various points around the Antarctic Continent.

    3.  Certain inshore benthic areas and waters are the 
sites of continuing scientific study and there is 
a need to maintain these free from modification and 
disturbance.

SCAR therefore requested it's National Committees to invite 
Governments to consider means whereby Specially Protected Marine 
Areas and Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest can be 
established.  It is suggested that in the first place this may 
be done by the adoption of Voluntary Guidelines for their 
establishment.

Suggested conditions that might apply in such cases are detailed 
below.

1.  Specially Protected Marine Areas

    a.  The areas of outstanding scientific interest (listed 
in an annex) shall be designated "Specially 
Protected Marine Areas" and shall be accorded 
special protection by the Participating Governments 
in order to preserve their ecological system.

    b.  The Participating Governments shall in Specially 
Protected Marine Areas prohibit

        1)  The collection of any plant and animal except 
in accordance with a permit

        2)  The operation of any power-driven craft.
- 3 -

c. A permit to enter a Specially Protected Marine Area and to collect any plant or animal within such an area shall have effect provided that:

      a) it was issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere; and

      b) the actions permitted thereunder will not jeopardize the natural ecological systems existing in that area.

Examples of such areas are:

Some of the unique shallow benthic communities of the Ross Island McMurdo Sound Region as documented by Dayton et al, 1974 (Ecological Monographs, 44 (1): 105-128);

In due course there should be included in the series of Specially Protected Marine Areas,

      a) representative examples of the major Antarctic inshore ecological systems

      b) areas with unique complexes of species

      c) areas which are the type locality or only known habitat of any plant or animal species

      d) areas which should be kept inviolate so that in the future they may be used for purpose of comparison with localities that have been disturbed by man.

2. Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest

There are areas that provide a baseline for long-term investigations, and areas that provide unique opportunities for specific kinds of scientific investigation. Limitations applicable to such sites would be similar to those for terrestrial and freshwater Sites of Special Scientific Interest.

Examples of such sites are:

      1. Arthur Harbour, Anvers Island - the site of extensive benthic ecological studies.

      2. Port Foster, Deception Island - in this area a long-term study of the recovery of benthic communities following volcanic activity is in progress.

      3. Borge Bay, Signy Island.

      4. West and south-west shore of Petrel Island, Adelie Land.

      5. Turks Head, Ross Island - the proposed site for long-term seal behaviour studies.

3. The Working Group on Biology recognized that special problems may arise concerning ship anchorages and recommends that the Logistics Working Group should be consulted when recommendations for Specially Protected Marine Areas and Marine Sites of Special Scientific Interest are being formulated by other Working Groups of SCAR.
