ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[R]CTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIV
                          ANT/49
OSLO                     19 June 1975
                          Original:English

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES - EFFECTS OF MINERAL EXPLORATION

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation VII-6;

Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of the Antarctic
Treaty;

Reaffirming that it is in the interest of all mankind that the
Antarctic Treaty Area shall continue forever to be used exclusively
for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of
international discord;

Acknowledging that the Antarctic Treaty places a special responsi-
bility upon the Contracting Parties to exert appropriate efforts,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure that
no one engages in any activity in the Antarctic Treaty Area contrary
to the purposes or principles of the Treaty;

Concerned that mineral resource exploration and exploitation
could adversely affect the unique environment of the Antarctic and of
other ecosystems dependent on the Antarctic environment;

Noting the technological developments in polar mineral exploration
and exploitation;

Convinced that further consultations on questions concerning
Antarctic mineral resources are desirable and in the meantime of the
need for restraint to avoid precipitate action in relation to the
subject of these consultations;

Aware that available scientific information on the environmental
effects of mineral exnloration and/or exnloitation in the Antarctic
-2-

has been inadequately studied and that the Consultative Parties
bear a special responsibility for environmental protection in
the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Aware also that Antarctic geological structures have not
been sufficiently investigated;

Recognizing the need for further study and consideration of
these matters;

Resolved that the Consultative Parties should seek to develop
an approach to the problems raised by the possible presence of
valuable mineral resources in the Antarctic Treaty Area, bearing
in mind the principles and purposes of the Antarctic Treaty ;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. (The subject "Antarctic Resources --
Effects of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be
fully studied, including juridical, political and
economic aspects, and be the subject of consultations
among them through diplomatic and other appropriate
channels;)

2. They undertake to study the environmental implications
of mineral resource activities in the Antarctic Treaty
Area and other related matters, including joint studies
among them, and that they exchange the results of such
studies;

3. They invite SCAR through their National Antarctic
Committees to:

(i) make an assessment on the basis of available
information of the possible impact on the environ-
ment of the Treaty Area and other ecosystems
- 3 -

dependent on the Antarctic environment if mineral 
exploration and/or exploitation were to occur 
there.

If possible and appropriate, Governments may wish 
to assist their National Antarctic Committees in 
this undertaking by appropriate means;

(ii)    continue to co-ordinate national geological and 
        geophysical research programmes  in the Antarctic 
        Treaty Area with the aim of obtaining fundamental 
        scientific data on the geological structure of 
        the Antarctic;

(iii)   consider what further scientific programmes are 
        necessary in pursuit of these objectives;

4.      The subject "Antarctic Resources--
        Effects of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be place 
on the Agenda of the Ninth Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting.
ANTARCTIC TREATY               TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING   HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ         TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                           OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                           OSLO
                                           ANT/49/ADD 1.
                                           20 June 1975
                                           Original:English

Item 17 - Antarctic Resources - Effects of Mineral Exploration.

Proposed amendments Preambular Paragraph to be
inserted in text in ANT 49.

1. Substitute for the Seventh Preambular Paragraph the
following:

"Convinced that further consultations on the questions
concerning Antarctic mineral resources are desirable and in the
meantime of the need for restraint while seeking timely agreed
solutions by the Consultative Parties to problems raised by such
questions; and noting the intention of their Governments to keep
these matters under review in the lights of possible actions by
others."

2. Insert a new first operative paragraph 1 reading as follows:

"1. The subject "Antarctic Resources - The
question of Mineral Exploration and Exploitation" be fully
studied in all its aspects in relation to the Treaty and be the
subject of consultation among them with a view to convening
a special preparatory meeting during 1976 the terms of reference
of which will be determined precisely through diplomatic channels,
the special preparatory meeting to report to the Ninth
Consultative Meeting".

3.       In the fourth operative paragraph, amend the title
of the subject to read: "Antarctic Resources - The question of
Mineral Exploration and Exploitation."
Item 17 - Antarctic Resources - Effects of Mineral Exploration 
and Exploitation.

Draft paragraph for inclusion on p. 9 of the final report.

"The Meeting noted that each Government represented at the 
Eight Consultative Meeting urges states and persons to refrain 
from actions of commercial exploration and exploitation while, 
acting as Consultative Parties, they seek timely agreed 
solutions to the problems raised by the possible presence 
of valuable mineral resources in the Antarctic Treaty 
Area. The representatives also noted the intention of their 
Governments to keep the question under continuing review 
in the light of possible actions by others.
