ANTARCTIC TREATY              
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE              
TRATADO ANTARTICO              
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA              


OSLO              

ANT/33               
13 June 1975               
Original:Spanish               


TESTED REGULATIONS IN FORCE FOR TOURISTS VISITING THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA               

Submitted by Argentina.               

This subject relates to item 7 of the agenda of the               
Seventh Consultative Meeting - Effects on the Antarctic environment               
and on scientific programmes of increasing ease of access.               

Recommendation VII-4 (Effects of tourism and non-governmental               
expeditions on the Antarctic Treaty Area) is the outcome of the               
debate on this subject, which revealed that most of the Contracting               
Parties share several principles in common in respect of tourist               
and other non-governmental expeditions.               

The subject of tourist expeditions is covered by the               
attached "Rules of Conduct".               

ANNEX 1:  Conditions governing visits to the Argentine Sector               
of Antarctica.               

ANNEX 2:  Conditions applying to tourist groups in Antarctica               

ANNEX 3:  Rules of conduct to be observed by tourists.               
- 2 -

ANNEX 1

CONDITIONS GOVERNING VISITS TO THE ARGENTINE SECTOR OF ANTARCTICA

The Argentine Republic in principle approves visits by tourist
groups to the bases it has established and equipped in the Argentine
Sector of Antarctica.

Foreign tourist groups must obtain permits in advance from the
Ministry of External and Cultural Relations (Department for Antarctica
and the Falkland Islands) and Argentine groups from the Ministry of
Defence (National Antarctic Board) subject, in both cases, to approval
from or under the auspices of the Under-Secretary for Tourism
(Patagonian and Antarctic Tourist Area).

Arrangements should be made at least 3 (THREE) months in advance
of the intended departure date and a permit will be granted if the
following requirements arising from the Antarctic Treaty are complied
with:

1. Organisers shall equip installations, vessels and other
    facilities designed for tourist use in such a way that they
    meet group requirements.

2. The organisers must take all necessary safety measures laid
    down by the regulations in force.

3. Organisers must provide groups with the means to render them
    entirely self-sufficient and capable of survival in every
    respect.

4. Organisers must draw up plans for visits and itineraries in
    sufficient detail, leaving it to the discretion of the
    Argentine authorities to make any changes necessary to avoid
    critical or dangerous situations.

5. The organisers shall expressly enjoin tourists to comply
    fully with the rules and instructions concerning conduct,
    safety, protection of Antarctic flora and fauna, etc.

6. In accordance with the ecological provisions of the
    Antarctic Treaty, all tourists are required to observe the
    following rules of conduct:
- 3 -

(a) They shall obey orders given by the head of base in pursuance 
of his duties.

(b) No animals or plants alien to the ecosystem may be brought 
into Antarctica.

(c) No parasites or other disease-inducing agents may be brought 
into Antarctica.

(d) Tourists may not kill, wound, capture, alarm or disturb 
Antarctic animal species;  this applies also to birds and their eggs.

(e) The prohibitions set forth in the preceding paragraph shall 
apply to Antarctic flora.

(f) The foregoing prohibitions shall apply to geological or 
archaeological specimens of all types and species.

(g) No examples of fauna, flora or geological species may be taken 
out of the Antarctic continent as souvenirs.

(h) Within a base tourists may travel only in duly authorised areas 
they may not move outside the installations or circulate in restricted 
areas or those declared out of bounds or areas under research or 
subject to special conditions.

(i) Tourists shall move slowly and quietly in the vicinity of bird 
colonies and shall take special care not to frighten birds which are 
hatching or caring for their young.

7. Permission to visit foreign bases situated in the Argentine Sector of 
Antarctica must be explicitly negotiated along with the other programme 
details.

8. All Antarctic cruises starting from Argentine territory on the South 
American mainland shall be accompanied by representatives of the Ministry 
of External and Cultural Relations (Department for Antarctica and the 
Falkland Islands) and the National Antarctic Board of the Ministry of 
Defence.
- 4 -

ANNEX 2

CONDITIONS APPLYING TO TOURIST GROUPS IN ANTARCTICA

If any tourist or group of tourists fails to comply with any of the provisions listed below, the authorities or officials belonging to the competent bodies shall be empowered to cancel all permits previously issued in response to application by the manager of the cruise concerned.

In such circumstances the official shall make notification of his action to the competent bodies by cable.

RULES IN FORCE
(to be observed)

1. No tourist shall under any circumstances land in Antarctica without express permission from his cruise leader who shall apply for permission by radio to the head of the base to be visited.
NOTE:  The purpose of this prohibition is to prevent disruption of or interference with the normal work at the base, bearing in mind the situation peculiar to each particular base, the desirability of co-ordinating the visit beforehand, and that in case of emergency immediate help may have to be provided.
Heads of bases must be notified of impending visits by the cruise leaders  at least 24 hours before the estimated time of arrival.

2. The number of tourists in each group and the number of groups shall be in keeping with the facilities available at the base.
The head of base shall stipulate the size of groups in each case according to the particular conditions at his base.

3. Visitors may not remain at bases at night or at mealtimes except in exceptional cases duly authorised by the head of base.

4. Except in emergencies, tourists may not occupy or use the limited facilities available at bases;  in particular they may not consume provisions or ask for shelter.
For practical supply reasons, only a limited supply of souvenirs and gifts shall normally be made available at bases.

5. Since groups must be self-sufficient they may not ask the bases f or help of any kind in respect of transport for landing, equipment, provisions or shelter.  Such help shall be given only in case of emergency.  If a group requests goods or services beyond the limits of humanitarian aid (except in the case of search and rescue operations) the head of base may request reimbursement from the cruise leader.
- 5 -

6. The responsibilities of tourist visit organisers shall include measures 
to guarantee the safety of all members of groups being taken on tours.
In view of the fact that the organisers must take all reasonable 
measures for safety, the Argentine Government accepts no responsibility 
regarding insurance against injury resulting from accidents or other 
mishaps that may befall tourists in consequence of their landing at the 
base, entry into or transit across the confines of the said base by the means 
of transit used for their cruise or visit.

For the purposes of the foregoing, a document shall be drawn up before 
any visit is undertaken, placing on record that the Government assumes 
no responsibility for risks that may be incurred through landing or 
visiting.

7. While visiting a base tourists must comply with all reasonable instructions 
from the head of base.

8. Before a visit is undertaken, the head of base or the Argentine official 
accompanying a group shall call a formal meeting in order to make known 
the rules of conducts which the tourists concerned must observe and 
draw attention to any particular restrictions which must be respected.

No one may approach magnetic laboratories while carrying any materials 
or objects made of iron.  It is also forbidden to approach sites 
containing seismographs.

9. Tourists may not carry on their persons firearms, knives or explosives, 
nor may they light any fires during their visit to Antarctica.

10. Visits by personnel from the base to the means of transport used by 
tourist groups  may be permitted by the head of base and the cruise 
leader.

11. At each base access shall be permitted to the post office during normal 
opening hours.  Before the visit is undertaken cruise leaders may 
make notification of the number of tourists wishing to avail themselves 
of the post office service.
ANNEX 3                                            - 6 -

RULES OF CONDUCT TO BE OBSERVED BY TOURISTS

The provisions of the Antarctic Treaty, to which the Argentine 
Republic is one of the original signatories, are in|force in the area
south of 60o South Latitude.  This legal instrument establishes freedom
of scientific investigation in the region, for the purpose of which the
Consultative Meetings held to date have adopted a number of rules
relating in particular to conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora
and to facilitating the activities of scientists in the region.

In view of the special conditions in which the said scientists have 
to work and their limited living space, the Argentine Republic has laid
down for the current season the rules of conduct set forth below.  It
should be remembered that the arrival of a tourist group not only
disturbs the work routine but is a source of concern both to those
responsible for organising the journey and to the staff at the base or
station visited.

   In the light of these considerations, the present rules of conduct
are designed to facilitate tourist exploration and at the same time to
ensure compliance with the Argentine legal provisions.  Accordingly,
tourists are invited to bear particularly in mind:

1. That they may travel and circulate only in the places indicated
by the authorities.  The possible existence of rifts and the consequent
danger of falling into them makes it advisable from all points of view
to comply with this stipulation.

2. The provisions governing the conservation of Antarctic flora 
and fauna prohibit disturbance, destruction or damage to animals or plants,
and the collection of any plant or animal species, including eggs.

3. 3. No attempt shall be made, either on foot or in a vehicle, to 
approach bird or seal colonies, or to molest or disturb them in any way,
even for reasons of natural curiosity, however harmless it may seem.
(In this connexion, prior consultation is advisable as a precaution).

4. It is categorically forbidden to introduce weapons or explosives 
of any kind into the region, including so-called sporting weapons.

5. It is also categorically forbidden to introduce any type of 
plant or animal, including domestic ones, in order to avoid environmental
pollution liable to damage fauna and flora in the region.

6. For reasons similar to those given in the preceding paragraph,
it is also forbidden to discard any form of waste, on the mainland, on 
ice or at sea.
- 7 -

7. The leader or person in charge of the excursion is the 
only person who may authorise tourists to circulate, or to approach
any type of installation.

8. The head of base or station is the only person who may
authorise a visit to an establishment and his instructions shall be
followed in respect of the places through which transit is permitted
and the activities that tourists may pursue.

9. Under no circumstances may tourists enter uninhabited bases,
stations, refuges, premises etc.  Such installations may be used
only in circumstances liable to cause danger to life ro limb.
Installations must be left in the same state in which they were found.

10. It is categorically forbidden to cause any form of damage or
write inscriptions of any nature whatsoever likely to change the normal
appearance of any installation, even though abandoned, or any places
designated as historic monuments to the memory of human effort and
sacrifice in the interest of a better knowledge of Antarctica.
