ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                       HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                             TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ                 OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                      OSLO

ANT/1
April 1 1975
Original: English

REVIEW OF SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS.              SCAR RESPONSE TO
ANTARCTIC TREATY RECOMMENDATION VII - 2.

(SCAR paper submitted by Norway)

In conveying the attached document SCAR requested
the National Committees to inform their Governments of the
likelihood of proposals being made in the future for the
establishment of specially Protected Areas and Sites of
Special Scientific Interest in the McMurdo Dry Valley System
(see paragraph 12 XIII - SCAR - 35, Report of the meetings
of the Working Group on Biology).
- 2 -

SCAR Response to Antarctic Treaty Recommendation VII-2.

Review of Specially Protected Areas.

1. Criteria for selection of Specially Protected Areas.

The SCAR Working Group on Biology reviewed these criteria and recommend that no change be made.  However, the Working Group was not in a position to assess at present the degree to which the present areas satisfy the criteria especially (a) (representative examples of major Antarctic land and freshwater ecological systems).  The reconstituted Subcommittee on Conservation will address itself urgently to the tasks listed under 1 and 2 of its terms of reference, namely,

1)     The establishment of a comprehensive classification of Antarctic and Subantarctic terrestrial, freshwater and inshore marine benthic ecosystems.

2)     Initiating action to see that representative examples are reserved as well as areas with unique assemblages of species and outstandingly interesting breeding colonies of birds and mammals.

When these tasks have been carried out, the Working Group on Biology will transmit definitive proposals to SCAR.

2. Review of existing Specially Protected Areas (SPA's).

The SCAR Working Group on Biology after considering the recommendations of National Committees, and the request to review them in the light of the criteria given in Recommendation VII-2, makes the following recommendations and comments.

a.     SPA's 1, 2 and 3.  It is recommended that these be retained with their existing boundaries.  These areas are currently being investigated by ANARE and in due course will be reported on through the Australian National Committee.

b.     SPA's 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13 and 15.  It is recommended that these areas be retained with their existing boundaries.

c.     SPA 6, Cape Crozier, Ross Island.  It is recommended that this area be considered for designation as a site of Special Scientific Interest.  This area is the site of continuing ornithological studies and thus subject to extensive use.  Thus the purpose of the area would best be served by the proposed change.
- 3 -

d.     SPA 10. Byers Peninsula, Livingston Island, South 
       Shetland Island. It is recommended that this area be 
       considered for designation as a Site of Special 
       Scientific Interest. This area biologically duplicates 
       Area 11, Cape Shirreff, Livinston Island, and there is 
       no need to reserve two similar areas.  Byers Peninsula 
       is likely to be the site of scientific work in the near 
       future.

e.     SPA 12. Fildes Peninsula, King George Island, South 
       Shetland Islands.  It is recommended that this area 
       be removed from the list of SPA's.  This area was 
       originally set up to reserve a freshwater lake. However, 
       the Bellingshausen and President Frei stations are 
       situated in it and there are extensive areas of land 
       cut up by tracked vehicles.  The lake catchment has 
       thus been affected and it is highly probable that the 
       lake has been contaminated and is no longer in its 
       virgin state.

f.     SPA 14. Lynch Island, South Orkney Islands.  It is 
       recommended that this area be considered for desig-
       nation as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.  The 
       Island provides unusual opportunities for ecological 
       studies of the grass, Deschampsia antarctica, and 
       there are proposals to conduct such studies in the 
       future.

g.     SPA 16. Coppermine Peninsula, Robert Island.  It is 
       recommended that this area be considered for design-
       ation as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.  In 
       recent years this area has been the site of ornithol-
       ogical and other studies and a small Chilean field-hut 
       is situated nearby.  The purpose of the area would best 
       be served by the proposed change.

h.     It was noted that Chile proposes in the future to 
       request that Port Harmony, Nelson Island, be designated 
       as an SPA.

3.  Entry to Specially Protected Areas.

The SCAR Working Group on Biology considered the present 
conditions governing access to SPA's and welcomed the intended 
strengthening of their function as Conservation Area.  They 
note that Article VIII and Recommendation VI.8 provide for entry 
to be prohibited except in accordance with a permit to collect 
native mammals, birds or plants, issued for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere and provided 
that the actions permitted will not jeopardize the natural 
ecological system existing in that Area.  The driving of any 
vehicle is prohibited. However, the present wording excludes all 
but biologists intending to collect specimens.  There will be 
need for other types of scientific activity, such as population 
monitoring, vegetation survey, topographical survey or geological 
survey.  The Working Group recommends that the conditions 
governing the issue of a permit to enter an SPA be enlarged so 
as to permit entry for other compelling scientific purposes 
which cannot be served elsewhere, in addition to the collection 
of native mammals, birds and plants.
