ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ


TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO

ANT/13
28 May 1975
Original: English

Designation of Barwick Valley, Victorialand,
Antarctica as a Site of Special Scientific Interest
(Proposal submitted by United States)

The proposed area, which includes most of Barwick Valley, is
one of the least perturbed by scientific and logistic activities,
in contrast to many areas south of the Olympus Range where numerous
scientific investigations have occured regularly over the past decade.

Barwick Valley contains portions of several glaciers, soils, a lake
about 3 km long and 1.6 km wide at the base of Webb Glacier, and a
connecting stream about 5.0 km long leading to Lake Vashka.  It is
proposed that the chief use of Barwick Valley be that of microbiological
research.

The proposed boundaries of the Barwick Valley Site of Special
Scientific Interest approximate an irregular pentagon enclosing about
325 km 2 as follows:  Skew Peak (160°43'E longitude, 77°13'S latitude)
as the northernmost boundary; southwest about 12.8 km to Mt. Bastion
Peak (160°30'E longitude, 77°19'S latitude); southeast about 11.5 km
to a point in the Apocalypse Peaks areas (160°46'E longitude,
77°24'S latitude); nearly due eastward about 16.6 km to a point in
the Insel Range (161°26'E longitude, 77°24'S latitude); nearly due
northward about 11.5 km to Sponsors Peak (161°24'E longitude,
77°18'S latitude); and northwestward about 20 km back to Skew Peak.

This area is shown on the attached map.

Justification

It is unlikely that any part of this area will be useful
except to microbiologists (i.e. aquatic or terrestrial bacteriologists,
mycologists and phycologists). Although small, as compared to the
total Dry Valley area, Barwick Valley can become an important
testing site for future microbiological and chemical global
monitoring.

lianacjement

Management to be in accordance with the attached plan.
Designation of Barwick Valley, Victoria Land, 
Antarctica as a Site of Special Scientific Interest
(Proposal submitted by United States)

Management Plan

1. Description of the Site. The proposed area, which includes the 
greater part of Barwick Valley, is in Victoria Land, inland 
from the Victoria Dry Valley, bordered on the south, west, and 
north by the Olympus, Willett, and Clare Ranges respectively.

The Barwick Valley area contains portions of several glaciers, 
exposed soils, a lake about 3 km long and 16 km wide at the base 
of Webb Glacier, and a connecting stream about 5 km long leading 
to Lake Vashka. The proposed boundaries of the Barwick Valley 
Site of Special Scientific Interest approximate an irregular 
pentagon enclosing about 325 km2 as follows: Skew Peak 160°43'E 
longitude, 77°13's latitude) as the northernmost boundary; south-
west about 12.8 km to Mt. Bastion Peak (160°30'E longitude, 
77°19'S latitude); southeast about 11.5 km to a point in the 
Apocalypse Peaks area (160°46'E longitude, 77°24'S latitude); 
nearly due eastward about 16.6 km to a point in the Insel Range 
(161°26'E longitude, 77°24'S latitude); nearly due northward about 
11.5 km to Sponsors Peak 161°24'E longitude, 77°18'S latitude); 
and northwestward about 20 km to close the boundary at Skew Peak.

This area is shown on the attached map.

2. Reason for Establishment. The Dry Valleys of Victoria Land represent 
unique environments possessing extreme polar desert ecosystems 
unlike any others on the earth and different from any other Special 
Area recognized under the Antarctic Treaty.  The Barwick Valley 
Site is one of the least perturbed and contaminated of the Dry 
Valleys, in contrast to many areas south of the Olympus Range
where scientific investigations in considerable variety have
been conducted regularly over the past decade. Barwick Valley
will be of very significant use to microbiologists, mycologists,
and phycologists, for both terrestrial and aquatic studies/ This
valley will be important as a reference base against which to
measure changes in comparable ecosystems of the other Dry Valleys
and also as a set of ecosystems which may be expected to be
sensitive to changes in atmospheric chemistry, for example, in
connection with global monitoring.

3. Outline of Proposed Research. Investigations are proposed of the
bacteriology, mycology (especially of yeasts and molds), and
phycology of the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in the
Barwick Valley, with special programs to establish baseline
measurements for biological and environmental monitoring. The
research will be designed to minimize perturbations of the
biological and environmental systems on the Site.

4. Period of Designation of Site. It is recommended that the initial
period designating this as a Site of Special Scientific Interest
should be for six years, to be reviewed after two years for
possible indications of weakness in the method used to achieve
the intent of the designation and of the management plan, and
to be reviewed after four years to determine if the designation
deserves consideration of renewal beyond the initial six years.

5. Details of Permitted Activities in the Area.

a. Access Points. Access will be by helicopter to Wright Valley,
thence into the Barwick Valley Site on foot past Lake
Vashka into the main part of the valley.
b. Pedestrian and Vehicular Routes.  Vehicles are excluded.
Routes for pedestrian traffic are yet to be located 
exactly.  The routes will be kept on well-drained ground 
as much as possible, with the minimum number of stream 
crossings and minimum contacts with lake margins.

c. Kinds of Scientific Activity Permitted.  All types of micro-
biological studies and biological and chemical monitoring 
activities may be undertaken, excepting those which would 
introduce exotic species capable of surviving in the region 
and those which would disrupt or damage the existing eco-
systems.  Geological, pedological, and glaciological studies 
will be permitted only under supervision of biologists 
(see d below), excepting those studies which could introduce 
exotic species or could disrupt the environment for the 
existing ecosystems.

d. Restrictions on Scientific Sampling.  In general, all scientific 
sampling in the Site area must be restricted to that which 
can be accomplished without introducing new organisms, 
including microorganisms, and without disturbing the environ-
ment, as by the release of heavy metal residues or hydro-
carbons.  Glaciological and geological sampling or investi-
gations will not be permitted, except under the immediate 
supervision of biologists engaged in microbiological studies 
of the Site.

e. Other Restrictions.  Use of the area for biological research 
will require advance permission.  All use of the 
area shall be reported to SCAR, which will maintain a record 
of all activities in the area.
6. Limitations on Access. Overflight of the area is not permitted.
Neither helicopters nor other mechanical devices are to be used 
to reach points within the area.  Landings and parking are 
restricted to locations well outside the boundaries of the area.
Field activities will be kept to a minimum.  Permanent field 
camps, landfill disposal, and other activities which would 
introduce new materials or organisms into the area are prohibited.
All materials carried into the area must be removed.
CLARE RANGE
                   Detour Nunatak         1620
CLARE RANGE
Mt Malony
1870
Mt Bastion
2530
Gibson Spur
Apocalypse Peaks
Balham Valley
OLYMPUS RANGE
Mt Circe
Mt Dido
2070
Mt Boreas
2180
Mt Aeolus
Mount Hercules
Mount Jason
Wright Valley
