ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTACTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ANT?B?TADO ANTARTICO
15 [?]R?T?G?SI?N CONSULTIVA
OSLO
Original: English

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST:
SITE NO. 1, CAPE ROYDS, ROSS ISLAND

(Draft management plan submitted by the Working Group
on Agenda Items 7 and 8 to be annexed to the draft
Recommendation in ANT/35).

(i) Description of Site

All that area of Cape Royds west of a line drawn from
the south coast of the Cape through Flagstaff Hill to
the south eastern tip of Pony Lake, and the west shoreline
of this lake; and south of a line drawn from the western
extremity of Pony Lake 2800True to the coast. The
boundaries, which are demarcated, are shown on the attached
map.

(ii) Reason for designation

This area supports the most southerly Adélie penguin
(Pygoscelis Adeliae) colony known and its survival is
marginal. The population declined rapidly from 1956
following interference by man until 1963 when United
States and New Zealand authorities agreed to restrict
activities and develop a management plan for the area.

It is considered important to continue study of this colony
under controlled conditions, at least until the penguin
population has recovered to its estimated normal pre-1956
(pre-man) level.

(iii) Outline of research

A long-term study of the population dynamics was begun
in 1969 and is expected to continue.
(iv)     Date of expiry of designation
30 June 1981.

(v)      Access points

The Site should not be entered during the period of penguin 
occupation (approximately mid-October to March) except by 
the marked tracks. Only scientists engaged in the population 
studies should enter the Site during this period. Visitors 
to Cape Royds should not enter the Site. Photographs of 
the colony, except for scientific purposes, should be taken 
from the boundaries of the Site.

(vi)     Pedestrian and vehicular routes

Vehicles should not enter the Site. Pedestrians should 
keep to the marked tracks and not move directly through 
the populated areas except as necessary in the course of 
scientific investigations. Helicopters and low-flying 
aircraft should avoid the penguin colony in accordance 
with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Fauna and Flora.

(vii)    Other kinds of scientific investigations which 
would not cause harmful interference.

Other kinds of scientific investigations should not be 
undertaken while penguins occupy the Site.

/(viii)
(viii) Scientific sampling

Taking samples of the bird population by killing, capture
or taking of eggs should be only for a compelling scientific
purpose and in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

(ix) Other restraints

The following activities should be avoided:

1. Landscaping and removing surface material.
2. Construction of huts or buildings.
3. The depositing of any pieces of equipment
or material that would in any way hinder
re-occupaticn of nests by penguins.
LEGEND
      Contours
      Colonies of Ad?lie Penguins
      and isolated nests
      Prominent rocks
      Boundaries of Skua territories
      and Skua nest sites
      
BACKDOOR BAY

PONY LAKE

Torn

Photo
Point

Access
Beach

MCMURDO SOUND

          100   0     100     200     300
                           FEET
