ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO
ANT/8
28 May 1975
Original: English

E

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
(Draft Recommendation by United States)

The Representatives,

Recalling Articles III and VII of the Antarctic Treaty;

Noting that numerous recommendations of Consultative Meetings
have established requirements for exchange of information between
governments;

Desiring to consolidate the requirements for periodic informa-
tion exchange into a standard annual report;

Conscious that other Recommendations, including I-I, I-III,
I-VII, I-XIII, II-I, II-VIII, IV-27, VI-3, VI-7, and VII-7 provide
for exchange of information on an irregular basis, or outside of
the annual reports exchanged between governments;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. They adopt Annex I to this Recommendation as the standard
format for the annual exchange of information between Governments;

2. They consider the provisions set forth in Annex I to satisfy
the information exchange requirements of Recommendations I-VI, II-IV,
II-VI, III-1, III-II, IV-23, VI-2, VI-6, VI-12, and VI-13;

3. They exchange the report described in Annex I through
diplomatic channels, not later than 30 November each year;

4. They report on any extensions, reductions or other modifica-
tions in the development of the activities previously reported, in
the report for 30 June according to Recommendation VI of the Second
Consultative Meeting;
5. Until such time as The Agreed Measures on the Conservation 
of Antarctic Fauna and Flora may becora effective, the information 
exchange requirements set forth in Recunnendation IV-19. should be 
considered as an interim guide line and may be added to Annex I.

6. They request that the host government for the forthcoming 
Consultative Meeting assume the responsibility to monitor the 
completeness and timeliness on the reports exchanged and to notify 
reporting governments in case of failure to provide complete or timely 
information.
ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING     HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

ANNEX I                         OSLO

ANTARCTIC TREATY

SUGGESTED REPORTING FORMAT FOR THE EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

Notes

1. Information, in as complete a form as possible under the categories
listed below is to be exchanged as early as possible but in no case
later than 30 November each year.

2. Under Recommendation II-VI any extension, reductions or other modi-
fications of activities (in the categories marked below with an
asterisk (*)) previously reported are to be furnished as soon as
possible and in any case prior to 30 June each year.

3. If a category is not applicable to the activities of a particular
country (for example, it has no airfields or does not intend to use
research rockets) this fact should be stated.

I.* The names, types, numbers, descriptions, and armament of ships,
aircraft, and other vehicles, introduced, or to be introduced,
into the Antarctic Treaty Area, and information on military
equipment, if any, and its location in the Area (List only
vehicles used for transport to and from Antarctica. Vehicles
at individual stations are described under category VIII below).

II.* Dates of expeditions leaving for, and arriving in, the Antarctic
Treaty Area, duration of stay, itinerary to and from the Area
and routes followed within the Area.

III.* The names, location, and date of opening of the Party's bases
and subsidiary stations established or planned to be established
in the Antarctic Treaty Area, listed according to whether they are
for summer and/or winter operations.

IV.*The names of the officers in charge of each of these bases,
subsidiary stations, ships and aircraft; the number and occupa-
tions and specialisation of personnel (including any designated by
other governments), who are or will be stationed at each of these
bases and subsidiary stations and on board these ships and air-
craft, including the number of personnel who are members of the
military and together with the rank of any officers and
the names and professional affiliation of personnel engaged in
scientific activities:

A.*Officers in charge of bases.

B.*Officers in charge of ships.

C.*Officers in charge of aircraft.
D.*Number, occupations and specialisations of personnel:
1.*Summer personnel (listed according to base or ship at 
which working);
2.*Winter personnel (listed according to base at which 
working).

E.*Number of personnel who are members of the military services 
together with rank of any officers.

F.*Names and professional affiliation of personnel engaged in 
scientific activities (list according to base or ship at which 
working; it would be useful to list each person's scientific 
disciplines as well as his affiliation).

V.* The number and types of armaments possessed by personnel.

VI.* The programme of work, including scientific investigation, being 
done and planned at each of these bases and subsidiary stations 
and on board those ships and aircraft; and also the area or areas 
of operation to be covered by such programme (this may be included 
as an Annex).

VII.* Principal scientific equipment (equipment may be listed according 
to the base at which it is customarily used):(this may be included 
as an Annex).

VIII.* Transportation facilities and communication equipment for use 
within the Antarctic Treaty Area:

     A.*Surface, marine, and air transport vehicles at each base;

     B.*Description of communications facilities using the standard term 
in accordance with Recommendation VI-2 (this may be included as an 
Annex).

     C.*Description of airfields in accordance with Recommendation III-1 
(location; operating conditions and limitations; radio aids to 
navigation; facilities for radio communications and instrument 
landing):(this may be included as an Annex).

IX.* Facilities for rendering assistance (medical and transport services 
and shelter available in emergencies).

X.* Notice of any expeditions to Antarctica not organised by the Party 
but organised in, or proceeding from, the Party's territory (includes 
tourism in accordance with Recommendations IV-27 and VI-7).

XI.* Description of activities in accordance with Recommendation III-2 
(names; position; description of location; date established; date 
last examined and estimates of available accommodation; facilities; 
food; fuel; and supplies of other kinds):(this may be included as an 
Annex).
XII.* Annual return of species killed or captured in the Antarctic Treaty Area in accordance with Article XII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Fauna and Flora, using the format annexed to Recommendation IV-19 (this may be included as an Annex).

XIII.* Notice of the intended use of radio-isotopes in scientific investigations in the Antarctic Treaty Area (Note: under Recommendation VI-6 this information is to be provided by Consultative Parties as early as possible, preferably six months in advance, but in any case annually).

XIV.* Notice of intended use of scientific research rockets in the Antarctic Treaty Area in accordance with Recommendation VI-12 including "inter alia" geographical co-ordinates of the place of launching; the time and date of launching or, alternatively, the approximate period of time during which it is planned to carry out the launchings; the direction of launching; the planned maximum altitude; the planned impact area; the type and other specifications of the rockets to be launched; including possible residual hazards; the purpose and research programme of the rocket.

XV.* Notice of ships which are carrying out substantial oceanographic research programmes in the Antarctic Treaty Area in accordance with Recommendation VI-13 including information required in paragraphs I, II, IV, VI and VII above.
