ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                OSLO

ANT/9 Rev. 1
17 June 1975
Original: English

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT
(Draft Recommendation submitted by United States,
United Kingdom and New Zealand)

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations VI-4 and VII-1;

Desiring to minimise the impact of man on the Antarctic
environment;

Noting with appreciation the response of SCAR to
Recommendation VI-4;

Recommend to their Governments that:

1. To the greatest extent feasible they observe
the code of conduct annexed to this Recommendation
at their stations and for their activities within
the Antarctic Treaty Area;

2. Through their National Antarctic Committees they
invite SCAR, in cooperation with the Scientific
Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE)
of the International Council of Scientific Unions,
to continue its interest in the development of
scientific programs for detecting and assessing
changes occuring in the Antarctic environment.
ANNEX to ANT/9. Rev. 1

MAN'S IMPACT ON THE ANTARCTIC ENVIRONMENT:
Code of Conduct for Antarctic expeditions and station activities.

1. Waste disposal

The following are recommended procedures:

(a) Solid Waste

(i) Non-combustibles, including chemicals
(except batteries)

These materials may be disposed at sea
either in deep water or, if this is not
possible, at specified sites in shallow
water.

(ii) Batteries should be removed from the
Antarctic Treaty Area.

(iii) Combustibles - wood, wood products and paper
should be incinerated, the ash
being disposed of at sea.
- Lubricating oils may be burnt
except those containing harmful
additives which should be
removed from the Treaty area.
- Carcasses and materials associat[?] 
with imported experimental
animals should be incinerated.
- All plastics and rubber products
should be removed from the
Antarctic Treaty Area.

/(b)
(b) Liquid Waste

(i) Human waste, garbage and laundry effluents 
should, where possible be macerated and be 
flushed into the sea.

(ii) Large quantities of photographic liquids 
should be treated for the recovery of silver 
and the residue should be flushed to the sea.

(c) The above procedures are recommended for coastal 
stations. Field sites supported from coastal 
stations should, where feasible, use the facilities 
of their supporting station. Inland stations should 
concentrate all waste in deep pits. Except as stated 
for inland stations, waste should not be buried.

(d) Waste containing radio-isotopes should be removed 
from the Treaty area.

(e) Every effort should be made to reduce the plastic 
packaging of products imported into the Antarctic 
Treaty Area.

(f) If possible the use of leaded fuels or fuels 
containing ethylene bromide and ethylene chloride 
should be avoided.

(g) When incinerators are used it is desirable to 
monitor the effluents.

2. Introduction of alien species

Procedures to safeguard against the introduction of alien 
species are covered in Article IX of the Agreed Measures for 
/the Conservation
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

3. Disturbance of breeding colonies and concentrations 
of birds and mammals

Procedures to minimise such disturbances are covered by 
Article VII of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Fauna and Flora.

4. Guidelines for Antarctic operating organisations 
planning major Antarctic Projects

    (a) In the planning of major operations in the Antarctic 
an evaluation of the environmental impact of the pro-
posed activity should be carried out by the Antarctic 
operating organisations concerned. Such an 
evaluation should include:

        (i) A description of the proposed action and an 
assessment of its potential benefits and its 
possible impact on the relevant ecosystems.

       (ii) A consideration of alternative actions which 
might alter the pattern of benefits versus 
adverse environmental effects expected to 
result from the action.

    (b) These evaluations may be circulated for information 
through SCAR channels to all the nations engaged in 
Antarctic activities.
