ANTARCTIC TREATY                        TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING             HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                   TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ       OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                         OSL0
                                         ANT/12
                                         28 May 1975
                                         Original: English

Designation of Cape Crozier, Ross Island as a
Site of Special Scientific Interest
(Proposal submitted by United States)

It is proposed that the present Specially Protected Area No. 6,
Cape Crozier, Ross Island, be reduced in area and redesignated as a
Site of Special Scientific Interest.

More specifically, it is proposed that the presently designated
Specially Protected Area No. 6, located at Long 169° 19'E, L 77° 32'S,
which now covers an area of approximately 62 km², be reduced so as
to include only the areas wherein the Emperor Penguins and the Adelie
Penguins and their associated biotic communities and environment
occur.  The area may differ somewhat annually, but generally will
include areas within the approximately 40 km² area lying within the
following boundaries: Long 169°20'E, L77°31'S; to Long 169°28'E, L77°28'S; to Long 169°20'E, L77°31'S; to Long 169°20'E, L77°28'S; 
going Long 169°20'E, L77°28'S with the summit of Post Office Hill
and east of a line which bears 315° True from Post Office Hill to the
Coast.  This area is shown on the attached map.

Justification

Protection of the Emperor Penguin ecosystem at Cape Crozier is
justified, as follows:

1. It is a unique biological complex which is vulnerable to
perturbations of environment.

2. It remains the southernmost Emperor Penguin rookery and
deserves special protection as it is relatively near the areas of
intensive scientific and logistic activity in Antarctica associated 
with the U.S. and New Zealand bases.  This justification therefore 
follows the logic of Specially Protected Area No. 8 (Dion Islands), 
which contains the only Emperor Penguin colony known on the 
western coast of the Peninsula.

3. The Adelie Penguin rookery at Cape Crozier is included 
because it has been subject to extensive scientific research, 
including the banding of more than 200,000 birds.  The rookery is 
therefore of continuing scientific interest.

4. Numerous visits to Cape Crozier by non-permit holding 
scientific and non-scientific personnel in recent years further 
substantiates the necessity for redefining the area and preserving 
it for scientific study.

Management

Management to be in accordance with the attached plan.
Designation of Cape Crozier, Ross Island
as a Site of Special Scientific Interest
(Proposal submitted by United States)

Management Plan

1. Description of the Site. The area is at the present Specially
Protected Area No. 6, Cape Crozier, Ross Island. This site will
be limited to approximately 40 km2 by eliminating the present western
boundary outside the rookery proper. The new site of Special
Scientific Interest will include only the land areas and associated
biota where the Adelie penguins nest and the adjacent sea ice zone
where the emperor penguins annually form a rookery. The proposed
areas lie within the following boundaries: Long 169° 20'E, Lat
77° 31' S; to Long 169° 28'E, 77° 31' S; to Long 169° 28'E, Lat
77° 28' S; to Long 169° 20'E, Lat 77° 28S; and the land area lying
north of a line from Long 169° 20'E, Lat 77° 28' S to the summit of
Post Office Hill and east of a line which bears 315° True from the
summit of Post Office Hill to the coast. The borders of the Site
of Special Scientific Interest, the access tract and road, helopad
and refuge hut are indicated in the attached map.

2. Reason for Establishment. This area includes the southern-
most emperor penguin rookery and deserves special protection because
of historical and ecological uniqueness. The Adelie penguin rookery
is also included because it has been subject to long term population
dynamics and social behavior studies, including the banding of more
than 200,000 birds. These rookeries are relatively accessible by air
from McMurdo Station and Scott Base, centers of intensive scientific
and logistic activities associated with United States and New
Zealand scientific programs. Redefinition of the boundaries permits
overland access outside the designated site proper and establishment
of supporting facilities to assist scientists in the field. This will
help to minimize access to the site by non-permit holding scientific
and non-scientific personnel.

3. Outline of Proposed Research. The proposed research will
include continuing studies of the emperor and Adelie penguin
populations to increase our knowledge of their ethology, life
cycles and physiological adaptation, natural population fluctuations,
and to determine possible changes detectable in their biological
characteristics which may be due to man-induced changes in the
environment.

4. Period of Designation of Site. The initial period of
designation of this Site as a Site of Special Scientific Interest
should be for a period of six years, to be reviewed after two
years for possible indications of weakness of the designation in
achieving the intent of the designation and the management plan,
and to be reviewed after four years to determine if the designation
deserves consideration of renewal beyond the initial six years.

5. Details of Permitted Activities in the Area

a. Access Points. Access shall be from the west and the
southwest to the hut and helo pad northwest of Post Office Hill,
cithcr by h[?]licp[?]er or surface travel.
b. Pedestrian and Vehicular Routes. Overflights of 
helicopters and low-flying aircraft are prohibited on the Site.
Vehicles are prohibited from entering the Site proper, and 
approaches to the Site boundary when serving authorized activities 
should be made on courses normal to the boundary orientation.
Pedestrian travel within the Site shall be limited to the shortest 
routes consistent with the authorized activity.

c. Kinds of Scientific Activity Permitted. On the Site 
biological, pedological, and geological observations will be 
permitted insofar as they will not cause harm to the birds or 
interfere with the breeding success of the penguin colonies; this 
will include consideration of the environments of the colonies.

d. Restrictions on Scientific Sampling. Taking samples 
of the bird populations by killing or live capture, or taking of 
eggs, will be allowed under permit if adequately justified well in 
advance of the request. Close inspection of birds, including 
photography, or taking blood or other biological samples, will 
require permits and adherence to 5(c) above.

e. Limitations on Access. Access shall be by the routes 
described above, and personnel shall have their visits within the 
Site limited to the time required for pursuit of the stated ob-
jectives of the authorized scientific study.

f. Other Restrictions. To the extent possible entry onto 
the Site by scientists other than biologists should be made at times 
when the Adelie colony is absent or when the Emperor colony is at least 
1 km from the locality under scientific consideration.
RECONNAISSANCE SERIES
SCALE 1:50,000

CAPE CROZIER

ROSS     SEA

 
SITE OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST F

ROSS     ISLAND          ROSS     ICE     SHELF

 
RELIABILITY
1     Observation found to be consistent with other evidence and comparisons
2     Adequate control of land formuation, ie. obtained from U.S. detail
photography using stereometrical methods

Astro Station: The Knoll
Latitude 77° 31' 46" S
Longitude 169° 19' 06" E

Published by the U.S. Army Topographic Command
under the authority of U.S. Geological Survey

1        1        1        1        1 Kilometres
1        0        1        2        3 Statute Miles
1        0        1        2        3 Nautical Miles
