ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING     HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           TRATADO ANTARTICO
Восьмое консультативное совещание   OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA 1975
                                 OSLO
                                 Original: English

    E        ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS

(Discussion Paper submitted by United States)

The Needs

The increasing needs to provide information storage
for data relating to the Antarctic Treaty and to promote
rapid dissemination of information calls for the entire
group of Consultative Parties to take a closer look at the
process of information dissemination under the Treaty and
to evaluate that information process. Some means of centralized
information exchanges might be considered with centralization
providing the benefit that it could assist in the conduct
of Treaty affairs, add continuity to the flow of general
Treaty business, and strengthen the connection between past
and present Treaty Consultatives. An additional benefit
to be derived from centralization of information processing
would be to meet some of the needs of future Consultative
Conferences. As the needs to handle more and more complex
issues arise and as the fluidity of national representation
continues the need to maintain the thread of past discussions
becomes more important.

Historically the Antarctic Treaty has always stressed
the need for mutual cooperation and for free exchange of
information as embodied in the Articles of the Treaty; and
in the subsequent Recommendations to governments. For
example, in Article III of the Treaty member states agree
to exchange of information regarding scientific programs,
- 2 -

observations, and results "to permit maximum economy and 
efficiency of operations..."  The concern for free interchange 
of information has been manifested in numerous Recommendations 
at the past Consultative Meetings.  This exchange has been in 
regard to operational information (I-VI), science programs 
(II-VII), facilitics for landing of aircraft (III-I), dates 
of interchange (V-23), and telecommunications matters (V-2, 
V-1, and VI-2).  The Consultative Parties have consistently 
shown a desire to efficiently utilize time and resources in 
regard to their scientific programs, operational details, and 
telecommunications exchange, so it may be advisable to take 
a close look at the general procedures for information 
exchange in the context of ongoing Treaty discussions and 
in the reporting of exchanges throughout the year.  All 
Consultative Parties, as well as interested historians, may 
find centralization an advantage.

The Functions

What specific functions might centralization of the 
information process serve?  Some functions are suggested:

1)  To provide for exchange of information between 
Consultative Parties, and to receive, collate, and dissemi-
nate information to member countries, providing a mechanism 
simpler than the current exchange of diplomatic notes.

2)  To collate Agreed Records from past Consultative 
Meetings and from the meetings which developed the Treaty.
- 3 -

3) To provide a means of closing the "information gap"
which exists from time to time. For instance, such centrali-
zation might be a method of encouraging and aiding individual
governments in completing and dispatching their Preparatory
papers and biannual reports due.

4) To supply a rapporteur at Consultative Meetings.

Some Alternatives

Alternative methods for fulfilling the Outlined Functions
need to be worked out among the Consultative Parties. There
are several alternatives none of which are the ideal. Among
these possibilities are:

A. Floating Storehouse

Creation of an information storage situation which
would float from country to country, possibly on a biennial
basis. Each Consultative Party Nation could house the
storehouse of information during the two years preceeding
the hosting by that country of the upcoming Consultative. One
difficulty with this approach would be to establish a method
of staffing both fluid and yet stable. Each host country
might be able to secuid an appropriate employee or employees
to manage the storehouse. With this type of approach it
would be necessary to establish ground rules as to the functions
and tasks involved.

B. Information Officer or Archivist

Creation of a group of consultants or a single
consultant who could bring together all the past official
- 4 -

documents both of the Consultatives and of the Treaty
development meetings as well.  Once these documents were
compiled the flow of information could be analyzed and
suggestions made for further treatment.  Such a consultant
or consultants might develop into a permanent aide to the
Consultatives traveling with the documents as a sort of
archivist or information officer.  Defining the skills and
duties of such a man would be the difficult task.

C.  Records Office

Creation of a Records Office would house the necessary
information and with a minimal staff serve the various functions
already discussed.  Difficulties with this approach are the
necessity of funding, the need to arrive at a convenient
centralized location, and the possibility of its eventual
growth of the Records Office placing a burden upon member
countries resources.

These three alternatives are clearly presented in the
embryonic stages and it will be up to the Consultative Parties
to work out creative and realistic definitions to reach a
functional solution to the needs of all.
