ANTARCTIC TREATY
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTA[R]CTIQUE
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
TRATADO ANTARTICO
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

OSLO                                  11 June 1975

Original: Spanish

AGENDA ITEM 17: ANTARCTIC RESOURCES - EFFECTS OF MINERAL
EXPLORATION.

(Working Paper submitted by Chile)

1. The Seventh Consultative Meeting approved Recommendation
VII - 6 (Antarctic Resources - Effects of Mineral Exploration),
which now appears under the same title as agenda item 17 of this
Eighth Consultative Meeting.

2. The text of this Resolution VII - 6, as approved after
hard discussions at the Wellington Meeting, is reproduced in
full below:

The Representatives,

Recalling the provisions and principles of the
Antarctic Treaty;

Reaffirming that it is in the interest of all
mankind that the Antarctic Treaty Area shall continue
forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes
and shall not become the scene or object of inter-
national discord;

Acknowledging that the Antarctic Treaty places
a special responsibility upon the Contracting Parties
to exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, to the end that no-
one engages in any activity in the Antarctic Treaty
Area contrary to the principles or purposes of
the Treaty;

Noting the technological developments in polar
exploration and the increasing interest in the
possibility of there being exploitable minerals
in the Antarctic Treaty Area;

Noting that there is a need for further study
and deliberation amongst the Consultative Parties;

Recognising that mineral exploration is likely
to raise problems of an environmental nature and
that the Consultative Parties should assume
responsibility for the protection of the environment
and the wise use of resources;

Conscious of the special situation in the
Antarctic arising form the particular regime of the
Antarctic Treaty and the Recomendations adopted
under it;

Recommend to their Governments that the subject
"Antarctic Resources - Effects of Mineral Exploration
be carefully studied and included on the agenda of
the Eighth Consultative Meeting.

3.      This recommendation represents the essential and strict frame-
work for discussion of agenda item 17, as pointed out by the Chilean
delegation when approval was given for its inclusion in the agenda as
adopted.

        In other words, the Consultative Parties agreed to examine item
17 within the terms of reference laid down by Recommendation VII-6.

4.      It must be stressed in the first place that the recommendation
reproduced above refers to study of the effects of mineral exploration.
By so doing, it restricts the issue to exploration, omitting mineral
exploitation and placing     emphasis on the effects that such explo-
ration may have.
-3-

5. The reference to the effects of mineral exploration contained 
in the title of this Recommendation relates to paragraph 6, which 
recognises that such exploration is likely to raise problems of 
an environmental nature and urges the Consultative Parties to assume 
responsibility for protection of the environment and the wise use of 
resources%.

The Recommendation thus links study of this matter with ecolo-
gical considerations and gives unambiguous        priority to protec-
tion of the Antarctic environment.

For this reason, the Chilean delegation has suggested that it would 
be advisable to examine this item together with item 6 (Man's Impact 
on the Antarctic Environment).

6. Thirdly, it should be remembered that Recommendation VII-6 
notes the need for further study and deliberation amongst the 
Consultative Parties and recommends in its very short paragraph that 
the final subject must be carefully studied.

It is evident from the wording of the Recommendation that this 
need for further study and deliberation implies that scientific and 
technical information must be available regarding the effects on the 
environment liable to be provoked by mineral exploration. This impact 
could, and should, be analysed first and foremost in relation to the 
Antarctic ecosystem; secondly, in relation to the likely effects on 
the ecosystems of the countries in the vicinity of Antarctica; and 
finally against the background of the repercussions that might occur 
at the level of the global ecosystem.
On this account, we should need a scientific and technical 
study of the effects which any future mineral exploration would 
have on the above-mentioned ecosystem.

7. Similarly, the further study to which the Recommendation 
must be construed as referring to minerals in the Antarctic,
alludes

The technological opportunities for their exploration and possible 
exploitation,and the economic feasibility of such operations.

This is what is apparently implied by the sentences in 
the Recommendation referring to "the possibility of there being 
exploitable minerals" in the Antarctic Treaty Area,and to the 
technological developments in polar mineral exploration.

The Recommendation thus proposes preparation of studies 
concerning the economic aspects we have mentioned above.

8. On the other hand, the references 
to/the "particular regime of the Treaty and the Recommendations";
the responsibility of the Parties to ensure that no-one engages 
in activities contrary to the Treaty and to protect the 
environment; the fact that it is in the interest of all 
mankind that the Treaty Area shall continue to be used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene of international 
discord; and the call not only for the above-mentioned studies, 
but for further deliberation among the Consultive Parties --
all these references lead one to infer that the Recommendation is 
also talking about the political and legal problems raised by this 
issue and which affect the Contracting Parties.

These legal and political difficulties associated with mineral 
exploration should be examined at the outset by the Consultative 
Parties; they certainly need to be discussed when item 17 is 
examined at this Consultative Meeting.

9. In conclusion it needs to be repeated that agenda item 17
- 5 -

is linked to item 6 (Man's Impact on the Antarctic Environment)
and item 18 (Marine Biological Resources). The connexion with
the latter item emerges from the considerations on the environment
contained in the Recommendation, and from the important place
held by marine resource[s?] in the ecosystem of Antarctica.
