ANTARCTIC TREATY            
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
                                                   HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              TRATADO ANTARTICO
                                                   OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                   OSLO      ANT/6
                                                              26 May 1975
                                                              Original: English

E

Marine biological resources in Antarctica.
Questions concerning necessary measures.
(Paper submitted by Norway)

In the Antarctic Treaty the Contracting Parties
have i.a. undertaken to be responsible for the preservation
and conservation of living resources in Antarctica (Article
IX, subsection 1, f). They have taken important measures in
this connection, not least in the drawing up of "Agreed
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora"
(Recommendation III-VIII, cf. i.a. Recommendations IV-19,
IV-20 and VI-9), and in taking the initiative towards, as
well as in establishing, the "Convention for the Conservation
of Antarctic Seals" of 1 June 1972 (cf. i.a. Recommendations
III-XI, IV-21, IV-22 and V-8). Both the "Agreed Measures" and
the Sealing Convention apply to the Treaty Area south of Lat.
60°S, thus covering the Antarctic sea areas. As regards the
sea areas (Southern Ocean), the Contracting Parties have also
encouraged SCAR to continue to maintain its interest in
scientific surveys (Recommendation V-3) and they have recom-
mended that information exchanged under the terms of subsection
5 of Article VII of the Treaty should also contain information
concerning oceanographic expeditions in the area south of
Lat. 60°S (Recommendation VI-13, cf. Recommendations I-6 and
II-6). However, no specific measures for surveying and con-
serving marine biological resources have been put into effect.

Increasing interest has been manifested in recent
years for marine biological resources in the waters furthest
south. This interest is focussed on possible exploitable fish
resources, but perhaps above all on the protein source re-
presented by the krill stocks. Several of the Contracting Parties
have shown interest in these living resources, and some
expeditions have already made valuable catches of krill. The
attention of third parties has also been drawn to the krill
resources. Thus it is generally known that the Federal Republic
of Germany intends to send a krill-cum-oceanographic expedition
to southern waters in the 1975-76 season. Also some international
organizations have initiated work on this problem, i.a. FAO.

...../2
.2.

Moreover, it must be expected that the increasing need for 
resources will lead to even greater interest in the biological 
resources of the Southern Ocean.

        Exploitation of marine biological resources in 
these areas may result in over-exploitation and disturbances 
in the ecological balance. The history of marine hunting and 
fishing contains many examples of how this may happen. As it 
is expressed in Recommendation V-3, "the Southern Ocean is 
an integral part of the Antarctic environment". To the extent 
that exploitation of the resources is relevant to the question 
of preservation and conservation of living resources in the 
Treaty Area, this is a matter of commom concern to the Con-
tracting Parties and might thus be discussed with reference 
to subsection 1 (f) of Article IX of the Treaty.

        An initial question which it is desirable to have 
clarified is therefore whether, and, if so, to what extent 
the Treaty Area is likely to contain such consentrations of 
living marine resources other than whale and seal (regulated 
respectively by the Whaling Convention and the Sealing Con-
vention) which it might be feasible to exploit and, as a 
consequence, if it must be considered necessary to take 
measures to regulate such exploitation in order to conserve 
these resources. Surveys included in national programmes will 
have to some extent produced results that may contribute to 
answering these questions, but there may also be a need for 
further surveys, evaluations and a synthesis of the findings 
to obtain an overall assessment of the situation. Consideration 
might also be given to the needs and possibilities for a more 
effective exchange of data and information and for increased 
effort concerning the coordination of research work in the 
Southern Ocean in respect of surveys and assesssment of living 
resources in the Antarctic Ocean (cf. Recommendation V-3 
concerning the coordination of research work in the Southern 
Ocean). The Contracting Parties should therefore consider 
requesting SCAR to make a scientific assessment of the question 
and to express its views regaring the need for possible measures.

        Depending on the scientific asscssment and develop-
ments in relation to the active exploitation of the resources, 
there may prove to be a need for measures to conserve such

...../3
.3.

resources. It is difficult to assess the substantive content 
of measures of this nature without having a more solid 
scientific basis. Even so it may already be worth arranging 
preliminary discussions on the most important matters of 
principle. One such issue is whether measures aimed at con-
serving marine biological resources should take the form of 
recommendations (as was the case with "Agreed Measures for 
the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora") or the form 
of a separate agreement (as was the case with the Sealing 
Convention). In practice the question is dependant upon the 
prevalence of the stocks in question and on which parties may 
be interested in and affected by such measures.

As to the question of the relationship between 
the parties to the Convention and third parties, it must be 
borne in mind that measures agreed between the parties to 
the Convention can only be imposed on third parties to the 
extent that the measures concerned relate to areas within 
the jurisdiction of the Antarctic Treaty parties. The extent 
of this jurisdiction will as far as future law is concerned 
depend largely on the outcome of the Law of the Sea Conference. 
Nevertheless it seems important for the parties to the 
Antarctic Treaty to start assessing the situation already now, 
with a view to implementation of effective measures at the 
earliest possible moment.

The question of how the matter should be handled 
in the future will necessarily depend on such expert opinions 
as are obtainable from qualified marine biologists. One possi-
bility is to request SCAR, through the national committees, to 
assess the question and give an opinion. Another possibility 
would be to establish an expert group or to arrange an expert 
conference to discuss the matter.
