ANTARCTIC TREATY                TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING     HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ     OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA
                                 OSLO                               
                                 ANT/19
                                 9 June 1975
                                 Originally:English

Agenda Item 17                 

ANTARCTIC RESOURCES - EFFECTS OF MINERAL EXPLORATION

(Working Paper submitted by United Kingdom)

Introduction

This paper is intended as a conference working
paper and does not necessarily reflect the views of the
United Kingdom Government.  It is submitted in the hope
that it will stimulate discussion of the main issues which
must be resolved before any regime for the regulation of
mineral exploration and exploitation in the Antarctic could
be adopted. Papers setting out other views on any or all
of these issues would be greatly welcomed.

2. The following is a list of some of the principal issues
which arise:

    (1) Which states should have the right to regulate
or participate in the regulation of mineral
activities?

    (2) What methods of regulation should be used?

    (3) What kinds of entities should be permitted
to explore and exploit?

    (4) What kinds of restrictions, if any, should be
placed on the exploration for and exploitation
of resources?

    (5) Who should benefit from the exploitation of
mineral resources?

                                 / (6)
(6) How would the conditions of a licence be 
enforced?

(7) What should be the geographical area covered 
by the agreement?

(3) What form might the agreement take?

3. It is considered that detailed consideration of these 
issues should start as soon as possible.

4. In the interests of promoting discussion at this 
meeting, and of assisting consideration of the legal and 
political problems, the following comments are offered.

1. Which states should have the right to regulate 
or participate in the exploitation of mineral 
activities?

A number of possible alternatives suggest themselves, 
including the exercise of regulatory power by the twelve 
Consultative Parties individually, or in some form of joint 
regulation. Other states could be permitted to gain the 
right to participate but only after they have obtained 
consultative status under Article IX(2) of the Antarctic 
Treaty.

2. What methods of regulation should be used?

It is considered that in the joint exercise of their 
regulatory power the twelve (acting unanimously) might issue 
licences subject to such conditions as they see fit. 
Applications for licences could be made to any Consultative 
Party which would then refer that application to a 
Consultative Meeting for consideration. If the meeting 
accepted the application, the Consultative Party could then 
issue a licence to the applicant containing such conditions 
as had been recommended by the meeting and had also been 
?.

/approv.
approved by all the Consultative Parties.

3. What kinds of entities should be permitted to 
explore and exploit?

There are many possibilities, ranging from 
Consultative Parties only and/or their nationals, to any 
state or person or corporate entity or even an inter-
national organization. It is considered that the less 
restricted the right of application, the more widespread 
would be the regime's chances of international acceptance.

4. What kinds of restrictions, if any, should be 
placed on exploration and exploitation?

Clearly, the basic objectives of the Antarctic Treaty 
should prevail and activity should be regulated so as to 
ensure that the Treaty and the subsequent Recommendations 
made under it are not contravened. In particular, exploration 
and exploitation should be regulated so as to protect the 
unique Antarctic environment.

5. Who should benefit from the exploitation of 
mineral resources?

There are at least three main forms of benefit:
minerals produced, the licence revenue, and the profits 
of the licensee. It seems probable that some means of 
approaching an equitable distribution of overall benefit 
would be an important part of any agreement.

6. How would the conditions of a licence be enforced?

A simple way would be to require the Consultative 
Party issuing the licence to exercise effective juris-
diction to ensure compliance with the conditions of the 
licence as authorised.

3.
 
/(7)
7. What should be the geographical area covered 
by the agreement?

An agreement could refer to:

(a) land and ice shelves within the Antarctic 
Treaty Area;

(b) land, ice shelves and continental shelves 
within the Antarctic Treaty Area; or

(c) the Antarctic Treaty Area.

8. What form might the agreement take?

It could be either a separate Convention or a 
Protocol to the Antarctic Treaty. The choice might 
depend on whether it was thought desirable to tie the 
agreement closely to the principles and purposes of 
the Antarctic Treaty. For example, a Protocol to the 
Treaty could mean that the agreement's consu?t?tive 
forum would be the Treaty's Consultative Meetings; the 
conditions on which licences would be issued could more 
easily take account of the regime already established 
by the Antarctic Treaty, coupled with present and future 
Recommendations made under it. The regulation of 
mineral activities would be more easily vested in those 
states with an active interest in the area.

6

9 June 1975
