ANTARCTIC TREATY                      TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                 TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ     OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                       OSLO
                                       28 May 1975
                                       Original: English

E
        Specially Protected Areas:  Litchfield Island
        (Proposal submitted by United States)

The Representatives, considering that Litchfield Island and its
littoral possess an unusually rich collection of marine and
terrestrial life, is unique amongst the neighboring islands in
providing for the nesting and rearing of a wide variety of
Antarctic birdlife, and offers a wide variety of terrain and
physical features which are inhabited solely by giant petrels and
that it provides an outstanding example of the natural ecological
system of the Antarctic Peninsula area, recommend to their Govern-
ments that the following be inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected
Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic
Fauna and Flora:

        SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA NO. 17
Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbor, Antarctic Peninsula

Description:  The small island, about 2.5 km in area, one of
approximately twelve within 10 km of the U.S. Palmer Station and
the UK Base N, located at about Long. 64° 06' W, L 64° 46' S.  The
area, about 3 km from the U.S. Palmer Station is shown on the
map accompanying the attached proposal.
U.S. Proposal for a Specially Protected Area -
Litchfield Island, Arthur Harbour, Antarctic Peninsula

It is proposed that Litchfield Island, one of approximately 12
small islands within 10 km of the U.S. Palmer Station and the United
Kingdom Base.N located in Arthur Harbour on Anvers Island, be
designated a Specially Protected Area. The island is shown on the
attached map.

Litchfield Island, located at approximately 64° 46S Lat. and
64° 06°W Long is one of the largest islands in the Arthur Harbour
area. This island, comprising about 2.5km² in area, possesses an
unusually rich collection of marine and terrestrial life found on
some of the islands off the western coast of the Antarctic Peninsula.
The plant life on Litchfield Island has been reported by some
scientists to be almost a complete representative sample of the
plant species of the Antarctic Peninsula. The diverse plant com-
munity includes the two antarctic angiosperms Deschampsia antarcticus
and Colobanthus crassifolius, the macroscopic algae Prasiola spp.
and probably Monostroma sp., a variety of mosses which are especially
luxurient, forming deep beds that are quite extensive in coverage.

The lichen community is also well represented with species of
Umbilicaria, Heuromogon, and Caloplaca in marked abundance. Litchfield
Island is unique among the neighboring islands in providing for the
nesting and rearing of a wide variety of Antarctic birdlife.
Species include Adelie penguins, giant petrels, antarctic terns,
Wilson''s petrels, brown skuas and Dominican gulls.
The island also offers a wide variety of terrain and physical
features, ranging from small and lush valleys to high and rocky
peaks, which are inhabited solely by giant petrels. There is even
a sheltered cove which offers protection for seals. In addition a
variety of small permanent rock pools possess a number of microscopic
algae not as yet reported at higher southerly latitudes in Antarctica.

In summary, this island offers a diversity of physical,
botanical and zoological characters which are normally found only by
visiting several locations.  All organisms are in great abundance
and generally in good condition.  However, the tremendous variety and
abundance of organisms leads to the supposition that there is little
need for conservation measures.  As a result, unnecessary and over-
extensive collections with little concern for the nature of the
community has occurred. Although the organisms are abundant, they
have required considerable time to achieve the size and density in
which they are present.  In addition, they are in a delicate
physiological balance with each other and their environment.

While a number of Specially Protected Areas, especially 9
(Green Island) and 10-12 in the South Shetlands have been established
to represent the rich native fauna and flora of the western peninsula
region, only G[?]n Isl[?]nd is locat[?]d as far south as Litchfield Island
and possibly possesses a somewhat similar flora.  Litchfield Island is
propos[?]d not only because of its probable greater diversity of micro-
environments and consequent greater diversity of fauna, flora, and
microorganisms, but for its location near the year-round, permanent
U.S. Palmer Station. Palmer Station has intensive summer programs and 
Litchfield Island can provide a useful long-range record of the changes 
caused by such activities near the Station and among the other islands. 
For example, nearby Humble Island has been the location of more 
intensive research and it is clear that this island has exhibited 
more pronounced changes which can be measured more accurately by 
comparisons with the less disturbed Litchfield Island.  In this con-
nection, Specially Protected Area No. 13 (Moe Island), located in the 
South Orkneys was justified in part as a basis for comparing man-
induced changes at Signy Island where U.K. scientific activities con-
tinue to be of considerable magnitude.  Finally, the only other 
Specially Protected Area located along the western coast of the 
Antarctic Peninsula is No. 8 (Dion Islands), protected, not for the 
flora, but because the island complex represents the only known colony 
of Emperor Penguins along that coast.
LOU DWATER COVE

LITCHFIELD ISLAND

ANVERS ISLAND
ARTHUR HARBOR
From U.S. and British surveys to 1965
Contour interval 10 meters
