ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING                  HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ                        TRATADO ANTARTICO
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA

                                                     OSLO

ANT/13/Rev.1
14 June 1975
Original: English

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST:

SITE NO 3, BARWICK VALLEY, VICTORIA LAND

(Draft Management Plan submitted by the Working Group on
Agenda Items 7 and 8 to be Annexed to draft Recommendation
in ANT/35)

Management Plan

(i)  Description of the Site. The Site includes the greater
part of Barwick Valley, Victoria Land, and contains parts
of several glaciers, exposed soils, a lake about 3 km wide
and 16 km long and a connecting stream about 5 km long
leading to Lake Vashka.  It is bordered on the south, west
and north by the Olympus, Willett, and Clare Ranges
respectively.  The boundary of the Site approximates to
an irregular pentagon enclosing about 325 km .  The Site
is defined by lines joining Skew Peak (77° 13'S, 160° 43'E),
Sponsors Peak (77° 18'S, 161° 24'E), a point on the Insel
Range (77° 24'S, 161° 26'E), a point in the Apocalypse
Peaks (77° 24'S, 160° 46'E), Mount Bastion (77° 19'S,
160° 34'E) and Skew Peak.  The Site is shown on the attached
map (to be drawn).

(ii) Reason for Designation.  Barwick Valley is one of the least
disturbed and contaminated of the Dry Valleys of
Victoria Land which are environmentally
- 2 -

unique and possess extreme polar desert ecosystems.
The Site is important as a reference base against
which to measure changes in comparable ecosystems
of the other Dry Valleys where scientific
investigations in considerable variety have been
conducted regularly over the past decade.  It is
also expected to be of use in connection with
global environmental monitoring.

(iii) Outline of research.  Investigations are proposed
of the microbiology, bacteriology, mycology (especially
of yeasts and moulds), and of the terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems, with special programmes to
establish baseline measurements for biological and
environmental monitoring.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 30 June 1981.

(v) Access points.  Access should be by helicopter
to Wright Valley, thence into the Barwick Valley
Site on foot past Lake Vashka.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes.  Vehicles should
not be used.  Pedestrian routes should keep to
well-drained ground avoiding streams and the lake
margins as much as possible.

/(vii)
- 3 -

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigation which would 
not cause harmful interference.
Geological, pedological, and glaciological studies 
except those which would introduce exotic species 
and those which would disrupt or damage the existing 
ecosystems.

(viii) Scientific sampling.  Scientific sampling in the Site 
should be restricted to that which can be accomplished 
without introducing new organisms, including micro-
organisms, and without disturbing the environment.

(ix) Other restreints.  Overflight of the Site should be 
avoided.  Aircraft landing and vehicle parkin? should 
te kept well outside the boundaries of the Site.
Field activities shoul? be kept to a minimum.
Permanent field camps, landfill disposal, and other 
activities which would introduce new materials or 
or?anisms into the Site shculd be avoided.  All 
materials carried into the Site should be removed.
