ANTARCTIC TREATY           
EIGHTH CONSULTATIVE MEETING           

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ           
ВОСЬМОЕ КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ           

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
HUITIÈME RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE           

TRATADO ANTARTICO           
OCTAVA REUNION CONSULTIVA           

                    OSLO           
                    14 June 1975           
                    Original: English           

SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST :           
SITE NO 4, CAPE CROZIER, ROSS ISLAND           

(Draft Management plan of the Working Group on Agenda Items           
7 and 8 to be Annexed to draft Recommendation in ANT/35)           

Management Plan           

(i) Description of the Site.  The Cape Crozier site comprises           
40 km  and includes the land areas where the Adélie Penguins           
(Pygoscelis adeliae) nest and the adjacent fast ice where the           
Emperor Penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) annually breed.  It           
is bounded by lines joining 77  28'S, 169  20'E, 77  28'S,           
169  28'E, 77  31'S, 169  28'E, 77  31'S, 169  20'E; and           
also includes the land area lying north of a line from           
169  20'E, 77  28'S to the summit of Post Office Hill and           
north-east of a line which bears 315  True from the Summit           
of Post Office Hill to the coast.  The boundaries of the Site,           
the access track and road, the helicopter landing place and           
refuge hut are indicated on the attached map: (to be drawn)           

(ii) Reasons for designation.  The penguin colonies are the           
subject of long-term studies of population dynamics and           
social behavior, and are relatively accessible by air from           
McMurdo Station and Scott Base.  Access to the Site needs           
to be restricted to scientists engaged in investigations           
within the Site.           
/(iii)
- 2 -

(iii) Outline of research. Studies of the Emperor 
and Adélie Penguin populations and their ethology,
life cycles, physiological adaptation and natural 
population fluctuations. Detection of possible 
changes in their biological characteristics which 
may be due to man-induced changes in the environment.

(iv) Date of expiry of designation. 30 June 1981.

(v) Access points. Access should be at points on 
the boundary closest to the refuge hut and the 
helicopter landing place.

(vi) Pedestrian and vehicular routes. Helicopters 
and low-flying aircraft should avoid the Site. 
Vehicles should not enter the Site and should 
approach the Site boundary when serving authorised 
activities on courses at right angles to the 
boundary orientation. Pedestrian movement within 
the Site should be limited to the shortest routes 
consistent with the scientific activity.

(vii) Other kinds of scientific investigation which 
would not cause harmful interference.

Biological, pedological, and geological observations 
except those which would cause harm to the birds 
or interfere with the breeding success of the 
penguin colonies. As far as possible such studies 
should be made at times when the Adélie Penguin 
/colony
- 3 -

colony is absent or when the Emperor Penguin 
colony is at least 1 km from the locality under 
scientific consideration.

(viii) Scientific sampling. Taking samples of the bird 
populations by killing or live capture, or taking 
of eggs for a compelling scientific purpose must 
be in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. Close 
inspection of birds, including photography, or 
taking blood or other biological samples, should 
be kept to a minimum.
