





Revision of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas       No. 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island




Revision of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA) No. 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island
Working Paper submitted by New Zealand
Introduction
In accordance with Article 6(3) of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, New Zealand conducted a five yearly review of the Management Plan for ASPA 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island. 

A revised Management Plan (Measure 12 (2008)) was adopted for ASPA 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island at ATCM XXXI – CEP XI to allow access of vehicles for snow removal by the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust to mitigate the immediate risk from an ice/snow buildup behind the historic hut. The Management Plan did not undergo a formal review at this time and therefore has been included here in line with the five yearly review process with the other historic hut Management Plans. 

The draft Management Plans were circulated for comment to IAATO and the four tour ship companies that frequently use the ASPAs as part of their tours; the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust who carry out a regular conservation programme on the historic huts and artefacts within the ASPAs; the United States Antarctic Programme environmental team; and scientists who have undertaken research within the ASPAs. 

The revisions are outlined in the table below.
Recommendations
New Zealand recommends that the CEP approves the attached revised Management Plan for ASPA 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island.

ASPA No. 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Recommendation VII-9 (1972) Historic Site and Monument (HSM) No. 16: Hut at Cape Evans and No. 17: Cross on Wind Vane Hill
Measure 2 (1997) Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 25
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 2 (1997) Specially Protected Area (SPA) No. 25
Any revisions to management plan:
Management Plan revised through Measure 2 (2005) to address issues surrounding conservation of the historic artefacts of the Area. 
Management Plan revised through Measure 12 (2008) to allow access of vehicles for management activities in accordance with the Aims and Objectives of the Management Plan; to mitigate the immediate risk from an ice/snow buildup behind the historic hut.
Current management plan: 
Measure 12 (2008)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
No
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA 155: Cape Evans, Ross Island
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes – changes to the titles and labels
    • Map A title changed from ‘Map A – Cape Evans, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: regional map’ to  ‘Map A – Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctic Specially Protected Area 155: Regional Map’.
    • Map A: the label of the hut changed from ‘Scott’s Hut Historic Monument 16’ to ‘Scott’s Terra Nova Hut Historic Site and Monument 16’
    • Map A: the label of the Cross on Wind Vane Hill changed from ‘Wind Vane Hill Memorial Cross Historic Monument 17’ to ‘Wind Vane Hill Memorial Cross Historic Site and Monument 17’
    • Map B title changed from ‘Map B – Cape Evans, Antarctic Specially Protected Area: site map’ to ‘Map B – Cape Evans, Ross Island, Antarctic Specially Protected Area 155: Site Map’.

    • Map B: the label of the hut changed from ‘HUT’ to ‘Scott’s Terra Nova Hut Historic Site and Monument 16’
    • Map B: the label of the Cross on Wind Vane Hill changed from ‘CROSS WIND VANE HILL’ to ‘Wind Vane Hill Memorial Cross Historic Site and Monument 17’
    • Map B: All labels were standardized to remove labels with full capital letters 
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    • The Management Plan has been revised in parallel with the other heroic era historic hut ASPAs in the Ross Sea region (ASPAs 157, 158 and 159) to provide consistency in wording and numbering between all plans where similar Management Plan provisions occur. Minor editing details have been completed throughout the Management Plan.
    • ‘and the Cross on Wind Vane Hill’ was added to the title.
    • Provision added to Management Activities: ‘Copies of this Management Plan, including maps of the Area, shall be made available at adjacent operational research/field stations’. (Section 3)
    • Added “any other activity specifically provided for in this Plan” as a reason for Permits to be issued. (Section 7)
    • Update on average hut visitor numbers from 1489 (1998-2004) to 1127 (1998-2009). (Section 7(i))
    • Added ‘only use tripods or monopods with flat bottomed rubber bases as opposed to those with metal spikes which can damage the floor’, ‘when the maximum number of visitors are in the hut at one time (12) the use of tripods or monopods is prohibited’ and ‘remain on established walking tracks’ to the Code of Conduct when visiting the historic hut and ASPA. (Section 7 (ii)).
    • Allow camping on Home Beach (Section 7(iv)).
    • Added the word ‘introduced’ to bullet 3, Section 7(v) so it now reads “All introduced materials are to be removed when no longer required and before a date to be specified in the relevant Permit.”
    • Allow collection of soil and natural materials from the ASPA. ‘Except with respect to any part of, or the contents of, an historic site or monument, samples of soil and other natural materials may be removed for scientific purposes. Such removal must be in accordance with an appropriate Permit’. (Section 7(vii))
    • Added requirement for nominated guides to brief visitors of the Code of Conduct, as well as the requirements of this Management Plan and to ensure they are complied with. (Section 7(ix))
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


