





Review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA) No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land





Review of Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)   No 163: Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud land

India introduced a Working Paper at XXV ATCM (WP47) on a draft management plan for a proposed site of Special Scientific Interest for snout of Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Schirmacher Hills (also known as Vassfjellet), Dronning Maud Land.  The Committee noted that this should be termed an ASPA rather than SSSI. Accordingly, during XXVI ATCM India submitted a draft management plan for Antarctica Specially Protected Area (XXVI ATCM/WP-38) and thereafter resubmitted revised management plan during XXVII-ATCM (WP 33).  The management plan was adopted by Measure 2 (2005) and designated ASPA 163 during XXVIII ATCM (WP 25).
According to paper submitted by Antarctica Treaty Secretariat (SP-10), “Review of the Status of ATCM Recommendations on Protected Areas”, this management plan, is scheduled to be reviewed in year 2010. Improved management plan, following the Guide to the preparation of management plans for Antarctic Specially Protected Areas, is being submitted for review. Few observational visits have been made to the area since 2005. No significant changes to the plan have been made, boundaries of the plan are not changed. 
Minor changes to the existing management plan include:
    a) Introduction: addition of text describing the importance of the area 
    b) Aims and Objectives: addition of text on minimizing introduction of alien species 
    c) Maps: Images showing the markers at ASPA boundary (Figure 1)
    d) Access to and movement within the area: addition of text to access the area by foot and restricted to vehicle movement and helicopter landing 
    e) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder:  addition of text describing material of human origin, not brought into area by permit holder, is added in consistent with other management plan.

The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection











Antarctic Specially Protected Area (ASPA)  No 163 : Dakshin Gangotri Glacier, Dronning Maud Land
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Measure 3 (2005)
First adoption of management plan: 
Measure 3 (2005)
Any revisions to management plan:
First Revision
Current management plan: 
Measure 3 (2005)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
n/a
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
n/a
Other relevant measures:
n/a
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Minor
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
There are no changes in existing maps, however one figure (Figure 1) has been added showing markers at ASPA boundary
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
Yes. The description has been updated with minor addition
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
No
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located (especially helpful if the plan is long).
    a) Introduction: a brief summary on the importance of the area is included 
    b) Aims and Objectives: additional objective, on minimizing introduction of alien species is included
    c) Maps : image showing the markers at ASPA boundary is included (Figure 1)
    d) Access to and movement within the area :  additional point added on accessing the area
    e) Collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the Permit holder : additional points are added on handling human origin waste
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
n/a
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
n/a
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
n/a
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
n/a


