





Improving the coordination of maritime search and rescue in the Antarctic Treaty area 





Improving the coordination of maritime search and rescue in the Antarctic Treaty area
Despite its remoteness and inhospitable environment – or perhaps precisely due to these unique features – Antarctica has been drawing an increasing number of visitors. Most of these visitors are involved in non-governmental activities, primarily in the form of tourism. 

The special environmental conditions found in the Antarctic region are such that they present a number of dangers to man. This paper is intended to contribute to the debate on how to improve the safety of human activities in the Antarctic Treaty area. It reviews the work already done in this respect and makes a number of proposals. 
1. General rules governing maritime rescue:
The principle of rendering assistance to ships in distress is well established, and has been reflected in Article 98 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (Montego Bay, 1982). 
The International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR Convention), signed in Hamburg on April 27, 1979, gave an international scope to the basic principles governing maritime rescue efforts. On a more general level, maritime rescue is subject to international coordination, particularly within the framework of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO). 
In Antarctica, assistance in emergencies has formed part of the established principles of the Antarctic Treaty System since the adoption of Recommendation X-I (Canberra, 1961). 
2. Current state of play of ATCM efforts in the field:
2.1. Resolution 6 (2008):
In this Resolution, the Parties emphasised the role to be played by Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres. They also recommended that their governments encourage operators of tourist vessels to consider the International Maritime Organisation’s “Enhanced contingency planning guidance for passenger ships operating in areas remote from SAR facilities (MSC.1/Circ/1184)” in planning their activities and report their vessel positions on a regular basis to the relevant regional Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres while operating within the Antarctic Treaty area.
However, this resolution only applies to tourist vessels.
2.2. Workshops organised by the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP):
The first COMNAP workshop was held in Valparaiso in August 2008, and examined safety issues. At the end of this workshop, COMNAP submitted WP 47, entitled “Towards Improved Search and Rescue Coordination and Response in the Antarctic”, to ATCM XXXII (Baltimore, 2009).
The working paper proposed actions and made recommendations. Essentially, these recommendations focussed on the need to improve communication between the different bodies with a presence in the Antarctic and to ensure a better exchange of information with a view to improving the effectiveness of rescue efforts. The following is a selection of the points raised:
    • the need to strengthen links, not just between different Rescue Coordination Centres, but also between these Centres and the National Programs with a presence in the Antarctic,
    • the need to better assess risks through the exchange of information on vessels entering the Antarctic area (on the basis of ship position reporting systems, the reporting of ships’ schedules in the area, and interaction between the COMNAP and ATS information exchange systems),
    • the need for information on the rescue assets and intervention capacities of Parties (the resources available at different stations and rescue centres),
    • the need to improve the provision of information on Antarctic air, land and sea traffic to Rescue Coordination Centres,
    • the role of COMNAP as a potential source of information for rescue operations.
The second COMNAP workshop was held in Buenos Aires on November 2-4, 2009 and hosted by the National Antarctic Directorate of Argentina (DNA). Participants included representatives of the five relevant Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres (MRCC), as well as representatives of other national Search and Rescue authorities, National Antarctic Programs, the IAATO and the IMO. The aim of this second workshop was to discuss ways to further improve search and rescue operations in Antarctica.  
2.3. Meeting of Experts on Management of Ship-borne Tourism in the Antarctic Treaty Area (Wellington, December 8-11, 2009):
A number of recommendations relating to maritime search and rescue were adopted at this meeting:
	- Recommendation 7: The Meeting agreed that the five Parties with Search and Rescue coordination 	responsibility in the Antarctic area should share their plans and further coordinate with national 	programmes and IAATO.
- Recommendation 8: That all crew on vessels planning to navigate in Antarctic waters should be 	required to undertake relevant training appropriate to the conditions expected to be encountered, and 	where appropriate in accordance with Chapter 14 of the IMO’s Guidelines for Ships Operating in 	Polar Waters. 
- Recommendation 9: The Antarctic Treaty Parties should continue to encourage tourist and non-	governmental organisations’ vessels not participating in the IAATO or COMNAP vessel monitoring 	schemes to report their positions regularly to the relevant MRCC. All tourist and NGO vessels 	should closely follow the IMO’s ‘Enhanced contingency planning guidelines for passenger ships 	operating in areas remote from SAR facilities’ in accordance with ATCM Resolution 6 (2008).  
- Recommendation 10: That those Antarctic Treaty Parties that have not yet done so should consider 	approving Measure 4 (2004) on Insurance and Contingency Planning for Tourism and Non-	governmental Activities in the Antarctic Treaty Area as a matter of priority.
Conclusion and proposal

The work done at the Valparaiso and Buenos Aires workshops and at the Meeting of Experts in Wellington manifested the need to improve the exchange and circulation of information held by the Parties in order to improve the effectiveness of maritime rescue efforts. In addition, the reaction capabilities of the Rescue Coordination Centres need to be increased. 

Along the lines of Resolution 6 (2008), the growth in maritime traffic in the Antarctic will undoubtedly lead to the need for new measures to be adopted. A resolution is proposed in the annex encouraging the Parties’ governments to take action to this end. 
Annex
Resolution X (20XX)

Improving the coordination of maritime search and rescue in the Antarctic Treaty area

The Representatives,

Aware of the increase in ship traffic, in particular passenger ship traffic, in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Concerned about the possible risk of accidents involving these ships and the resulting harm to both persons and the environment;

Recalling the work of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) in the field of maritime safety and rescue;

Recognising the value and importance of the search and rescue systems and procedures established under the auspices of the IMO, in particular as regards the network of Search and Rescue Regions and their corresponding Rescue Coordination Centres;

Recognising the important role played by the Rescue Coordination Centres working under the auspices of the IMO in the coordination of rescue efforts in their respective zones;

Emphasizing the considerable efforts undertaken by the Rescue Coordination Centres active in the Antarctic Treaty area in keeping with their responsibilities arising from measures adopted by the IMO;

Noting that these Rescue Coordination Centres are in possession of systems able to guarantee the confidentiality of information transmitted by vessels and collected by them;

Wishing to improve the coordination of search and rescue efforts in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Recommend that:	
    • the Parties recognise the importance of the following aspects in ensuring the effectiveness of search and rescue efforts:
        ◦ placing on the Secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty (ATS) website up-to-date information on the different stations and the land, sea and air rescue assets available at each;
        ◦ providing advance reports to the respective Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres (MRCC) of the planned schedules in the Antarctic Treaty area of vessels flying their flags;
        ◦ ensuring that all vessels flying their flags in the Antarctic Treaty area systematically undertake to regularly report their position to the respective Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC), using the most appropriate means;
    • the Parties encourage captains of vessels flying their flags to contact all vessels encountered in the Antarctic Treaty area and urge them to report their position to the respective MRCC, if they have not already done so.
