





Rules governing the participation of experts in meetings of ATCM bodies





Rules governing the participation of experts in meetings of ATCM bodies

At the XXXII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (Baltimore, 2009), the Parties heard an important presentation by Mr. Michael Davies-Sekle, Vice-President for Marine Investigations of the Liberian International Ship & Corporate Registry, on the investigation that was conducted following the sinking of the Explorer in 2007.
Mr. Davies-Sekle spoke at a working session that had been designated as informal for procedural reasons. This is why his comments are not included in the final report. However, it would be desirable for the final report to include more than just a mere reference to the presentations made by speakers who do not belong to international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica; rather, an account should be given of the substance of the presentations they make before the ATCM. 
This paper offers proposals for clarifying the procedure to be followed for the participation in meetings of ATCM bodies of experts who do not belong to international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica.

Only experts who belong to an international organisation having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica may be invited to participate in meetings of ATCM bodies (cf. Articles 39 and 40 of the Revised Rules of Procedure). The ATCM Rules of Procedure do not provide for the possibility of inviting other categories of experts, either from the public administrations of non-Consultative Parties or as independent experts, and whether or not they are involved in activities having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica. 
As a result, whenever experts who do not belong to an international organisation having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica attend and participate in meetings, their comments cannot be included in the meeting report; this was the case of Mr. Michael Davies-Sekle at the XXXII ATCM,  
Admittedly, one might argue that a Party would simply have to agree to including the expert’s comments in their account for these comments to form part of the final report. However, France does not feel that resorting to such ploys are the best way to meet the ATCM’s needs. 
In Recommendation XIII-1 (Brussels, 1985) on improvements to the ATCM, the Consultative Parties recommended that action be taken to ensure that the final reports of the ATCM were a complete and accurate reflection of the work done. To translate this commitment into practice, France feels that the Rules of Procedure should be amended to allow for the participation of experts who do not belong to international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica. 
To this end, France proposes the following amendments to the Rules of Procedure as revised by Decision 1 (2008):
    • In paragraph 40, after the words “(…) propose that an invitation be extended to other international organisations having a scientific or technical interest in Antarctica”, add the words: “non-Consultative Parties, non-governmental bodies or independent experts” and replace “afin que celles-ci” with “afin que ceux-ci” [translator’s note: in the French version only, in English it would continue to read “to assist”];
    • In paragraph 42, after the words “(…) the Host Government shall extend invitations to international organisations (…)” add the words: “non-Consultative Parties, non-governmental bodies or independent experts” and replace “identifiées” with “identifiés” [translator’s note: in the French version only, in English it would continue to read “identified”] as well as “l’expert qu’elles auront désigné” with “l’expert désigné” [translator’s note: in the French version only, in English it would continue to read “designated expert”];
    • The title “Experts from International Organisations” currently used in the revised Rules of Procedure (for paragraphs 39 onward) should be amended to read “Experts”. 

These proposals are intended to facilitate the ATCM's access, where necessary, to external sources of information and input. 

