





Site Guidelines for Damoy Point, Wiencke Island, Antarctic Peninsula





Site Guidelines for Damoy Point, Wiencke Island, 
Antarctic Peninsula
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom and Argentina

Summary
1. Damoy Point is a rocky isthmus situated on the west coast of Wiencke Island, off the Antarctic Peninsula. British and Argentine field huts are located on the point. Damoy Hut (UK) is designated as Historic Site and Monument No 84. The site is frequently visited by tour operators, private yachts and occasionally national Antarctic programmes. 
2.  Following the adoption of Site Guidelines by Resolution 5(2005), the United Kingdom and Argentina, with the assistance of IAATO, has prepared Site Guidelines for Damoy Point and recommends that the CEP submit these for adoption by the ATCM.
Background
3. Damoy Point is situated on the west coast of Wiencke Island, off the Antarctic Peninsula. Damoy Hut (UK) is designated as Historic Site and Monument No 84. It sits approximately 100 metres from the shoreline of Dorian Bay. The hut was established by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS) in November 1975 and was used as a transit station for BAS staff and stores to be flown south from the skiway on the glacier above the hut to Rothera Research Station when sea ice prevented access by ship.   It was last occupied by BAS in 1993.   There is an Argentine field hut close by. 
4. The Bahía Dorian hut was established by the Argentine Navy on February 23rd, 1953. It sits in very close proximity to the British Hut and covers an area of ca. 12 square meters. The hut has often been used as an emergency refuge. 
5. Damoy Point is visited frequently by tour operators, private yachts and by national Antarctic programmes. More than 2700 people visited the site in 2008/09. Visitors to the site visit the huts, the gentoo penguin colony located nearby, and walk up on to the glacier above the huts. Overnight camping, skiing, climbing expeditions and paragliding also take place in and around Damoy Point. For this reason the UK, who manages the British hut, has worked with Argentina and IAATO to develop these site guidelines. 
6. The attached site guidelines for Damoy Point are submitted in a format consistent with other ATCM Site Guidelines.

