





Revised Management Plan for Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago





ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
1. Is a new ASPA proposed?
No
2. Is a new ASMA proposed?
No
3. Does the proposal relate to an existing ASPA or ASMA?
Yes
First designation:
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 20)
First adoption of management plan: 
Recommendation XIII-8 (1985)
Any revisions to management plan:
Measure 2 (2004)
Current management plan: 
Measure 2 (2004)
Any extensions of expiry dates of management plan:
Resolution 3 (1996) (Extension)
Measure 2 (2000) (Extension)
Renamed and renumbered by Decision 1 (2002) as:
ASPA No. 139 Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
Other relevant measures:
Decision 4 (1998), Measure 1 (2008), Measure 2 (2009)
4. If the proposal contains a revision of an existing management plan, please indicate the types of amendment:
(i) major or minor?
Major
(ii) any changes to the boundaries or co-ordinates?
No.
(iii) any changes to the maps? If yes, are the changes in the captions only or also in the graphics?
Yes. Changes to graphics.
(iv) any change to the description of the area that is relevant to identifying its location or its boundaries?
No.
(v) any changes that affect any other ASPA, ASMA or HSM within this area or adjacent to it? In particular, please explain any merger with, incorporation of or abolition of any existing area or site.
Yes. A Helicopter Access Zone is proposed for designation within ASMA No.7 SW Anvers Island and Palmer Basin which applies to access to the Area.
(vi) Other - brief summary of other types of changes, indicating the paragraphs of the management plan in which these are located.
See below for complete listing of changes.
5. If a new ASPA or ASMA is proposed, does it contain any marine area?
N/A
6. If yes, does the proposal require the prior approval of CCAMLR in accordance with Decision 9 (2005)?
N/A
7. If yes, has the prior approval of CCAMLR been obtained? 
N/A
If yes, please list the CCAMLR Final Report and Paragraph No.
N/A
Revised Management Plan for
Antarctic Specially Protected Area No. 139
Biscoe Point, Anvers Island, Palmer Archipelago
    1. Biscoe Point was originally designated as SSSI No.1 through Recommendation XIII-8 (1985, SSSI No. 20) after a proposal by the United States of America. The primary reason for designation of the Area is the rich terrestrial ecology of the site, including its vegetation and soils. The site has the most extensive stands of Antarctic hair grass (Deschampsia antarctica) and Antarctic pearlwort (Colobanthus quitensis) in the Anvers Island region.
    2. The date of expiry of the Area was extended by Resolution 3 (1996) and through Measure 2 (2000) and the Area was renamed and renumbered through Decision 1 (2002). The boundary of the Area was revised through Measure 2 (2004) following collapse of the ice ramp joining the island to Anvers Island and to remove the marine component. The boundaries of the Area have not been changed in the current Management Plan, and the grounds for designation of the Area remain valid.
    3. The substantial changes to the provisions of the existing Management Plan include:
    (i). (Introduction) A brief introduction was added to outline key features of the Area, including the location, the primary and subsidiary reasons for designation and the history of revisions of the Biscoe Point Management Plan.
    (ii). (Section 5) Map 2 was revised to reflect changes in helicopter access and overflight conditions. The extent of the Adélie and Gentoo penguin colonies has been updated, using orthorectified imagery acquired in November 2009. 
    (iii). (Section 6(ii)) A section describing access to the Area by air, sea and on foot has been added, including access routes and landing sites. Information relevant to specific landing sites or approaches was added, including local sea ice and brash ice conditions.
    (iv). (Section 6(iii)) The Helicopter Access Zone guiding access to Biscoe Point, which mostly lies outside of the ASPA boundaries, is designated within Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 7.  A recommended aircraft separation distance of 2000 feet from the edges of known breeding bird colonies within the Area is noted and shown on Map 2 [Note: the Helicopter Access Zone is proposed for addition to ASMA No. 7 in a separate Working Paper].
    (v). (Section 7(i)) Aircraft access guidelines have been clarified and strengthened. During the period 01 October to 15 April inclusive, overflight of the Area below 2000ft (~610m) is prohibited outside of the Helicopter Access Zone, unless authorized by permit. Air access routes have been revised because of the changes to breeding areas, and aircraft landing within the Area should now approach within the Helicopter Access Zone. 
    4. Minor changes to the existing Management Plan include:
    (i). (Section 3, (Bullet 1)) A requirement was added that signs showing the location of the Area and stating that special restrictions apply should be displayed prominently at nearby stations (Palmer (US) and Yelcho (Chile)).
    (ii). (Section 3, (Bullet 2)) A requirement was added that signs or structures erected within the Area should be removed when no longer necessary.
    (iii). (Section 6) Updates to the description of the Area have been made, based on recent observations, data and publications, especially relating to the Area’s plant communities, terrestrial ecology and breeding birds.
    (iv). (Section 7 (Bullet 1)) A revision was made to the conditions for issuing a permit to enter the Area to ensure consistency in wording used in other management plans recently adopted.
    (v). (Section 7(i)) Provisions on movement within the Area have been clarified and strengthened. Specific guidance is provided on movement close to the penguin colonies.
    (vi). Section 7(ii)) Provision has been added to allow activities with educational aims.
    (vii). (Section 7(v)) A requirement has been included that footwear and other equipment brought into the Area should be cleaned thoroughly before entry.
    (viii). (Section 7 (vii)) A requirement has been added that the appropriate national authority should be notified of any items removed from the Area that were not introduced by the permit holder.
    (ix). Recent relevant references were appended to the plan.
    (x). Minor textual revisions were made to maintain consistency with wording in plans recently adopted by the ATCM.
    5. The revised Management Plan is attached for consideration by the Committee for Environmental Protection.

