





Guidelines on Minimising the Impact of Pollution by Light at Antarctic Stations and Ships





Guidelines on Minimising the Impact of
Pollution by Light at Antarctic Stations and Ships
Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom

Summary
The UK has developed and implemented simple practical guidelines to minimise the impact of light pollution on scientific observation and on birds.
The UK would welcome comments on these guidelines (at Appendix A to this paper) as the basis for the development and eventual adoption of formal CEP guidelines. 
Introduction
Globally, pollution by light is recognized as an environmental concern.  It can hamper atmospheric, astronomical and meteorological observations and is an unnecessary waste of energy. Excessive light may cause adverse impacts on fauna, resulting in bird strikes on buildings or ships. Increasingly, light pollution is addressed at the planning stage of new development projects.
Light pollution is caused by excessive artificial light being directed where it is not required. At research stations in Antarctica, the reflective capacity of the surrounding snow and ice may exacerbate this problem. 
Vessels sailing in Antarctic waters require artificial light, including deck lights and high power search lights to assist safe navigation and scientific work undertaken during hours of darkness.  Whilst IAATO have developed guidelines for their vessels, and the UK and some other national programmes implement “darken ship” procedures there is, as yet, no Treaty-wide endorsed procedure for controlling light pollution from vessels.  In addition, stations in the Antarctic require outdoor lighting for staff to move safely between buildings, but light pollution mitigation procedures are not consistently adopted. Nothing in these guidelines will affect the safety of operations at research stations or on ships. 
The Impact of Light Pollution at Research Stations and Research Vessels
Light pollution at UK research stations in the Antarctic, and elsewhere, was examined and found to have an adverse impact upon scientific values and on birds.  
Impact on Science
Local light pollution hampers accurate visual meteorological observations at night, as well as the observation of the aurora, airglow1 and other upper atmospheric phenomena. Light pollution generally reduces the quality of such observations, and is particularly noticeable in marginal conditions (e.g. broken cloud or drifting snow) when observation without local light pollution would be difficult but possible. 
Impact on birds
Bird strikes can occur on vessels as a result of light pollution, in particular when operating around the shores of the South Orkney Islands and the northern Antarctic Peninsula. The problem is exacerbated in conditions of poor visibility (e.g fog, snow storms) and may result in mortality or physical injury. Birds may also become coated in oil or grease by coming into contact with mechanical parts on the ships (e.g. hydraulic cranes). It is not uncommon for tens of birds to be affected in one night, generally small petrels. The presence of science or expedition staff with experience in handling birds is a significant contribution towards mitigating this impact.
Guidelines to minimize or avoid light pollution
In view of this, the UK has developed and implemented the following guidelines for use within its own operations to minimize the impacts of light pollution. The guidelines were recognised as an example of best practice by the British Astronomical Association. We encourage the CEP to build on these, taking into account work done by other Parties and IAATO, and develop a single set of guidelines for wider use and adoption at ATCM.

Appendix 1.	 Guidelines to Minimize or Avoid Pollution by Light in Antarctica

i. 	Pollution by light is excessive artificial light being directed where it is not required. It may hamper atmospheric, astronomical and meteorological observations and is an unnecessary waste of energy. It may also cause adverse impacts on fauna, resulting in bird strikes on buildings or ships;

ii. 	Pollution by light, and measures to minimise such pollution, should be considered in Environmental Impact Assessments of proposed activities as appropriate;

iii.	Avoid over- lighting. Use only the correct and minimum amount of light for the task in hand, and do not leave lights on unnecessarily. This might compliment a National Operator’s overall carbon reduction strategy;

iv. 	Where practical and safe, outdoor lights on buildings should be fitted with motion sensor detectors and installed in casings which prevent the emission of light above the horizontal; 

v.	Where practical, low-pressure sodium lighting is preferable, as it can be filtered out in astronomic observations of the night sky;

vi.	Appropriate anti-bird strike blinds should be fitted to buildings at high risk of bird strike;

vii	Measures to avoid light pollution, including the requirement to close blinds and curtains on ships and at stations, should be included in pre-departure briefings, and at safety briefings onboard vessels and at stations;

viii.	Posters could be displayed on vessels and at stations instructing staff to draw curtains in cabins and common spaces when lights are on;

ix.	Record all incidents of bird strikes through appropriate internal reporting mechanisms.  An example of a bird strike log for this type of incident has been set up by the UK and is freely available to other national programmes; 

x. 	Where appropriate expertise exists, consideration might be given to training programmes for members of the ships crew and station staff to deal with bird strikes. Appropriate equipment to deal with birds following an incident should be provided. 


