





Proposal for the discussion of aspects related to the management of Historic Sites and Monuments 





Proposal for the discussion of aspects related to the management of Historic Sites and Monuments

Summary
Following an assessment of the various tools currently provided for in the Madrid Protocol, its annexes and additional related provisions, Argentina would like to submit for the CEP’s consideration various comments regarding the management tools currently applicable to HSMs, with a view to evaluating these tools and possibly extending their scope and increasing their effectiveness. In order to ensure that these aspects are adequately addressed, Argentina proposes that the CEP set up an Intersessional Contact Group to this end, and that the results of the group’s work be presented to CEP XIV (Buenos Aires, 2011). 
HSM Enhancement 
These days, the measures taken with regard to world cultural heritage by various recognised international institutions, such as ICOMOS (International Council of Monuments and Sites), UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) and WMF (World Monument Foundation), no longer focus merely on the protection of cultural goods (defined as protecting or safeguarding these goods from damage or danger, either man-made or natural), but rather consider preservation from a more holistic standpoint. The term currently being used to describe this approach is “enhancement”. The aim of enhancement is not merely to protect cultural goods, but also to ensure their conservation (defined as a series of measures taken to prolong the life of cultural goods) and dissemination (educational measures intended to communicate the messages contained in these goods), so that this cultural heritage can be used by present and future generations.  
With this more holistic concept in mind, what follows is a brief assessment of the management tools available in the Antarctic Treaty System for the enhancement of historic artefacts.  
Management tools for historic artefacts
Over the years, the ATCM has approved a total of 38 standards for the protection of HSMs. However, of these, only five correspond to new mechanisms for ensuring effective protection and management of HSMs (see IP 22, Argentina).
Annex V of the Madrid Protocol comprises the main tool for the protection of Antarctic HSMs. It establishes the ban on damaging, removing or destroying any HSM. This Annex also considers aspects related to the designation and listing of HSMs, the communication of information on their locations and boundaries, and the exchange of information on any significant changes or damage to an HSM.  
Generally speaking, the provisions of Annex V take the form of recommendations meant to express the importance of the Antarctic’s historic artefacts and the need to develop specific measures for their protection and dissemination However, Annex V does not stipulate any mechanisms or procedures for the development of these measures. 
The Revised List of Historic Sites and Monuments (Measure 3, 2003) contains a brief description of all Antarctic HSMs, gives their location and indicates the countries that proposed their designation as well as those currently in charge of their management. This List is important in that it permits the identification of the historic artefacts currently enjoying protection under the ATS.  
However, these descriptions do not comply with standardised criteria, and as a result the quality and quantity of the information available on the nature and current status of each HSM on the List is highly variable. The design and development of tools for the enhancement of a site largely depend on having an adequate description of the nature of the HSM, its physical context, its current status and the potential risks that it faces. The fact that the historic artefacts included in the current HSM List are very diverse in nature only further complicates efforts to define more specific management tools for them. A detailed analysis of the current HSMs can be found in IP XX (Argentina), which is intended as a complement to the arguments presented in this paper.   
As the List was being drafted, the Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments (Resolution 3, 2009) were being developed, which include a series of criteria for the designation of HSMs as well as a number of general principles for the management of these sites, which had admittedly already been addressed in previous standards, such as Resolution 8 (1995), but which are now grouped together in a single document. These Guidelines also include a number of notable new aspects, such as the possibility of formulating holistic conservation strategies for the conservation of each HSM, and the inclusion of HSMs in the evaluations carried out during inspections performed in conformity with art. VII of the Antarctic Treaty. However, these Guidelines did not go so far as to propose specific mechanisms or procedures for the enhancement of HSMs.  
The Guidelines for handling pre-1958 historic remains (Resolution 5, 2001) offer interim protection for this type of historic artefact until such time as their existence or present location can be reliably determined. The importance of these Guidelines lies in the fact that they allow for protection to be granted to the full range of historic artefacts present in the Antarctic, through the definition of mechanisms to be implemented during the interim protection period. Since the adoption of the Guidelines in 2001, only four pre-1958 HSMs have been designated. However, in the recitals for these designations, there is no reference at all to the use of the Guidelines in the evaluation process for the sites in question. From this fact, one can assume that to date at least, these Guidelines have enjoyed scant use. 
The aim of the Visitor Site Guidelines, the valid list of which is included in Resolution 4 (2009), is to ensure appropriate management of tourism through the definition of standard codes of conduct for the sites that receive visitors. Granted, this tool was not developed specifically with the goal of protecting of HSMs in mind (or even historic artefacts not designated as such), but if it were to be used appropriately, it could achieve this objective. To this end, it would be useful to establish criteria to be applied when preparing Guidelines that include HSMs or other historic artefacts. To date, the approaches used in such cases have varied widely: in some cases, specific zones and detailed codes of conduct have been established, whereas in others, there is simply a reference to the presence of historic artefacts, and very general guidelines for conduct are given, hardly sufficient to assure the necessary level of protection. The inappropriate use of this tool could lead to a situation where the existence of a historic artefact is made public without first ensuring that the necessary strategy for its protection and preservation is in place, with the resulting negative impact that this could have on the artefact in question.  
The concept of “history” in the ATS framework
One result of the assessment of these tools, particularly the Guidelines for the designation and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments (Resolution 3, 2009), is that the definition of “historic” in the Antarctic context (which ultimately determines what is to be enhanced) is seen to be in line with a traditional conception of history, based on reverence for the deeds of “great men”, and where historical events are considered finite, such that everything that happens after the fact is not considered to be history, and is even considered to disturb it. However, recent historiographical trends have transformed this conception. These days, history is seen as an ongoing process that extends up to the present day, where great events combine with more everyday occurrences in a broader sociopolitical and institutional context. 
The application of this static, traditional view of history has had direct repercussions on the management practices of Antarctic historical heritage, such that all attention is focussed on its protection, and there is little use of practices that would imply more intervention in (and a relation to) the present. A more holistic view of what can currently be defined as “historic” would contribute to enriching the historic process of human intervention in Antarctica. 
Conclusions 
In short, although it can rightly be said that the Parties have shown a worthy and constant interest in protecting – and, to a lesser degree, disseminating – the artefacts of historical value in the Antarctic, there has not yet been sufficient progress made in providing the Antarctic Treaty System with the practical, specific tools it needs to ensure this protection.  
In conclusion, Argentina feels that there should be a change in the strategy for dealing with historic artefacts. One the one hand, there is a need to evaluate the concept of what is considered to be “historic”, and on the other hand, there is a need for the assessment to include the more holistic concept of “enhancement”, which encompasses protection, conservation and dissemination.  
Proposal to the Committee for Environmental Protection
Whereas: 
The ATS has consistently demonstrated its commitment to the importance to be attributed to historical heritage in Antarctica;
There is a need to ensure that the holistic concept of “enhancement” is respected when addressing matters related to historical artefacts in Antarctica, and that in conjunction with this, there be a more holistic view taken with respect to the current definition of the concept of “history”; and
It is important that there be various types of tools available for the appropriate enhancement of HSMs, given the broad diversity of historic artefacts currently included in the list of Historic Sites and Monuments.  
Argentina proposes to the CEP that: 
An Intersessional Contact Group (ICG) be set up to discuss the points raised in this paper, and that a report be submitted on the results of this work to the next meeting of the CEP. 

