





Report of an incident at Wordie House (HSM No. 62)





Report of an incident at Wordie House (HSM No. 62)

Working Paper submitted by the UK, France and Ukraine 

Summary 

    1. This paper provides details of an incident on 11 January which resulted in some damage to Wordie House (HSM No.62), the subsequent investigation and the action taken by the French authorities, as two French citizens and two French yachts are involved in the matter.  This report is submitted to Parties for their information and consideration, in accordance with Article 13 of the Protocol.

    2. This incident has shown that not all visitors to Antarctica are aware of the legal requirements and obligations, particularly those on yachts who can enter Antarctica without logistical support from other authorised organisations, such as national programmes or tourism members of IAATO.  The incident also raises the issue of the level of awareness of the protection of Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments afforded by the Environmental Protocol.  Consequently the UK, France and Ukraine recommend that the CEP and national authorities consider ways in which to raise awareness of the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol, in particular to highlight the need for prior authorisation to enter Antarctica and compliance with the Protocol’s Environmental Principles and protection of Historic Sites and Monuments.

Background

    3. Wordie House (former British base F), situated in the south west corner of Winter Island on the Antarctic Peninsula (65 degrees 15’ S; 64 degrees 16’W), was adopted as HSM No. 62 in 1995.  It is located close to the Ukrainian base, Vernadsky, and managed jointly by the UK and Ukraine under an MoU, and in accordance with the ATCM Site Guidelines, adopted in 2009.   Wordie is a popular visitor destination especially for those in yachts or small boats. 

    4. On 11 January 2010, the UK authorities received a report from the UK Antarctic Heritage Trust team undertaking maintenance at Wordie House that they had found two men from two yachts moored nearby, sleeping in the hut, and apparently the worse for drink.  The doorframe had been badly damaged, seemingly caused by forced entry to the building.  There was further damage to a window frame which had also been forced open (from the inside) and to a new concrete base for the stove.  These appeared to have been damaged when the two men had attempted to light a fire in the building even though the stove was not in working order at the time.  

    5. Fortunately, no-one was injured and the damage caused to the building was subsequently repaired by the team from the UKAHT.  

    6. A valuable artefact, a sunshine recorder, was also reported missing but it was impossible to identify when this occurred and therefore who may be responsible for the loss.



Investigation and action taken 

    7. This appeared to the UK authorisation authorities to have been a clear breach of the protection to Historic Sites and Monuments afforded by the Environmental Protocol, as well as non-compliance with the relevant Site Guidelines. Copies of adopted ATCM Site Guidelines for Wordie House (in all four working ATCM languages) are available and displayed prominently at Vernadsky Station. The Station Commander, as a key holder, only allows entry into Wordie House after an applicable briefing with passengers and staff (sleeping overnight is not allowed at Wordie House).

    8. In view of the nationality of those involved, the UK notified the French authorities and asked if they could carry out further investigations.  On 15 January the French authorities confirmed that neither of the two vessels involved in the incident had applied to the relevant French administration for authorisation nor had been granted approval to proceed to Antarctica. They kindly undertook to investigate further.

    9. France has started an inquiry and sent formal requests to the skippers of the two yachts asking them to provide detailed information on their current touring activity in Antarctica. No reply has come yet as the two yachts are probably still at sea. It is still not clear whether they were lacking information or whether they intentionally infringed the rules. Once information has been gathered, the competent authorities will be able to refer the matter to the public prosecution. If the matter is brought to court, several issues will be likely to arise during the proceedings: the question of potential gaps in the competence of French courts (in cases where no French citizen would be involved), the availability and the quality of the information intended for Antarctic visitors, the value in court of findings of an enquiry made by foreign authorities, validity of evidences. Some of these issues can become complicated legal questions in the Antarctic framework.

Raising Awareness of Competent Authority Requirements for Entering Antarctica

    10. This incident raises concerns not only about the behaviour of a small minority of visitors to the Antarctic but also the effectiveness of authorisation processes, and the potential risk to Historic Sites and Monuments by those who do not understand, or respect, the protection afforded to them under the Environmental Protocol.

    11. The UK has recognised the potential for yachts to enter Antarctica without appropriate authorisation and has recently updated its permitting procedures to include advice and guidance specifically targeted at small yachts.  This is being actively promoted on Government and other relevant websites, and opportunities are being sought to reach the wider UK yachting community.  The UK would be happy to share this with any other Parties on request.  

    12. France has made information for visitors to Antarctica available through various channels: nautical charts and/or nautical instructions, various websites including the French competent authority’s official website. The French competent authority also masters on the internet an exchange forum specifically intended for registered Antarctica tour operators. Options to improve information and awareness are currently under scrutiny. France would also be interested in sharing this with any other Parties.

    13.  The UK, France and Ukraine would like to work with others to consider how the CEP/ATCM can also raise awareness of the requirements of the Environmental Protocol to Treaty Party nationals internationally. 

Recommendation

    14.  The United Kingdom, France and Ukraine recommend that the CEP/ATCM, particularly through their competent authorities, consider ways in which to raise awareness about the requirements of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection, including, in particular to highlight the need for prior authorisation to enter Antarctica and compliance with the provisions of the Environmental Protocol. 



